URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/61.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Georges v Barnardos Australia [2025] NSWPICPD 61; (1 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Georges v Barnardos Australia
[2025] NSWPICPD 61
Rebecca Georges
RESPONDENT:
Barnardos Australia
Employers Mutual NSW Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W28929/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
1 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 6 March 2025 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – psychological injury – COVID-19 vaccine
mandate – psychological injury wholly or predominantly
reasonable action taken by the employer in respect of discipline under section
11A of the 1987 Act –
Martsoukos v Secretary, Department of
[2024] NSWPICPD 85
distinguished
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr D McCabe, solicitor
McCabe Partners Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr J Hart, counsel
Hall & Wilcox Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Georges v Barnardos Australia
[2025] NSWPIC 74
SENIOR MEMBER:
Ms K Haddock
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
6 March 2025
INTRODUCTION
is yet another matter involving a dispute about the development and application
by an employer of a COVID-19 vaccination mandate.
Georges (the appellant) was employed by Barnardos Australia (the respondent) as
a co-ordinator of its home interaction program
for both parents and young
children in the New South Wales south coast. This was known as the
“HIPPY” program. The appellant
commenced employment with the
respondent in 2010.
February 2021 the appellant went on maternity leave. This period coincided with
the COVID-19 pandemic. At the time that the appellant
embarked on maternity
leave, it was envisaged that she would return to work in or about March 2022.
During this period, the respondent
had commenced a process of consultation with
its staff about the development and implementation of a vaccination policy. This
in a policy entitled “COVID-19 Vaccination
(policy) first
becoming operative on 8 December
The policy inter alia
required staff to be fully vaccinated unless they gained an exemption under the
appellant was opposed to being vaccinated. The appellant applied for an
extension of her maternity leave, an additional year,
in the hope that the
requirement for vaccination might change. This request was granted by the
respondent. Over time, both the appellant
and respondent had various exchanges,
by telephone, email and correspondence, about the vaccination mandate, but they
were not able
to resolve the matter. Ultimately, the appellant’s
employment was terminated on 17 October
This process is more fully
set out in the Senior Member’s decision (see below).
appellant alleged that:
“My psychological injury resulted from
my employer’s coercion and discrimination in order to receive the
vaccination,
as they made it a mandatory requirement of my employment and
provided no support to me.”
appellant submitted a claim for workers compensation, signed 30 April 2023,
stating that her psychological injuries were due to
the respondent’s
vaccination requirements.
notice dated 29 June 2023, issued pursuant to
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act), the
respondent’s workers compensation insurer declined the claim for the
reasons set out therein.
s 78 notice was issued on 20 September 2023 which affirmed the earlier
For the purposes of this
appeal, relevantly the s 78 notices relied on the provisions of
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act), stating that the
respondent’s actions were reasonable with respect to discipline and/or the
provision of employment
appellant then lodged an application in the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission).
matter was heard on 11 February 2025. In a decision dated 6 March 2025, a Senior
Member of the Commission found in favour of the
respondent and the appellant now
appeals that decision.
ON THE PAPERS
52(3) of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the 2020 Act)
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by the parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined
on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE EVIDENCE
order to save repetition, I am only going to extract evidence not otherwise
detailed in the Senior Member’s reasons. However,
the COVID-19 Vaccination
is an important document so
I therefore extract below the salient aspects of that document.
COVID-19 Vaccination Policy
The purpose of this Policy is to set out Barnardos commitment
to continually strive towards a safe and healthy working environment,
taking all reasonably practicable steps towards protecting Workers from the risk
of COVID‑19 transmission and infection.
Barnardos must also try to protect
the health and safety of the people we support and interact with through our
The following principles underpin the Vaccination
Policy and its administration:
wellbeing being a priority focus
directives, mandates and health orders will be observed
A culture of
care will prevail through the conscious application of our values
We will engage
in open dialogue and genuine consultation with employees and all key
stakeholders
We will empower
employees with communication and education
founded on due diligence, evidence and hearing the voices of our people
Lead with people
and policy in harmony
Taking into
consideration the children, families and communities we work with.
This policy applies to Workers (see definition below) who are
engaged by Barnardos as well as children, young people and their families,
authorised carers, service delivery partners, other agency workers and visitors.
The interim policy position previously adopted for Clients (see definition
below) will remain unchanged with a view to updating this
Policy when the
position is clear and endorsed by the Executive Leadership Team.
It is the responsibility of every person within this scope to ensure they
comply with this Policy.
Failure to adhere to this Policy along with supporting procedures and
government public health orders, may lead to a direction to
not attend work or
be engaged and/or disciplinary action up to and including termination of
employment/engagement.
(emphasis added)
The risks of COVID-19 have presented the need to consider comprehensive
measures to protect Workers, Clients, Visitors and others
and provide a safe
environment for Workers to work together and provide services to the Clients
they serve and ensure business continuity.
Barnardos has a duty of care to ensure, as far as reasonably practicable, the
health, safety and welfare of Workers, Visitors and
others at work and those
affected by their work. In relation to COVID-19, this means Barnardos is
required to manage the risk of
COVID-19 to Workers, Clients and Visitors in the
work environment. Vaccination helps reduce the risk of COVID-19 infection to
protect Workers, Clients and Visitors. In line with advice from the
Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI),
it has been found
that initial protection is reduced, and increased waning is evident following
Primary COVID‑19 Vaccination
Dose (usually 2 doses).
Barnardos has a diverse and geographically spread workforce providing
services to the community, including the most vulnerable. There
is frequent
Barnardos in the delivery of services. We also
have contractual obligations to
meet with our funding bodies to ensure we are compliant. We want to ensure
organisational consistency,
as far as reasonable and practicable in the policies
we develop, to ensure we create a positive and collective culture between
Workers and support and enabling functions.
Vaccination
Vaccination
All Workers are required to provide Vaccination
Evidence acceptable to Barnardos of Primary COVID-19 Vaccination Dose Status and
Disability Workers, Up-To-Date Vaccination Status. Barnardos will accept for
these purposes, a copy of the Worker’s COVID-19
Digital Certificate or
alternatively the Immunisation History Statement (as long as the IHI number has
been blacked out for privacy
reasons). This Vaccination Evidence can be obtained
through Medicare via the MyGov account, Service NSW app or the Check In CBR app.
for Exemptions
Barnardos understands that some current Workers and
prospective Workers may have medical conditions preventing vaccination as
by an Authorised Medical Practitioner for which there is a recognised
Medical Contraindication.
Any Worker who has a medical condition preventing them from being COVID-19
Vaccinated is required to provide medical evidence by an
Authorised Medical
Practitioner, satisfactory to Barnardos, of the medical condition and the reason
for which they are unable to
receive the recommended Primary COVID-19
Vaccination Doses or in the case of Disability Support Workers, the recommended
maintain Up-to-date Vaccination Status.
Medical Evidence provided must clearly identify the medical condition and
specify that the Worker's medical condition gives rise to
a Recognised Medical
Contraindication in respect of all Approved Vaccines. Barnardos reserves the
right to contact the issuing Authorised
Medical Practitioner to verify the
authenticity of any such Medical Evidence and clarify any details in line with
the organisation’s
duty to maintain a healthy and safe workplace.
Any Worker who is unable to receive their Primary COVID-19
Vaccination Doses for any other reason, including by reason of a sincerely
religious belief, religious practice or religious observance, must email their
Manager and notify HR via email at covidvac@barnardos.org.au.
Requests for exemption from the requirement to receive Primary COVID-19
Vaccination Doses or in the case of Disability Support Workers
to maintain an
Up-to-date COVID-19 Vaccination Status will be considered by Barnardos on a
case-by-case basis via completion of an
Individual Risk Assessment
will be assessed having regard to:
the basis for
the request (e.g., temporary or permanent Medical Contraindication or other
grounds) and relevant supporting information;
the nature and
requirements of the Worker's role, including whether there is likely to be
interaction with members of the public or
people with vulnerabilities in
connection with their employment;
the risks of
exposure (for the Workers and Clients) to COVID-19; and
the overall
purpose and scope of the Policy.
Workers should immediately raise
their concerns if unable to comply with the requirements of this Policy for
consideration and consultation.”
THE SENIOR MEMBER’S REASONS
dispute before the Senior Member pertained to whether the respondent had a
defence to the claim pursuant to s 11A of the 1987
Act. The respondent relied
primarily on its action with respect to discipline, but also relied on its
action with respect to the
provision of employment benefits.
Senior Member referred to the appellant’s evidence in her statements dated
16 November 2022, 14 March 2024, 30 April 2024,
5 August 2024 and 15
November 2024.
The appellant
commenced maternity leave in February 2021 and was due to return in March 2022.
During this period the respondent commenced
enforcing COVID-19 vaccinations
requiring all employees to be double vaccinated in order to return to
appellant says she was advised of the respondent’s intended policy in both
October and December 2021. This made her “anxious
employment.”
requested to read the policy as it applied to “all workers”. The
appellant responded that she had no questions
and would “reach out to [the
policy manager] in the
the appellant was against the COVID-19 vaccine and her return to work date was
looming, she requested an extension of her unpaid
parental leave until March
2023. Her request was approved by letter from the respondent dated 17 February
2022. The contents of the
letter were summarised by the Senior Member at reasons
[133]. The letter stipulated that although the extension of leave was approved,
the appellant’s employment was conditional upon being fully vaccinated
prior to returning on 10 March
The appellant says
extending her leave was her only option as she believed her employment would be
terminated if she returned to
work on 10 March
appellant says it was at this time she experienced symptoms of irritation from
sudden noise, being snappy and cranky at home and
her anxiety levels increased.
She says she felt discriminated against by the respondent and was under duress
to receive the vaccinations
if she wanted to continue her
employment.
appellant says the respondent contacted her on 25 October 2022 regarding her
impending return to work in March
It was at this time that
her anxiety and depression had elevated to a point where she did not think she
could return to work.
appellant first consulted Dr Khadka regarding anxiety and depression on 2 March
appellant said that although the “pandemic ended in May 2022”, the
respondent continued to deny her employment unless
she was vaccinated. Her
employment was eventually terminated on 17 October 2023. The appellant says that
in terminating her employment,
the respondent did not take into consideration
the government had relaxed restrictions in May 2022. She said the threats of
termination
caused her distress and depression and there was no determination on
the respondent’s part as to whether alternative work arrangements
available. She complains that the respondent had requested she provide a risk
assessment to prove that she was not a threat
to anyone in the workplace, which
she asserts was impossible.
appellant said that as a result of the respondent’s actions in regard to
terminating her employment, she suffered psychological
Senior Member considered the lay evidence of the respondent, including the
statements from Ms Sharon Dolan, who was head of HR
design, standards and
respondent’s centre manager, Maria
Dolan states that in October 2021, the policy consultation process commenced.
The appellant was emailed details of the proposed
policy and was invited to be
involved in the process. Staff were emailed a survey, and a subsequent reminder
email was sent to staff
on 28 October
Dolan states the results of the survey were published on 9 November 2021 and a
link to the information was provided to staff. On
8 December 2021 the policy was
published online and sent to all staff, which required all staff to have their
first vaccination by
Dolan states the respondent regularly reviewed the policy and made appropriate
She states the
appellant had been invited to participate in the consultation process during
October 2021 to December 2021 and they
had communicated with the appellant
during the time she was on parental leave noting the requirements to be
vaccinated.
Dolan states that two weeks prior to the appellant’s expected return date
in March 2023, they became aware the appellant
was still unvaccinated. A formal
direction to comply with the policy was therefore sent to the appellant on 27
February 2023. The
Senior Member summarised the direction to comply at reasons
[135]–[140]. The direction to comply set out that it was a condition
the appellant’s employment to be fully vaccinated and was a requirement of
the policy. The appellant was given seven days
to comply with the policy, or, in
the event she was unable to be vaccinated due to medical or other reasons, she
was required to
provide reasons why.
Dolan stated that on 2 March 2023 she received an email from the appellant,
however it did not contain any submissions with respect
to an exemption. The
Senior Member summarised the contents of the appellant’s email at reasons
[141]–[145]. The respondent
placed the appellant on unpaid parental leave
due to non-compliance with the policy and discussions continued. Ms Dolan said
followed was a request from the appellant to work from home two days a week
as she had not organised
14 April 2023 a letter titled ‘Non-Compliance with Vaccination Policy
– Individual Risk Assessment Consultation was
sent to the appellant. The
Senior Member summarised the contents of the letter at reasons
[146]–[154]. The letter noted that
as the appellant had indicated she was
not intending to be vaccinated, the matter had been progressed and requested the
to complete an individual risk assessment “in order to better
understand your personal circumstances and assess the risk level
The risk assessment
was attached to the letter and a meeting was scheduled for 26 April 2023. The
letter invited the appellant to
suggest ideas of what she considered to be
reasonable and practical steps that could be taken to minimise the risk of
exposure to
and the passing of COVID-19 in her role.
Dolan states the appellant’s role required her to attend various locations
approximately 50% of the time and the remainder
was office based which could
mostly be done at home.
appellant failed to participate in the risk assessment process which resulted in
an inability to move forward and ultimately
the termination of the
appellant’s employment.
Senior Member referred to Ms Corsiglia’s statement noting an overlap with
Ms Dolan’s evidence.
Corsiglia states she explained the risk assessment to the appellant and that it
would be conducted with HR to determine whether
she could return to her
workplace while unvaccinated.
Corsiglia said she contacted the appellant in February 2023. The appellant
informed her she wished to return to work, however she
was unvaccinated and had
no intention of doing so. She requested to work her full 24-hour working week
from home as she did not have
Senior Member summarised the treating and expert medical reports at reasons
[167]–[226].
Senior Member considered the appellant’s submissions from reasons
[257]–[272]. The appellant submitted that although
COVID-19 restrictions
had relaxed by 2022, the respondent’s policy had not. The appellant
submitted that return to work discussions
occurred over a twelve-month period,
and she had done all that was needed of her, however the respondent “shut
by issuing a
formal direction which eventually led to the termination of her
employment.
appellant submitted it was not reasonable for the respondent to maintain its
policy after the Public Health Orders in respect
of teachers and carers of the
aged and disabled children had been withdrawn in June 2022. The appellant
submitted that during 2023,
the respondent acted unreasonably by failing to
think about the effect of the policy on a person-by-person basis, particularly
the appellant’s circumstance, a long-term employee who from as early as
2020 was running a successful program called the Lighthouse
program, with four-
and five-year-olds.
appellant submitted the modifications made to the policy were only minimal such
as a booster shot and isolation.
appellant submitted that although the deemed date of injury was 6 March 2023,
part of her injury occurred well before any action
by the respondent in respect
of discipline.
appellant submitted the respondent had failed to meet its onus under s 11A of
the 1987 Act.
Senior Member set out s 11A of the 1987 Act. She noted the respondent primarily
relied on its action with respect to discipline
but also relied on its action
with respect to the provision of employment benefits.
considering whether the appellant’s injury was wholly or predominantly
caused by action taken by or on behalf of the respondent
with respect to
discipline and/or the provision of employment benefits, the Senior Member
Ponnan v George Weston Food
and Temelkov v
Kemblawarra Portuguese Sports & Social Club
noting that causation is
a question of fact to be determined by the evidence in each case.
Senior Member referred to the appellant’s evidence, noting her feelings of
being depressed, snappy and increasingly anxious
at the time she applied for an
extension of her parental leave. The Senior Member noted the appellant had
applied to extend her leave
for a further year to avoid the requirement to be
vaccinated.
Senior Member noted that apart from one isolated reference to psychological
symptoms on 6 July 2021, the appellant first consulted
her treating GP, Dr
Khadka, about anxiety and depression on 2 March 2023. The Senior Member noted
that the isolated clinical record
of 6 July 2021 related to struggles with
wearing a mask rather than being employment
She noted the absence
of reports from medical practitioners prior to March 2023.
Senior Member quoted from the decision of Snell DP in
Hamad v Q Catering
in which the Deputy
President discussed the need for medical evidence when dealing with the question
of causation under s 11A(1)
of the 1987 Act. The Senior Member noted the
appellant relied on Dr Anand’s supplementary report in maintaining that
was not wholly or predominately caused by the respondent’s
Senior Member set out her reasons as to why she did not accept Dr Anand’s
She noted Dr Anand, a
consultant psychiatrist and neuropsychiatrist qualified by the appellant, first
provided a report in September
2023 diagnosing the appellant with Adjustment
Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood. Dr Anand said the prominent
the psychological condition was “the constant coercion and
discrimination” to receive the
vaccination.
The Senior Member
then referred to Dr Anand’s supplementary report dated 10 January 2025
where he said the diagnosed adjustment
disorder with depression and anxiety
existed as of 6 July 2021. The Senior Member was unconvinced by
Dr Anand’s supplementary
report finding it of “little
assistance” as there was no mention in Dr Anand’s initial
report of the diagnosis
existing in July 2021, nor was there any medical
evidence supporting a psychological diagnosis had been made in July
Senior Member was ultimately satisfied that the appellant’s injury was
wholly or predominantly caused by the respondent’s
action with respect to
discipline.
Senior Member accepted that the appellant’s ability to perform all her
duties at home, where she did not have to engage
childcare services, was to be
regarded as an employment benefit, however the respondent’s action with
respect to the provision
of such employment benefit was not causative of the
appellant’s injury.
Senior Member’s task then turned to whether the respondent’s action
was reasonable.
Senior Member referred to the principles of reasonableness in
Director General of School
Northern NSW
Local Health Network v
Department of
Education & Training v
actions are not required to meet a counsel of
perfection.
Senior Member rejected the appellant’s submission that the Public Health
Orders were determinative in considering whether
the respondent acted reasonably
and said that “the fact that Public Health Orders may have been
extinguished does not abrogate
the right of an employer to make its own judgment
and assessment of the risk it is prepared to accept in the environment in which
it operates.”
Senior Member noted it was not in issue that the respondent’s employees
dealt with vulnerable people and the appellant had
failed to establish the
requirements of her role were to the contrary. She referred to Ms Dolan’s
uncontested evidence that
the appellant was required to attend community events
and clients’ homes which exposed her to
The respondent had a
duty to both its employees and its clients. The Senior Member referred to the
appellant’s complaint that
there were concerts and sporting events with
“thousands of people jammed shoulder to shoulder” while she was not
to return to work. The Senior Member distinguished this from the
appellant’s employment circumstance noting attendees of concerts
ability to undertake their own assessment of the risk in deciding whether to
attend a concert, unlike the clients of the
respondent who were visited in their
Senior Member referred to the appellant’s submission that the
respondent’s review of their policy was merely a “bit
touch-up”. The Senior Member concluded that the policy was reviewed, and
it was open to the respondent to maintain its
requirement.
Senior Member referred to the chain of events that occurred between the
appellant and the respondent during the appellant’s
maternity leave.
Ultimately, the Senior Member concluded that the respondent’s action with
respect to discipline was reasonable.
The Senior Member noted the respondent
elucidated to the appellant that she was required to comply with the policy and
be vaccinated
to return to work, or otherwise, apply for an exemption. If she
applied for an exemption, a risk assessment would occur to ascertain
whether the
appellant’s unvaccinated status could be accommodated. In February 2023,
the appellant advised she was not vaccinated
and that she had no intention of
doing so. At this stage, the respondent proposed an individual risk assessment
and requested the
appellant attend a meeting. The Senior Member concluded the
respondent had accepted the appellant did not intend to be vaccinated
was the next step in the process. The Senior Member noted there was no evidence
the appellant engaged in the process, she
did not respond to the “show
cause” letter, propose any reasonable adjustments nor did she attend the
proposed meeting
to discuss the risk assessment and gave no evidence of her
decision not to do so.
Senior Member said that because of the appellant’s actions, “[i]t is
therefore impossible to ascertain whether the
respondent would have been able to
accommodate the [appellant] in returning to work whilst she was
unvaccinated.” The Senior
Member referred to Ms Dolan’s
evidence that the respondent had been able to “make it work” with
other employees.
Senior Member noted the respondent consulted its staff prior to implementing the
policy which it believed was best suited to protect
its staff and clients. The
appellant requested an extension of her parental leave to avoid having to be
vaccinated so she was aware
it was a condition of her employment to be
vaccinated to return to work. The Senior Member said the respondent’s
policy regarding
vaccination had not changed and the Senior Member was of the
view that it was reasonable for the policy to remain in
the Senior Member noted funding for the program would have been at risk had the
appellant’s position not been filled.
Certificate of Determination issued on 6 March 2025
“1. There is an award for the respondent.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant argues the following five grounds of appeal.
– Failure to consider the appropriate weight to be attached to
statements of the respondent’s witnesses Sharon Dolan
– Failure of respondent to adduce evidence of its
COVID-19 policy as changed over time.
Ground Three
– The appellant had suffered injury before any
actions by the respondent concerning discipline.
Ground Four
– Whether the actions of the respondent regarding
discipline were “reasonable”.
Ground Five
– Whether the actions taken by the respondent were
“reasonable” taking into account its grievance policy.
LEGISLATION
11A of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
“1. No compensation
is payable under this Act in respect of an injury that is a psychological injury
if the injury was wholly
or predominantly caused by reasonable action taken or
proposed to be taken by or on behalf of the employer with respect to transfer,
demotion, promotion, performance appraisal, discipline, retrenchment or
dismissal of workers or provision of employment benefits
to workers.
psychological
is an injury (as defined in section 4) that is a
psychological or psychiatric disorder. The term extends to include the
physiological
effect of such a disorder on the nervous system.”
NATURE OF APPEAL
this appeal was filed, a five-member bench of the Court of Appeal delivered
judgement in
State of New South Wales v
considered the nature of an appeal under s 352(5) of the 1998 Act,
disapproving what had been the leading authority of
Raulston v Toll Pty
on this question. The
Court of Appeal rejected what it described as the ‘narrow’ view of
the appellate function under
s 352(5) of the 1998 Act that
had provided, instead stating the following:
“Future appeals
under s 352 should apply the approach in
Warren v Coombes
. Appropriate deference is to be given to members where their
findings are based on evidence in respect of which they have an advantage
as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member
hearing an appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the
an inference was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member
were a jury and there was some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential
Member, after making appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the
member, would reach a different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she
should not shrink from giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member
will be dismissing
an appeal without fully addressing whether there is an error
of fact, law or
discretion.”
was decided by the Court of Appeal, I issued the following
Direction dated 31 July 2025 to the parties in this matter inviting
submissions
as to the application of that decision to the issues in this
“On Thursday 17 July 2025, the Court of Appeal handed
down its decision in
State of New South Wales v Culhana
[2025] NSWCA 157
This decision addresses the correct approach regarding the nature of an
appeal to a Presidential Member under
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
The parties are invited to provide any supplementary submissions with respect
and its effect on this appeal as follows:
appellant is to file and serve any supplementary submissions by no later than
4 pm on 7 August 2025
respondent is to file and serve any supplementary submissions by no later than
4 pm on 14 August 2025
Appellant’s submissions
appellant, with commendable alacrity, provided a set of supplementary
submissions dated 1 August 2025 in response to the Direction.
The appellant
submitted the following.
to Ground One:
submissions refer to the
failure of the Respondent (who bears the onus of proof to establish a defence
under section 11A) to include
attachments referred to in those statements and
the failure of the Member to properly consider a submission on behalf of the
that that failure derogated from the weight that could be given to
those statements.
witnesses were called to give oral evidence and no action was taken by the
Respondent’s legal representatives to seek to
have those annexures to the
statements admitted into evidence.
with the decision in
, the Presidential member is in the same
position as the member and the member had no advantage in assessing the
evidence. It is submitted
that, consistent with
, the Presidential
member of appeal should consider the appeal by way of rehearing.
is submitted that, in considering the appeal by way of rehearing, the
Presidential member should decide what weight should be
given to the said
statements. It is submitted that the Presidential member should not be satisfied
that the Respondent has made out
its defence under section 11A when the evidence
it has submitted is deficient.”
to Ground Two:
of the Appeal refers to
the failure of the Respondent to adduce evidence of changes to its COVID 19
Policy as it changed over time.
All the Respondent did was to adduce the Policy
extant as at February 2023, but not the versions of 2 December 2021 and 30 June
[appellant] (see [reasons], para 2) relied upon incidents arising from her
employment from 1 March 2010 to 6 March 2023. The
Claim Form nominated an injury
date of 27 August 2021 ([reasons] para 7) and evidence was adduced regarding
events arising from the
Appellant’s employment with the Respondent from
February 2021 to 27 February 2023 (see [reasons] paras 43 to 76): it was
relevant on the question of ‘reasonable action’ to know
what the Respondent’s Covid 19 Policies were as amended
member failed to consider changes in the Policy over time ([reasons] paras 162
to 166), despite the Respondent submitting ([reasons]
para 239) that its
vaccination policy WAS regularly review[ed] and implemented after consultation.
with the decision in [
], the Presidential member is in the same
position as the member and the member had no advantage in assessing the
evidence. It is
submitted that, consistent with [
Presidential member of appeal should consider the appeal by way of rehearing.
is submitted that, as the Respondent has the onus to adduce evidence to satisfy
its obligation to establish its section 11A Defence,
the Presidential member
should take into account the failure of the Respondent to adduce its relevant
Covid 19 Policies which can
form one basis to assess whether the
Respondent’s actions were ‘reasonable’ for the purposes of
section 11A. The
section 11A defence should be rejected and the matter remitted
to the member to determine what benefits are payable.”
to Ground Three:
of the Appeal points
out an obvious error in the Member’s decision that the Appellant’s
injury was (at least in part)
suffered BEFORE any actions on the part of the
Respondent regarding discipline or termination.
Member needed to make a determination as to WHEN the Appellant was first injured
because the Respondent’s reliance on section
11A depended on when it took
actions concerning discipline or termination.
with the decision in
, the Presidential member is in the same
position as the member and the member had no advantage in assessing the
evidence. It is submitted
that, consistent with
, the Presidential
member of appeal should consider the appeal by way of rehearing.
is submitted that the Presidential member should apply the evidence before them
of the Appellant and Dr Khadka’s contemporaneous
records regarding the
onset of the Appellant’s injury, not just accept that it was
‘open’ to the member to find
injury occurred in late 2022 (based
solely on a history recorded by Dr Fernando. The Respondent’s defence
under section 11A
should be rejected as its actions occurred AFTER the Appellant
was already injured.” (emphasis in original)
to Grounds Four and Five:
“21. The Member dealt with this
issue at [reasons] paras 297 to 325 and it is not suggested that the member
erred as to the
applicable law. However, the Member’s fact finding and
exercise of discretion are also proper subjects for appeal pursuant
and the Presidential member should approach these questions consistent
, that is by way of a rehearing, unimpeded by any finding
that the Member has made as the member had no advantage in considering the
is submitted that the Presidential member should accept the submissions made in
Grounds 4 and 5 and find that the Respondent has
not established that its
actions were reasonable taking into account that those actions did not even
comply with its own policies.”
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the proper approach to this question is that as
described by Leeming JA in Culhana at [91]. The respondent
“However, the two specific matters referred to by the
respondent at paragraph [5] of [the respondent’s submissions on
remain unaffected by
. First, error must still be shown. The
is to simply expand the circumstances in which the
President can correct such error. Second, parties are bound by the presentation
of their case at arbitration, and no issues can be raised on appeal where those
issues could have affected the course of the arbitration
and have been met with
additional responsive
respondent says that the application of
would not affect the
conclusion challenged in Grounds One, Two and Three. The respondent says that
the appellant has not shown why
the decision on appeal would be any different
from that which the Senior Member decided.
respect to Grounds Four and Five, the respondent puts the
“The appellant simply submits that the President
should accept the submissions made by her in respect of grounds 4 and 5. Those
grounds of appeal are dealt with from paragraphs [29]–[42] of [the
respondent’s submissions on appeal]. In short, the
Policy was amended to
consider changes to Public Health Orders and the Member did not take into
account the terms of the Grievance
Procedure because no submission was made by
the appellant that the Member should have. In any case, even if the appellant
was permitted
to run this argument on appeal, there is no basis to infer that
the Grievance Procedure applied to the circumstances of this case.
also does not affect the proper disposition of this
addressing each appeal ground in turn, I would make the following remarks about
how I intend on approaching this appeal in
. Firstly, no
oral evidence was given in this matter before the Senior Member. This is not a
criticism, indeed this is a very common occurrence
in how first instance disputes are heard and determined in the Commission. There
is no presumptive right for any party to require oral evidence, leave must be
sought and granted by the presiding
as no oral evidence was adduced in this matter, the advantages that the first
instance decision maker would usually have
over an appellate body, by virtue of
having heard such evidence, are in my view limited in this appeal. I am
therefore in as good
a position as the Senior Member was to consider the
evidence and draw what I consider to be the correct inferences or conclusions
I consider that the Senior Member was in error. What this does not mean, is that
I would substitute my own preferred outcome on
a factual matter. Error still
must be proven. However, I do not accept the appellant’s submission that I
“should consider
the appeal by way of
rehearing.”
Notwithstanding the decision in
, s 352(5) of the 1998 Act
makes it plain that error is required and that the appeal is not a review or new
hearing. The correct approach
is as I have extracted (above) from the decision
of Leeming JA in
As to Ground One
appellant makes the following accusation about the evidence relied upon by the
respondent before the Senior Member. The appellant
firstly refers to the
statement of Ms Sharon Dolan signed 9 June 2023 and to the fifteen
annexures referred to in the statement,
which are designated SD1 to SD15. The
appellant alleges it is untrue that the annexures referred to in the statement,
can be found
at Reply pp 18–70.
appellant also complains about the absence of the annexure MC01 referenced in
the statement of Ms Maria Corsiglia.
a result of what the appellant obviously considers to be missing attachments to
these two statements, the appellant submits the
“6. The Personal Injury Commission must proceed on probative
evidence, not left in a position when it must speculate on the
contents of
documents supposedly forming part of the evidence of a witness. It was the
Respondent's obligation to discharge the onus
of proof to establish the section
11A defence. The paucity of the Respondent's evidence from statements submitted
in the Reply was
not considered by the Member.
weight that should have been attached to these statements, therefore must
negligible (
Dupas v The Queen
(2012) 218 A CRIM R 307).
Member proceeded to make a decision without probative evidence on the key
question in the case: whether the Respondent has established
a defence under
section 11 A.
Member made an error of law, fact and discretion because the Respondent's
witness statement should have been rejected. Therefore,
the Respondent had not
made out its defence under s 11A and the Appellant's claim should be
.” (emphasis in original)
respondent says that with respect to the annexures to Ms Dolan’s
statement, the appellant has not set out the basis for
the serious contention
that has been made. The respondent says that “it is plain from a review of
the attachments that there
is nothing to indicate that the attachments from
pages 18 to 68 do not reflect the attachments referred to by Ms
terms of attachment MC01 to Ms Corsiglia’s statement, the respondent
agrees that this document is not present but can be
supplied “if
necessary”. The respondent says this in response to this missing annexure:
“In any case, nothing turns
on its absence from the material before the
[Senior] Member. This is because paragraph [9] of Ms Corsiglia’s statement
that the attachment is ‘... notes about that call [in October
2022] and the following correspondence with Rebecca’. Ms
Corsiglia goes on
to describe communications she had with the [appellant] and the ARD and Reply
includes relevant written communications
between the
respondent continues:
“9. The [appellant] gives evidence
including phone
conversations (albeit at a different point of time) she had with
Ms Corsiglia at paragraph 21 of her further evidentiary statement
at page 26 of
the ARD. Indeed, most of the [appellant’s] further evidentiary statement
from pages 22 to 30 is directed to that
very issue.
there was some real contest as to what was said in phone conversations the
[appellant] had with Ms Corsiglia or about the broader
nature of the
communications that she had with the respondent, she could have put further
evidence on about those issues.
content of Attachment MC01 is simply not an issue in dispute between the parties
and nor was it raised as an issue before the
Member. Moreover, it is not clear
how the absence of that document before the Member could lead to some adverse
inference being drawn
against the respondent. Such a complaint ultimately goes
nowhere and could not have affected the result in any case (
Consideration
a result of reading the appellant’s submissions, I was concerned that the
fifteen annexures to Ms Dolan’s statement
signed 9 June 2023 were absent
from the material considered by the Senior Member. I noted that the respondent
said that the material
was present in the Reply at pages 18–68, which the
appellant submits “is not
This is a serious
accusation to level at another practitioner. It is tantamount to a submission
that the respondent is attempting
to mislead this Commission.
light of the seriousness of the appellant’s submission, I therefore
conducted a review of the material that was before the
Senior Member. I examined
the description of each of the fifteen annexures given by Ms Dolan in the body
of her statement and then
attempted to ascertain if any of the documents could
be located in either the ARD or Reply. The results of this examination of the
material I set out in the Table below.
Attachment number
Description in Ms Dolan’s statement
Location of document in evidence
SD01 & SD02
Described as “HIPPY – Home Interaction Program for Parents and
Youngers [sic]”
Reply, pp 18–22
This is a letter from the respondent dated 12 April 2010 confirming a
casual appointment with HIPPY & letter dated 15 July 2013
confirming a
permanent part-time position with HIPPY
Described as “job description”
Reply, pp 23–27
This is a document that describes the details of the position including its
purpose, and job responsibilities/duties
Described as “Rebecca started her parental leave on 16 March 2021 and
was booked until 14 March 2022”
Reply, pp 28–30
This document is a letter from the respondent to the appellant dated
14 January 2021 providing details of the parental leave arrangement
SD05 & SD06
Described as the respondent’s “COVID policy consultation
process ...” and “[a]s part of that process a survey
staff”. “A reminder of that survey was emailed out on 28 October
Reply, pp 31–32
This document is titled “Barnardos Plan for Moving Forward from
Reply, p 33
This document is an email from “Rita D’Arcy” dated
28 October 2021 with the subject heading “**Employee Survey
Today**”. Within the content of the email it states “If you
haven’t yet completed the survey, I would encourage
you to do so by
using this link”
Described as “On 9 November 2021 the results of that survey were
Reply, p 34
This document is an email from “Rita D’Arcy” dated
9 November 2021 with the subject heading “COVID-19 Vaccination
Employee Survey Results”
Described as “On 8 December 2021 our COVID policy was published
online and available to all staff and sent to all staff including
parental leave”
Reply, pp 35–51
This document is titled “COVID-19 Vaccination
Described as the appellant extending her parental leave on 16 January 2023
Reply, pp 52–53
This document is an email from the appellant to the respondent dated
16 January 2023 stating “I wish to notify you that I will
be taking a
further 12 months unpaid leave to care for my young baby. I will return to work
in March 2023”
Document described as a “Direction to comply with Policy” sent
Reply, pp 54–55
This document is a letter from the respondent dated 27 February 2023
to the appellant with the subject heading “Re: Formal Direction
with Vaccination policy”
Described as the appellant’s response to the ‘Direction to
comply with Policy’ and the respondent’s ‘whole
Reply, pp 56–64
Here there is a chain of emails between appellant and respondent commencing
28 February 2023
Described as a “Non-Compliance with Vaccination Policy –
Individual Risk Assessment Consultation” letter that was
emailed to the
appellant on 14 April 2023
Reply, pp 65–67
This document is a letter from the respondent to the appellant dated
14 April 2023 with the subject heading “Re: Non Compliance
Vaccination Policy – Individual Risk Assessment
Consultation”
SD13 & SD14
Described as email from McCabe Partners dated 18 April 2023 attaching a
statement dated 16 November 2023 [sic, 2022] and a request
payments to be backdated to 8 November 2021 together with a workers
compensation lodgement form
ARD pp 155–156
This document is a letter from McCabe Partners dated 18 April 2023
requesting weekly payments to be paid from 8 November 2021 (incorrectly
Reply pp 68–70
icare lodgement form dated 22 February 2023
Reply pp 1–6
Statement of appellant dated 16 November 2022 (incorrectly recorded as
16 November 2023)
Described as Sharon Dolan’s responses to the appellant’s
allegations
Reply, pp 7–9
This document is titled “Statement by Sharon Dolan in response to
Statement by Rebecca Georges” dated 6 June 2023
is evident from the Table, the annexures referenced in Ms Dolan’s
statement are readily ascertainable if one examines the
material and undertakes
the comparison that I did. The description given by Ms Dolan of each annexure
was of sufficient detail to
enable each document to be located. Obviously, this
is not ideal. The preferable and usual course of action would have been for each
annexure to have been identified by the allocated annexure number with each
annexure then appearing sequentially after the end of
the statement, numbered
one through to fifteen. However, the Commission’s processes are
sufficiently flexible and informal
to cope with the circumstance referred to in
this ground.
I am satisfied that
the documents I have identified are the ones referred to in the statement, which
is the respondent’s submission
in this ground.
Additionally,
I have reviewed the submissions put by the appellant before the Senior
Not once did counsel for
the appellant raise the issue addressed in this ground with respect to the
annexures to Ms Dolan’s
statement signed 9 June 2023.
the following reasons, I do not accept the appellant’s complaints in
Ground One as they apply to the annexures to Ms Dolan’s
Firstly, the annexures are not absent from the material as alleged. The material
I have examined and identified corresponds
with the description in the statement
of each annexure. I would remark that the annexures are situated in the Reply in
a place which
relatively is proximate to the statement of Ms Dolan. One
document is in the appellant’s ARD. Secondly, this submission was
to undermine the weight given by the Senior Member to the statement of Ms Dolan.
The appellant refers to the “paucity
of the Respondent’s evidence
from statements submitted in the
and that the
“Member proceeded to make a decision without probative
The appellant
concludes by saying the statement should have been
None of these
submissions can be substantiated. No submission to reject Ms Dolan’s
statement was made by the appellant nor
was any submission made regarding the
weight to be given to the statement of Ms Dolan. The rules of evidence do not
apply in Commission
proceedings,
so the question is not one of rejection, rather it is a question of
In any event the
essential complaint in this ground is the incorrect assertion that the fifteen
annexures to Ms Dolan’s statement
were absent from the proceedings.
As I have set out above, factually there is no basis for this complaint, indeed
the assertion should
not have been made. This aspect of Ground One is
leaves the annexure MC01 which is missing from Ms Corsiglia’s statement.
There is no dispute about this fact.
Corsiglia signed a statement on 9 June
The reference to the
missing annexure appears at paragraph [9] of the statement where the witness
says the following:
“In October 2022 I telephoned Rebecca to
check she was aware of the COVID policy and to arrange her return to work. She
she was aware of the policy and had a copy. She informed she was not
vaccinated and was not intending to do so. She asked what would
happen with her
employment. I explained a risk assessment would need to be conducted with HR to
determine weather [sic] she could
I made notes about that call and the following correspondence with Rebecca.
Refer Attachment
Corsiglia also recounts further contact with the appellant by telephone in
February 2023, stating the following:
“11. In February 2023 I
telephone[d] her again to see where she was at. She said [she] would like to
said she was not vaccinated and did not intend to get
vaccinated.
also said she would need to go her entire 24hr working week from her home as she
did not have childcare for her 2-year-old. I
did not go into the detail
regarding her role requiring some face to face and that would not work. I was
merely seeking her intentions
at that time.
28 February 2023 I emailed Rebecca the ‘Direction to comply with
Vaccination Policy’ which she replied to on 2 March
2023. I passed those
details to HR. From then Sharon Dolan dealt with the
appellant relied on a number of statements including one signed 15 November
At paragraph 21 of this
the appellant
recounts a discussion with Ms Corsiglia in February 2023.
witnesses describe the February 2023 contact and their recollections are not in
conflict. The appellant does not say anything
Corsiglia in October 2022, which is of course related to the missing annexure.
Reading both witnesses’
statements reveals discussions about the
respondent’s vaccination policy and the effect of the policy upon the
appellant’s
intended return to work. I do not see any controversy about
what was said, although it is apparent that the appellant was not pleased
the vaccination requirement.
have also closely read the Senior Member’s decision and the transcript of
the hearing. The appellant took no point regarding
the missing annexure MC01 nor
was there any challenge to the evidence of Ms Corsiglia about her contact with
the appellant. The Senior
Member in the dispositive section of her decision made
reference to Ms Corsiglia’s evidence at reasons [315] and [319], neither
of which are challenged on appeal.
accept the annexure should have been in evidence. But the mere fact of its
absence, without more, does not assist the appellant.
The exchanges between the
two witnesses are not in dispute. Even if I were to assume that the absence of
the annexure is an error,
having regard to how it is described by Ms Corsiglia
and the lack of any contest in the appellant’s response, it is hard to
its relevance to any matter in dispute. If this was an error, it only justifies
intervention on appeal if the error affected
appellant has failed to establish how the absence of the annexure was relevant
to the resolution of the overall controversy between
the parties and thus how
the result was affected. Additionally, this point was not argued before the
Senior Member and having read
the material, including the transcript, I cannot
see that the issue now complained of was a matter in dispute. This aspect of
One is dismissed.
As to Ground Two
appellant complains that the respondent only had in evidence the single
iteration of its COVID-19 Vaccination Policy, dated February
and not its earlier
versions. The appellant contends:
“All that is set out in the
Policy adduced in evidence (Reply pages 50/51) is that the Policy was
‘reviewed in line with
all applicable laws from the CDC, etc AND changes
in the PHOs’ (shortened), with PHOs being Public Health Orders.
However, the Policy gives no indication if and how the Policy was changed due
to the Government withdrawing its PHO in June 2022 (at
which time the
requirement for health workers to be vaccinated was withdrawn).
The Respondent could have called/adduced evidence from its CEO Ms Cheers or
another employee as to the changes in its Covid 19 Policy.
Its failure to do so
must lead to an inference that this evidence would not support its case.
The requirements of the Respondent’s Covid 19 Policy were fundamental
to the determination of this case and the Respondent complying
with its onus to
establish all the elements of section 11A. The Member refers to the Policy in
detail at [reasons] paragraphs 162
to 166 and its ‘reasonableness’
at paras 304 to 325. Indeed the Member at paragraph 318 (wrongly) refers to the
not having changed until the termination of the Appellant’s
employment.”
appellant alleges that the failure to put the earlier versions into evidence and
the Senior Member’s reliance on the policy
as “reasonable” was
thus an error.
reply, the respondent submits the following:
“By the second
appeal ground, the [appellant] argues that the failure by the respondent to
adduce all the versions of the respondent’s
COVID-19 Vaccination Policy
(set out from pages 35 to 51 of the Reply) (Policy) should lead to an inference
that this evidence would
not have supported its case (AS [5]). The Member was
not invited to make any adverse inference pursuant to
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298.
In any event, there is no substance to the complaint. The broad nature of the
changes made to the Policy can be inferred from the
terms of the Policy itself
(see the ‘Version control and change history’ section set out at
pages 50–51 of the
Even more fundamentally, it was not the precise changes made to the Policy
over time that was relevant. Rather it was the fact that
the Policy was not a
static document. See the respondent’s submissions on that issue (T3.23,
T20.8, T45.31).
The way that issue ultimately featured in the Member’s analysis in the
[reasons] was principally by a rejection of the [appellant’s]
that it was not reasonable for the respondent to maintain the Policy after
relevant Public Health Orders had been withdrawn
(see [reasons]
[300]–[309]).
The Member found that the withdrawal of those orders was not determinative
([reasons] [301]) (a finding not challenged on appeal)
and that the Policy was
reviewed ([reasons]
Consideration
for the appellant addressed the Senior Member on the terms of the
Nowhere in the
appellant’s submissions before the Senior Member was any issue taken with
respect to the absence of the two
earlier iterations of the policy. Nowhere was
Jones v Dunkel
submission put to the Senior Member by the appellant
regarding the absence of the two earlier versions of the policy. Needless to
say, it is not an error for the Senior Member to not deal with an argument that
was not put.
any event, if one considers the terms of the policy, especially at paragraph
the amendments to the
earlier versions of the policy are plainly spelt out in the Table. The Table has
four columns, the fourth being
entitled “Amendment”. Plainly this
fourth column lists the amendments between the latest version of the policy as
to the one immediately preceding it. The development of the policy can
easily be tracked by reviewing this Table. I do not accept
the submission
that the absence of the earlier versions left a lacuna in the evidence.
I refer to the appellant’s submission that the Senior Member’s
remark at reasons [318] wrongly asserts that the
policy had not changed until
the termination of the appellant’s
employment.
Reasons [318] reads:
“The respondent’s policy regarding
vaccination
changed by the time the [appellant’s] parental leave ended, and in my view
it was reasonable for the policy to remain
in force” (emphasis
appellant does not correctly represent what the Senior Member said at reasons
[318]. The Senior Member’s remark was limited
to the “policy
regarding vaccination”, it was not more broadly referring to the entire
policy. If one reads paragraph
[14] of the policy, which tracks the policy
amendments, there was no amendment to the vaccination requirement. The Senior
remark at reasons [318] is therefore a correct statement of that
the reasons I have set out above, the appellant has not established that the
Senior Member was in error.
Two is dismissed.
As to Ground Three
appellant says that she pleaded a disease injury spanning the entirety of her
period of employment, from 1 March 2010 to 17 October
2023. The appellant then
says that as the respondent did not dispute injury, it was thus accepted that
the appellant had in fact
suffered injury between 1 March 2010 and 17 October
appellant says that what flows from this is that the injury was suffered
the employer commenced any of the processes set out in s 11A
of the 1987 Act. The appellant says that while the s 11A process may
made the condition worse, referencing my decision in
Martsoukos v Secretary,
Department of Education
had not wholly or predominantly caused the appellant’s psychological
injury. In short, the appellant says the injury predated
the commencement of the
s 11A process with respect to discipline.
appellant says that the Senior Member found that the appellant started suffering
significant psychological symptoms towards the
The appellant says that
the “discipline” relied on by the respondent did not commence until
February 2023.
respondent says that the Commission is not bound by strict pleadings. The
reference to the 1 March 2010 date is self-evidently
a reference to the
appellant’s first day of work.
respondent says: “The fact the respondent at the arbitration withdrew any
dispute in relation to injury does not amount
to some broader admission by the
respondent that such injury commenced from 1 March
This is contrasted
to the appellant’s case that stated her symptoms started in February
respondent then submitted the following:
[appellant’s] submissions on this ground from AS [6] to [10] then appear
to amount to an attack on the finding
made by the Member on the first limb of
the s 11A defence. The Member’s reasoning on that issue is set out
from [reasons] [279]–[296].
Given the one isolated clinical reference on 6
July 2021 to psychological distress (that did not touch on the
[appellant’s]
employment with the respondent in any case) and the absence
of any other treating practitioner reports that predated March 2023,
was principally dealing with a contest between the evidence of Dr Fernando and
24. The high
point of the [appellant’s] case on this issue was a supplementary report
from Dr Anand dated 10 January 2025
in which Dr Anand found as follows:
opinion, Ms Georges' injury was not due to reasonable action taken by Barnardos
Australia as noting the timeline, Ms
Georges was diagnosed with adjustment
disorder with depression, anxiety on 06 July 2021, well before Barnardos
Australia implemented
their COVID-19 vaccination policy in February 2022. This
suggest that the psychological injury was not initially caused by the employer's
vaccination policy.’
Member correctly reasoned from [reasons] [289]–[291], Dr Anand’s
first report says nothing of a diagnosis
on 6 July 2021. If the view expressed
by Dr Anand in his supplementary report was due to him having reviewed
clinical records (a
matter that is not clear given they are not referred to in
the documentation he states he reviewed at page 2 of the [appellant’s]
late documents), that would have been an error. As the Member correctly found,
there is no basis to conclude that the [appellant]
was diagnosed with any
psychological condition on 6 July 2021 based on the isolated clinical report.
reasoning for Dr Anand’s conclusion is otherwise not exposed. This appears
to have caused the Member to have doubt
as to the accuracy of Dr Anand’s
opinion. In those circumstances, the Member was correct to prefer other evidence
on the issue,
including the opinion of Dr Fernando.
27. Contrary
to the [appellant’s] submission at AS [8]–[9], the fact Dr Fernando
found that the [appellant] began feeling
psychologically distressed towards the
end of 2022 does not undermine the conclusion that the disciplinary process that
in early 2023 was at least the
predominant
cause of the
[appellant’s] injury.
28. A defence
under s 11A can be made out even if there are some stressors that commence
before the disciplinary action commences,
otherwise the concept of
‘predominantly’ would have no work to do. The Member’s
findings on that issue were carefully
reasoned and the [appellant’s]
submissions from AS [6] to [10] on this ground are an attempt to re-litigate
adverse findings
made against the [appellant] without identifying any real
Consideration
appellant says that she had suffered personal injury in terms of a psychiatric
injury before any disciplinary process had commenced,
alleging that the gradual
onset of her psychiatric injury started on her first day of employment on 1
March 2010. The appellant further
states that as “injury” was not
put in issue by the respondent, that this constitutes an admission that the
pleaded in ARD was accepted by the respondent.
the following reasons, I do not accept this submission. Firstly, the appellant
has not taken me to any evidence which suggests
or shows in any probative sense
that the appellant had suffered injury from the commencement of her employment.
From my review of
the material there is no evidence of any psychiatric issue
before a clinical note from the Warrawong Medical
citing an “anxiety
issue” on 6 July 2021.
have read the appellant’s
statements.
Nowhere does the
appellant attribute her condition to any work related conduct or events prior to
the advent of the vaccine mandate
let alone any issues from March 2010. Indeed,
in her statement dated 14 March 2024 the appellant directly attributes her
psychological
injury to the respondent’s vaccination
requirement.
The claim form
signed by the appellant dated 30 April 2023 puts the injury date in August
Likewise the icare report
of injury form also signed by the appellant says the injury occurred
“whenever the vaccine mandates
Dr Anand, a
consultant psychiatrist retained to provide a medico-legal report for the
appellant, noted that the only earlier issues
from a psychiatric perspective
were brief post-partum ‘blues’ following the births of her
No history of any
issue with work from 2010 was recorded. I would remark that for the Commission
to make findings the material must
be “satisfactory, in the probative
sense ...”.
therefore accept that the appellant suffered any psychological injury starting
in 2010 as is pleaded.
I deal with the appellant’s submission that by virtue of the admission of
injury by the respondent, that there was an acceptance
of the matter as pleaded.
Firstly, I do not accept that there was any admission by the respondent that the
injury as pleaded by the
appellant was accepted. Counsel for the respondent
submitted that “I can confirm that the respondent doesn’t put in
the question of injury
Nowhere in her
submissions before the Senior Member did the appellant make any submission that
the acceptance of injury constituted
the admission now asserted. Secondly, cases
are decided on evidence and not
The evidence did not
support any submission that injury of gradual onset commenced in 2010. In any
event the Commission is not bound
There is nothing in
this aspect of the argument in Ground Three.
real contest in Ground Three relates to the appellant’s assertion that the
“attended her general practitioner Dr Khadka on 6
July 2021 ([reasons] para 167) who records that the Appellant has an
issue’ – previously seen counsellor – no
thoughts of self-harm – mental health care plan to be considered’.
Thus the Appellant was suffering some (albeit minor) symptoms of her conceded
injury as early as July
appellant then argues that the Senior Member accepted that the appellant started
suffering significant symptoms towards the end
Pausing here, I think the
appellant is referring to reasons [191] and not [190] in this paragraph.
appellant alleges that the process of “discipline” relied on by the
respondent did not commence until February 2023,
which post-dated the appellant
suffering injury, relying upon my decision in
and the Court of
Appeal’s decision in
Secretary, Department of Education v
Senior Member dealt with the evidence relating to this issue at reasons
[283]–[293]. In summary, the Senior Member was not
persuaded that the 6
July 2021 clinical note made any reference of the then presenting symptoms being
related to any issue at work.
Was this a correct factual conclusion for the Senior Member to draw? The
clinical note appears at page 99 of the Reply. It reads
Tuesday July 6 2021
Letter Created – re. MEDICAL CERTIFICATE to .
anxiety issue. struggling with mask. makes her heart race. previously seen
counsellor. no thoughts of self harm.
kids with her who suffer too from anxiety.
no thoughts of self harm.
looking after kids.
on maternity leave.
child has not had vaccine. She says she is still doing research on it.
review in 4 weeks.”
my opinion, the Senior Member’s remark at reasons [283] about the clinical
note is completely accurate. There is no error
in how the Senior Member treated
this entry.
entry is also an unsatisfactory basis for Dr Anand’s later opinion of 10
January 2025 where he states, “In my opinion,
Ms Georges’ injury was
not due to reasonable action taken by Barnados Australia as noting the timeline,
Ms Georges was diagnosed
with adjustment disorder with depression, anxiety on 06
July 2021, well before Barnados Australia implemented their COVID-19 vaccination
policy in February
Firstly, Dr
Anand’s opinion appears to make an assumption, unsupported by any path of
reasoning, that the condition described
in the 6 July 2021 note was work
related. There is no evidentiary basis for that assumption arising from a plain
reading of the clinical
note. Secondly, the note does not record a diagnosis of
“adjustment disorder with depression, anxiety”, as is apparent
the extract (above). The note records an “anxiety issue” only, with
no attribution of its origin. The Senior Member
found Dr Anand’s
supplementary report to be “unconvincing and of little
assistance”.
with this statement. The clinical note is an entirely unsatisfactory basis for
the opinion expressed by Dr Anand in his 10
January 2025 report. In any event
the opinion expressed by the doctor in the 10 January 2025 report is not
supported by any path
of reasoning.
leaves the appellant’s general assertion that the appellant had suffered
injury before any discipline had commenced. This
is really the major assertion
made in this ground.
commencing this examination, I set out the principles to be considered. In
, Sackville AJA said a broad view had to be taken to the expression
in s 11A “action with respect to discipline”. The
psychological
injury must be wholly or predominantly caused by this action, which action the
employer must prove was
reasonable.
argument that the injury predated any action with respect to discipline was
correctly articulated by the Senior Member at reasons
[265]–[267]. The
Senior Member noted that the description of injury commenced “from 2010,
‘but really from 2021’
to 17 October 2023, during which time the
[appellant] received correspondence about the requirement to be double
vaccinated.”
reflects what was put to the Senior Member by the
description about the injury from 2021 to 2023 fairly encapsulates how the
appellant put her case. The Senior Member also,
quite correctly, had regard to
the remarks of Deputy President Snell in
at [88] which discussed
the need for medical evidence to substantiate causation in particular cases.
2021, the evidence is that the appellant was on maternity leave. During 2021 the
respondent developed the policy and provided
it to staff, including the
appellant. The policy became operative on 8 December
The policy made clear,
in paragraph 3 entitled “Scope”, that non compliance with the policy
may lead to disciplinary
action including termination of employment. The policy
did have scope for an exemption to be applied for, but the evidence is that
appellant did not avail herself of this possible avenue.
appellant in her Worker’s Injury Claim
says that she suffered
psychological injuries due the vaccination mandate and attributes a date of
injury of 27 August 2021.
I would remark that this form was signed by the appellant on 30 April
The appellant in her
statement dated 30 April 2024
says that she gave notice to her employer on 27 August 2021, citing the
Workers Injury Claim Form. Clearly this statement is mistaken
as the form was
not signed until 30 April 2023.
appellant refers to receiving the vaccination emails during 2021 while she was
on maternity leave
that as she was against being vaccinated, she applied for extra time off and
that she felt “quite
depressed”.
appellant later says, in her statement dated 15 November 2024, that “it 25
Oct 2022 [sic] when I was contacted by Barnardos
regarding my impending return
to work in March 2023 that my anxiety and depression had elevated to the point I
did not think I could
work. I first consulted Dr Khadkha regarding my anxiety
and depression on
02/03/2023.”
appellant continues:
“21. In February 2023, I had
discussions with Centre Manager Maria Corsiglia about my intended return to work
in March 2023.
I was surprised that Barnardos was still maintaining that I had
to be vaccinated when most other employers had relaxed their requirements.
started having all of the symptoms set out in paragraph 18 of my statement of
14/03/2024.
symptoms were made worse when I received a letter from Barnardos of 27/02/2023
giving me a formal direction to comply with
their Covid Policy. As set out
above, I consulted Dr Khalda on 02/03/2023 and continued to consult that doctor
to date together with
the psychologist Liz [Sheppard]. I feel I have been
incapacitated for work from 06/03/2023.
14/04/2023, Barnardos sent me another letter appointing a meeting on 26/04/2023
with Maria Corsiglia and Lynda Sinnott, Program
Manager. I was told I may be
disciplined and my employment terminated. This increased my symptoms of anxiety
and depression.
do not feel that I have been fit for any employment since
06/03/2023.”
Psychologist Liz Sheppard saw the appellant on 11 May
Ms Sheppard was of the
view that the appellant “does meet criteria for an adjustment disorder
with anxiety and depressed mood
but did not posit
any view about when this condition came about. This is not a criticism of Ms
Sheppard, a review of the report reveals
she was concerned about treatment.
now turn to Dr Fernando’s report of 1 September 2023, a psychiatrist
qualified by the respondent.
The doctor takes a history that “Rebecca reported she started feeling
psychologically distressed towards the end of 2022 when
they started sending
letters informing her about her return-to-work plan and the need to comply with
the vaccination
Dr Fernando
then diagnoses the appellant as suffering from “an adjustment disorder
with anxiety and depressive symptoms as
is then asked and answers a series of questions about the question of
stating that the
“company’s COVID vaccine mandate policy implementation appears to
have been a substantial contributing
factor to her psychological
Later in the
same answer the doctor states, “I note that on the 14
2023, she received a non-compliance with vaccination letter which she appears to
have perceived as a termination notice. The
time correlation is suggestive that
this appear[s] to be one the main factors [sic] contributing to her
psychological distress (substantial
work related factor).” The Senior
Member recounted this extract at reasons [204].
my view the Senior Member was correct to dismiss the appellant’s
submission that her psychological injury pre-dated the respondent’s
with respect to discipline. The only evidence of a medical kind the appellant
points to is Dr Khadka’s entry dated 6
July 2021, which is an
unsatisfactory basis for this submission as I have discussed above. By the time
the appellant consults Dr
Khadka on 02 March 2023 regarding her anxiety and
depression, the appellant had been in contact with the respondent about her
to work and had received the letter dated 27 February
which was entitled
“Formal Direction to Comply with Vaccination Policy”. I would remark
that the appellant had by this
time long possessed the policy and which clearly
provided that non-compliance without gaining an exemption meant disciplinary
This fact is confirmed shortly thereafter in the letter dated 14 April
“Non-Compliance with Vaccination Policy - Individual Risk Assessment
Consultation”. This action on behalf of
the respondent corresponds with
the appellant’s own evidence about her attendance with Dr Khadka on 02
March 2023 and Dr Fernando’s
opinion on this issue that I have extracted
above. There is no relevant medical evidence before this time which suggests
injury had been suffered.
appellant relies upon my decision in
. For the following
reasons, that decision may be comfortably distinguished from the facts in this
, it was common ground that that the worker’s
injury in that matter was caused by receipt of two emails from the
employer dated 27 August and 2 September
I then went to on to
examine the nature of the emails and whether they possessed the necessary
disciplinary charter. I found that
This being the case,
when the disciplinary action commenced at a date well after the dates of the two
emails, the worker had already
suffered her compensable injury.
is to be contrasted to this matter. It is apparent that the respondent did not
need to enforce the vaccination mandate on the
appellant while she was absent on
extended maternity leave and that was the unchallenged
It was only once
the appellant’s return to work was imminent in February 2023 that the need
for the appellant to comply with
the policy became necessary. Dr Fernando is the
only doctor who has considered this issue. For the reasons I have set out above,
the Senior Member was correct to afford Dr Anand’s opinion little
appellant has failed to establish error. Having reviewed the evidence and the
Senior Member’s findings, I agree with the
Senior Member’s decision
on this issue.
Three is dismissed.
As to Ground Four
appellant alleges that the policy was “substantially unchanged between
December 2021 and February 2023, the Respondent failed
to adduce any evidence
that it had actually complied with its own
appellant continues:
“Therefore, the Public Health Order
applicable to the Respondent’s own Covid 19 policy was no longer
applicable after
13/05/2022. There was no evidence adduced by the Respondent
(perhaps through its CEO Ms Cheers or one of the other employees) that
consideration was given by the Respondent to the withdrawal of the PHO.
It is submitted that the Respondent by its own policy was obliged to take
into account changes to the Public Health Orders. Failure
to do was not
reasonable action on its behalf regarding actions taken pursuant to the Policy
regarding discipline.”
a result, the appellant submits the Senior Member made an error in accepting the
respondent’s s 11A defence.
reply the respondent argues as follows:
“29. The [appellant]
appears to allege there was no evidence that any consideration had been given by
the respondent to change
its policies following the withdrawal of relevant
Public Health Orders.
factual allegation underpinning such argument is incorrect. The
[appellant’s] own argument contends that the relevant Public
Health Orders
were not extended beyond 13 May 2022 (a matter which should have, in any event,
presumably been proven by the inclusion
of the Public Health Orders themselves
rather than the [appellant’s] statement evidence on the issue).
Policy was amended on 30 June 2022 (see page 50 of the Reply) with amendments
that included the following [respondent’s
policy review commenced in March 2022 in line with all applicable laws and
guidance from the Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention and local health
authorities. Updates specifically relate to Barnardos position on booster
requirements,
changes in PHO’s
and privacy policies on Individual
Health Identifiers (IHI) as well as position for visitors.”
Policy was therefore amended specifically to take into account changes in the
Public Health Orders. The submission at AS [3]
(page 7) that:
there was no evidence adduced by the Respondent ... that any
consideration was given by the Respondent to the withdrawal of the PHO’
cannot be accepted.
statement from Ms Dolan from paragraphs [32] to [38] also explains why it is not
as straightforward as simply repealing the Policy
on expiry of the relevant
Public Health Orders.
any case, as submitted at paragraph 16 above, the Member did not find the repeal
of the Public Health Orders as determinative
of the reasonableness issue. The
[appellant] has advanced no reason as to why the Member fell into error in
arriving at that conclusion.”
Consideration
appellant does not in terms specify the particular finding or passage of the
decision where the asserted error is said to lie.
The gravamen of the complaint
in this ground is that the respondent’s vaccination policy obliged it to
take into account changes
in Public Health Orders and it failed to so, thus
rendering its action with respect to discipline not reasonable.
Senior Member dealt with the respondent’s actions and whether they were
reasonable at reasons [297]–[325]. Relevantly,
the appellant put to the
Senior Member that while the requirement to be vaccinated may have been
reasonable in 2021, the situation
had changed by
It was put that the
policy should have changed because conditions had
Senior Member found the following:
“301. I do not regard the
withdrawal of the Public Health Orders as determinative in considering whether
the respondent acted
reasonably.
the respondent submitted, the fact that Public Health Orders may have been
extinguished does not abrogate the right of an employer
to make its own judgment
and assessment of the risk it is prepared to accept in the environment in which
it operates.
Geraghty J said in
, the test of ‘reasonableness’ must
weigh the rights of the employees against the object of the
employment.”
is the crux of the issue in dispute in this ground. The appellant has not shown
why this finding was in error. I would also note
that the policy on its face
says that it is informed by applicable laws and Government
directives.
terms of the submission that there is no evidence the respondent failed to take
into account changes in Public Health Orders, this
submission is incorrect. As
submitted by the respondent, the policy itself notes that it was reviewed in
March 2022 and again in
Additionally Ms Dolan
states that the policy “had been reviewed in line with changes in the
latest information on COVID as
more information became
available.”
also states that the respondent’s approach was to tailor the policy across
the organisation.
is nothing in this ground. The Senior Member, in a carefully reasoned decision,
has assessed the reasonableness of the respondent’s
actions and found that
they were reasonable. A consideration of the evidence reveals that this finding
was correct on the evidence.
The appellant’s assertion of error in this
ground relies on a submission which does not correctly reflect the evidence.
Four is dismissed.
As to Ground Five
Five is a second complaint about the Senior Member’s finding in favour of
the reasonableness of the respondent’s
actions. This ground relates to the
respondent’s Grievance Procedure. The appellant asserts
“2. In response to the letter of 27 February 2023 (sent
via email on 28 February 2023 (see Reply page 62) the Appellant had
her view in her email of 2 March 2023 (Reply page 62) which was the
necessary written step in the Grievance Procedure asking
why she was no allowed
to return to work (?).
was no evidence adduced by the Respondent that it carried out any of its
obligations under its own Grievance Procedure. It
is submitted the Respondent
did not follow its own policy in regard to grievances and therefore its actions
in disciplining the Appellant
were not reasonable actions. This caused further
aggravation of the Appellant’s disease and eventually led to the
termination
of her employment in October 2023.
Appellant was left in the position of not understanding why the Respondent had
not changed its policy regarding Covid 19, had
not taken into account the change
in the Public Health Orders, and had not dealt with her grievance according to
its own policies,
all of which led to her accepted disease injury.”
appellant relies upon clause 2.2.2 of the respondent’s Grievance Procedure
which deals with the investigation of a grievance,
as it appears that no such
investigation has been carried out.
respondent says that this matter was never argued before the Senior Member and
that the appellant is bound by the manner in which
the case was
Consideration
have read the transcript of the appellant’s submissions before the Senior
Member. No submission about the Grievance Procedure
was made nor was any
submission put of a failure to comply with the said procedure (and in particular
clause 2.2.2 of it) so as to
render the respondent’s actions not
reasonable. The Senior Member cannot be in error for failing to deal with an
argument that
any event, this ground misunderstands how the Grievance Procedure works. The
Grievance Procedure appears at Reply p 79 and in the
following pages. It
provides for a three-step procedure for staff and volunteers to raise
grievances.
The investigation
provision, clause 2.2.2 relied upon by the appellant, is part of step 2, which
is described as the “Formal
Procedure”. I have read the
appellant’s email dated 2 March
which is relied upon in
this ground. At no place in this email does the appellant invoke the Grievance
Procedure. Even if one were
to assume that the email had this effect, this would
only constitute the first step of the procedure being “Local
Resolution”.
investigation stage only arises at the second step and there is no evidence that
the second or “formal” stage of
the Grievance Procedure had been
only is the reliance on the Grievance Procedure misconceived, it was also never
argued before the Senior Member.
Five is dismissed.
Senior Member, in a carefully considered decision, found that the respondent
employer had established its defence under s 11A
of the 1987
I entirely concur with
her reasoning and finding of facts. The evidence is that in response to COVID-19
and the Government requirements
around vaccination, the respondent as a
responsible employer consulted with its staff (including the appellant) about
the development
of its vaccination policy. The policy in its terms contemplated
circumstances where a staff member may be unvaccinated (risk assessment
granting an exemption). The policy was also reviewed twice in light of
developing circumstances. The appellant did not engage
with her employer, the
respondent, in the terms set forth in the policy for those choosing to be
unvaccinated. The reasons relied
upon by the respondent for maintaining the
vaccination requirement after the withdrawal of the Public Health Orders was
the Senior Member to be reasonable and this finding has not been
challenged on appeal.
a consequence, this appeal must fail.
Certificate of Determination dated 6 March 2025 is confirmed.
Judge Phillips
1 September 2025
Reply to Application to Resolve
a Dispute (reply), p 35.
p 50, [14] “Version control and change
Application to
Resolve a Dispute (ARD), p 153.
Appellant’s statement
dated 14 March 2024, ARD, p 12,
Barnardos Australia
[2025] NSWPIC 74
[82]–[114].
[115]–[123].
Reply, p 66.
[115]–[123].
Transcript (T) of Proceedings dated 11 February 2025, T
41.32–42.5.
[2007] NSWWCCPD
[2008] NSWWCCPD
[2017] NSWWCCPD 6
[287]–[293].
[289]–[290].
[295]–[296]
Compensation Court of NSW, Geraghty CCJ, 18 June 1998, No 14068 of 1997,
unreported (
[2013] NSWCA 255
[297]–[299].
[301]–[302].
[308]–[309].
[310]–[315].
[316]–[319].
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
Respondent’s submissions 14 August 2025,
Respondent’s
submissions 14 August 2025,
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
; Procedural Direction PIC 1, [38].
Appellant’s
supplementary submissions 1 August 2025,
Respondent’s
submissions on appeal 5 May 2025,
Respondent’s
submissions on appeal 5 May 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions on appeal 2 April 2025, Ground One,
See s 43 of the
Appellant’s submissions on appeal 2 April 2025, Ground One,
Appellant’s
submissions on appeal 2 April 2025, Ground One,
Appellant’s
submissions on appeal 2 April 2025, Ground One,
Section 43(2) of the
Hancock v East
Coast Timber Products Pty Limited
[2011] NSWCA 11
, [83] per Beazley
Walshe v Prest
[2005] NSWCA 333
Reply, p 51.
Appellant’s submissions on appeal 2 April 2025, Ground Two,
Respondent’s submissions on appeal 5 May 2025,
Industries Limited v Bell
[2010] NSWCA 162
), [30], per McColl
Appellant’s submissions on appeal 2 April 2025, Ground Two,
[2024] NSWPICPD 85
reasons [190] and [286].
Respondent’s submissions on appeal 5 May 2025,
Respondent’s
submissions on appeal 5 May 2025,
ARD, p 118.
ARD, p 123.
Onesteel Reinforcing
Pty Ltd v Sutton
[2012] NSWCA 282
, [2], per Allsop
Commerciale SA (In Liquidation) v Akhil Holdings Ltd
[1990] HCA 11
, 296–7, per Dawson
Tray Fit Pty Limited v
[2015] NSWWCCPD 2
Appellant’s
submissions 1 April 2025, Ground 3,
Citing reasons [190]
and [286] at appellant’s submissions 1 April 2025, Ground 3,
[2024] NSWCA
Appellant’s
submissions 1 April 2025, Ground 3, [8]–[9].
Application to
Lodge Additional Documents 20 January 2025, p
Appellant’s
submissions 2 April 2025, Ground Three,
Reasons, [265].
ARD, p 189.
206–207, question and answers 9 (b)(i) and (ii), 10(a), (b) and
ARD, p 205 at
letter dated 27 February 2023, ARD, pp
Appellant’s submissions 2 April 2025, Ground Four, [1].
Appellant’s
submissions 2 April 2025, Ground Four,
50–51, [14].
p 15, [33].
Reply, p 15,
Respondent’s
submissions on appeal 5 May 2025,
Reply, p 81,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.24 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter