URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2013/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v McKEEHAN [2013] NSWPST 2 (23 August 2013)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HCCC v McKEEHAN
Hearing dates 27 and 28 May 2013
Decision Date 23
August 2013
Inquiry into a Complaint against a psychologist pursuant to
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) sections 145A
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
Parties: New South Wales Health Care
Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Catherine McKeehan
(Psychologist)
Decision: The Tribunal finds the psychologist guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
Tribunal: Ms Mary Brennan, Deputy Chairperson
Lizabeth Tong (Psychology Member)
Dr Janina Szyndler (Psychology
Dr Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
Appearances: Ms R Mathur of
counsel instructed by Ms F Westwood for the Complainant;
Mr A J Kimmins
of counsel instructed by Mr S O’Reilly for the
Psychologist;
Catchwords:
unregistered psychologist-
unsatisfactory professional conduct- professional misconduct-failure to maintain
professional boundaries-inappropriate
personal relationship with a vulnerable
client-submission of false documentation to
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
[1938] HCA 34
New South Wales Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 135
Ibrahim v Walton
, Court of Appeal 23 April 1991, unreported
[2011] NSWPST 4
INTRODUCTION
Between 1 July 2007 and 8 September 2008, Catherine McKeenan
psychologist)
worked at Reiby Juvenile Justice Centre
(the Centre)
From July to November 2007, she provided counselling services to client A, a 15
year old detainee at the Centre. On his sixteenth
birthday, client A was
transferred to Baxter Juvenile Justice Centre. The psychologist continued her
telephone calls. On his release from the
Baxter facility in April 2008, the psychologist began a sexual relationship with
A, resulting in the birth of a daughter in May 2009.
As a result of absences from work at the Centre, the psychologist lodged medical
certificates from a practice certifying her unfit
for duties for approximately 5
weeks in mid 2008. The psychologist’s employer subsequently obtained
evidence that the medical
certificates were forgeries and sought repayment of
salary covering this period.
practitioner admits her relationship with client A. She does not admit that she
lodged three forged certificates with her employer
or that she dishonestly
obtained sick leave payments from her former employer, as alleged by the
complainant.
Tribunal’s task after considering the psychologist’s admissions and
the evidence filed was to determine whether she
had engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct. Secondly, the Tribunal needed
to decide whether
the evidence established on the balance of probabilities that
the practitioner had lodged false medical certificates and dishonestly
sick leave payments. After adjudication of these issues, the Tribunal had to
decide the orders flowing from any finding
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct.
REASONS FOR DECISION:
FINDINGS–COMPLAINTS AND PARTICULARS
Complaints dated 10 September 2012 were lodged with the Tribunal. The
Complaints’ particulars were the same. Complaint
One alleged
unsatisfactory professional conduct
as defined by section 139B(1)(a) and
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
National Law)
. Complaint Two alleged
professional misconduct
defined by section139E of the National Law. Complaint One was amended at the
start of the hearing to reduce the quantum of the
sick leave payments that the
psychologist had allegedly obtained dishonestly.
A" was identified in a Schedule to the Complaints. The Tribunal directed
pursuant to Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law, that the client’s
name not be published.
inquiry was held on 27 and 28 May 2013. At its close, the Complainant sought
costs if the Tribunal found the Complaints
The psychologist was employed by the Department of Juvenile Justice from 31
December 2001 to 8 September 2008. She was granted conditional
registration to
practice as a psychologist on 3 April 2001. This conditional registration
expired on 31 March 2005. The psychologist
was then granted provisional
registration on 7 August 2007 on the basis of enrolment in the Master of
Clinical Psychology program
at the University of Western Sydney. Her
registration was cancelled on 21 May 2009 due to her failure to re-enroll in an
postgraduate course in psychology and thereby complete a Masters
July 2007 the psychologist began counselling client A. Client A was a 15 year
old youth at the Centre. From the evidence tendered,
some of the
psychologist’s colleagues had concerns regarding the professional
boundaries between psychologist and client A
during July to November 2007. In
November 2007 another psychologist took over as client A’s primary
counsellor.
February 2008 client A was transferred to Baxter Juvenile Justice Centre. During
that time, the psychologist maintained contact
with client A through regular
telephone calls. In mid April 2008, client A was released from this facility. On
the same date, a sexual
relationship began between him and the psychologist.
psychologist took two months annual leave shortly after client A’s
release. She then took sick leave from 16 June - 25 July
2008. The psychologist
returned to work and on 4 August 2008, she signed and submitted typed flexitime
record sheets covering the
period 12 May - 1 August 2008, including time that
was sick leave. After 4 August 2008, the psychologist did not attend work again.
On 11 August 2008 the Department of Juvenile Justice ceased paying her. The
psychologist resigned by email sent on 21 August 2008.
On 4 September 2009 the
psychologist’s employer received facsimiled medical certificates
certifying the psychologist was unable
to attend work between 16 June - 25 July
to the psychologist’s curriculum vitae, from September 2008 to April 2009
she worked at Child and Adolescent Mental
Health, in Lake
16 May 2009 the psychologist gave birth to a daughter. The father’s
particulars were not stated on the birth certificate.
During this time, the
psychologist and client A were living in Queensland with the
psychologist’s mother.
July 2009 the psychologist’s employer advised her in writing that she had
been overpaid salary due to the rejection of medical
certificates she had lodged
covering the absence from 16 June - 25 July 2008. She was asked to make contact
with her employer to
arrange repayment of the overpaid salary.
September 2009 the Centre received a telephone call from the mother of a
detainee, who was in detention at the Centre at the same
time as client A. She
advised that client A had fathered a child with a staff member, known as
“Cate” working at the
Meaning of unsatisfactory professional misconduct and professional
Pursuant to section 139B of the National Law,
unsatisfactory professional
of a registered health practitioner includes both of the
(a) conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgement possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(l) other improper or unethical conduct.
Any other improper or
unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner's profession.
Professional misconduct
under section 139E of the National Law
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
Particulars of complaints
Complaint One pleads:
1. Between 13 July 2007 and 22 November 2007
the practitioner in the course of her employment with the Department, provided
professional
psychology services to client A. During the course of these
sessions, the practitioner failed to observe appropriate boundaries in
she:i) wrote to client A stating that “when you get out we can see each
other”; “I love you”; and “the
only reason I come to
work is to see you”;ii) gave client A, a 15-year-old minor, tobacco on a
weekly basis;iii) discussed
with client A during counselling sessions her
romantic feelings for client A.
iii) entered into a personal and emotional relationship with client A.
2. Between 13 July 2007 and 3 February 2008 the practitioner failed to
safeguard the confidentiality of information obtained from
client A during the
provision of psychological services in that she:
i) disclosed to Leilani Tonumaipea, a unit manager employee of the Department
a letter written by client A stating “I love you”
with a picture
depicting a person falling off a cliff.ii) Disclosed to Marilyn Lonsdale, a
nurse employee of the Department, a “love
letter” written and a
cushion with a love heart made by client A;
3. The practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic
practice in that she failed to record adequate clinical notes
for client A in
that she:i) failed to record in her notes receipt of the above-mentioned love
letter and cushion;ii) failed to keep
a clinical record of
counselling session;
to record a treatment plan.
4. Following a direction to end the
counselling relationship with client A, the practitioner failed to observe
appropriate boundaries
with client A in that between 22 November 2007 and 3
February 2008 the practitioner;(i) continually met and spoke to Client A in
was a detainee at Baxter Juvenile Justice Centre, the
practitioner was in a
personal and romantic relationship with client A. In furtherance of that
relationship the practitioner:i) provided
client A with a mobile phone number
0401 834 816 belonging to her but registered in a false name and which client A
listed under
the name “Uncle Sam” with staff at Baxter Juvenile
Justice Centre;ii)the practitioner received 64 phone calls from Client
6 February 2008 and 16 April 2008 which were of a personal nature.
6. Between 18 April 2008 and late 2009 the practitioner engaged in a sexual
and emotional relationship with client A in circumstances
where:i)client A was
aged 16 years and 2 months on 18 April 2008 when the sexual relations commenced,
having been released from juvenile
detention that day;ii) the practitioner
provided client A with alcohol on the night of their first sexual encounter;iii)
believes he has fathered a child with the practitioner, that child
being born on 16 May 2009;iv) the practitioner did not place client
name on the birth certificate as the father, despite his attendance at the birth
and despite her informing client A that
he was the father;v) client A lived with
the practitioner while she was pregnant and after the birth of the baby, at the
the practitioner’s mother in Queensland for approximately four to
six months.
7. On or about 4 September 2008 the practitioner submitted to the Department
of Juvenile Justice 3 forged medical certificates stating:i)
certificates had been issued and authorised by a Dr Alef Ghaly of Kanwal Medical
she was unfit for work between the periods of 16 June 2008 to 27 June 2008; 30
June 2008 to 18 July 2008; 21 July 2008 to 25
8. As a result of the submission of three forged medical certificates, the
psychologist dishonestly obtained from the Department of
Juvenile Justice
$6,869.23 in sick leave payments.
Two asserts that the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct and
relies upon the particulars of Complaint One
both individually and
cumulatively.
Evidence tendered
complainant tendered four volumes of material marked Exhibits 1-4. This
evidence included documents pertaining to the psychologist’s
registration,
working history and investigation of the Complaints; witness statements;
documents generated by the Department of Juvenile
Justice and peer review
evidence from Dr Greta Goldberg. A further bundle of material relating to the
amended quantum in paragraph
8 of the Complaints was Exhibit 5 and a chronology,
psychologist tendered a medical report from Dr Josephine Sundin that was Exhibit
Particulars Admitted
to the start of the hearing,
the psychologist admitted particulars 1-6 of
the Complaints. Her counsel also advised the Tribunal that the psychologist
acknowledged
the admissions for particulars 1-6 were sufficient to establish
professional misconduct under the National Law.
Particulars denied
psychologist did not admit Paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Complaints. Hence, the
psychologist firstly denied that she submitted three
forged medical certificates
to the Department of Juvenile Justice. Copies of these certificates form part of
Particular 7 -Dr Atef Ghaly’s evidence
three medical certificates were purportedly issued and authorised by Dr Atef
Ghaly of Kanwal Medical Centre, Kanwal, covering
the psychologist’s
incapacity for work for the three periods set out in particular 7. The
Department of Juvenile Justice sent
Dr Ghaly’s practice the certificates
on 4 September 2008 so that their authenticity could be verified. In a
statement dated
2 November 2011, Dr Ghaly said that the certificates were not
issued by his practice and that the psychologist had not been a patient.
noted that his first name was misspelt, his Medicare provider number was
incorrect and the signature on the three certificates
was not his. Fourthly,
his practice was mis-described as “Kanwal Medical Practice” rather
than “Kanwal Family
Practice” and the facsimile number was
incorrect. The certificates were also not in the form Dr Ghaly
Tribunal was left with no doubt, after considering Dr Ghaly’s evidence,
that the certificates submitted on or about 4 September
2009 were forgeries.
Ms Cathy Smith’s evidence
next issue to be considered was whether the psychologist submitted the medical
certificates. The complainant relied upon the
evidence of Cathy Smith, an
administration officer at the Centre who provided a statement and gave evidence
at the hearing.
Smith stated that the psychologist telephoned her on 21 August 2008 to ask why
her salary had been stopped. After this telephone
call, the psychologist emailed
Mr Michael Vita at the Centre, resigning with an effective date of 8 September
2008. This was forwarded
to Ms Smith. In the afternoon, the psychologist sent
an email to Ms Smith, seeking five days recreational leave to “be
paid.” Ms Smith said that she spoke to the psychologist and
advised her that she needed to obtain medical certificates to
cover the days she
was absent in June and July 2008 that the psychologist had described as
‘sick leave’ on her flexitime
3 September 2008 Ms Smith emailed the psychologist asking she contact another
colleague about the documentation she needed to submit
to cover the 25 days of
sick leave in June and July 2008. Ms Smith gave evidence that the psychologist
telephoned her during the
morning of 4 September 2008 to advise that she had
medical certificates covering the time. In refreshing her memory on this, Ms
Smith referred to a file note she made the next day, which forms part of Exhibit
From the writing at the top of the documents, the three medical certificates
appear to have been sent by facsimile to the Centre
at 10.08am on 4 September
2008. The writing also shows the document was facsimiled from the number: 61 2
49246199 with the description:
“CHILD PSYCHIA.” No other evidence
was led as to where the facsimile originated.
Kanwal Family Practice was contacted about the certificates and a staff member
verbally advised that the psychologist had not
been seen as a patient. Ms Smith
then facsimiled the three certificates to that practice for their review. Ms
Smith gave evidence
that after this occurred the psychologist telephoned her to
ask if the three certificates had been received. The psychologist then
again more than once to follow up on the payment being sought.
complainant has the onus of establishing that the psychologist submitted the
false medical certificates. On the basis of Ms Smith’s
evidence, coupled
with no other explanation being provided by the psychologist, the Tribunal is
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities
that this occurred. While the
psychologist’s counsel submitted that there is no direct evidence that his
client facsimiled
the certificates, her contemporaneous telephone calls with Ms
Smith, including enquiring of Ms Smith whether the three certificates
received, is compelling evidence that she submitted or arranged for the
certificates to be submitted to her employer. While
no evidence was led about
the facsimile number from which the certificates were sent, the Tribunal notes
the area code covered Newcastle
and surrounding areas. The psychologist’s
curriculum vitae indicates that she was working at Lake Macquarie from September
- April 2009.
the psychologist could have given evidence on this issue. As noted by the Court
of Appeal in
New South Wales Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 135:
Yet these were the very matters which were wholly within the knowledge of the
respondent in which he did not offer to answer in the
witness box. On the
contrary, he chose the safety of the well of the Tribunal.... In these
circumstances, the only inference one
can draw from the respondent’s
refusal to give sworn testimony in this manner was that his evidence would not
have assisted
his case in resisting the finding of professional misconduct.
in the decision of
Ibrahim v Walton
, Court of Appeal 23 April 1991,
unreported, the Court noted that in considering complaints against a medical
practitioner, there
are matters other than the practitioner’s interest or
the public interest in considering a right to silence. This is due to
undoubted privileges and powers medical practitioners have over the patients and
the need to protect those patients.
Particular 8-
Anthony Tonk’s evidence
psychologist also denied that as a result of submitting the forged medical
certificates she dishonestly obtained $6,869.23 in
sick leave payments.
Tribunal heard evidence from Anthony Tonks who in 2008,
was team leader,
staff entitlements within the Department of Juvenile Justice. He explained the
calculation of wages paid to the
psychologist for the time covered by the false
medical certificates. He sent correspondence to the psychologist advising her of
overpayment and seeking her response and followed this up. On the basis of
his evidence, the Tribunal was satisfied about the quantum
paid to the
psychologist for the period she was absent from work in June and July 2008. The
Tribunal also finds that the psychologist’s
employer advised her of the
overpayment and sought a response from her about repayment.
psychologist’s counsel submitted that his client received this amount by
her employer’s action of paying her in advance
and that she received this
money before she submitted the three false medical certificates. Hence, it
could not be argued that she
obtained the payments due to the
certificates’ lodgement. It was also conceded that when the psychologist
lodged the three
medical certificates she may have incurred a debt to the
department but this did not establish that she dishonestly obtained the
complainant acknowledged that the payment occurred automatically, requiring no
action by the psychologist. However, it was also
submitted that once the
psychologist lodged the flexitime record on or about 4 August 2008, which
included describing that she was
on “sick leave” from 23 June
– 25 July 2008 she was then required to provide sick leave certification
period as per her employer’s policy. Further, when the
psychologist submitted the three certificates on 4 September 2008 she
were necessary to legitimise the payment she had received and she also knew the
certificates were forgeries. It was the
conduct of completing the flexitime
record and submitting the certificates that amounted to dishonestly obtaining
sick leave payments.
complainant also submitted that the psychologist’s failure to repay the
money and failure to give evidence to explain her
conduct, should lead to the
Tribunal drawing an adverse inference.
the Tribunal is satisfied that the psychologist submitted three forged medical
certificates on or about 4 September 2008, it
does not find that she dishonestly
obtained $6,869.23 in sick leave payments. The psychologist clearly did not
have the right to
retain those moneys when she failed to furnish proper evidence
to support her time from work for alleged illness. This is a different
however, from finding that the psychologist dishonestly obtained the sick leave
payments from her employer. If the particular
had specified the psychologist had
“improperly retained” the sum, the Tribunal may have made a
different finding. It
does not find her action of stipulating on the flexitime
record that she was on sick leave or lodging the false medical certificates
established that she obtained the sick leave payments
dishonestly.
Psychologist admitted unsatisfactory professional conduct as particularised
under paragraphs (i) and (ii) of Complaint One which
reflects the definition in
section 139B(1)(a) and (l) of the National Law.
the admissions made, coupled with the extensive evidence tendered by the
complainant, the Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite
standard in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
, that the complaint of unsatisfactory
professional conduct has been proven.
psychologist also admitted professional misconduct as particularised under
paragraphs (i) and (ii) of Complaint Two, which reflects
the definition in
section 139E of the National Law.
in view of the psychologist’s admissions and the evidence it examined, the
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied to the requisite
standard in
, that the complaint of professional misconduct has been
psychologist advised prior to the hearing that she wished the matter to proceed
by way of a two-stage process, so there was a
separate hearing in relation to
the orders to be made by the Tribunal. At the hearing, her counsel advised that
this was no longer
Basis for findings
conduct of the psychologist in encouraging the development of a relationship
with client A, such as her written expressions of
love; the gifts of tobacco;
and providing client A with the means to contact her when he was transferred
from the Centre to another
facility, demonstrated a complete disregard for
proper professional boundaries. The psychologist also appeared to disregard
A’s vulnerability as a detained youth, 18 years her junior,
with whom she had a therapeutic relationship. In then engaging
in a sexual
relationship with client A, after he had turned sixteen and continuing that
relationship for over a year, the psychologist
engaged in serious misconduct of
grave concern to the Tribunal.
psychologist took a number of actions which demonstrated that she appreciated
her conduct was wrong. For example, she registered
the mobile phone which
client A used to call her from the Baxter facility, under a false name. She also
omitted to name client A
on the birth certificate of their child, despite
advising client A he was the father.
Karen Chapman, who supervised the psychologist at the Centre, annexed a copy of
the Orientation Programme for Psychologists or
Counsellors working at the
Department of Juvenile Justice to her statement. This document outlined ethical
and medicolegal issues,
supervision and leave allowances. The Clinical
Supervision Guidelines for Department of Juvenile Justice psychologists, dated
May 2003, outlined the responsibilities of supervisor and supervisee,
including the need to bring work-related difficulties to the
supervisor, to
promote the best interests of the client and to take appropriate action to care
the Tribunal notes that the psychologist never completed her Masters in Clinical
Psychology and failed, on three separate
occasions (2004, 2006 and 2007) to
complete the module on Core Skills and Ethical Practice, her actions in relation
to client A clearly
breached the Code of Ethics as adopted by the Australian
Psychological Society in 2007 and also the NSW Psychologist Registration
as in operation at the time.
Dr Greta Goldberg’s
her peer review report, Dr Goldberg noted that the psychologist’s conduct
transgressed the ethical conduct, codes and principles
of the Psychology Board
of Australia and the Australian Psychological Society including issues of
propriety, competence, professional
responsibility and integrity as well as
conflicts of interests and non-exploitation. She opined these
relate closely to the allegations that she waited until his sixteenth birthday
and his discharge to seduce the 16 year
old using alcohol, into a sexual
encounter that resulted in the birth of a baby which she apparently desired and
intended (or decided)
to keep. In addition to using the boy for her own ends, it
seems she also instructed him to lie and conceal his paternity in order
provide her legal protection. Her overall level of disregard for the mental,
emotional and psychological welfare of her juvenile
client clearly transgresses
all professional codes and principles and probably civil law as
Goldberg also considered that the psychologist’s behavior in taking the
extended leave and lodging allegedly forged medical
certificates “reflects
the impaired reality testing and ethical judgement and reflects an inability to
foresee or take responsibility
for the consequence of her own
behaviour”.
Tribunal finds that the psychologist has engaged in professional misconduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to have justified
cancellation of her registration
under the National Law, had she been registered. Her actions in encouraging an
emotional relationship
with client A, starting sexual relations shortly after he
turned sixteen and cohabitating with him for many months, is gross misconduct.
The submission of forged medical certificates when her employer requested
evidence of her incapacity, is further conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature
which would have justified suspension or cancellation of her registration,
particularly when her relationship with
client A is also
considered.
Dr Josephine Sundin’s evidence
psychologist tendered a detailed report from Dr Sundin, who saw her for the
purposes of a psychiatric assessment on 13 February
2013. Dr Sundin also gave
telephone evidence at the hearing. Dr Sundin reported that the psychologist
described being both depressed
and anxious from sometime in 2005, was prescribed
anti-depressant medication by her general practitioner in 2008 and that the
psychologist
had been on this medication fairly consistently since that time.
her oral evidence, Dr Sundin opined that the psychologist’s current
diagnosis is Major Depressive Episode in partial remission.
Dr Sundin agreed
with Dr Goldberg’s opinion stated in paragraph 50. above, adding that the
presence of a serious Major Depressive
Episode certainly has the capacity to
impair reality testing and judgement.
Given the long standing nature of the
psychologist’s mood disturbance and treatment with medication, it is the
view that the psychologist’s reported symptoms may be
more consistent with a Chronic Major Depressive Disorder.
Insight of the psychologist
psychologist stated that she attempted to obtain help and support from her
psychology supervisor and clinical supervisor, but
they failed to offer what she
perceived as appropriate help. Dr Sundin noted that the psychologist
acknowledged that she “probably
did not make entirely clear to her
supervisor the extent to which she was floundering in her work” and that
she was “left
with the impression that [the psychologist] was embarrassed
by her clinical difficulties and resorted to her default strategy of
acknowledging difficulties to others, especially senior
psychologist attended one session of counselling, through the free workplace
based Employee Assistance Programme available to
her, but reported finding the
counsellor unsympathetic. She stated that she did not have the funds to pursue
professional help. The
psychologist’s version of the support she received
is somewhat different from the version provided by her employers and supervisor.
This evidence suggested that the psychologist had the opportunity to discuss her
concerns about boundary issues in her relationship
with client A but did not do
so in any open manner. Colleague Mr Derek Payne, for example provided a
statement (Exhibit 1) that
he discussed professional boundaries with the
psychologist.
greatly concerns the Tribunal that while in a therapeutic relationship with
client A and in a significant position of trust that
the psychologist failed to
seek treatment for her psychological condition. Rather, she proceeded to misuse
alcohol as a way of managing
her low mood, showed limited insight into her
behaviour and did not seek appropriate treatment or supervision to help resolve
difficulties, which culminated in the conduct leading to the Complaints. The
psychologist has a long standing pattern of avoidance
of acknowledging difficult
issues and thus failing to access support and assistance for herself. This is
described as “hiding
her head in the sand” by her own counsel in his
final submission to the Tribunal. Dr Sundin, in her conclusion stated that
psychologist “is perplexed by her own behaviour and as yet has not
developed an appreciable understanding of the origins
behaviour”.
Sundin reported that the psychologist has a new general practitioner who has
been weaning the psychologist off the medication she
has been taking for years,
changing to an alternate antidepressant. She has not been referred to either a
psychiatrist or a clinical
psychologist for any form of psychological treatment.
Given that the Tribunal has not heard evidence directly from the psychologist
with respect to her desire to be treated, the Tribunal agrees with the
complainant’s submission that her prospects for rehabilitation,
into her misconduct or recovery from her psychological illness is guarded.
Tribunal also accepts the complainant’s submission that the
psychologist’s avoidant personality traits act as a barrier
treatment. It is this aspect of the psychologist’s personality which
concerns the Tribunal given that it makes
the psychologist vulnerable to
developing maladaptive coping strategies in the face of future life stressors.
The Tribunal notes
Dr Sundin’s views that the psychologist needs both
psychiatric treatment for her mental health needs and a plan for her future
mental health needs.
Tribunal does not currently have any confidence as to whether the psychologist
will engage in treatment and if so, when she might
commence such treatment or
her prognostic outcome. The Tribunal notes Dr Sundin’s comment that the
psychologist advised she
had “been too ashamed to seek care.” The
orders made reflect this concern as well as the seriousness of the conduct.
13 Schedule 5D of the National Law (NSW) gives the Tribunal power to make a
costs order. In this case the Tribunal found seven
of the eight particulars of
Complaint One and Two were proven. The complainant seeks an order that the
psychologist pay the complainant’s
costs of the proceedings. The
psychologist did not oppose the costs order sought. In view of the findings of
serious misconduct,
the Tribunal orders the psychologist pay the
complainant’s costs as agreed or assessed. It also notes the decision in
HCCC v Greenwood
[2011] NSWNMT 13
and that, as was found in that case,
the particulars of the Complaints established were more than sufficient to
justify the making
of the orders below. Further, particular 8 of the Complaints
did not add to the hearing’s length in any significant way.
psychologist is prohibited in applying for provisional registration as a
psychologist for a minimum period of 3 years from the
date of this
the psychologist apply for provisional registration in accordance with order 1,
she must also produce written evidence that
she has engaged in therapy for a
period of at least 12 months prior to her application for registration, with a
clinical psychologist,
a psychiatrist or both. This evidence should be provided
by way of a written report from her treating practitioner(s) to the Psychology
Council of NSW specifying the dates of treatment sessions and her clinical
progress. The psychologist must provide the authority
to the treating
practitioner(s) for this purpose.
the time the psychologist commences the therapy referred to in order 2, she must
provide a copy of Dr Sundin’s report and
a copy of this Decision to the
treatment provider(s) covered by the order. The psychologist must also provide
evidence to the Psychology
Council of NSW that this has occurred. Again,
written confirmation from the treating practitioner(s) confirming review of the
documents will suffice.
Tribunal directs as a condition of the psychologist’s future provisional
registration that she cannot practise in juvenile
services for 5 years from the
date of these orders.
to s149C(4)(a) of the National Law, the Tribunal finds that if the psychologist
had been registered, it would have cancelled
her registration.
to s149C(4)(c) of the National Law the Tribunal requires the Psychology Board of
Australia to record the fact that the Tribunal
would have cancelled the
psychologist’s registration in the National Register kept by the
Tribunal reprimands the psychologist (Annexure A).
psychologist pay the complainant’s costs as agreed or
Publication
A copy of this Decision
is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
McKeehan and her legal advisor;
Psychology Board of Australia;
(NSW office);
Psychology Council of NSW;
the Board and Council considers appropriate.
Dated: 23 August
---------------------------------------
---------------------------------------
Mary Brennan
Lizabeth Tong
-------------------------------------
----------------------------------------
Janina Szyndler Noel
HCCC V CATHERINE MCKEEHAN
Catherine McKeehan, the Tribunal has found that you have demonstrated gross
professional misconduct in your practice of psychology.
You seriously violated
professional boundaries in your therapeutic relationship with client
The facility where you were employed demanded from you a higher level
of caution, vigilance and sound professional boundaries for
the safety of the
clients, your colleagues and yourself. It is your responsibility to maintain
appropriate professional boundaries
at all times.
You are strongly
reprimanded by this Tribunal for your breach of professional
boundaries.
You are unable to apply for provisional registration as a
psychologist for 3 years and only if you seek treatment. The Tribunal needs
ensure you are able to comply with the requirement that appropriate professional
boundaries with clients must be maintained at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (259 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter