URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Dukes Painting Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 15 (1 October 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Dukes Painting Services Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 15
Hearing Date(s):
21 August 2025
Date of Orders:
1 October 2025
Decision Date:
1 October 2025
Taylor J, President
1. I convict Dukes Painting Services Pty Ltd of the offence as
2. I impose a fine of $105,000.
3. Dukes Painting Services Pty
Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or
4. Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) 50% of the fine
is to be paid to the prosecutor.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Work health and safety —
Offences — Category 3 — Risk of falling from a mobile
working platform
SENTENCING — Relevant factors on sentence — All
facts, other than disputed facts, relied on by the prosecutor should be
contained in agreed statement of facts — Whether utilitarian value of
guilty plea is reduced because the court required to
engage in a disputed fact
hearing — Objective seriousness of the offence — Top of the lower
range of objective seriousness
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
[2011] NSWCCA 229
R v Thomson (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA
Makarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
SafeWork NSW v
BSA Ltd (No 3)
[2023] NSWDC 417
SafeWork NSW v Duralina Pty Ltd; SafeWork NSW
v Mill HR Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWDC 253
SafeWork NSW v Grandcity Constructions Pty
Ltd; SafeWork NSW v Cai [2018] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v Kayrouz
Constructions Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] NSWDC 38
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil
Contractors
[2025] NSWIC 8
Texts Cited:
Australian Standard AS 2550.10-2006 “Cranes, hoists and winches
– Safe use”
SafeWork NSW, “Code of Practice: Managing the
Risks of Falls at Workplaces” (August 2019)
SafeWork NSW, “Code
of Practice: Managing the Risks of Plant in the Workplace” (August
Principal judgment
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Dukes Painting Services Pty Ltd
Representation:
E Aitken (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Kingston Reid
File Number(s):
2024/292557
13 August 2022 Mr Kheirury was painting the exterior of an apartment block,
using a mobile elevated working platform (MEWP). It
had a boom that could lift
him more than 11m above the ground allowing him to paint the balcony and eaves
of the four-storey building.
Painting Services Pty Ltd (Dukes) had hired Mr Kheirury and supplied him with
the MEWP without checking whether he was licenced
to operate it (he was not). It
failed to instruct him that he was not allowed to extend the boom with its
platform unless the MEWP’s
outriggers were in place. A pre-start check of
the MEWP was not completed that morning. Such a pre-start check would have
that on that day the MEWP had a malfunctioning interlock, which meant
its boom could be extended by Mr Kheirury without the outriggers
being in place.
Extending the boom of the MEWP without the outriggers in place could cause the
MEWP to tip over with the result that
anyone on the platform would fall from
height. The result was that on that day Mr Kheirury was placed at risk of
falling from height.
appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence charged in a Second
Amended Summons filed on 16 June 2025, that as
a person who had a work health
and safety duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act
(NSW) (WHS Act) it had failed to comply with that duty contrary to
s 33 of the WHS Act.
risk particularised at paragraph 10 of Annexure A to the Second Amended Summons
is as follows:
“The risk was of Mr Kheirury falling from a height while undertaking work
on and from the MEWP at the Site.”
its plea of guilty, Dukes accepts that it could have taken the following
reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at least
minimise the
reasonably foreseeable risk:
“a) Prohibiting workers who were not licenced to operate the MEWP
from operating it;
b) Including an express prohibition in the ‘Online Induction’
presentation and/or the ‘SWMS-001-Painting External’
‘Safe Work Method Statement – EWP’ on extending the boom and
platform of the MEWP while the outriggers
were stowed; and
c) Verifying that an adequate pre-start check of the MEWP was undertaken in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions,
including but not limited
to checking that the interlock and alarm were functioning properly.”
maximum penalty for this offence at the relevant time was a fine of 5,770
penalty units ($620,101.90).
The evidence
NSW tendered an amended Agreed Statement of Facts (AF). The AF established the
identity and role of the parties, described
the MEWP, set out parts of relevant
guidance materials, described the system of work in place prior to the offence
and set out steps
taken by Dukes after the incident to improve systems of work.
It did not contain facts that set out what happened on the day in question.
circumstances where the evidence in the AF was insufficient to establish all
relevant facts, the Prosecutor tendered, without objection,
a substantial bundle
containing, in addition to the AF, redacted written statements of a SafeWork
Inspector and a witness, a redacted
portion of a record of interview with a
further witness, a technical report describing the MEWP, various photographs,
induction training
documents, safe work method statements (SWMS), extracts from
the MEWP logbook, and records of licences and training held by relevant
At the hearing the Prosecutor tendered a further page from a record of an
interview with a witness.
submitted that the Court could accept the Prosecutor’s submissions as to
the factual findings the Court could make on
the basis of that tendered
material. Contrary to a submission made by Dukes that did not mean the Court did
not have to engage in
a disputed fact hearing.
there are any facts that are not agreed that need to be established in a
sentence hearing, the court must then engage in
a disputed fact hearing. Where
that occurs, and the prosecutor establishes the facts in dispute, the court may
find that the utilitarian
value of the plea is reduced and apply a reduced
discount on penalty.
explained that its insurer had “refused to permit” Dukes to admit
various facts going to what occurred on the day
in question, which was why the
Prosecutor was required to include large amounts of evidence in the prosecution
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil Contractors
, Paingakulam J set out what the
Court expects of parties appearing at a sentencing hearing in circumstances
where there are no relevant
In short the Court expects
that other than disputed facts,
facts relied upon by the prosecutor
will be contained in the agreed statement of facts, supplemented only by visual
aids, such as
photos, diagrams or videos. There is no need for the agreed facts
to be supplemented by records of interview or lengthy documents
that do no more
than confirm facts that are not disputed.
an initial agreed statement of facts was filed, prior to the hearing the Court
raised with the parties that key facts which
were necessary to both convict and
to determine an appropriate sentence were neither admitted nor apparent on the
evidence proposed
to be relied upon. That led the prosecutor to ultimately
tender the AF which contained the following paragraph not in the initial
“On 13 August 2022 there was a risk of Mr Kheirury falling from a height
while undertaking work on and from the MEWP at the
i. Mr Kheirury was not prohibited by the Defendant from
operating the MEWP when he did not hold the proper licence to operate
ii. Whilst the Defendant had an induction presentation (which
Mr Kheirury completed) a SWMS-001-Painting External and a Safe Work
Statement – EWP none of them had an express prohibition prohibiting the
boom being extended while the outriggers were
stowed, and
iii. No verification was done confirming that an adequate
pre-start check of the MEWP was undertaken in accordance with the
manufacturer’s
instructions, including checking that the interlock and
alarm were functioning properly.”
at the outset of the hearing Dukes admitted further facts, including:
“a. the Defendant provided Mr Kheirury with the MEWP;
b. Mr Kheirury and ‘Richii’ or ‘Richii
Kheirury’ are the same person;
c. Mr Kheirury was required to use the MEWP, noting that the
word ‘required’ in this context should be taken to mean
that it was
necessary for Mr Kheirury to use the MEWP to complete the works that the
Defendant had engaged him to undertake;”
Notwithstanding
those agreed facts, there remained facts that the Court has had to find to be
established by having to consider large
amounts of tendered evidence rather than
on the basis of agreed facts. In those circumstances the question arises as to
reduce the discount that would otherwise be applied because the
utilitarian value of the plea was diminished by the need to conduct
fact hearing. I have determined not to reduce the discount in this particular
case given:
(1) the steps Dukes took, albeit late and after questions raised by the Court,
to admit certain key facts;
(2) Dukes’ acceptance that the Court could otherwise find facts as
submitted by the Prosecutor;
(3) that while the Court had to take a number of steps in order to have relevant
facts before it, ultimately the hearing was conducted
in half a day; and
(4) importantly, the Prosecutor’s submission that in those circumstances
the value of the plea had not been diminished.
that is the outcome in this particular case the Court takes this opportunity to
reiterate that a failure to ensure all relevant
facts, other than disputed
facts, are contained in an agreed statement of facts, supplemented only by
visual aids, may well have
consequences, including as to the discount on
sentence and costs. The Court should not need to be given bundles of documents
or statements
of evidence to establish facts which are not reflected in the AF
but which are not in dispute. Such a course of action gives rise
to unnecessary
delays and inefficiencies and adds to the costs incurred. As occurred in this
case, where a prosecutor proceeds to
file evidence to establish facts that are
not disputed the Court may well ask the parties why the scheduled defended
hearing ought
not to be vacated until such time as all relevant facts are
reduced to an agreed statement of facts.
Factual findings
reviewed the evidence I am satisfied that the facts for which the Prosecutor
contends in its written submissions at [6]–[19]
are proven. I do not
repeat them all, but instead set out the following key factual findings upon
which I convict and sentence Dukes:
(1) Mr Kheirury was contracted by Dukes to paint the interior and exterior of a
four-storey block of apartments at 27 Illawarra Street,
Allawah, NSW.
(2) Dukes supplied him with a MEWP that had a boom of more than 11m to use to
paint the exterior, that he used on the date of the
offence, 13 August 2022.
(3) In order to operate the MEWP safely, its boom, that lifts the working
platform, should only be extended after the outriggers
are put out, so they can
stabilise the MEWP and prevent it from tipping over.
(4) The MEWP had an “interlock” function that ought to have
prevented the boom from being extended if the outriggers
were not extended, but
that safety function was not operational that day.
(5) Mr Kheirury was trained on operating an elevated work platform but not
licensed to operate a MEWP with a boom of more than 11m.
(6) Dukes’ project manager for the site, Mr Barry, failed to check whether
Mr Kheirury was licensed to operate the MEWP.
(7) As a result, Dukes had no reason to assume that Mr Kheirury had knowledge of
the specific safety issues that arise when using
a MEWP of that size.
(8) Mr Barry spent 15–20 minutes showing Mr Kheirury how to use the MEWP,
including how to set up the outriggers. Mr Barry,
however, failed to instruct Mr
Kheirury that the platform was not to be raised if the outriggers were not
(9) Neither the induction that Mr Kherirury completed, nor the SWMS for the work
that he saw and signed, contained a prohibition
on extending the boom while the
outriggers were stowed.
(10) Dukes failed to verify that there was an adequate pre-start check of the
MEWP conducted. Such a pre-start check would have included
a check as to whether
the interlock was functioning. The physical logbook recording pre-start checks
contained no entry for the day
in question.
with the nature of the s 33 charge, there was no evidence put before me
that the pleaded risk manifested. In particular,
there was no evidence put
before me that the MEWP in fact tipped over and that Mr Kheirury fell and was
injured. Such evidence, if
available, would have established a more serious
charge and given rise to a much more significant penalty.
obligations and guidance material
43(2) of the WHS Act prohibits a person conducting a business or undertaking
from directing or allowing a worker to carry
out work at a workplace, in
circumstances where that work is required by the Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017 (Regulations)
to be carried out by a person authorised by a
licence as set out in the Regulations and that worker is not so authorised.
4 of the Regulations requires a person to hold a high-risk work licence
to operate a boom-type elevating work platform (EWP) which
has a boom that can
extend to a length of 11m.
was ample guidance material available to Dukes on 13 August 2022,
(1) the “Danger” and “Warning” labels on the front rail
of the platform of the MEWP, which stated that outriggers
must be properly
extended before the boom is used as serious injury could result if they were
(2) “Nifty SD170 (SD50) – Operating & Safety
Instructions”, particularly “Section 4.2 – Setting
procedures” which included the warning that “Failure to deploy the
outriggers correctly could result in death or serious
(3) “Code of Practice: Managing the Risks of Falls at Workplaces”,
published by SafeWork on August 2019, which at page
31 noted relevant risk
control measures that should be taken when using EWPs, including ensuring that
workers operating boom-type
EWPs with a boom length of 11 metres or more are
(4) “Code of Practice: Managing the Risks of Plant in the
Workplace”, published by SafeWork NSW on August 2019, particularly
sections 1.4, 3.3, and 3.7, which address the importance of ensuring
appropriate information, training, instruction, supervision,
and licensing for
workers using a plant; taking reasonable steps to ensure that safety features,
warning devices, guarding, operational
controls, and emergency stops are used
according to instructions and information provided; and managing risks to health
and safety;
(5) Australian Standard AS 2550.10-2006 “Cranes, hoists and winches
– Safe use”, particularly Part 10 on MEWPs,
which stated that MEWPs
fitted with outriggers should be located in a manner that allows for the
outriggers to be extended, that
pre-operational inspections should be carried
out prior to the working shift and the results entered into the logbook, and
malfunctioning MEWP should be corrected prior to being returned to
Systems of work prior to the incident
the offence, Dukes implemented the following system of work:
(1) The MEWP was equipped with outriggers which were interlocked to prevent the
platform being raised unless the outriggers were
extended and an alarm that
sounded if the boom and platform were raised. On the date of the offence the
alarm was operational but
the interlock was not, which meant the platform could
be raised without the outriggers extended, albeit an alarm would be audible
that occurred.
(2) Dukes engaged STM Equipment Pty Ltd to service and maintain the MEWP every 3
months. The MEWP had been serviced on 30 May 2022
as part of the periodic
inspection and was due to be inspected at the end of August 2022.
(3) Prior to commencing work, subcontractors were required to complete a
computer-based company induction, which did not deal with
the use of the MEWP.
Mr Kheirury completed the induction but Mr Ebrahimi, a subcontractor engaged by
Mr Kheirury under the business
name of Vivid Glow, did not.
(4) Dukes had an “Elevated Work Platform Competency Assessment”
which was intended to be used before a worker commenced
use of the EWP and
required that the worker demonstrate the use of outriggers. This was not
completed in respect of Mr Kheirury.
(5) Project Managers would from time to time undertake Toolbox Talks with
workers at project sites, which did not occur at the relevant
(6) A Nifty operator manual, a yellow logbook identifying the daily safety
checks to be taken each day and a pre-start checklist
document were located in
the MEWP. Neither the logbook nor checklist were filled out on 13 August
(7) Personal protective equipment and a harness were provided.
(8) Mr Kheirury was provided with SWMS for Internal Painting and External
Painting. Neither document identified the interlock or
outriggers as available
safety controls.
Systems of work after the incident
the offence, Dukes undertook:
(1) the provision of toolbox talks and safety meetings with its team regarding
safety and working at heights and direct staff refresher
training about working
at heights;
(2) a review of all its workers’ licences and training, methods for
completing the daily checklist, methods for completing
SWMS, training for
workers on the completion of SWMS and daily checklists, training on the use of
EWPs for all its Project Managers,
and EWP competency process;
(3) to send out memorandums about training requirements and recommendations to
(4) ongoing weekly safety discussions with its Project Managers.
Offender’s case on sentence
read and relied on the affidavit of Mr Paul Williams, the Managing Director of
Dukes. The following is a summary of his evidence.
is a painting business. It employed 22 staff as at August 2022. As of August
2025, it has 18 employees and 3 contractors who
provide the business with
administrative support. At any one time, it may engage up to 20 contractors
across its projects.
Operations Team allocates projects to Project Managers, who are supported by
Coordinators and the WHS team to oversee
sites, manage subcontractors, and
ensure that works are completed in a safe, competent and timely way.
is an active member of several industry groups, including Australian Concrete
Repair Association, Master Builders Association,
Master Painters Association and
Engineers Australia. Peter Dukino, current Director and Secretary of Dukes,
previously served as
President of the Master Painters
Association.
Systems of work prior to August 2022
to August 2022, Dukes operated under a WHS management system that was developed
and maintained in partnership with an external
WHS consultancy, for the purpose
of application across operational sites.
components of the system included:
(1) documents and processes, including WHS policies and procedures, SWMS, risk
assessment templates, daily pre-start checklists,
plant and equipment inspection
forms, and checklists for the use of equipment;
(2) training and induction materials, relating to safety for employees and
subcontractors and working at heights;
(3) supervision and site monitoring, including regular WHS inspections,
providing supervisory staff with access to WHS documentation,
and requiring EWP
pre-start checks as part of daily operations;
(4) consultation and communication, including toolbox talks and communication
and contractors;
(5) reviews and auditing, including quarterly site audits and system reviews
conducted by an independent external WHS consultant
to identify areas for
improvement and compliance with legislation; and
(6) system accessibility, by making WHS documents and forms accessible to
Dukes’ employees and contractors via Dukes’
digital platforms and
the provision of physical copies of safety documentation.
Expression of remorse and contrition
through Mr Williams’ affidavit, acknowledged the seriousness of its
failure to comply with s 33 and the “lasting
impact” of the
offence on Mr Williams “personally and on the entire Dukes
business”. Mr Williams noted that the
breach had prompted Dukes to improve
its safe work and risk management practices.
Systems of work
after August 2022
has taken steps since August 2022 to address its admitted failures.
to the first particular, Dukes has taken steps to prohibit unlicensed operators
from using the MEWP. It has introduced a
prohibition against unlicenced workers
from accessing EWPs and being given the codes to access the keys. This
prohibition has been
communicated to workers. It has also implemented a
structured process to ensure that EWP operators hold current high risk work
before operating such platforms. As part of their online induction, a
worker uploads their licence, which is checked by the compliance
verify the date of issue and expiry, the licence type, the worker’s name,
and the document’s legibility and
completeness. The information is
recorded in Dukes’ digital training register, and automated notifications
are sent to Dukes
prior to a licence’s expiry date.
Managers are required to check a subcontractor’s qualifications against
project requirements prior to awarding a contract,
manually record users’
licence details upon moving an EWP onto the site and prior to the EWP’s
use, and physically check
Dukes’ licence register and the onsite
operators’ licence. Dukes undertakes regular checks to verify that the
prohibition
is being implemented, including by conducting randomised site spot
checks and training sessions.
to the second particular, Dukes has included an express prohibition in its
“Online Induction” presentation in
respect of extending the boom and
platform of the relevant MEWP while its outriggers are stowed. It has also
created, with the assistance
of an external WHS consultancy, specific SWMS
relating to the use of EWPs, including the MEWP.
to the third particular, Dukes now verifies that an adequate pre-start check of
the MEWP is undertaken. It checks that the
interlock and alarm are functioning
properly by requiring workers to complete and submit pre-start checklists,
having its operation
team review that the checklists have been completed,
requiring that the EWP pre-start books are photographed each time the MEWP is
used, and conducting monthly spot checks.
Williams also gave evidence that Dukes has taken additional steps to improve
safety at worksites.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the WHS Act set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (CSP Act) at
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this
seriousness
determining objective seriousness, I apply the principles set out by Paingakulam
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil
Contractors
NSW submitted that this offence falls at the top end of the lower range of
objective seriousness, having regard to the following
(1) The pleaded risk was foreseeable, as was acknowledged by Dukes’ own
systems of work including its SWMS, online induction,
and pre-start check in the
yellow logbook for the MEWP.
(2) Although the likelihood of the risk materialising was high, it was mitigated
by the steps Dukes had already taken to address
the risk of using the MEWP.
(3) The potential consequences of the risk materialising were serious, including
the risk of death.
(4) The pleaded measures were simple and straightforward for Dukes to implement
and would only have required it to amend and enforce
its existing systems.
submitted that the offence fell into the lower range of objective seriousness,
having regard to the following:
(1) While the pleaded risk was foreseeable, it is a risk which can be reduced to
a level accepted to comply with the WHS Act where
an MEWP is operated in
accordance with operating instructions.
(2) Mr Kheirury was not a “vulnerable worker”, in that he did not
have little or no training and he did not have language
difficulties.
(3) The risk relates to one worker, one machine, at one time and at one
(4) Mr Kheirury prior to commencing work for Dukes had completed an online site
induction in January 2022 and an onsite induction
of the MEWP’s operation
the day before the risk eventuated.
(5) Dukes had a system in place to prevent persons operating MEWPs if they were
not properly licenced, although it did not operate
in the way it should have on
the day the risk eventuated.
Court accepts that Dukes, prior to the incident, was a company that took
appropriate steps towards ensuring safety, notwithstanding
that the admitted
contravention occurred.
gravamen of this offence is that Dukes gave Mr Kheirury a piece of potentially
dangerous mobile equipment to use to work at a
height of more than 11m without
ensuring certain measures to address the risk of falling from height. The MEWP
was at risk of tipping
over if Mr Kheirury worked on the platform with the boom
extended while the outriggers were not extended. That danger needed to be
addressed by both mechanical and instructional means, including:
(1) a functional interlock to prevent the boom being extended when the
outriggers were stowed;
(2) training of users as recognised by a licensing system; and
(3) express instruction prohibiting users from extending the boom without the
outriggers being extended.
failed to take the reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at least
minimise the reasonably foreseeable risk set out at
[5] above. As a result on 13
August 2022 there was a risk that Mr Kheirury would fall from a height.
risk is one I find to be serious. I accept, however, that in all the
circumstances, including the steps taken by Dukes before
the incident to ensure
safety, the offence falls in the lower range of seriousness, albeit at the top
of that range.
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence.
The risk of a fall from height is an extremely
common risk in painting and other
building maintenance works. While lifting mechanisms, such as a MEWP, are
appropriately used to
mitigate such a risk, if not properly used they can give
rise to serious safety risks. The failure to check and use mobile lifting
equipment in accordance with safety instructions is a common risk factor in many
industries. The fine ought to be set mindful of
the need for general deterrence
to address those common risks.
noted, Dukes was a company that has demonstrated a concern to meet its WHS Act
responsibilities. It is apparent that the failures
to which it has pleaded
guilty were not consistent with its usual approach to safety. Further, it has
taken extensive steps to seek
to avoid similar risks arising in the future.
Those findings reduce the extent to which I need to have regard to specific
deterrence.
Nevertheless, the penalty should appropriately contain provision for
specific deterrence.
Aggravating factors
with the concession made by SafeWork NSW, I find that there are no aggravating
factors as contemplated by s 21A(2) of the
Mitigating factors – s 21A(2) of the CSP Act
submitted by Dukes, the offence was not part of a planned or organised criminal
however this mitigating
factor is not one that has a significant impact on this sentence.
has no prior convictions under the WHS
It is otherwise of good
noting the evidence
of the actions it has taken following the offence and its community engagement.
of the evidence of the actions it has taken following the offence, I find that
Dukes has good prospects of rehabilitation
and, notwithstanding it frequently
undertaking high risk work, unlikeliness to
adhering to Dukes’ obligation to respond to statutory notices, Dukes has
assisted SafeWork during the proceedings by
facilitating worker and officer
interviews.
has provided evidence that it has accepted responsibility for its
entered a plea of guilty on 16 June 2025 to the charge particularised in an
Amended Summons filed in Court on that date. The
plea of guilty was entered at
the sixth mention of proceedings, which commenced with the issue of a summons on
9 August 2024. The
prosecutor accepted that it was open to the Court to award
the maximum utilitarian discount of 25% in recognition of the early guilty
to the Amended Summons.
that a discount of 25% is appropriate in these
circumstances.
to pay a fine
Court must have regard to Dukes’ means before imposing a
There was no evidence
before the Court concerning Dukes’ financial position, nor a submission
that it had a reduced capacity
to pay a fine.
at the hearing withdrew a submission that the Court ought to have regard to the
impact that an order to pay of costs would have
on Duke’s capacity to pay
appropriate fine in light of all I have considered is $140,000, which will be
reduced by 25% to reflect the plea of guilty.
make the following orders:
(1) I convict Dukes Painting Services Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
(2) I impose a fine of $105,000.
(3) Dukes Painting Services Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of
the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) 50% of the fine is
to be paid to the prosecutor.
[2011] NSWCCA 229
–[33], quoted at SafeWork NSW v Kayrouz Constructions Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] NSWDC 38
. See also SafeWork NSW v BSA Ltd (No 3)
[2023] NSWDC
[2025] NSWIC 8
Work Health
and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW), Schedule 4, Table 4.1, item
Makarian v The Queen (2005)
228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan
[2025] NSWIC 8
SafeWork NSW v
Grandcity Constructions Pty Ltd; SafeWork NSW v Cai
[2018] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v Duralina
Pty Ltd; SafeWork NSW v Mill HR Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWDC 253
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
21A(3)(i)(i).
R v Thomson
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
ss 21A(3)(k)
Fines Act 1996
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (289 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter