URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/242.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bettar Holdings Pty Ltd trading as Hunt Collaborative v RWC Brookvale Investment Pty Ltd as trustee for Brookvale Development Trust [2025] NSWCA 242 (4 November 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Bettar Holdings Pty Ltd trading as Hunt Collaborative v RWC Brookvale
Investment Pty Ltd as trustee for Brookvale Development Trust
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 242
Hearing Date(s):
25 August 2025
Date of Orders:
4 November 2025
Decision Date:
4 November 2025
Bell CJ at [1];
Kirk JA at [2];
McHugh JA at [3]
(1) Allow the appeal as to Ground
(2) Set aside order (1) made by the primary judge on 28
March 2025, and in lieu thereof order:
(a) The plaintiff is
to pay the defendant’s costs of the proceedings at first instance on the
ordinary basis until 24 July
2024, and on the indemnity basis thereafter.
(3) Otherwise dismiss the
(4) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s
costs of the appeal on the ordinary basis.
Catchwords:
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION —
Building and Construction Industry
Security of Payment Act 1999
(NSW) — Whether there was a
“construction contract” within meaning of
of the Act —
Whether payment claim complied with
— Whether payment claim
validly served — Whether subcontractor liable to pay amount
COSTS — Whether primary judge erred in ordering costs
on indemnity basis in relation to entire proceedings — Where court
position to re-exercise discretion — Whether unreasonable not to accept
Calderbank offer
Legislation Cited:
Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act 1999
4, 8, 13, 14, 15, 31
Cases Cited:
Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd v GR Securities (1986) 40 NSWLR
Bettar Holdings Pty Limited trading as Hunt Collaborative ACN 050061946 v
RWC Brookvale Investments Pty Ltd as trustee for Brookvale
Development Trust ABN
42359186969 ACN 670150437 no 2 (costs)
[2025] NSWDC 91
Bettar Holdings Pty
Ltd trading as Hunt Collaborative v RWC Brookvale Investments Pty Ltd as trustee
for Brookvale Development Trust
[2025] NSWDC 11
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp
Commercial Union Assurance Co of Australia Ltd v Ferrcom Pty
(1991) 22 NSWLR 389
Crown Green Square Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc
(2002) 209 CLR 95
[2002] HCA 8
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
(2021) 104 NSWLR 615
[2021] NSWCA 106.
Lendlease Engineering Pty
Ltd v Timecon Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWSC 685
Masters v Cameron
(1954) 91 CLR 353
[1954] HCA 72
Rose v Manno Kingsway Pty Limited as trustee for the Manno
Kingsway Unit Trust
[2025] NSWCA 23
WNA Construction Pty Ltd v Canberra
Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 17
Texts Cited:
K Mason, JW Carter and GJ Tolhurst, Mason & Carter’s Restitution
in Australia (5th ed, 2025, J W Carter Publishing Pty Ltd)
Principal judgment
Bettar Holdings Pty Ltd t/as Hunt Collaborative (Appellant)
Brookvale Investment Pty Ltd as trustee for Brookvale Development Trust
(Defendant)
Representation:
S Robertson SC; D Byrne (Appellant)
MD Martin KC
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Pinsent Masons (Appellant)
Mills Oakley
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales
[2025] NSWDC 11
[2025] NSWDC 91
Date of Decision:
12 February 2025
File Number(s):
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The respondent (
) engaged Hannas Contracting Services Pty Ltd
) to manage the development of land at Brookvale. Hannas conducted
a tender process for construction management services to which
the appellant
) made a submission. Hunt and Hannas engaged in negotiations. On
27 October 2023, Hannas sent Hunt an email stating that it “agreed
the commercial conditions noted in the ... letter of offer”; it was
“Hannas intention, once a draft contract is agreed
between both parties,
to execute a contract”; and “the above should provide enough
assurance for you to discuss the project
with you[r] team and push
Hunt undertook work on the project at Hannas’ instruction. The
relationship between Hunt and Hannas broke down, and Hunt ceased
21 December 2023, Hunt purported to serve a payment claim on RWC pursuant
Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment
). If the provisions of the Act had thus been
validly engaged, RWC did not provide a payment schedule within the statutory
then sued RWC for a statutory debt claimed to arise pursuant to
of the Act. The primary judge dismissed the claim. The primary
judge ordered Hunt to pay RWC’s costs on the indemnity basis
in relation
to the entire proceedings in circumstances where Hunt had not accepted a
offer made by RWC on 25 July 2024 and her Honour considered
that Hunt’s claim had been “doomed to fail”.
The primary issue on appeal was whether there was a “construction
contract” within the meaning of
of the Act, being “a contract or
other arrangement under which one party undertakes to carry out construction
work, or to supply
related goods and services, for another party”. Hunt
submitted that there was a contract at common law (ground 1); or that
conventional estoppel prevented RWC from denying such a contract (ground 2); or
that RWC was bound by a promissory estoppel from
resiling from a promise to
enter such a contract (ground 3); or that there was an “other
arrangement” (ground 4).
The other issues on the appeal were whether Hunt’s purported payment
claim identified the construction work (or related goods
and services) to which
it related, for the purposes of
of the Act (grounds 5 and 6); whether
the payment claim was served (ground 7); whether in light of the other grounds
RWC was liable
to pay the amount claimed (ground 8); and whether the primary
judge erred in the exercise of her Honour’s discretion as to
costs (ground
The court held
(McHugh JA, Bell CJ and Kirk JA agreeing),
the appeal as to ground 9 and otherwise dismissing the appeal:
per McHugh JA (Bell CJ agreeing; Kirk JA not
Hunt did not establish on the balance of probabilities that Hannas
had actual authority to enter the alleged contract on behalf of
RWC: [1]; [2];
per McHugh JA (Bell CJ and Kirk JA agreeing)
There is no basis in the material available for use on an objective
assessment of the parties’ communications whether up to
or after the email
of 27 October 2023, to conclude that the parties had agreed to be bound in
contract no later than that date. RWC
was also not prevented by a conventional
estoppel from denying such a contract or bound by a promissory estoppel from
resiling from
a promise to enter such a contract: [1]; [2]; [39]-[43];
[77]-[85]; [87]; [116]; [118]-[121]; [123]-[125].
Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd v GR Securities
(1986) 40 NSWLR
Masters v Cameron
(1954) 91 CLR 353
[1954] HCA 72
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community of SA Inc
(2002) 209 CLR 95
Rose v Manno Kingsway Pty Limited as trustee for the Manno Kingsway
[2025] NSWCA 23
per McHugh JA (Bell CJ and Kirk JA agreeing)
Hunt’s argument that an “other arrangement” within the
of the Act existed at 27 October 2023 was outside the pleading.
In any event, and whether or not there is any true conflict in the
authorities
as to what constitutes an “other arrangement”, there was no
“other arrangement”: [1]; [2]; [131]-[140].
Lendlease Engineering Pty Ltd v Timecon Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWSC 685
Crown Green Square Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
[2021] NSWSC 1557
per McHugh JA (Bell CJ and Kirk JA not expressing a
There was much to be said for the proposition that the progress claim
constituted a valid payment claim for the purposes of
s 13(2)(a):
[144]; [147].
WNA Construction Pty Ltd v Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 17
per McHugh JA (Bell CJ agreeing; Kirk JA not
However, RWC was not served with the claim because it was sent to
Hannas and Hunt did not establish that Hannas was RWC’s agent
purpose: [1]; [2]; [148].
per McHugh JA (Bell CJ and Kirk JA agreeing)
primary judge’s approach to costs involved
House v King
either or both because her Honour misdirected herself in considering that her
earlier rejection of the claim necessarily meant
that it was doomed to fail, or
because her Honour gave inadequate reasons for her conclusion. However, it was
unreasonable for Hunt
not to have accepted RWC’s
That being so, costs of the proceedings at first instance should be awarded on
the indemnity basis from 25 July 2025: [1];
[2]; [152]-[158].
: I have had the benefit of reading the detailed reasons of McHugh
JA. I prefer not to express a view on grounds 5 and 6, it not
necessary to do so to dispose of the appeal. I agree with McHugh JA in
relation to grounds 1-4 and 7-9 and the orders his
Honour proposes.
: I agree with the orders proposed by McHugh JA for the reasons given
by his Honour with respect to grounds 1-4 and 8-9, save that
I express no view
on the agency issue. It is not necessary to do so, and it is by no means clear
that the issue was in dispute in
the proceedings below. Whilst the appellant
bore the onus there was no need for it, or the court below, to address the
agency point
if it was not in dispute. It is also not necessary to address
grounds 5-7 and I prefer to express no view on them.
: Before the Court is another case in which a contractor seeks to invoke
the beneficial operation of the
Building and Construction Industry Security
of Payment Act 1999
). The appellant (
asserts error in almost every aspect of the decision of the primary judge, Cole
DCJ, dismissing Hunt’s claim brought on a
statutory debt alleged to be
owing by the respondent (
) pursuant to
of the Act:
Holdings Pty Ltd trading as Hunt Collaborative v RWC Brookvale Investments Pty
Ltd as trustee for Brookvale Development Trust
[2025] NSWDC 11
grounds of appeal span four pages covering, in summary, the following sets of
(1) Failure to find that a “construction contract” existed between
the parties, being an ordinary contract at common
law (or that RWC was bound by
a conventional estoppel from denying such a contract; or that RWC was bound by a
promissory estoppel
from resiling from a promise to enter such a contract; or
that there was an “other arrangement” within the meaning of
extended definition of “construction contract” in
Act): Grounds 1-4.
(2) Failure to find that Hunt’s purported payment claim complied with
of the Act: Grounds 5-6.
(3) Failure to find that the payment claim was served: Ground 7.
(4) Failure to find that RWC was liable to pay the amount claimed plus interest:
(5) Independently of all the other grounds, error in exercising the discretion
as to costs: Ground 9.
not far below the surface of the first and third sets of issues are questions of
the event that Hunt fails on the first set of grounds, the second, third and
fourth sets fall away. Only the independent ground
as to costs would
The parties and key individuals
was registered on 1 August 2023. It appears to be a special-purpose vehicle
incorporated to develop land at Brookvale in New South
the Brookvale
Danny Hanna is the chief executive officer of Hannas Contracting Services Pty
). He described himself as “an experienced
developer/builder having completed a significant number of civil infrastructure,
industrial and residential build and development projects in and around Sydney
since 1988.”
engaged Hannas to manage the development of the Brookvale land. Precisely when
that occurred is not clear. The nature and extent
of the relationship between
Hannas and RWC is also not clear. A company search of RWC as at 16 April 2024
did not disclose that Mr
Hanna was a director or secretary of RWC.
is a builder. Its General Manager is Mr Nicholas Bettar. Mr Bettar said in
his affidavit made 16 May 2024 that he has known Mr
Hanna since the late
Hunt’s claim was for a statutory debt
sued on a statutory debt claimed to arise pursuant to
of the Act as
of the Act defines “construction contract” in an extended way:
construction contract
means a contract or other arrangement
under which one party undertakes to carry out construction work, or to supply
related goods
and services, for another party”. Hunt claimed to be a party
to a “construction contract” with RWC on several bases
which was contested below and in this Court). Hunt alleged a contract in the
ordinary common law sense. It also claimed
in the alternative to have the
benefit of either a conventional or a promissory estoppel which put it in
substantially the same position
as if there were such a contract. There was a
debate about whether on the pleadings Hunt also claimed to be a party to some
kind of “arrangement” within the meaning of the extended
definition in
of the Act, “A person who, under a construction contract, has
undertaken to carry out construction work or to supply related
services is entitled to receive a progress payment.” By
person referred to in
who is or who claims to be entitled to a
progress payment (the
) may serve a payment claim on the
person who, under the construction contract concerned, is or may be liable to
make the payment.”
Hunt purported to serve a payment claim on RWC.
(Whether that “payment claim” complied with the requirements of
of the Act was disputed below and in this Court, as was the question
whether the claim had been properly served.)
, “A person on whom a payment claim is served (the
) may reply to the claim by providing a payment schedule
to the claimant.” By
, a payment schedule “must
indicate the amount of the payment (if any) that the respondent proposes to
, if the respondent does not provide a payment
schedule to the claimant within a maximum of 10 business days, “the
becomes liable to pay the claimed amount to the claimant on the due
date for the progress payment to which the payment claim relates”.
not provide a payment schedule within the time Hunt alleged it was due. Hunt
then sued pursuant to
s 15(2)(a)(i)
to “recover the unpaid portion of the
claimed amount from the respondent, as a debt due to the claimant, in any court
of competent
might be noted that Hunt’s claim was not brought under the general law,
e.g., for damages for breach of contract or in quantum
meruit. It was
exclusively a claim for a statutory debt alleged to have arisen in accordance
with the terms of the Act.
will be seen, the question whether Hannas was acting as RWC’s agent did
not directly arise on the pleadings. However, the
question is potentially
relevant to at least two matters that were in contest below and in this Court.
First, whether any “construction
contract” came into existence to
which RWC was a party (Grounds 1 to 4). Secondly, whether any payment claim had
been served
on RWC, as opposed to Hannas (which will be addressed below in
relation to Ground 7).
Counsel for Hunt accepted that in order to succeed on the appeal his client
needed a finding in this Court that RWC had actually
conferred authority on
Hannas. The position taken by RWC on the appeal was less clear. Its Senior
Counsel indicated that he had not
raised lack of agency at first instance by way
of answer to the issues now covered in this Court by Grounds 1 to 4. As to those
it was not clear to what extent RWC was relying in this Court on a
failure to establish agency, as opposed to uncertainty about the
parties to any
contract on 27 October 2023, as a reason to find no contract was entered. But
RWC did and does rely on the failure
to establish agency as an answer to the
question of service. In the circumstances, and particularly given the
acknowledgement by
Hunt that it needs to establish that Hannas had actual
authority, it is appropriate to address the question of Hannas’ authority
on its merits.
to Grounds 1 to 4, on Hunt’s case, contrary to the finding below, RWC, by
its agent Hannas (acting through its chief executive
officer Mr Hanna), entered
an ordinary common law contract with Hunt “by about 27 October
order to establish the conferral of actual authority by RWC, Hunt must point to
some act on the part of RWC. It relies on RWC’s
appointment of Hannas as
development manager. It submits:
“The inference to be drawn is that when Hannas Contracting Service
was appointed as the development manager, that carried with
it a power to enter
into contracts in aid of the development on behalf of, and it therefore follows,
in the name of, RWC.”
Tcpt, 25 August 2025, 8.13-16.
appointment of a development manager may or may not confer actual authority on
the appointee to bind the appointor to contracts
with third parties. For
example, the authority to “manage” might be limited to liaising with
contractors and consultants.
The appointment might extend to authority to give
directions to contractors or consultants, but stop short of authority to enter
contracts with third parties on behalf of the appointor. The scope of the
authority, if any, conferred on a person described as a
depends on any express terms of the appointment, and may otherwise be implied
from the circumstances.
the circumstances here is that the contract alleged was both high in value
(involving millions of dollars of expenditure) and
of fundamental importance to
the whole Brookvale project. The alleged contract was to appoint Hunt as
managing contractor. As Senior
Counsel for Hunt (whose familiarity with such
matters is not in doubt) explained without dissent from the bar table:
“A managing contractor model usually involves a contracting manager being
appointed as the agent of the principal to, in effect,
organise the job, and
usually that company or that person has delegated authority on the part of the
principal to enter into contracts
on behalf of the principal. They are usually
remunerated on a percentage of cost-type basis. ‘I've got a $25 million
pay you 6% or 5.5% of the actual cost,’ sometimes with a bonus
as well. ‘If you get the job done for $22 million rather
than 25 I'll give
you an additional bonus because you're saving money for me as the
principal.’”
Tcpt, 25 August 2025, 15.29-37.
is to say, the alleged contract with Hunt would be the primary contract through
which the Brookvale project would be delivered.
It would expose RWC to
liabilities to third parties via delegated authority granted to Hunt to enter
into contracts on behalf of
RWC. The fact that the alleged contract with Hunt
would be of such significance to RWC and the Brookvale project is relevant in
ways. First, it goes to the question whether it should be implied from any
conduct established on the part of RWC that RWC conferred
authority on Hannas to
enter such a contract. Secondly, it goes to the probability that any such
conduct on the part of RWC occurred.
evidence as to RWC’s appointment of Hannas is principally found in
par 1 of Mr Hanna’s affidavit made 22 July 2024.
He described Hannas
as “the development manager authorised by [RWC] to manage the development
on [RWC’s] behalf.”
Hunt submitted that the evidence in Mr
Hanna’s par 1, which does not identify the time at which the
appointment occurred, should
be understood as extending to October 2023. In
light of the documentary and other evidence disclosing that Mr Hanna was
functions in that role at that time, that submission should be
statement in Mr Hanna’s par 1 is conclusory in form, and might ordinarily
be objectionable to prove the conferral of authority
by RWC. But the evidence
was contained in an affidavit read in RWC’s case, and should be given such
weight as it warrants in
the circumstances. On the other hand, the statement in
par 1 says nothing about the nature and scope of the authority “to manage
the development on [RWC’s] behalf” that RWC had conferred on Hannas.
Given the significance of the alleged contract with
Hunt, the fact that RWC
appointed Hannas to manage the development did not, without more, implicitly
carry with it the authority
to enter a major contract with a third party such as
Hunt to act as managing contractor. The primary judge took a similar view of
that evidence at J[70].
Hanna’s affidavit also included the following at pars 7 and 10:
“[7] As the representative of [RWC], I would brief the board on my
discussions with Mr Bettar. Importantly the proposal he
gave me was one where
the preliminary costs were to form part of the profit component of the building
That was important as the board of [RWC] were relying upon my
advice as an experienced builder to ensure that any price agreed was
commercially competitive
[10] As at 27 October 2023 I had not made a decision about whether [Hunt] would
be the builder on the Brookvale Project because I
still did not have any
understanding of the proposed cost of the build. At the time I was still in
discussion with another builder
with a view to having a competitive process
running on the appointment of a builder for the development. ...”
italicised words in par 7 were admitted only as to Mr Hanna’s state of
evidence in par 7 that Mr Hanna would brief the board of RWC on his discussions
with Mr Bettar is at best (from Hunt’s perspective)
neutral. It is
consistent with the proposition that Mr Hanna had authority to discuss matters
(i.e. to negotiate) with Mr Bettar,
while lacking authority to bind RWC. The
further evidence that Mr Hanna understood that the board was relying upon his
suggests that he understood that the decision to enter the
contract was one to be made by the board, not by Mr Hanna as chief executive
officer of Hannas. That is a circumstance inconsistent with his having actual
authority to make the decision himself. On the other
hand, that evidence is not
inconsistent with the proposition that once RWC’s board made any decision,
Hannas might have authority
to enter the contract in order to implement the
Hanna’s evidence at par 10 that as at 27 October 2023 he “had not
made a decision about whether [Hunt] would be the
builder on the Brookvale
Project ...” could be read as meaning he had not yet decided what advice
to give to the board of RWC.
The same is true of his evidence at par 19 that as
at 6 November he “had still not formed a view on whether to engage
or not.” Both paragraphs are, however, more naturally read as
implying that Mr Hanna understood that he had authority to make
the decision (as
CEO of Hannas) himself. But even if that was Mr Hanna’s understanding, the
delegation to him of authority
to make a decision (a matter of RWC’s
internal decision-making processes) is not the same as authority to enter
contracts on
RWC’s behalf (a matter of RWC’s dealings with third
parties). Nor was there any direct evidence of the basis for any
understanding
Mr Hanna may have had — that is, evidence of anything RWC itself may have
done. The high point of the evidence
remains Mr Hanna’s conclusory
statement that Hannas was “the development manager authorised by [RWC] to
manage the development
on [RWC’s] behalf”. Given the scale and
significance of the proposed contract, even if Mr Hanna understood that Hannas,
acting through him, had RWC’s authority to enter contracts on its behalf,
that would be a slight basis from which to infer
that RWC had in fact conferred
actual authority on Hannas to do so.
submitted that the evidence on this subject was within the power of RWC to lead;
that the Court should weigh the evidence in
accordance with the principles in
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
; and that inferences should
be drawn adversely to RWC consistently with
Commercial Union Assurance Co of
Australia Ltd v Ferrcom Pty Ltd
(1991) 22 NSWLR 389
at 418 per Handley JA
(Kirby P agreeing). In particular, Hunt submits that Mr Hanna was the only
witness called in RWC’s case,
and that no one on behalf of RWC, such as a
director, gave evidence to the effect that Hannas had no, or had only limited,
difficulty with this argument is that, as Senior Counsel for Hunt acknowledged,
Hunt bore at least the legal onus on the question
of agency. It is difficult to
see why an inference should be drawn against a party for failing to lead
evidence about an issue unless
the party is clearly on notice of the issue.
There was some debate at the hearing of the appeal as to whether it was
necessary for
Hunt expressly to plead that Hannas was acting as agent for RWC in
Hannas’ dealings with Hunt. Agency was an issue on which
Hunt carried the
onus. RWC might ordinarily be entitled to a pleading of the material facts
constituting its conferral of actual
authority on Hannas, or from which the
agency was to be inferred. The amended statement of claim contained no such
pleading. As the
primary judge said, “absent from the Amended Statement of
claim is the pleading of any agency agreement between Hannas and
authorised Hannas to enter into a contract or ‘other arrangement’ on
behalf of RWC”: J[70].
in the particulars to the allegations of material fact, the names of certain
individuals, including Mr Hanna and Mr James
Webb, a Senior Development Manager
at Hannas, were followed by the word, “(Defendant)” — i.e.,
RWC. To the extent
that those references should be read as raising an allegation
of agency, the allegation would be that those individuals were themselves
of RWC. (That is consistent with Mr Bettar’s evidence in
cross-examination: “my understanding was [Mr Hanna] was
RWC”: Tcpt,
6 November 2024, 8.47.) The pleading would not be read as an allegation that
Hannas, the corporation, was an agent
of RWC as a result of Hannas’
appointment as “development manager”.
circumstances in which RWC does not suggest that it is prejudiced on appeal in
relation to Grounds 1-4 if Hunt is permitted to
argue that Hannas was acting as
RWC’s agent, the absence of a proper pleading of agency is not decisive of
the question. But
the pleading issue does have a bearing on Hunt’s
argument that inferences should be drawn adversely to RWC because RWC failed
lead evidence denying any such agency. In the absence of any clear allegation in
the pleading that RWC had conferred actual authority
on Hannas to enter a
contract with Hunt, it is difficult to identify the specific allegation that Mr
Hanna, or any director of RWC,
could have been expected but failed to deny.
does it appear that the hearing at first instance was conducted on the basis
that Hunt’s case was that Hannas (the corporation)
authority to enter the alleged contract with Hunt. The closest the parties
appear to have come to addressing the
question of agency was after the evidence.
In addresses, in the course of disputing service of any payment claim,
RWC’s counsel
“The contracting party here is the defendant, RWC Brookvale Investments
Pty Ltd. As I was at pains to point out to Mr [Bettar],
Hannas was the
development manager. He accepted that. They were the agent for the purposes of
inviting tenders for this work. But
Mr [Bettar] or the plaintiff knew that the
contracting party was the defendant because that’s the entity to whom he
payment claim; that’s the entity that he sued. He wasn’t
contracting with Hanna.”
Tcpt, 6 November 2024, 52.28-34.
“... They served it on the development manager for the project but that is
not the ordinary place of business of the defendant.
The fact that as it’s
said, Hannas Contracting Services might have been the agent of RWC Brookvale, it
was the agent for the
purpose of inviting tenders to do this building work.
It wasn’t the agent for the purposes of receiving payment claims
Tcpt, 6 November 2024, 53.35-41.
words “[t]hey were the agent for the purposes of inviting tenders for this
work” fall short of conceding that Hannas
was RWC’s agent for the
purposes of entering a contract. They do not suggest that RWC was on notice that
Hunt’s case
was that Hannas was RWC’s agent for that purpose.
issue might have been readily resolved in cross-examination of Mr Hanna. Hunt
did not take that course. That may well have been
a forensic choice. But in
circumstances where Hunt carried the onus on the issue, and there was no clear
allegation of agency in
the pleading or otherwise, Hunt failed to cross-examine
on the point at its own risk.
was other evidence relevant to this issue, being the evidence of the
parties’ communications discussed below. One important
aspect of those
communications is the absence of any reference to RWC until well after the
crucial date of 27 October 2027. Another
is Mr Hanna’s insistence on
formality, which would require any contract binding RWC to be in writing and
executed formally
on RWC’s behalf. Those matters are inconsistent with
Hannas’ having actual authority to enter contracts (or at least
contract) on RWC’s behalf.
the result, Hunt has not established on the balance of probabilities that Hannas
had actual authority to enter the alleged contract
with Hunt on behalf of RWC.
But given that the question is finely balanced, and in circumstances where the
extent to which the issue
was in dispute below is far from clear, it is
appropriate to consider the first set of grounds of appeal (whether the parties
a binding contract, etc) making the assumption in Hunt’s favour,
contrary to the conclusion just reached, that Hannas (acting
through its CEO Mr
Hanna) had RWC’s actual authority to enter the alleged contract with Hunt
on RWC’s behalf.
First set of Grounds (1 to 4): Ground 1
— contract at common law
noted above,
of the Act defines “construction contract” in an
extended way. It is convenient to begin with Hunt’s primary case
there was a “contract” in the ordinary common law
The nature of the alleged contract
case is that by about 27 October 2023, “the parties concluded what is
sometimes referred to as an ‘
early works contract
contemplation that that contract would be in due course be substituted with a
broader and more formal contract” (emphasis
in original). Hunt
characterised the type of contract as falling within what was said by McLelland
Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd v GR Securities
NSWLR 62 at 628:
“There is in reality a fourth class of case additional to the three
mentioned in
Masters v Cameron
, as recognised by Knox CJ, Rich J and
Dixon J, in
Sinclair, Scott & Co v Naughton
[1929] HCA 34
(1929) 43 CLR 310
namely, ‘... one in which the parties were content to be bound immediately
and exclusively by the terms which they
had agreed upon whilst expecting to make
a further contract in substitution for the first contract, containing, by
consent, additional
Rose v Manno Kingsway Pty Limited as trustee for the Manno Kingsway Unit
[2025] NSWCA 23
per Bell CJ (Mitchelmore and Adamson JJA
needs to put this case outside the third class discussed in
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
[1954] HCA 72:
“Or, thirdly, the
case may be one in which the intention of the parties is not to make a concluded
bargain at all, unless and
until they execute a formal contract.” Dixon
CJ, McTiernan and Kitto JJ explained at 361:
“Cases of the third class are fundamentally different. They are cases in
which the terms of agreement are not intended to have,
and therefore do not
have, any binding effect of their own:
Governor &c. of the Poor of
Kingston-upon-Hull v Petch
. The parties may have so provided either because
they have dealt only with major matters and contemplate that others will or may
be regulated by provisions to be introduced into the formal document, as in
Summergreene v Parker
or simply because they wish to reserve to
themselves a right to withdraw at any time until the formal document is
Footnotes omitted.
law as to intention to create contractual relations is well-settled. As Gaudron,
McHugh, Hayne and Callinan JJ held in
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community
(2002) 209 CLR 95
[2002] HCA 8
“Because the search for the ‘intention to create contractual
relations’ requires an objective assessment of the
state of affairs
between the parties (as distinct from the identification of any uncommunicated
subjective reservation or intention
that either may harbour) the circumstances
which might properly be taken into account in deciding whether there was the
intention are so varied as to preclude the formation of any
prescriptive rules. Although the word ‘intention’ is used
context, it is used in the same sense as it is used in other contractual
contexts. It describes what it is that would objectively
be conveyed by what was
said or done, having regard to the circumstances in which those statements and
actions happened. It is not
a search for the uncommunicated subjective motives
or intentions of the parties.”
Footnotes omitted.
to entry into the “early works contract” for which Hunt contends,
Hunt submits that the most important piece of evidence
in this regard is an
email sent by Mr Webb to Mr Bettar of Hunt at 2:47 pm on 27 October 2023. The
email was copied to Mr Hanna and
to Mr Stephen Ogden, also of Hannas. On
Hunt’s case, that email constituted RWC’s acceptance (by its agent
an earlier offer made by Hunt. If the 2:47 pm email did not operate
as an acceptance resulting in a binding contract, it is difficult
to see how any
contract was formed.
is convenient to defer setting out the terms of the 2:47 pm email until after
addressing the communications which preceded it.
something should first be said about the primary judge’s reasons for
finding at J[64] that no contract came into existence
between Hannas and Hunt,
or between RWC and Hunt. Apart from the agency question, there were two
different but overlapping strands
to the reasoning: that there was an absence
both of “consensus on terms” and of intention to be immediately
bound. Thus
her Honour said at J[64]:
“Some terms of a potential future contract were agreed, but negotiations
were always subject to a comprehensive agreement being
arrived at and recorded
in a written and executed contract. This never occurred. A complete set of
agreed terms was never arrived
at between Hannas and Hunt.”
absence of a “complete set of agreed terms”, or of “a
comprehensive agreement”, would not be inconsistent
with an agreement in
the fourth class described in
Baulkham Hills Private Hospital
an agreement would still require that the parties intend to be bound
immediately. On the primary judge’s findings,
that element was missing in
her Honour also said at J[66] that “it is clear from the [2:47 pm] email
that a letter of intent and a contract were anticipated
future steps, so that
Hannas did not intend for there to be a binding contract at that stage.”
The effect of that reasoning,
and of the earlier statement that the negotiations
were always subject to a written and executed contract, was effectively to put
the case into the third class in
Masters v Cameron
. That is to say, to
the extent that there was any agreement as to terms, “the terms of
agreement [were] not intended to have,
and therefore [did] not have, any binding
effect of their own”.
central question in the present case is thus whether, viewed objectively, the
parties’ communications and conduct manifested
an intention to be
immediately bound.
The communications and conduct up to 27
October 2023
part of the tender process, on 3 October 2023, Mr Brian Gillen, a Project
Manager at Hannas, sent Mr Bettar an email with the tender
documents for the
Brookvale project, requesting that Hunt provide a lump sum cost breakdown.
11 October 2023, Mr Bettar responded to Mr Gillen’s email, copying
Mr Hanna and others at Hannas. That email attached what
was described as a
“Cost Plan”, being a nine-page spreadsheet headed “Indicative
Budget Estimate”. A note
at the end of the spreadsheet stated,
“Costs are after demo, shoring, contamination and all piles are done. We
start with the
slab on ground.” Mr Bettar said in the email, “Please
see attached costings ... circa $27.75m”. (Mr Bettar corrected
this figure
to $25.75m in a later email the same day.) He explained the way in which the
spreadsheet had been prepared as follows:
“it’s a cost plan as we
obviously didn’t go to market and tender it properly, as time was of the
He said later in the email, “It would take us weeks to get
market prices and rates, if you wanted a proper price ... probably
$25m, but you never know.” In the context, it is clear that that figure
was directed to the price that might be obtainable
for a lump sum contract.
of the pages in the spreadsheet had more than 100 rows. Towards the top of the
eighth page was a row beginning “STAFF”.
Below that were the titles
of various positions, such as Project Manager and Carpenter, followed across
each row by columns including
a quantity (the unit being one week) and a rate.
One of the columns was headed “CC(QS) Budget Estimate incl. 8%”. At
least in the context of an indicative budget for a lump sum contract, the
spreadsheet thus identified weekly rates for persons occupying
positions, such as Project Manager, and indicated that the construction
contractor would charge an additional 8%.
days later, on 13 October 2023, Mr Bettar sought an update on the status of his
submission.
Mr Webb responded that day, copying among others Mr Hanna.
Mr Webb said, “We are still in the process of reviewing all the tenders
and working with the contractors to bring the price in line with our
communications between Mr Bettar and Mr Hanna ensued. On Thursday 19 October
2023, Mr Bettar sent an email to Mr Hanna referring
to “yesterday’s
chats”. This appears to be the point at which the possibility of entry
into a construction management
contract, as opposed to a lump sum contract, was
introduced. Mr Bettar said, “As requested, I have also prepared a
construction
management proposal, which I will finish Monday morning after
reviewing what the guys come back with”.
Bettar sought a time for a meeting. Mr Hanna responded suggesting Tuesday
morning, that is, 24 October.
9:10 am on 24 October 2023, Mr Bettar sent Mr Hanna an email saying,
“Please find attached my letter and std contract with
std conditions as
asked.” The words, “as asked” indicate that Mr Hanna had
sought the proposed terms of a formal
written contract. Mr Bettar’s email
attached the Master Builders Association of New South Wales Pty Ltd’s
standard form
Construction Management Contract (September 2002 edition), and a
document headed “Schedule 10 - Special Conditions”.
Bettar’s email of 9.10 am also attached a letter dated 20 October 2023
signed by him and addressed to “Hannas P/L ...
Attn: Danny Hanna”.
The heading of the letter was “Re: Construction Management proposal for
‘Rockwater’ in
Brookvale”. Two matters should be noted.
Hunt particularly relied on a paragraph consisting of a single sentence on the
second page of the letter: “The cost of
the management staff to run the
project is as per our previous submission”. Hunt submitted that this
should be read as a reference
to the line items under the heading STAFF on page
8 of the spreadsheet which Mr Bettar had emailed to Mr Gillen on 11 October 2023
in the course of the tender process for a lump sum contract.
the next paragraph in the letter was as follows:
“Further, whereas we had an 8% P&O charge on a lump sum, we discussed
with you a 25% discount to 6% on a Construction Management
basis. This P&O
charge, represents myself, accounts, other office staff etc (head office
overheads) and profit.”
is uncontroversial that “P&O” refers to profit and overheads.
Hunt submits that the effect of these paragraphs
was that for the purpose of its
Construction Management proposal, the cost of the management staff identified in
the 11 October spreadsheet
(as part of a lump sum tender process) would
remain the same, but be subject to a 6% charge instead of the 8% charge for a
contract. The difference was said to be explicable on the basis that a
lump sum contract would involve more risk for Hunt than a
construction
management contract structure.
3:06 pm on the same day, 24 October 2023, Mr Bettar sent an email to
Mr Hanna, Mr Webb and Mr Ogden of Hannas, thanking them “for
today”. In a series of bullet points Mr Bettar summarised what had been
said and confirmed “the plan moving forward”.
These included the
(1) “You wanted your lawyers to review my sub-contract and supply
agreement, no issue”. That again indicates an insistence
on a formal
written contract on the part of Hannas.
(2) “You asked for the CV’s of the key people, which I will forward
to you”; “You asked to interview them,
also”. At the end of
the email, Mr Bettar said, “One thing I wasn’t 100% sure on, you
stated you wanted to interview
my guys next week, what days work?” The
insistence on interviewing the key people shows that this was an important issue
Hannas. One ordinarily interviews key people before entering a contract
which commits one to work with them.
11:43 am on Friday 27 October 2023, Mr Bettar sent Mr Hanna and Mr Webb an email
attaching a letter addressed to “Hannas
P/L ... Attn: Danny Hanna &
James Webb”. The letter had a number of features which should be
(1) The body of the letter began:
“Further to our many meetings, discussions and your recent phone call this
morning, with James and Steve, we wish to confirm
the following offer that you
As per your request, I have tried to relay the minutes of our telephone
conversation below, so that we have a clear baseline, prior
to starting.”
Although the letter purported to confirm an offer made by Hannas, it is clear
enough from what was said at the end of the letter (see
below) that in substance
it amounted to an offer from Hunt which Hunt was seeking to have Hannas
(2) Mr Bettar stated, “We also note, that our 20th of October letter
should be read in conjunction with this letter.”
The 20 October letter had
been attached to Mr Bettar’s email of 9:10 am on 24 October 2023. This is
significant on Hunt’s
case, because the 20 October letter said, “The
cost of the management staff to run the project is as per our previous
submission”,
which Hunt submitted should be read as a reference to the
line items in the 11 October 2023 spreadsheet. The 27 October letter
that statement towards the end of the letter: “The cost of the
management staff to run the project is as per our previous
submission.”
(3) After the words, “We understand the following: ...”, were 19
numbered paragraphs. These included a number of commercial
terms, for example,
that Hannas had proposed a 5.5% profit and head office overhead fee, but also a
$600,000 bonus should the project
be completed before the end of 2024 and raw
costs not exceed $22m.
(4) Point 8 was that Hannas wished Hunt to start the following Monday, 30
October 2023. “Hunt needs a letter of intent confirming
this letter today
for Monday’s start date.”
(5) Points 11 to 15 identified things Hunt was to start on Monday, including
negotiations with suppliers.
(6) Point 17 was: “Hanna’s to interview Hunt’s management
team next week, as works will begin next week (subject
to Hanna’s return
confirmation today), as costs begin to accrue from Monday.” That sequence
of events would be contrary
to what one might expect as discussed above.
(7) Mr Bettar referred to having “sent a standard CM contract with
special conditions”. He said, “This contract
and conditions have
been used in the past on more intricate and large sized projects.” That
showed a consciousness that a formal
contract would be required, at least at
some stage.
October letter ended with the following:
“If you are in agreement with what is noted throughout this letter, please
confirm your intention to engage us
for this project. We believe the
fundamentals have been agreed between both parties after offers, counter offers,
consideration has
been made by both. Whereas, verbally you said
‘Marbrook’, Danny, thank you, but
like you said
let’s keep it formal
and send me
something solid
today, so I
can start my long, hard, sweaty road for the rest of 23 and 2024.
We anticipate that this submission will meet your approval, and should you
require further clarification please do not hesitate to
telephone number
Emphasis supplied.
was not in dispute that the word “Marbrook” meant congratulations in
Arabic. That suggests that the discussions between
the parties had been
productive of something warranting congratulations. However, as Mr Bettar
acknowledged, Mr Hanna had insisted
“let’s keep it formal”. In
this context, the most natural understanding of those words is that Mr Hanna was
to a formal written contract.
is clear enough from the words “If you are in agreement with what is noted
throughout this letter” that Mr Bettar was
not purporting to accept any
offer claimed to have been made already by Hannas.
was the 27 October letter itself, at least in form, a contractual offer.
Instead, on Hunt’s side, Mr Bettar was seeking
at least that Hannas
“confirm your
to engage us”. “Engage”
here means enter a contract, but the word “intention” contemplates
into the contract would happen at a later date — not that a
binding agreement would be reached immediately upon Hannas’
accepting an
offer constituted by Hunt’
October letter. To the contrary, as Mr
Bettar had indicated at point 8, “Hunt need[ed] a letter of intent
confirming this letter
today for Monday’s start date”. That was the
“something solid today, so I can start” that Mr Bettar was
requesting.
email to which the letter was attached included the following:
“Gentlemen, please find attached.
I believe it is in line with our discussions.
If you are in agreement, I await your letter of intent or written confirmation
today, so I can gear up correctly for Monday start.”
is again plain from the email that Mr Bettar was seeking a commitment from
Hannas with a view to making a “Monday start”.
The form of
commitment he sought was either a “letter of intent” or
“written confirmation”. The words “written
confirmation”
pick up the words towards the end of the attached letter, “please confirm
your intention to engage us”.
would be a rational negotiating tactic on the part of a contractor wishing to
secure a job to use the urgency of the circumstances
to try to extract a
commitment from the principal. It was at least implicit in Hunt’
October letter and email that Hunt would not commence work on the following
Monday unless it received “something solid”.
As will be seen, there
may have been an element of bluffing in doing so. But by referring to
“keep[ing] it formal”, Mr
Bettar set the standard by which
Hannas’ responses are to be judged for the purposes of determining whether
a contract came
into existence.
1:15 pm the same day, 27 October 2023, Mr Webb responded to Mr Bettar and Mr
Hanna as follows.
Thank you for the letter. As Danny mentioned it is Hanna’s intention to
progress with Hunt Collaborative.
We are currently reviewing the legal documents you have sent through and will
come back with any comments. We will also put together
a formal letter of
intent. Can you please work on a detailed scope of works on your CM role that
can accompany the contract.
Danny and I would like to meet with your team next Thursday at 10am. If this
time works for you ca[n] you please send through a meeting
invitation. We can
host in our office. Please also have their CV’s sent across by Tuesday
next week for Danny and I to review
before the meeting.
email was carefully worded. It did not express an intention to
Hunt. Instead it referred to an intention “to
Collaborative”, that is, to negotiate further, in circumstances where
Hannas sought a “detailed scope of works
on your CM role” and
proposed to interview the Hunt team the following Thursday. The references to
reviewing the legal documents,
to a formal letter of intent, and to the
contract, all showed an unwillingness at this stage to give Mr Bettar the
commitment that
he had sought.
Bettar sent Mr Webb and Mr Hanna an email at 1:39 pm the same day,
27 October, addressing various aspects of Mr Webb’s email
trying to schedule the meeting at a different time. The email concluded by
“Await your letter of intent and or confirmation today. Please, if you
don’t think today, let me know as I need to cancel
my workshop on the
weekend. We are moving things to meet Saturday.”
made explicit that in the absence of a letter of intent or confirmation received
that day, Mr Bettar’s team would stop
working on the project.
Bettar said at [39] of his affidavit made 16 May 2024, that after sending this
email he had a telephone conversation with Mr Webb
as follows:
“I told him that that I needed something strong and decisive, not wishy
washy. After some discussion, James Webb (RWC) acknowledged
specifically asked him that he must reply noting that he agrees to the
commercial terms of our letter, so I can have confidence
moving forward and the
email can act as a letter of intent.”
assimilation of Mr Webb to RWC in that evidence may be put to one side.
critical email was then sent by Mr Webb of Hannas to Mr Bettar of Hunt at 2:47
pm on 27 October 2023. As noted above, the email
was copied to Mr Hanna and to
Mr Stephen Ogden, also of Hannas. The body of the email was as
Thanks for the chat earlier, as discussed it is Hannas intention to send Hunt
Co. a letter of intent early next week which includes
the commercial agreement
between both parties and a draft contract to be used under the CM agreement.
Hannas agree to the commercial conditions noted in your attached letter of
offer. It is Hannas intention, once a draft CM contract
is agreed between both
parties, to execute a contract between Hannas and Hunt Co. for the Brookvale
I will also speak with E-Lab and EI on the fee for the structural and fire
engineer with the intention of having them engaged by
Monday 30th October
I believe the above should provide enough assurance for you to discuss the
project with you[r] team and push forward.
Have a good weekend.
submits that two features of the email are worthy of particular note. The first
is that, “by its second paragraph, the
email positively indicates
agree[ment]
’ noted in a ‘
letter of offer
’ sent to Mr
Webb by Mr Bettar earlier that day (11:43 am)” (emphasis supplied).
fact that there might be “agreement” as to some commercial terms (in
the sense that they were commercially acceptable
to Hannas) is consistent with
both the third and the fourth classes of case discussed above. The question
remains whether, viewed
objectively in all the circumstances, the 2:47 pm email
indicated an intention to be immediately bound at all. The difficulty Hunt
is that the 2:47 pm email was carefully worded to make clear that entry into any
contract was a matter for the future.
(1) The first paragraph expressed a present “intention” to send
“a letter of intent early next week”. Although
the potential
contractual effect of a “letter of intent” would depend on its
terms, of its nature, such a letter may
well fall short of manifesting any
intention to be immediately bound in contract. Here, the fact that the letter
was to include “a
draft contract to be used under the CM agreement”
suggests that the letter was not itself to have contractual force. To the
that the proposed letter was to “include[] the commercial agreement
between both parties”, that would be consistent
with the addition of
further commercial terms beyond those “agree[d]” to date. The
contours of what may be described
as “commercial” terms are in any
event elastic. For example, although located among the dispute resolution
of an agreement, a clause providing for the availability and extent
of liquidated damages might have a significant bearing on a party’s
commercial risk and be the subject of substantial commercial negotiation. As
will be seen, the topic of liquidated damages does
not appear to have arisen
until 31 October 2023.
(2) The statement in the second paragraph that “Hannas agree to the
commercial conditions noted in your attached letter of
offer” was not a
statement that those were the only “commercial conditions” that
would be the subject of any agreement.
Instead, this statement acknowledged that
such commercial conditions as had been identified in Hunt’
October letter were commercially acceptable to Hannas and did not
require further negotiation.
(3) But the fact that the agreement as to those commercial terms was not to be
immediately binding was made clear by the next sentence.
That sentence expressed
a present “intention” to execute a contract between Hannas and Hunt,
but only “once a draft
CM contract is agreed between both
(4) That is, again, consistent with Mr Hanna’s insistence, to which Mr
Bettar had referred in his 27 October letter, on keeping
things formal.
second feature to which Hunt points is “the text of the penultimate
paragraph”. Hunt submits that in the context:
’ that Mr Webb was offering is
reasonably to be understood as conveying a promise that Mr Bettar’s
company, Hunt, would
be paid in accordance with the agreed ‘
’ and could therefore safely ‘
’ with the ‘
’ (that is, Hunt acting
as a construction manager in relation to a
in Brookvale).”
Emphasis in original.
submission should be rejected. Read objectively in the context of the preceding
communications and the earlier parts of the 2:47
pm email itself, the language
deployed — “the above should provide
assurance for you
the project with you[r] team and
push forward
— has the opposite effect. The reason why the assurance Mr Webb was giving
would have to be “enough” for
Mr Bettar was that Mr Webb was saying,
in effect, “I’m not giving you a contract”. An immediately
binding agreement
would have given Hunt complete assurance. The email made clear
that the “assurance” that Mr Webb was offering fell well
of that. The only assurance Mr Webb was giving was that, in circumstances where
certain commercial terms identified by Hunt
were acceptable to Hannas, Hannas
presently intended (i.e., expected) to proceed to enter a contract, but only
after the parties
agreed the terms of a draft construction management contract.
the words used were not “push forward
with the project
the sense of acting as the appointed construction manager for the whole job).
The words were instead simply “push
forward”. The parties were still
negotiating and exchanging pre-contractual information. For example, in his
email sent at
1:15 pm on the same day, Mr Webb and asked Mr Hanna
“Can you please work on a detailed scope of works on your CM role that
accompany the contract”. The words “push forward” are readily
understood as referring to tasks of that kind,
particularly given that Mr Bettar
had said (a little more than an hour earlier than the 2:47 pm email in his email
of 1:39 pm) that
he would need to “cancel my workshop on the
weekend” unless he received a “letter of intent and or confirmation
submission that the 2:47 pm email “communicated an agreement immediately
to be bound by an obligation to pay Hunt
for its work on the Project in
accordance with the ‘
’ albeit in circumstances where both parties expected that a
more formal contractual documentation would be executed in due
should be rejected.
objectively, Mr Webb’
pm email did no more than acknowledge
agreement on some of the commercial terms, and express a present intention to
execute a contract
once the complete terms had been agreed. It did not manifest
an intention to give rise to an immediately binding contract. Whether
“enough assurance” for Hunt to take the risk of discussing the
project internally and pushing forward was a
matter for Hunt.
other strand in her Honour’s reasoning concerned the lack of consensus as
to terms. By way of example, as to the reference
to “the commercial
conditions noted in your attached letter of offer” (i.e., Hunt’
October letter), her Honour said at J[66] that those “commercial
conditions” “did not include, for example, pay
rates which could
form the basis of a progress payment”. As noted above, Hunt relies on Mr
Bettar’s statement in Hunt’
October letter that the cost of the
management staff to run the project “is as per our previous
submission”. Even if
that statement is taken to be a “commercial
condition” that had been “noted” in the 27 October letter, so
as to be understood objectively as falling within what was
“agree[d]” in Hannas’ 2:47 pm email (which is contestable),
the primary judge’s basic point that the “terms of an arrangement
between RWC and Hunt had not been settled” (at
J[66]) remains correct. In
addition to the prospect that there might be further “commercial”
terms, such as the liquidated
damages referred to above, there would be much
more to the terms of a construction management contract involving the kind of
relationship
in contemplation here than the limited number of “commercial
conditions” identified in the 27 October letter. Some of
the difficulties
in this respect were exposed in argument:
“KIRK JA: In relation to this so-called early works type of contract, we
don't have a clear articulation of rates. You've got
to go back to [the 11
October 2023 ‘Cost Plan’] and what was discussed previously. We
don't have any clear indication
to be claimable. We don't have any provision made in relation to termination and
although you say there's an implied term about terminating on reasonable
notice. We don't have any terms about when it could be invoiced.
We don't have
any terms about how that might interrelate to some future agreed
Tcpt, 25 August 2025, 44.10-17.
Counsel for Hunt accepted in argument on the appeal that it was at least
relevant to the question whether any contract was
formed at all that various
matters had not been agreed. Although the absence of agreement on all terms that
might be relevant to
the parties’ contractual relationship is not fatal
— so much is acknowledged by the existence of the fourth class of
which contemplates that additional terms may be agreed later — it
militates against the conclusion that the parties intended
to be immediately
bound no later than 27 October 2023. Her Honour was right to find at J[64] that
there was a lack of consensus as
an objective assessment of the communications and conduct up until 27 October
2023, there was, thus, no error in the primary judge’s
finding that no
contract came into existence.
conclusion is reached independently of the fact that any reference to RWC was
absent from the parties’ communications until
after 27 October 2023. The
2:47 pm email in particular was expressed in terms of Hannas’ own
intention, not the intention of
RWC or of some undisclosed principal. On their
face, the communications do not suggest that Hannas was acting on behalf of any
party. Hunt needs to establish that that was in fact what was happening.
For the reasons given earlier, Hunt has not done so.
parties’ subsequent conduct may also be taken into account in determining
whether the parties intended immediately to be
bound, and thus in determining
the existence (as opposed to the terms) of a contract:
Rose v Manno
[43] per Bell CJ (Mitchelmore and Adamson JJA agreeing). The same conduct is
relevant to the allegation of, at least, a conventional
estoppel. In this case,
the matters on which Hunt relies are at most equivocal, and the subsequent
conduct as a whole (including
the absence of complaint by Hunt that RWC or
Hannas was departing from any contract) is inconsistent with the existence of
any contract
(or, indeed, with the proposition on which the alleged conventional
estoppel is founded, namely, that the Plaintiff and the Defendant
themselves on the basis that such an agreement had been reached).
relies on the primary judge’s finding at J[67]:
“It is clear from the evidence of Mr Bettar, including the emails in the
exhibit to his affidavit, that Hannas knew that Hunt
was working on the
Brookvale project and performing the kind of tasks a construction manager
performs, such as engaging subcontractors.
Officers of Hannas requested officers
of Hunt to undertake various tasks.”
finding is supported by evidence of various communications between the parties
in November 2023, not all of which need be addressed.
Hunt submits that the
finding is consistent with the proposition that a contract had been concluded by
27 October 2023. So much may
be accepted. But Hunt’s further submission,
that it is difficult to articulate a plausible alternative characterisation of
the communications between the parties, should be rejected. So too should
Hunt’s more particular submission that “RWC’s
case seems to be
Hunt was performing voluntary work for it for several weeks in the forlorn hope
of eventually concluding a contract
with it”. To the extent that, as the
primary judge appears to have found, Hunt performed work (being the provision of
of the kind provided by a construction manager) at the request of
Hannas after 27 October, those circumstances would give rise to
at least an
arguable claim in quantum meruit, and Hunt might be taken to have known that. In
those circumstances, one could not characterise
Hunt’s work as
“voluntary”. And it would also be rational for a construction
manager in Hunt’s position,
having come as far as it had, to leverage the
advantages of practical (if not yet legal) incumbency in order to secure the
which it sought.
is commonplace when contracting for construction work for the would-be
contractor to incur expense (e.g., in preparing a tender)
while carrying the
risk that no agreement will be reached: K Mason, JW Carter and GJ Tolhurst,
Mason & Carter’s Restitution in Australia
(5th ed, 2025, J W
Carter Publishing Pty Ltd) at [1034]-[1035]. Clearly enough, this was the
position until 27 October. Any activities
to be performed by Hunt contemplated
by Mr Webb’s reference to “push[ing] forward” fall into a
similar category.
Mr Webb’s statement appears to have been directed to
internal work to be undertaken by Hunt: “the above should provide
assurance for you to
discuss the project with you[r] team
on the facts of any given case, a point may come at which the party requesting
the work takes on “the risk of liability
in contract or restitution if the
contemplated contract does not materialise”:
Mason & Carter’s
Restitution in Australia
at [1035]. As will be seen, after 27 October Hunt,
in response to specific requests by Hannas, undertook the work of a managing
contractor,
in circumstances that may well have given rise to a restitutionary
entitlement. But a claim in quantum meruit was no part of Hunt’s
statement of claim, whether as a free-standing cause of action, or as an element
in an argument directed to establishing
the existence of a “construction
contract” within the meaning of the Act — as to which, see below.
Moreover, Hunt
accepted at the hearing of the appeal that on its pleaded case
the contract (in the ordinary common law sense) was entered into no
27 October 2023. Putting to one side the possibility of an overarching
“other arrangement” reached by 27 October,
that pleading foreclosed
a case in which the “construction contract” (within the meaning of
the Act) was “a series
of separate contracts in the common law
sense” entered after 27 October: Tcpt, 25 August 2025, 83.17-31. The same
of a case based on separate requests for work after 27 October giving
rise to an entitlement in quantum meruit, understood as quasi-contract.
of the communications after 27 October 2023 are also inconsistent with any
contract at all (including one in the “fourth
class”) being on foot
(or with the parties proceeding on the assumed premise that a binding contract
was on foot).
Tuesday 31 October 2023, Mr Bettar sent an email to Mr Webb and Mr Hanna
confirming the discussion of various matters at a meeting
that day. These
included a discussion about different issues that had arisen about retention. Mr
Bettar stated: “All in all,
it was agreed that this all needs to be looked
at together.” Mr Bettar also stated: “You brought up LD’s
[liquidated
damages]. I said I have never ever ever heard of LD’s being
applied on a CM job. Its crazy and illogical. ... Obviously, we
need to sort
this as well. I know you need to satisfy the bank in terms of incentive, but
this is not normal. ... Anyway, lets sort
something out as this is very
bizarre.” The fact that there was no agreement even in principle about
basic matters such as
retention and liquidated damages is inconsistent with the
proposition that the parties had already agreed to be immediately bound
days earlier. Towards the end of the same email, Mr Bettar asked: “We are
obviously working on your job full time, started
as of yesterday. Obviously, I
expect my PM and Project Engineer etc will be paid from Monday the 30th on, till
we get on site, correct?”
It is difficult to see why Mr Bettar would be
asking that question if there was already a contract on foot addressing the
which those personnel were to be paid.
Mr Webb specifically responded to other aspects of Mr Bettar’
October email on 2 November (including affirming the need for liquidated
damages), he did not traverse the query about payment from
30 October. Mr Webb’s silence on that point is neutral for present
purposes because silence was ambiguous in the circumstances.
It was consistent
with the existence of a contract already on foot; but also with the proposition
that Hunt would be paid on the
basis of quantum meruit; and also with an
unwillingness on Hannas’ part to commit even to paying the Hunt staff who
were already
at work on the job.
3 November 2023, Hannas sent the first draft of the contract (between RWC and
Hunt) to Hunt. That set out the scope of services
in considerable detail.
Whether or not that scope would be considered a “commercial” term,
it would certainly be open
to be negotiated. Importantly,
the “Management Fee” for the project as “the fixed lump amount
of $1,200,000.00 + GST on account of
preliminaries, off-site management, on-site
costs (including supervision), overheads and profit”. That was different
Hunt submits was the position outlined in Mr Bettar’s letter of
27 October 2023, namely, 5.5% of the costs, plus the cost of
onsite personnel at
weekly rates. These were, on any view, “commercial” terms, and (as
will be seen) even they were still
being negotiated.
on 3 November 2023, Mr Walter Galizia of Hunt emailed Mr Webb of Hannas, asking,
“James, please confirm if I can start
Brookvale”. There was some suggestion in submissions that
“contacting” might be a
typographical error for
“contracting”. On either reading, the fact that Mr Galizia was
asking the question was inconsistent
with the existence of a binding agreement
for Hunt to manage the project, or any belief that there was such an agreement.
response on 6 November (“Confirming you can speak
with the sub-contractors”) gave permission to Mr Galizia to do so.
also inconsistent with the existence of any contract by which RWC gave Hunt the
authority to manage the project.
8 November 2023, Mr Bettar emailed Mr Ogden, Mr Webb and Mr Galizia about the
draft contract. He said, “So much for a standard
contract. Hoping its
reasonable.” Although that language can be accommodated within
Hunt’s submission that the contract
formed on 27 October 2023 was within
the fourth class described above, the absence of any reference to a contract on
foot is at least
as readily seen as inconsistent with the existence of any
on 8 November, Mr Webb sent an email to Mr Bettar among others requesting that
Hunt provide a “reverse brief” of
value engineering recommendations
“in the form of an RFI/Design changes schedule” (“RFI”
meaning, apparently,
a request for information). Hunt submitted that this email
gave rise to an implied promise of some kind to pay for the work. Again,
may be accepted. But that says nothing either way about the position whether a
contract had already been entered as at 27
October 2023. Indeed, as was
pointed out in argument, the outcome of the value engineering exercise might
affect the price and also
whether Hunt would get the job. Particularly in
circumstances where the parties were simultaneously negotiating the terms of a
agreement, this email is at most neutral as to the existence of a
contract as at 27 October.
13 November 2023, Mr Bettar sent an email to Mr Webb, Mr Ogden and
Mr Galizia of Hannas, copying Mr Hanna, concerning the draft
contract. He
complained:
Your lawyer has turned a standard, balanced and reasonable contract of just over
20 pages, to something that is three times the size!
He has added so many
clauses, modified so many other clauses and skewed it mostly your way.
It’s just too stupid for words.
He has also made some fundamental mistakes in there, like the management fee and
what that encapsulates, noted fixed prelims? And
a whole bunch of bizarre
things. ...”
Emphasis in original.
Galizia then sent the same group of people a set of marked up comments on the
contract. This included a radical redrafting of
’s “Management
Fee” as follows, together with a comment:
Management Fee
is 5.5% applied to all
costs associated with the project. The cost for the project is, but not limited
to, all trades, suppliers,
consultants, fees and charges and on-site prelims.
the fixed lump amount of $1,200,000.00 + GST on account of preliminaries,
management, on-site costs (including supervision), overheads and
All amounts are exclusive of GST.
Gentlemen, this is pretty disappointing. In all the documentation and chats it
was clear that on site prelims and super was in the
raw cost. My costing
proposal to you had all this in there.
Logically, how can you even suggest this, when the prelims on the job are more
than 5.5% anyway.
To be fair, you did mention the $1.2M, but I thought that was a budgeting cost
on your side.”
this point, it was clear not only that the parties had not reached agreement on
the terms of the formal written agreement, but
also that they were worlds apart
on key commercial terms. While Hunt’s comment referred to “all the
documentation and
chats”, that is, the negotiations, there was no
assertion of a binding agreement governing the Management Fee. Instead, the
subject was effectively treated as one for further negotiation. And the comment
was real scope for confusion
as to what had been communicated earlier on the central issue of Hunt’s
remuneration.
to the importance of the communications up to and including 27 October
2023, the significance of subsequent material of this
kind (i.e., what was and
was not said) is limited, particularly in relation to the question whether the
parties entered a binding
contract. But it is inconsistent with either
formulation of the estoppel for which Hunt contends.
also relies on evidence that Mr Galizia attended a design meeting on
16 November 2023 at Hannas’ head office at which various
allocated to Hunt. For example, the minutes of the meeting state “Hunt to
produce program for design”, and
identify the person to whom that
“Action” is assigned as “WG”. Hunt submits that this is
evidence of the
parties mutually proceeding on a basis that there was some kind
of legal relationship between them, in the nature of a contract,
that involved
Hunt doing work and being entitled to be paid for it. But the conduct of the
parties is also consistent with one or
the other or both of the following
possibilities. First, that Hunt was doing work in the expectation of a contract
being entered
in the future. Secondly, that Hunt would be entitled to be paid on
a restitutionary basis if such a contract did not eventuate.
second possibility is consistent with what occurred when Mr Bettar sought to
bring matters to a head on 1 December 2023. He sent
an email to Mr Hanna which
gave an account of the parties’ negotiations and the economics of the
project from Hunt’s
perspective. The email included the following two
statements (which were not anchored as to time): “The deal was essentially
agreed on fundamentals”, and “We started our works in good
faith.” Notably, Mr Bettar did not assert that any binding
contract had
been entered. To the contrary, that language conveys that while the parties may
have reached an in-principle agreement
as to commercial terms, Hunt had
performed work “in good faith”, that is, unprotected by rights in
contract. Later in
the email, Mr Bettar said:
“If for whatever reason we have an issue, tell me
immediately to
Its only the honourable thing to do and I am sure you would ask the same if you
were in my shoes.
I know you are going away next week, so today is it and
we can formulate
costs and amicably split
Bold and underlining in original; italics added.
words, “tell me immediately to stop”, are inconsistent with
Hunt’s having any right in contract or otherwise
to treat RWC as bound to
Hunt. And the words, “we can formulate costs and amicably split”,
were not referable to remuneration
on an expectation basis in accordance with
the fee structure in the contract that Hunt now asserts. Instead, those words
are consistent
with a reliance or restitutionary entitlement.
followed inconclusive communications on 6 December 2023 between Mr Bettar
and Mr Webb (Mr Hanna apparently being on leave).
Mr Bettar sought
confirmation of various “things previously understood as agreed”,
including, for example, what was included
in the $1.2 million fee. Mr Webb
responded, “as you can appreciate, I will need to defer to Danny for all
commercial sign-offs
as I have not been in all of your discussions of late. He
should have reception towards the end of the week.”
Friday 8 December 2023, Mr Bettar emailed Mr Webb, saying that he had instructed
Mr Galizia to cancel all meetings going forward.
He said, “Post Monday if
I have not heard I will do the right thing and email all people informing of my
position and submit
costs”. The reference to submitting costs was again
inconsistent with any contractual entitlement.
lingering hope that the parties might reach agreement was extinguished on 11
December 2023. Mr Hanna and Mr Bettar both gave affidavit
evidence of a
conversation they had that day. Hunt said that it did not ask the Court to
choose between the two accounts, which it
described as slightly different. Hunt
directed the Court to Mr Hanna’s evidence in which he said the
conversation included
the following:
So, what about all of my time that I have spent on this, who
will pay my cost?
I am happy for you to submit a claim to cover your reasonable costs
given that we have known each other for over 30 years, and I
will have my guys
assess the claim. But please, do not submit something that’s going to
Ok, I’ll put together my cost, and send it through to
Bettar’s account of this part of the conversation was not materially
different (putting to one side the assimilation of Mr
Hanna to RWC):
“Me: ‘What a waste of time. What about all my costs
over the year?’
Danny Hanna (RWC): ‘Your costs will be paid, though,
don’t put the boot in or I will. Email me your claim and James
Me: ‘OK. I’ll send through my claim’.”
either version, Mr Bettar proposed to submit a claim covering Hunt’s costs
incurred, and Mr Hanna proposed that they be paid,
provided that the claim was
reasonable. Neither party was proceeding on the footing that there was a binding
agreement on foot between
13 December 2023, Mr Bettar emailed Hunt’s Progress Claim No 1 in the sum
of $157,102 (excl GST) to Mr Hanna and Mr Webb.
This was calculated as a claim
for costs incurred (being various staff at certain rates over certain periods),
plus “Office
overheads 10%”. Calculated in that way, the claim was
not referable to the fee structure in the contract that Hunt now asserts.
15 December 2023, Mr Hanna responded, “I did say don’t submit
something that is insulting!”
20 December 2023, Mr Bettar sent an email to Mr Hanna, copying Mr Webb and Mr
Galizia, stating that he had asked Mr Galizia to
“redo the claim in
relation to the contract that we have”. He described the earlier progress
claim as “a time and
motion charge”.
Galizia then sent an email on 21 December 2023 to Mr Webb, copying Mr Hanna
and Mr Bettar, and attaching Progress Claim No 1A (which
was said to supersede
Progress Claim No 1 dated 13 December 2023). This claim was in the sum of
$232,472 (incl GST), and was expressed
to be made under the Act. It included
what was described as a “P and O Charge” of $120,000 (excl
GST), calculated as
10% of a “P&O charge agreed at $1.2m”, on
the basis that 6 weeks were being charged of a 60 week program, being 10%.
assertion of the existence of a contract at that late stage, after the
parties’ relationship had collapsed, does not assist
in determining
whether there was a contract on foot no later than 27 October
Conclusion as to common law contract
was no error in the primary judge’s finding that no contract came into
existence. In the communications in the period
running up to Mr Webb’
email on 27 October 2023 the parties insisted on formality. There was no
sign of a mutual intention to be bound in contract short
of the execution of a
formal contract. Mr Bettar was endeavouring to take advantage of the tight
timeframe to persuade Mr Hanna and
Mr Webb to commit to a contract. He failed to
do so. Hunt then continued to be involved and to do work at Hannas’
instruction,
taking the risk that the contract negotiation which continued might
not be successful. No doubt Mr Bettar had reason to expect that
Hunt would be
paid at least for the work it had done. That was consistent with the
conversation between Mr Bettar and Mr Hanna on
11 December 2023 about payment of
Hunt’s reasonable costs. But there is no basis in the material available
for use on an objective
assessment of the parties’ communications and
conduct, whether up to or after 27 October, to conclude that the parties had
agreed to be immediately bound in contract no later than that date.
Grounds 2 and 3 — conventional or promissory
Counsel for Hunt fairly acknowledged that it was likely that if Ground 1 was not
made out, it would be difficult for Hunt to
succeed on Grounds 2, 3 and 4. That
acknowledgement was rightly made.
Conventional estoppel
amended statement of claim pleaded in the alternative to the claim in contract
that “the Plaintiff and the Defendant conducted
themselves on the basis
that an agreement had been reached for the Plaintiff to carry out [construction
management services] on the
Project” (at par 9), and alleged that
“the Plaintiff and Defendant accepted that common assumption as being
(at par 10). There followed particulars of various communications
and meetings in the period 31 October to 30 November 2023. The
effect of the
estoppel would be to prevent RWC from denying the existence of a common law
premise that the parties conducted themselves on the basis of a common
assumption that a contract had been entered must be rejected,
substantially for
the reasons given above when addressing the parties’ supposedly
post-contractual conduct.
further allegations (at pars 13 and 14) that RWC knew or intended that the
plaintiff would rely on the common assumption as being
true, and that Hunt would
suffer detriment if RWC was allowed to resile or depart from that common
assumption, should also be rejected.
The first allegation is not supported by
evidence. The latter allegation must confront the fact that it was open to Hunt
a restitutionary claim which (no doubt for sound forensic reasons) it
did not bring.
generally, Senior Counsel for Hunt confirmed that the agreement the subject of
the alleged common assumption was essentially
the same alleged early works
contract that was the subject of Ground 1. The same difficulties with that
contract identified above,
including the lack of consensus as to terms,
translate into corresponding problems with the proposition that the parties
themselves on the basis that such a contract was in existence.
2 is not made out.
Promissory estoppel
amended statement of claim pleaded in the alternative at par 16 that “by
its email dated 27 October 2023 (2:47pm), the Defendant
represented that it
would accept
the terms proposed by the Plaintiff in relation to the
performance of [construction management services] on the Project (the
Representation
).” (Emphasis supplied.) For substantially the same
reasons given above in relation to Ground 1 as to why Hannas’ conduct
not evince any intention to be bound, there was no such representation before,
on or after 27 October 2023.
also pleaded at par 17 that “[i]n reliance on the Representation, the
Plaintiff conducted itself on the basis that an agreement
for it to perform [construction management services] on the
Project”. (Emphasis supplied.) In the circumstances of the parties’
communications, no reliance by Hunt (on whatever representation it might have
perceived to have been made) could have been reasonable.
was alleged at par 19 that it would be unconscionable to allow RWC to resile
from the representation. The estoppel pleaded at pars
16, 17 and 19 was directed
to preventing RWC from denying the existence of a common law agreement, i.e.,
that “an agreement
had been reached
”: at par 17. However, in
argument in this Court, Hunt put the promissory estoppel rather differently:
“Sitting within
the 27 October critical email is, we say, a promise
that you can push forward with the job and you'll at least be paid a reasonable
price”: Tcpt, 25 August 2025, 46.25-27. Even if Hunt were permitted to
depart from its pleading as to the formulation of the
estoppel in that way, the
claim would face two difficulties. First, again for the reasons given above,
there was no promise to pay
conveyed by the 27 October email. Read as a whole,
the email did no more than express a present intention, leaving it to Hunt to
decide whether it wished to take the risk of “pushing forward”.
an estoppel in that form is not directed to preventing RWC from denying a common
law agreement. Instead, it might at most
lead to RWC’s being estopped from
denying that Hunt was entitled to be paid a reasonable price for work performed.
it is not obvious how the estoppel would add to a right to bring a claim
in quantum meruit). For such an estoppel to avail Hunt under
the Act, it would
have to be accommodated within the rubric of s 4’s extended definition of
a “construction contract”
as an “other arrangement”.
That was how the estoppel was advanced on appeal (Tcpt, 25 August 2025, 46.38,
47.5). That
argument is addressed under Ground 4 below.
3 is not made out.
Ground 4: an “other
arrangement”
definition of “construction contract” in s 4 is “a contract or
other arrangement under which one party undertakes
to carry out construction
work, or to supply related goods and services, for another party”.
submitted that it was open to it to advance a case that such an “other
arrangement” existed as at 27 October. However,
Hunt accepted that it
would have to be an “other arrangement” reached on 27 October.
argument faces a number of difficulties.
it is outside the pleading. As the primary judge said at J[65]: “the
Amended Statement of Claim does not plead an ‘other
arrangement’”. The amended statement of claim put the case in three
ways, all of which were directed to the existence
of a common law contract for
the purposes of the definition in s 4.
(1) Paragraph 8 alleged that “by no later than 27 October 2023 there was
an agreement between the Plaintiff and the Defendant
for the Plaintiff to
perform construction management services (the
(2) Paragraph 9 alleged that “the Plaintiff and the Defendant conducted
themselves on the basis that an agreement had been
reached for the Plaintiff to
carry out the Services on the Project.” Paragraph 15 alleged that it would
be unconscionable to
allow the Defendant to resile or depart from the common
assumption that there was such an agreement. The effect of the conventional
estoppel would thus be to permit Hunt to proceed on the footing that there was a
common law contract on foot.
(3) As noted above, the effect of the promissory estoppel pleaded at pars 16, 17
and 19 would again be to prevent RWC from denying
the existence of a common law
agreement, i.e., that “an agreement had been reached”.
pleading at par 21 was then:
“By reason of the matters set out in paragraphs [3] to [19] above, there
was a construction contract within the meaning of
s4 of the SOP Act between the
Plaintiff and the Defendant.”
three of the pleaded bases by reason of which there was alleged to have been a
“construction contract” within the
meaning of s 4 depended
either on the existence of a contract at common law, or (what amounted to the
same thing) on RWC’s
being estopped from denying the existence of a
contract at common law. There was no suggestion in the pleading of some
arrangement” that did not involve a contract at common law.
No such conclusion was stated; still less were any material facts
is significant in this regard that the extended definition in s 4 requires that
the “other arrangement” be one “under
which one party
to carry out construction work, or to supply related goods and
services, for another party”. Similarly, the statutory right
receive a progress payment” in s 8(1) is conferred on “A person who,
under a construction contract, has
to carry out construction
work or to supply related goods and services”. Section 8(1) engages the
mechanics of the Act, including
the s 13(1) right to serve a statutory payment
a party wishes to rely on the extended definition in s 4, the party must plead
the material facts said to constitute the non-contractual
“arrangement”. The material facts include the basis on which the
party alleges that it had “undertake[n]”
to carry out any work or to
supply any goods and services. The amended statement of claim contains no
allegation that Hunt had “undertake[n]”
to perform work or supply
services on any basis other than pursuant to a contract at common law.
follows that even if Hunt were permitted to depart from its pleaded case in the
amended statement of claim so as to be permitted
to advance the alternative
formulation of the promissory estoppel identified above (“a promise that
you can push forward with
the job and you'll at least be paid a reasonable
price”), that would still not satisfy Hunt’s pleading obligation
respect to a s 4 “other arrangement”. That is because the
alternative formulation of the estoppel does not allege even
as a conclusion
that Hunt undertook to perform any work, still less any material facts going to
that conclusion.
Notwithstanding
the deficiency in the pleading, the primary judge appears to have heard argument
with respect to the possibility of
an “other arrangement”: see at
J[68]-[69]. Hunt’s written submissions canvassed such an arrangement. But
concluded at J[69] that the case for such an
“arrangement” was not made out: “Hunt did not identify, in its
or its submissions, the basis upon which it asserted that it had an
arrangement with Hannas or RWC for the performing of the tasks
it performed
between 30 October 2023 and 8 December 2023 for reward.” There was no
error in that conclusion.
primary judge also referred at J[68] to conflicting authority as to whether an
“other arrangement” must involve legally
enforceable obligations,
being Ball J’s decision in
Lendlease Engineering Pty Ltd v Timecon
[2019] NSWSC 685
and Henry J’s decision in
Crown Green
Square Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
[2021] NSWSC 1557.
Ball J held that
“the relevant arrangement must give rise to a legally binding obligation,
although, of course, that obligation
need not be contractual in nature”:
at [87]. His Honour contemplated, as an example of a non-contractual obligation,
giving rise to an estoppel”: at [67]. One of the reasons
which Ball J gave for that conclusion was that “there is no
principle that can be applied in drawing the dividing line between arrangements
that do not give rise to legal obligations
but nevertheless are treated as
arrangements for the purposes of the SOP Act and those that are not”: at
J declined to follow
: at [165]. Her Honour ultimately held at
“Accordingly, in my view, an arrangement under the SoP Act requires
something more than a party undertaking to carry out construction
another. There must be a concluded state of affairs between two or more parties
involving some element of reciprocity or
acceptance of mutual rights and
obligations relating to payment or price for the works (which may or may not be
legally binding obligations)
under which one party undertakes to carry out
construction work for another party to the arrangement.”
is not necessary, and in circumstances where the issue received little attention
in the parties’ submissions it would not
be appropriate, for this Court to
resolve the conflict in these lines of authority, if indeed there is any true
conflict. It suffices
for present purposes to note that the parties effectively
proceeded on the footing that one or the other of them was correct. If
so, whichever test is applied, there was no “other arrangement” for
the purposes of s 4 on the pleadings.
correctly states the law, the only legally binding
obligations alleged were those arising in contract or estoppel and rejected
There was no other legally binding obligation alleged as part of any
“other arrangement”.
Crown Green Square
correctly states the law, the only
“concluded states of affairs” between Hunt and RWC “involving
some element of
reciprocity or acceptance of mutual rights and
obligations” on the pleadings were those alleged in contract or estoppel,
were again rejected above.
was some discussion at the hearing of the appeal about whether facts giving rise
to a right to make a restitutionary claim in
quantum meruit could constitute, or
at least be an element of, some “other arrangement” for the purposes
of the Act.
It is not necessary to consider that question for two reasons.
First, there was no pleading to that effect; nor was the case put
that way at
first instance. Secondly, Hunt’s case was that the s 4 “construction
contract” existed no later than
27 October 2023. Hunt accepted at the
hearing that any “other arrangement” would have to have been reached
on 27 October.
But there is no suggestion, either in the pleadings or in the
evidence, of any facts that could give Hunt a right to claim in quantum
until after 27 October. On any view, the parties were in negotiations up until
that time. And, of the matters particularised
in the amended statement of claim
in support of the claim based in conventional estoppel, none involves the
performance of any services
by Hunt, or any request for such work by Hannas or
RWC, before 31 October: see the particulars to par 10.
4 is not made out.
Conclusion on Grounds 1 to 4
argument proceeded on the basis that unless Hunt established one or more of
Grounds 1 to 4, it could not succeed on the appeal
(leaving aside Ground 9
relating to costs). Hunt having failed to do so, the appeal must be
Grounds 5, 6, 7 and 8
being so, it is unnecessary to consider these grounds of appeal. It suffices to
make the following observations.
5 and 6 are directed to the primary judge’s finding that Hunt’s
21 December 2023 progress claim “does not
identify in a reasonable
way the particular work in respect of which the claim is made” (J[84]), so
as to fail the requirement
in s 13(2)(a) that “A payment claim— (a)
must identify the construction work (or related goods and services) to which
progress payment relates”.
this case, the progress claim was not in respect of construction work but in
respect of related services. The claim identified:
(1) in general terms the nature of the services (“construction/project
management services”; “Costs to close out
the project & collate
documents”; “Extraordinary Costs” of “termination”
of two staff; and “P
and O Charge”);
(2) the person performing the service;
(3) the person’s title (such as “Project Manager” or
“Site Clerk”);
(4) the number of units of time the person spent performing the service
(expressed in weeks or days);
(5) the rates per unit of time for those persons; and
(6) the total amount claimed for the services of that person (although in some
cases in place of a figure were the words “in
P & O”, conveying
that these costs were part of the charge for overhead).
is much to be said for the proposition that, particularly given that this was a
claim for services, the matters identified in
the progress claim sufficiently
identified the construction work or related services to which the progress
payment related, so as
to constitute a valid payment claim for the purposes of
s 13(2)(a). See,
WNA Construction Pty Ltd v Canberra Building and
Maintenance Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 17
per McCallum CJ,
Loukas-Karlsson and Baker JJ. The fate of such a claim, formulated in that way,
would be a matter for an adjudicator.
7 was directed to the primary judge’s finding at J[89] that RWC was not
served with the payment claim. This ground is
not made out in circumstances in
which the payment claim was not sent to RWC itself but was instead sent to
Hannas, and Hunt has
not established on the balance of probabilities that Hannas
was RWC’s agent for that purpose.
8 contends that in circumstances where RWC did not provide a payment schedule to
Hunt within 10 business days after the date
on which Hunt alleged the payment
claim was served on RWC, the primary judge should have given judgment
accordingly in favour of
Hunt. This ground is expressly premised on the success
of at least one ground in each of the three earlier sets of grounds. As that
premise is not made good, this ground is not made out.
indemnity costs
ground is independent of the others. It attacks the primary judge’s
exercise of the costs discretion by which her Honour
ordered, in a separate
judgment, that Hunt pay RWC’s costs of the proceedings including the costs
of the costs application,
on the indemnity basis:
Bettar Holdings Pty Limited
trading as Hunt Collaborative ACN 050061946 v RWC Brookvale Investments Pty Ltd
as trustee for Brookvale
Development Trust ABN 42359186969 ACN 670150437 no 2
[2025] NSWDC 91
parties proceeded on the basis that leave to appeal on this independent ground
was not required: see
Housman v Camuglia
(2021) 104 NSWLR 615
per Leeming JA (Bell CJ and White JA, agreeing).
statement of claim was filed on 23 February 2024: J2[5]. Although part of her
Honour’s consideration concerned a
offer sent on 25 July
2024 by the solicitors for RWC to the solicitors for Hunt, her Honour’s
indemnity costs order was not
confined to the period after that offer was made.
Instead it was made on the indemnity basis in relation to the entire
proceedings:
J2[27]. That was because her Honour considered that “[t]he
plaintiff’s claim under the Act was doomed to fail”
(at J2[25]), and
that “[i]t should have been clear to the plaintiffs prior to the filing of
the statement of claim that a claim
under the Act based on the 21 December 2023
claim could not succeed.”
my respectful opinion, the primary judge erred in so ordering. Central to her
Honour’s exercise of discretion was her conclusion
that Hunt’s claim
was always doomed to fail in the sense that, as her Honour put it at J2[23], the
case was “without
substance”, “groundless”,
“fanciful or hopeless” or “so weak as to be futile”.
all different ways of expressing an evaluative conclusion that the
proceeding was so obviously lacking in merit that it should not
brought. Having identified the relevant principles, her Honour’s reasons
for concluding that Hunt’s claim fell
into that category were expressed as
“[25] The plaintiff’s claim under the Act was doomed to fail. The 21
December 2023 claim, upon which the plaintiff’s
claim under the Act was
based, did not comply with the Act. It was not served upon the defendant as
required by the Act. It could
not, therefore, trigger an entitlement to payment
under the Act. In addition, there was no proper basis for the claim under the
because there was no agreement or arrangement between the parties as
required by the Act.
[26] The principal judgment sets out the purpose of the Act (see [7] –
[9]). The Act sets out an administrative process which
can trigger an
entitlement to payment in a party who has an agreement or an arrangement to
undertake construction work in the circumstances
specified in the Act. It should
have been clear to the plaintiffs prior to the filing of the statement of claim
that a claim under
the Act based on the 21 December 2023 claim could not
Honour thus articulated that the plaintiff’s claim was not made out. In
so doing she referred to and relied upon her principal
judgment. However, her
Honour did not articulate
the claim was doomed to fail in the sense
that it was always obviously lacking in merit. That the claim failed was the
analysis on the issue, not the end of it. This approach constitutes
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40)
error either or both
because her Honour misdirected herself in considering that her earlier rejection
of the claim necessarily meant
that it was doomed to fail in the relevant sense,
or because her Honour gave inadequate reasons for her conclusion (which is legal
Court is in a position to re-exercise the discretion itself. There is no doubt
that costs should follow the event. I am not persuaded
that Hunt’s claim
under the Act was doomed to fail in the sense that it should not have been
brought, responding to the points
her Honour made as follows:
(1) Her Honour referred, first, to the conclusion that the 21 December 2023
payment claim did not comply with the Act. Although it
was not necessary to
decide this issue on the appeal, as noted above, there is much to be said for
the contrary view.
(2) Secondly, her Honour noted that the payment claim was not served upon RWC as
required by the Act. As noted above, the question
of agency was not
straightforward in this Court. Although it has not been necessary to address
Hunt’s arguments as to whether,
for example, RWC “specified”
an email address for the service of payment claims for the purpose of s 31(1)(d)
Act, if the agency point had fallen in Hunt’s favour it was fairly
arguable that RWC had been served.
(3) Thirdly, her Honour said that there was no agreement or arrangement between
the parties as required by the Act. Although that
question should be answered
adversely to Hunt, the extent of analysis above demonstrates that it was fairly
arguable. The primary
judge’s conclusion that there was “no proper
basis” for the claim under the Act on that ground should not be accepted.
the absence of a conclusion that the proceedings were doomed to fail in the
requisite sense, the remaining question is whether
the Court should depart from
ordering costs on the ordinary basis in light of the
offer sent on 25 July 2024 on behalf of RWC was an offer to
pay $33,000 “in full and final satisfaction of your client’s
proceedings”. Hunt would have done far better to accept that offer than to
proceed with the litigation, lose at first instance
and in this Court, and be
ordered to pay the costs in both courts. But that is not the test. The question
is whether, accepting that
Hunt’s claim was not unarguable, it was
nevertheless unreasonable in all the circumstances for Hunt not to accept the
That is a question on which reasonable minds might reasonably differ.
25 July 2024 letter addressed the defects in the claim in detail: J2[6] and
[21]. At the time that offer was sent, the
proceedings had been on foot for
some five months. The evidence on the primary question — whether there was
a “construction
contract” — was fundamentally documentary,
consisting of communications to which Hunt was a party. The difficulties in
material were apparent on its face. In those circumstances the 14 day period for
which the offer remained open was sufficient.
And given that Hunt’s claim
for a statutory debt was all or nothing, RWC’s offer of $33,000 was not a
mere invitation
to Hunt to capitulate. Hunt’s claim faced several hurdles.
In circumstances where RWC had explained why the claim was weak,
Hunt was in a
position to assess the merits of the offer, and the offer involved a real
compromise, it was unreasonable for Hunt
not to have accepted that offer. That
being so, costs should be ordered on the ordinary basis until 24 July 2024, and
on the indemnity
basis thereafter.
Costs in this Court
Hunt has succeeded on Ground 9, there was very little argument directed to that
ground. Hunt has otherwise failed on the
appeal, and costs should follow the
orders I propose are as follows.
(1) Allow the appeal as to Ground 9.
(2) Set aside order (1) made by the primary judge on 28 March 2025, and in lieu
thereof order:
(a) The plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs of the proceedings at
first instance on the ordinary basis until 24 July
2024, and on the indemnity
basis thereafter.
(3) Otherwise dismiss the appeal.
(4) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal on the
ordinary basis.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (460 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter