URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2012/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v R COLQUHOUN [2012] NSWPST 7 (5 December 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
(NSW) No 86a
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEARING OF COMPLAINT BY THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
AGAINST ROSS McNICOL COLQUHOUN
REASONS FOR
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
________________________________________________________________
HCCC v R COLQUHOUN
[2012] NSWPST 7
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr P J Griffin of counsel instructed by Ms M Richmond,
Ross McNicol Colquhoun
(Respondent) appeared for himself.
FILE NUMBER
CORAM: Hon G Mullane
(Chairperson)
Dr L Tong (Psychologist Member)
Ms M Crowley (Psychologist Member)
Ms F Taylor (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 2, 3, 4, 5,
18 & 20 July 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 5 December
DATE OF ORDERS: 5 December 2012
INTRODUCTION
1 These are disciplinary proceedings against the Respondent Psychologist. The
Complainant alleges various conduct and complains
that such conduct is either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct. The Complainant
seeks that the Respondent’s
registration as a psychologist be cancelled.
2 The hearing was conducted in two stages. After the first stage of the
hearing, the Tribunal made findings in relation to the factual
allegations
against the Respondent. There was then a second stage of the hearing as to
whether the facts established instances of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct and then as to the appropriate outcome.
the conclusion of the second stage of the hearing, written submissions were
required. The Complainant was required to provide
written submissions by 10
August 2012, the Respondent was allowed 21 days after receipt of the
Complainant’s submissions to
file his submissions, and the Complainant was
allowed to file short submissions in reply to the Respondent’s submissions
7 days of receipt of the Respondent’s submissions. The
Complainant’s submissions were filed on 10 August 2012, the
Respondent’s
were filed on 31 August 2012, and the Complainant’s
submissions in reply were lodged on 7 September 2012.
4 The evidence before the Tribunal comprised:
EXHIBITS IN THE COMPLAINANT’S CASE:
(1) A1 The Amended Complaint filed in the Tribunal on 2 June 2012;
(2) The Respondent’s Response to Directions Order of 27 March 2012;
(3) A2 The Evidentiary Certificate from the Psychology Council of NSW as to
registration, qualifications etc of the Respondent;
(4) A4 Statement of Patient B’s wife of 6 October 2009
(5) A5 Statement of Patient B’s aunt of 27 August 2009;
(6) A6 Statement of Patient A’s father dated 1 September 2009;
(7) A7 Statement of Patient A’s mother dated 21 September 2009;
(8) A8 Response from R.N. Phillipe Jacquot dated 13 May 2009;
(9) A10 Request for a report from Dr Jassim Daood of 24 November 2009;
(10) A11 Response from Dr Daood;
(11) A12 Request for a report from Dr Donald Tan dated 11 November 2009;
(12) A13 Response from Dr Tan;
(13) A15 Psych ‘n’ Soul
Clinical records for Patient B;
(14) A17 E-mail from Patient B to Respondent dated 28 February 2008;
(15) A 18 Clinic treatment notes for Patient A;
(16) A 20 Clinic appointment diary pages showing appointments for patients
(17) A21 HCCC request for expert advice to Professor Mattick;
(18) A22 Professor Mattick’s advice letters dated 2 August 2010 and 27
June 2012 and his “Statement of personal, financial,
professional
connection dated 23 August 2010 ;
(19) A24 APS Guidelines on record keeping as revised November 2004;
(20) A25 Statement to Police by Respondent regarding Patient B dated 4 April
(21) A27 HCCC request for information from Respondent dated 28 August
(22) A28 Response of 22 April 2009 from Respondent to HCCC request;
(23) A29 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 14 November 2009 advising no
other records of appointments of Patient A on 2 and 14
(24) A30 HCCC request to Respondent dated 29 March 2010 for response;
(25) A31 Response from Respondent dated 21 April 2010;
(26) A32 HCCC Section 40 letter dated 17 November 2010 to Respondent advising
of proposed outcome of investigation;
(27) A33 Respondent’s section 40 submissions received 5 November
(28) A35 NSW Health Rapid Opiate Detoxification from Opioids –
Guidelines published January 2005;
(29) A36 Psych ‘n’ Soul ROD Practice and Procedure Manual
updated November 2008 but applicable at the time of Patient
(30) A38 Letter by Respondent to HCCC dated 16 October 2009 advising of
changes to procedures for documentation at the clinic;
(31) A39 Code of Ethics of Australian Psychological Society – 2003
version and 2007 version;
(32) A42 ASIC Company extracts for R and D Counselling and Group Therapy Pty
(33) A43 Report of Hon Prof Raj Sitharthan, supervisor of Respondent, and CV
of the witness;
(34) A44 “Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy and Procedure
Manual” of the Clinic
EXHIBITS IN THE RESPONDENT’S CASE:
(35) Affidavit of the Respondent sworn 23 March 2012;
(36) R1 The Respondent’s CV;
(37) R2C Statement from Chris Oszywa;
(38) R5A Extract from August 2011 up-date of Policy and Procedure Manual of
clinic; and “Rapid Opiate Detoxification Manual”
of clinic dated 31
August 2011 and “formulated :27/9/99”.
(39) R5B Document headed “Section 5B Respondent’s bundle
pre-detox therapy”;
(40) R13 pages 2 &4 of NSW Medical Board Code of Professional Conduct
– Rapid Detoxification in an Unlicensed Setting- January
(41) R15 Statement of Dr Donald Tan of 4 May 2012 and clinical record of 16
May 2007 in relation to Patient A;
(42) R16A Respondent’s submission to the Health Care Complaints
Commission of 21 April 2010;
(43) R16B Respondent’s submission to the Health Care Complaints
Commission of 22 April 2009;
(44) R16C Respondent’s letter to the Health Care Complaints Commission
dated 2 July 2009;
(45) R16D Respondent’s letter to HCCC dated 16 October 2009;
(46) R16E Respondent’s letter to HCCC of 1 November 2010;
(47) R17A Extract from handbook of Differential Diagnosis re: DSM-IV;
(48) R17B Document “Overview of the DASS and its uses”;
(49) R24 BTOM-Cv1.0 NSW Health Questionnaire —Methadone/Buprenorphine
(50) R25 Statement of Mark Anns – psychologist, dated 28 June 2011;
(51) R26 Respondent’s submission of 17 July 2012;
(52) R27 Revised and extended submissions of same date;
ORAL EVIDENCE:
(53) Oral Evidence by Ms Sue Chapman;
(54) Oral Evidence by Mr Barry Chapman;
(55) Oral Evidence by Ms Robin Butler;
(56) Oral Evidence by Dr Daood;
(57) Oral Evidence by Dr Tan;
(58) Oral Evidence by Professor Mattick;
(59) Oral Evidence by the Respondent;
(60) Oral Evidence by Mr Mark George Anns;
(61) Oral Evidence by Ms Nicolee Jayne Beaumont;
(62) Oral Evidence by Professor Thiagarajan Sitharthan; and
(63) Further Oral Evidence by the Respondent.
THE RESPONDENT’S CURRICULUM VITAE
5 According to his curriculum vitae the Respondent is 61 years of age. He
graduated with a degree of Bachelor of Science (Psychology)
from the University
of Wollongong in 1995 and completed Honours in that degree in 1996. In 2002 he
completed a post-graduate Diploma
in Counselling and Psychotherapy at the Jansen
Newman Institute. He was awarded a Master of Applied Science (Neuroscience)
the University of Sydney in 2004. He completed a degree of Doctor of
Health Science at Deakin University in 2009 and that degree
entitles him to use
the title “Doctor”.
6 The Respondent practiced from 1994-1998 as
a Drug and Alcohol Counsellor, and then from 1998-2002 he worked in the
treatment of
addictions.
7 Although he completed his Psychology degree in
only 1995, since 1996 he has been the Clinical Director of “Addiction,
and Psychology Services: Psych ‘n’ Soul; Advanced
Rehabilitation Services”, which is the business name for a
“R & D Counselling and Group Therapy Pty Ltd” of which he is the
Managing Director.
8 The Respondent was not registered as a psychologist
until conditional registration was granted to him on 3 June 1997. Full
registration
was not granted until 2 March 1999, on completion of a 2 year
supervision requirement.
9 The Respondent’s evidence is that in April
1998 he was employed to design and implement a program in Sydney for use of
in the treatment of opiate dependence, “operating for much of
the time at Edgecliff Medical Centre”. His evidence is
that his company
“R & D Counselling and Group Therapy Pty Ltd” did not trade
under the name “Addiction Treatment
and Psychology Services” until
at a clinic in Ultimo.
10 The Respondent has been responsible for
the design and development of the program of the Psych ‘n’ Soul
Clinic (“the
Clinic”) providing rapid opiate detoxification for
opiate addicts.
11 His theses topics for his Master of Applied Science
degree from the University of Sydney were “Neurological Mechanisms of
Addiction”, and, “Smoking Cessation using Pharmacology and a
Structured CPT Telephone Counselling Program”.
12 As part of his Doctor
of Health Sciences degree, he completed a paper based on research entitled,
“The Use of Naltrexone
in the Treatment of Opiate
Dependency”.
13 The Respondent’s evidence is, “My training
has been in Clinical Health Psychology which has a focus on the treatment
psychological aspects of chronic disease”. He is a Member of the
Australian Psychological Society College of Health Psychology,
and was Chair of
the NSW branch for 3 years. He is a member of the Executive of the College and
is also currently a supervisor for
practising psychologists who wish to gain
admission to the College.
14 He has no formal qualifications in Clinical
Psychology. His evidence is: “My approach to treatment is based on Person
Psychodynamic and Personal Construct theory and practice, but mainly
derives from a Health Psychology model.”
15 In addition to his work in
relation to opiate addictions, his evidence is:
have completed hundreds of medico-legal reports for both personal injury and
criminal Court hearings. These involved detailed
assessment and diagnosis of
specific psychological illnesses based on the use of the DSM IV. Assessment
comprises use of Mental
Status Examinations techniques (clinical interviewing),
behavioural observation, corroborative interviewing, use of the Psychiatric
Impairment Rating Scale and a range of psychometric instruments, including the
Psychological Assessment Inventory.”
16 His evidence is that he has conducted a number of research studies in the
last 12 years and has published since 1995 15 papers
or other publications and
has presented since 1998 25 papers at seminars or conferences. It appears from
the list that 17 of those
papers related to addiction and 9 of those related to
Rapid Opiate Detoxification.
17 The Psych ‘n’ Soul clinic
operated using staff who included the Respondent, other psychologists, drug and
alcohol counsellors,
nurses, and part-time medical general practitioners who
carried out medical assessments and supervised the administration of Naltrexone
to patients either by tablets or by (longer lasting) implants.
RAPID OPIATE
DETOXIFICATION (“ROD”)
18 The Respondent’s Affidavit evidence is:
“Rapid Opiate Detoxification (ROD) has been
conducted in private and public health facilities for some 22 years and in
since 1998. It has traditionally involved the use of general
anaesthetic or heavy sedation to detoxify people who have recently
used opiates
including heroin, morphine or methadone. It is highly effective with nearly
100% completion rates and government funded
research over 3 years found that it
was also cost effective. From an early stage it is found not only to be highly
effective but
also relatively safe. ... The form of ROD used in the facility is
different in that it uses light sedation or none, and involves
an opiate-free
period before induction of Naltrexone. It has been found to be just as
effective, less expensive and safer. It is
carried out in compliance with the
NSW Medical Board Code of Professional Conduct as modified by recommendations by
the Health Care
Complaints Commission.”
19 Although it appears that ROD treatment has been available for more than 20
years, the Psych ‘n’ Soul Clinic is the
only establishment in Sydney
that provides such treatment. It is not provided in any public hospital. The
evidence is that there
is one facility for ROD treatment in Western Australia.
The Tribunal is not aware of it being available in States or Territories
than New South Wales and Western Australia.
20 At the Psych ‘n’
Soul Clinic the assessment of the patient’s suitability for ROD commences
by the Respondent
completing an assessment questionnaire in the company of the
prospective patient and any support person. He has been administering
assessment questionnaire form for 12 years. Much of the information is provided
by ticking boxes. The Respondent’s
practice is that where an answer to a
question is negative, he leaves the “tick box” blank and if another
answer covers
the same issues, he leaves it blank. He says he also asks
additional questions of the prospective patient to obtain greater detail.
21 He said in his evidence:
of the purposes of the questionnaire is as an “aide-memoire” or
check list so that nothing is over-looked.
Moreover, it only forms part of the
full assessment process. Often more important and relevant information is
gained through the
less formal unstructured interview, although questions that
explore for symptoms of mental health problems are derived from DSM IV
Zimmerman (Interview Guide for Evaluating DSM-IV Psychiatric Disorders and
Mental Status (1994).).”
22 It emerged in these proceedings that the Respondent generally did not record
notes of his interviews of the patients, other than
on the questionnaire form or
attached to it.
23 The Respondent also testified that the purpose of the
first interview is to enable extensive questioning about issues that arise
the answers provided, observation of client behaviour, consideration of the
client’s relationship with support people
in environmental contexts,
explanation of the program in detail, explaining potential risks and alternative
treatment options, explaining
potential benefits of alternatives, answering any
questions of the client or support people to ensure informed consent and to
competence to make a decision, and provide the prospective patient with
information about the program and a copy of the treatment
agreement and informed
consent to read and to discuss with family and bring further questions to the
next session if the person chooses
to proceed.
24 From the results of the
questionnaire and any other information, a psychological assessment is prepared
by the Respondent and typed:
“to be circulated to medical staff and
counsellors for cross-checking of details”.
25 The Respondent’s
evidence is that at the time of the psychological assessment and “the
pre-detoxification counselling
sessions”, an “Authority to Release
Information” is signed and mostly witnessed by a support person. It
the name of the patient’s methadone (or buprenorphine) prescriber
and/or GP. He says that this is “required by the NSW
Medical Board Code
of Professional Conduct”, and, “allows us to communicate the wish of
the client to exit the methadone
program and allows the prescriber to contact us
if they have any reservations about the client undertaking an abstinence-based
treatment”.
26 According to the Respondent:
next step, if the client remains suitable and wishes, is for a medical
assessment, which is often undertaken by a registered
medical practitioner at
the clinic. At other times an external medical practitioner nominated by the
client would be contacted and
sent a letter for medical assessment and pathology
tests as recommended by our protocols. At that medical assessment, blood and
urine tests are ordered and upon return of pathology results and reports from
the external assessing doctor, the medical practitioner
reviews these results
and advises what more (if any) tests are required and makes the final decision
as to the suitability of the
patient to undergo ROD. The decision to undergo
ROD is ultimately a medical one and it is a fundamental principle adapted as
by the client that the doctor has the final say on this, although the
doctor may confer with other staff including myself and nurses
regarding the
mental health assessment to reach the right decision.”
27 His evidence is:
“On occasions when the person is using
heroin and whose health or well-being is in danger, it may be considered best to
with detoxification and then follow-up with counselling subsequently.
On occasions clients have over-dosed while waiting for treatment.”
28 He also gave affidavit evidence that:
“Another important issue discussed is the
capacity of the client to forego opiate use for more than 48 hours to preclude
the need for a ROD. Not only is it less severe and they are likely to
experience mild, if any, withdrawal symptoms, it also makes
the detoxification
process a lot more affordable and hence accessible. Many clients abstain for 48
hours and we conduct an ‘Accelerated
Detoxification’ that does not
result in any significant withdrawals and no need for over-night stay or nursing
care. If they
are concerned, based on previous detoxification attempts that
this is not going to be possible, then they are warned that withdrawal
more severe as required by Standard 8, that they will need a doctor present for
some hours and they will need to be cared
for by nurses over a 24 hours period,
and that the costs will accordingly be greater. ... The benefit of clarifying
this situation
is that proper preparations can be made to implement those safety
measures that are required under Standard 3. Planning to expect
a withdrawal
reaction well before the ROD allows for greater safety, especially as to impose
a longer opiate-free period may enhance
the possibility that the client will lie
Essential to this process is the display of withdrawal symptoms that
rule out recent use and indicate a period of abstinence.”
29 During the “pre-detox” sessions the treatment agreement and
informed consent forms are completed. The form makes provision
for a support
person to be present when the patient signs the agreement and to also sign the
agreement. The form includes acknowledgment
by the support person that the
procedures and risks and patient obligations “were explained and fully
understood”. The
support person also undertakes “to supervise and
oversee the enforcement of the instructions and guidelines of Addiction
and Psychology Services professionals to oversee the fulfilment of the
Patient’s obligations as stated above” and also
”hereby gives
consent to the treatment.”
THE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH ROD
30 It is evident from the form of “Treatment Agreement and Informed
Consent” used by the Respondent and the clinic in
relation to ROD
treatment that there are serious risks involved for the patient. The risks are
more so given the desperation of
some patients to end longstanding opiate
addiction. The first five paragraphs of the document are set out below and the
requires that the patient initial each of those paragraphs:
This Agreement is contingent on the Patient’s complete understanding of
Addiction Treatment and Psychology Services addiction
treatment program which
includes assessment, preparation counselling, Rapid Opiate Detoxification (ROD)
precipitated by Naltrexone,
the risks involved with the procedure and the
Patient obligations, the use of Naltrexone as maintenance medication and
after-care counselling. By signing this form the patient agrees that
the procedure the risks and the obligations have been explained
understood and that the Patient is giving Addiction treatment and Psychology
Services full permission to proceed with the
treatment program on this
ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF TREATMENT
: The Patient understands
that the benefits of the ROD include rapid detox, shortened in-patient stay,
reduced discomfort during detox,
earlier entrance to rehabilitation and an
earlier return to work. The patient is aware of alternative forms of opiate
detoxification
which include in-patient detox, long-term detox, methadone
maintenance, holistic therapies and the option of using no medications
detox at all. The patient and/or support person approached Addiction Treatment
and Psychology Services for the purpose of
undergoing the addiction treatment
program and by signing this form the patient has chosen the Addiction Treatment
and Psychology
Services addiction treatment program of his/her own free
PROCESS AND DURATION OF TREATMENT
: ROD is a procedure for
accelerated detoxification from opiate dependence precipitated by the use of
Naltrexone. Because of the
acute withdrawal caused in people who are opiate
dependent the medications are not ordinarily approved by the manufacturers for
in detoxification. The treatment includes a pre-procedure physical
examination, psychological assessment and medical consultation.
If medically
cleared and the patient has abstained from opiates for the prescribed period
(usually 12 hours), the Patient will be
admitted to the clinic to received
symptomatic medications. The Patient will then be sedated using sedatives. In
an emergency an
intravenous line may be inserted or the patient may be
Once sedated opiate antagonist medications will be given to detoxify the
body. Other medications will be used to control blood pressure
and heart rate
if necessary. The actual ROD procedure takes 6-8 hours. Once the patient has
completed detoxification the patient
will be given Naltrexone as a maintenance
medication which needs to be taken daily to prevent relapse and/or overdose or
else a naltrexone
implant can be inserted for long-term protection. After-care
therapy is recommended for a period of 6 months with 24 individual
counselling
sessions over this time.
RISKS OR DISCOMFORTS
: the patient is aware that the
practice of medicine is not an exact science and the Patient acknowledges that
no guarantees or assurances
have been made concerning the results of the above
treatment. The patient is also aware that the ROD and the use of Naltrexone for
detoxification is still viewed as experimental and that the government is
presently drawing up regulations for the use of these medications
in this way.
The NSW Department of health have approved the use of Naltrexone and published
draft guidelines for detoxification
and have determined that the medication used
in this way is both safe and effective. The risks and discomforts that may
the insertion of an implant, intravenous line or from intubation
include bleeding, bruises or infection. The risks and discomforts
occur during sedation include irregular heartbeat, wheezing, cardiac arrest or
death. The risks and discomforts that may
occur after ROD include pain, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea, cramping and bone ache. A patient cannot take part in this
if pregnant. The Patient declares that the risks associated with ROD
have been explained and understood and the Patient consents
to this treatment or
to any other procedure that would be necessary to perform in case of any
complication. The Patient acknowledges
that the treatment might cause
undesirable short-term side effects and subsequent to those explanations the
patient agrees to undergo
the treatment.
PATIENT FULL DISCLOSURE
: The Patient gave Addiction
Treatment and Psychology services all information concerning the patient’s
drug use, health and
mental condition and is aware that it is on the basis of
full disclosure of this information that Addiction Treatment and Psychology
Services agreed to treat the Patient. The Patient’s risks of an adverse
outcome will be increased if the physician is not
fully informed of the complete
medical history including the exact types and amounts of drugs the patient has
been using. If any
information is kept from Addiction treatment and Psychology
Services or the clinic or doctors, the Patient has put their own health
and if medical complications arise from such failure to disclosure all
information Addition Treatment and Psychology Services
will not be held
responsible.”
31 There are further requirements in relation to the obligations of the patient
and support person and these are set out in paragraphs
7 to 9 of the agreement
as follows:
OBLIGATIONS
: The Patient agrees to the following obligations for
the Addiction Treatment and Psychology services program.
full compliance with the instructions and guidelines of Addiction Treatment and
Psychology Services ’s [sic] physicians
and therapists prior to, during
and after the ROD procedure.
To disclose
all information regarding the patient’s mental, physical and emotion
To take the
daily after-care medicine in the dosage determined by the physician.
participate in individual therapy with addiction treatment and Psychology
Services staff or a source approved by Addiction treatment
and Psychology
services from their commencement to their end and agree upon participating in
random urine screening when requested.
SUPPORT PERSON
: the support person declares that he/she was present at the
time of executing this Agreement and that the procedure, the risks and
patient obligations were fully explained and understood. The support person
also agrees to supervise and oversee the enforcement
of the instructions and
guidelines of addiction treatment and Psychology Services Professionals to
oversee the fulfilment of the
Patient’s obligations as stated above and
hereby gives consent to the treatment.
: the Patient understands that the ROD procedure
is being performed by the admitting doctor and the medical staff contracted by
not by Addiction Treatment and Psychology Services. The Patient also
understands the assessments, preparation and after-care program
provided by contracted psychologists and therapists. Consequently the patient
releases, indemnifies and holds Addiction
Treatment and Psychology Services
harmless from any and all acts of conduct relating to treatment and/or
complications arising out
of treatment on behalf of the medical staff and/or
complications arising out of treatment on behalf of the medical staff and/or the
psychologists/therapists. Current Medical Defence and Professional Indemnity
Insurance is verified for doctors and psychologists
and other health
professionals who work in the program.”
15 of the Treatment Agreement is as follows:
“NALTREXONE CONSENT
The patient understands that the manufacturer of
Naltrexone recommends that people who are dependent on opiates not use it. The
understands that it would be unsafe to take
unprescribed medications while on Naltrexone. Of utmost importance, the
patient understands that TAKING OPIATES WHILE ON NALTREXONE
IN AN ATTEMPT TO
OVERCOME ITS BLOCKING EFFECT MAY RESULT IN OVER-DOSE AND/OR DEATH. Further to
this, the patient understands that
UPON CEASING NALTREXONE OR THE EFFECTS OF AN
IMPLANT CEASING TOLERANCE TO OPIATES WILL BE GREATLY REDUCED. THIS MEANS THAT
PATIENT RELAPSES TO OPIATE USE, EVEN A GREATLY REDUCED DOSE MAY CAUSE
OVER-DOSE AND/OR DEATH. The patient agrees to carry a card
stating that the
patient is taking Naltrexone in the even that emergency medical treatment is
Practice and Procedure Manual for the clinic in Section 2 explains how the
psychologist is to handle a telephone enquiry and complete
a record of the
initial enquiry, make an appointment for the treatment program to be explained,
require that the patient must come
with a support person and advise that the
appointment will take about 2 hours. There is a requirement that at the
appointment, the
psychologist explain the treatment program, explain and discuss
the program with the patient and the support person, and obtain contact
of the general practitioner. It requires that an “intern
psychologist” conduct psychometric tests and administer
the questionnaire
“elaborating on answers, especially those regarding drug use, psychiatric
history and suicide ideation and/or
provides for the following procedure:
there is in
Section 2 (2) a statement regarding the first
appointment:
“Psychologist or therapist to
discuss the program with the patient and their support person
• in Section 2 (2) “intern psychologist to conduct psychometric
tests and questionnaire ... elaborating on answers especially
those regarding
drug use, psychiatric history and suicide ideation and/or attempts”.
Section 2 (3)
“Psychologist to go through psychometric
tests and interview with patient and determine area of need and make
recommendation
for treatment plan and to check motivation of client. Determine
if they are more suitable for a Rapid Opiate Detoxification if high
dose and/or
long-term heroin use or on prescribed opiate replacement treatment or illicit
methodone, biodone or buprenorphine –
Subjutex or Suboxone ( Refer to ROD
Protocol if suitable). Also discuss role of support person.”
provides for the psychologist to then arrange for the patient to visit his or
her general medical practitioner or, alternatively,
for the psychologist to make
an appointment for them to see a doctor at the clinic. The psychologist is then
“book first pre-detox session after referring to current appointment
slots available on white board”.
also provides, “
Give the patient a copy of the Treatment Agreement,
Informed Consent, and Payment Policy ... to take home and read at their
then provides for the “
First Pre-Detox Session with therapist to
concentrate on anxiety, expectations, attributes and style, and the relationship
the patient
has with their support person
.” It requires that at that
session the therapist: “
read through the ‘Payment Policy’
and key sections of the ‘Treatment Agreement’ with the patient and
person (eg safety warnings and what is and is not included), obtain
signatures, give copy to the patient and file the original in
patient’s administration file.”
provides that at that appointment after the agreement is signed the therapist
ensure the patient has a
“Patient Guide”
“Pre-detoxification Information”.
is provision in the manual for a second pre-detox session that will include
“safety issues and after care process
manual includes the following comments:
to explain procedure, risks and discomforts, severity of withdrawal if a period
of abstinence of at least 48 hours is
not adhered to.
(Naltrexone) implants have not been produced by a major drug company and should
still be regarded as experimental. Like most
new drugs or preparations, they do
not have a Product Licence. However, they appear to do what is claimed for them
and Naltrexone
itself is a very safe drug. The implants contain nothing which
is known to have significant toxic effects. They are particularly
useful for a
patient who has nobody to supervise their oral Naltrexone or who think they will
be tempted to cheat. As with oral
Naltrexone, patients tend to test out the
effectiveness of their heroin-blocking effect. On a few occasions patients have
to have over-come the blockade. Attempts to do so with large amounts of
opiates are obviously dangerous, especially if the effect
of an implant has
almost worn off.”
Naltrexone implants and Naltrexone tablets taken regularly
seem able to block even large amounts of heroin or other opiates. Many
test out the blockade in the first few days and are re-assured to find it works.
However, it can be dangerous to try
to over-come the blockade by using
enormous amounts, especially when the implant may be starting to wear off, i.e.
any time after
potentially lethal over-dose. When you have been clean for a few weeks,
lose your tolerance of opiates. That means that even quite a small amount of
heroin could kill you if you were not protected
by Naltrexone. Abstinence from
opiates has risks as well as benefits. There is a sad and steady trickle of
over-dose deaths in
patients who have been clean for weeks or months and thought
they deserved a little treat. DON’T LET THIS HAPPEN TO YOU!
explanatory notes for the ROD stage of treatment your support person is
committing him/herself to be active throughout your
treatment. This includes
joining therapy when requested,
and assisting you in the daily administration of
medication.
(In the same
Getting ready
: You will receive additional instructions for
the night before and the morning of treatment. It is unlikely that you will
more than 24 hours in the hospital, but we ask you to prepare an
over-night bag, just in case. Ensure that your support person can
pick you up
from the hospital. If this is a problem, please call us and we will help
(in the same
document) In the hospital the medical staff will administer a range of
medications to counter the effects of the acute
withdrawal. They also give you
sedation so that you suffer no discomfort and have no memory of the procedure.
The reaction might
otherwise be quite dangerous and even life-threatening which
is why the procedure should only be done in a
Waking Up Clean
After ROD treatment your body is detoxified of all opiates. Although you
will not experience acute withdrawal symptoms, you may experience
some general
discomfort such as fatigue, light nausea, occasion diarrhoea, short-term
insomnia and minor aches. These sensations
wear off within a number of days and
are most attributed to side-effects from the medications used in the
detoxification and the
rapid change the body experiences both physically and
emotionally. This discomfort may be due to the lack of endorphins which will
take some time to return to normal body levels.
As an opiate addict, your body has been under constant sedation. After
all the opiates have been removed the body remains hyper-sensitive
environment so that the patient may feel discomfort until the body begins
producing its own opiates again. Regular drug use
also hides pain from
pre-existing medical problems so if you have undetected conditions and injuries
you may feel aches and pains
for the first time. This may affect whether you
are well enough to be discharged immediately. Sometimes you may even need to
in the hospital for an additional period of time or will be referred to the
proper physician to address any pre-existing disorders.
You may also become
aware of painful feelings or psychological problems. Opiates tend to mask this
pain. The after-care counselling
is designed to deal with these physical and
psychological problems. Overcoming these issues will help to ensure your
long-term recovery.
The transition from opiate dependency to total detoxification involves
rapid change, which may be emotionally and physically stressful.
Over the next
weeks you will regain a good appetite and digestion, desire interaction with
family and friends, and enjoy physical
activity, normal sexual sensations, and
an improved sense of well-being.
Discharge and Recovery
The doctor will discharge you usually within 24 hours of treatment. Your
support person should accompany you home. Our professionals
are available 24
hours a day for a week immediately following ROD. The recovery process is
different for everybody and you may feel
weak for some time. If you are
addicted only to opiates, your recovery will be shorter.”
The document
explaining the treatment to the patient includes a note to the support person.
“Involvement of the family member or friend who
is not an addict is essential throughout the entire treatment process. At the
interview, the psychologist will explain the treatment method to you and the
patient and encourage you to ask questions.
“Our research shows that when a family member understands the
healing process, supports the patient in therapy and participate
pharmacological program, the chances of relapse are reduced
significantly.”
(It provides that the support person is to sign the treatment agreement,
accompany the patient to the treatment, and participate in
their process of
“recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration into life”).
In the same
document, it says, addressed to the support person:
“Taking after care
medicine, Naltrexone, every day is essential to the successful completion of the
treatment. You are asked
to actively participate in the pharmacological program
by accompanying the patient in the daily ‘ritual’ of taking their
medication by crushing the tablet, mixing it with sweet drink and watching them
In the pre-detox
information to patients under “
The week before admission”,
“Two days prior to detox, take one 20mg tablet of Losec, one 300mg tablet
of quinine sulphate
on each day. One day prior to detox take one 20 mg tablet
or Buscopan. And, “Try to lower your opiate use if at all possible.
Avoid any risky combinations of drugs, especially tranquilizers, hypnotics,
(Benzodiazepines) and alcohol 24 hours before ROD as
these drugs in themselves
will have their own withdrawal effects.”
(In the same
document) Under the heading “Discharge” it provides
not expect to leave the treatment centre without your support person. They can
pick you up at around 5.30pm and no later
than 6pm”, and, “On
leaving the clinic, you will be given a medication kit to help you adjust over
the next few days.
Taking the medication exactly according to the
doctor’s instructions. Your local doctor will be able to prescribe
of your medication if needed.” And, “Patients react
differently on the first night of treatment. Some may be quite
drowsy and may
sleep through the night. Others may find it harder to sleep and may wish to
read or watch tv. Some patients suffer
symptoms over the first night because
their body has been stresses by the detoxification. They may complain of
diarrhoea, nausea,
stomach cramps or leg and back ache. We have nursing staff
and a doctor available over-night in case of emergency.”
document titled “Carer Information Sheet for Provision to
Carers/Supporters” it lists the following “symptoms
that may be
experienced”:
“Muscle aches and cramping pains in
back and/or legs, stomach cramps, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, diarrhoea,
feel hot/cold,
shivering, irritable, angry or unreasonable with mood swings,
difficulty sleeping, general feeling of weakness, and, may have thoughts
using heroin.”
document warns that if the patient becomes aggressive, “try to reason with
them but if this does not work, don’t
put yourself at risk”, and,
“Make sure all car keys and money are kept in a secure place”, and,
“Make contact
with the patient before treatment to throw out any drugs
such as heroin, cocaine or amphetamines. This includes syringes, needles
other implements associated with drug taking”. It provides that the
Management Guidelines for the carer for the first
4-5 days after the treatment
Management Guidelines for Carer (first 4-5
1 Ensure that the patient is kept in a comfortable, safe environment.
Electric blanket, hot packs, hot baths and showers are all
useful to help with
symptoms. (Supervise safe use.)
2 Some of the medication may cause dizziness, so assistance may be
required. Do not allow the patient to go out alone walking in
the first 4 days,
however, light exercise is a good thing after the first 24 to 36 hours.
3 Keep all medications well away from the patient
Do not allow
the patient to drive a motor vehicle whilst on
medication under any circumstances
5 Ban visits and phone calls from drug using friends. After the first
couple of days encourage visits from "
non using friends
6 Ensure the patient is drinking plenty of fluids, particularly water,
juice flat lemonade or sports drinks
7 It is common in the first few days not to feel hungry,
do not force
the patient to eat
. Try light food, soups or baby food.
8 Sleeping is often disrupted; the medication may be useful but does not
always work. It takes time for a normal sleeping pattern
to return. The patient
needs to plan activities to keep occupied during the night. You as the Carer may
also have disturbed sleep
so have a back up in case you need help. Try to
maintain a normal sleep pattern, that is awake during the day and sleep during
9 During this period boredom and restlessness are a problem, there is a
mental struggle around giving up the drug. Many people want
to try a dose of
heroin to see if Naltrexone really works. Some people need a high dose of
Naltrexone in the first few days to stop
these thoughts, up to 6 tablets per
day. Try to have some activities pre-planned to alleviate the boredom.
IT IS VERY DANGEROUS FOR PEOPLE TO USE ANY AMOUNT OF HEROIN
The patient will not feel the euphoria, but their body can still
10 Often at this time the patient will be very emotional, uncooperative
and unrealistic. They need firm limits and caring support.
11 Some patients may take other drugs, such as marijuana.
condone the use of any illegal drugs
. It is important to remember, at this
time, the focus is to stop using heroin; other drugs may be dealt with later.
12 The emergency support line is available for you and the detox patient.
The doctor will assist you with any questions or difficulties
you are having.
Complications
Should the patient develop complications as a result of detoxification
procedures that are unable to be treated at home, they are
to contact the
nearest emergency department (see Discharge Notes listing emergency hospitals
and 24 medical centres) after contacting
our staff and ensuring they take the
documentation they have been provided with”
Instructions to Carers
advised that as soon as they are settled they should have a hot shower with
assistance as they may be quite weak. This
pains they may feel. Gradually increase their intake of clear fluids. If
tolerated they may
have a light meal, with no dairy products, the day after the
detoxification, if not nauseated.”
carer receives a pack of medication at the time of the patient’s
discharge. Patients who have not had an implant inserted
are given 50 mg
Naltrexone (PO) to take and a prescriptions for Naltrexone with instructions to
the carer to ensure it is taken daily
for up to 6 months. The doctor is
required to document the use and maximum dosage of detox medications for each
medication before
discharge as per Discharge Sheet.
The document
then lists Naltrexone plus 7 other medications.
F of the Practice and Procedure Manual of the Clinic is a document titled
“Management of Acute Opioid withdrawal precipitated by
Naltrexone”
and includes the following
information:
“MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE OPIOID WITHDRAWAL
PRECIPITATED BY NALTREXONE
Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist which has recently been registered
for use in Australia. During the withdrawal process, emergencies
can arise even
under the most controlled hospital environments. These guidelines are intended
to assist medical and nursing staff
working in detoxification units and those
who may have to manage an emergency situation.
Precipitated
naltrexone-precipitated withdrawal occurs 20 to 60 minutes following ingestion
of a naltrexone tablet.
Gastrointestinal
symptoms are usually predominant. Severe vomiting and diarrhoea may
become agitated and distressed and delirium with confusion is common.
sympathetic overactivity, particularly profuse sweating and piloerection, may
If a patient
has taken sedative drugs in conjunction with naltrexone, as commonly occurs,
delirium is exacerbated but other signs
may be less clear.
significant risks associated with precipitated withdrawal.
Most deaths
associated with precipitated withdrawal appear to have been the result of
aspiration associated with high doses of sedative
In people who
have received high doses of sedating drugs, delayed respiratory depression
emerging after acute withdrawal has subsided
may have contributed to
electrolyte problems can follow vomiting and diarrhoea.
During acute
delirium, confused patients must be considered at risk, and require medical
Diagnosis and
History may
be difficult to obtain from confused patients, particularly if they are
defensive about being identified as heroin users.
should suspect naltrexone precipitated withdrawal in any patient presenting with
signs of opioid withdrawal in conjunctions
with delirium or intractable
A history of
opioid dependence should be gained from the patient, significant others or by
inspection of injections sites for recent
track marks. An absence of track marks
should not exclude this diagnosis.
assessment of the degree of sedation and of the patient's capacity to protect
his/her airway is essential.
f1umazenil to reverse sedation is not recommended, due to the chance of the
presenting patient having concurrent benzodiazepine
dependence and the risk of
inducing life-threatening seizures.
desirable to check electrolytes and arterial blood
precipitated withdrawal is self-limiting, with delirium usually lasting only
symptomatic.
Patients with
vomiting may require fluid and electrolyte replacement.
Although most
patients will experience fluid loss to some degree, the insertion of IV cannulae
and administration of fluids should
be balanced against potential problems.
Patients in delirium frequently remove IV lines.
Most patients
will be capable of tolerating oral fluids within 12 hours of ingestion of
naltrexone.
naltrexone-induced withdrawal delirium, most patients can be reoriented. This
is critical in both obtaining a history and
in managing the confused
important part of management is reassuring the patient that symptoms, although
severe, will be short lived.
staff should be aware that the antagonist induced withdrawal syndrome is
extremely traumatic and that patients expressing
fear of death, for example
should not be treated contemptuously, but given appropriate, repeated
reassurance.
administration of opioid agonists is unlikely to be helpful. Patients should be
warned that taking heroin will not alleviate symptoms.
In managing
vomiting and diarrhoea, clinical experience indicates that conventional
antiemetics provide little relief. Octreotide
(Sandostatin) 100ug by
subcutaneous injection is the drug of choice in reducing vomiting and
Agitation and
sympathetic overactivity can be treated with clonidine (150 ug orally or 100 ug
by intramuscular injection, repeated
after 2 hours if agitation persists and
hypotension is not a problem).
When urgent
sedation is imperative (where patients are violent and confused), midazolam 5-10
mg by intramuscular injection may be
abdominal cramps are a problem, a single dose of 20 mg hyoscine-Nbutylbromide
(Buscopan) can help.
Patients and
families should be informed that residual symptoms may persist for up to 7
Patients need
to be warned of the risk of overdose if they use heroin following
naltrexone.
43 The NSW department of Health Guidelines for Rapid Detoxification from Opioids
published on 27 January 2005 applied at all relevant
times. The Guidelines are
expressed to apply subject to various conditions, which includes that the
procedure “should occur
only in a facility that has the capacity to retain
people as in-patients in the event of severe withdrawal”.
objectives of the document are expressed to be “to assist trained D &
A clinical staff:
have a clear knowledge and understanding of rapid
detoxification;
2 to assess patients seeking rapid
detoxification;
3 to provide accurate information about the procedure;
4 to obtain informed consent to treatment; and
5 to perform rapid detoxification safely and effectively in
detoxification units – relatively low level care settings”.
45 In the executive summary to the document it says that:
“Antagonist precipitated withdrawal can be
very severe. Untreated the acute phase of precipitated withdrawal involves two
clusters of symptoms -
Gastrointestinal
symptoms, comprising unremitting vomiting and diarrhoea, often with cramping,
abdominal pain, lasting many hours;
Psychological
disturbances with agitation, dysphoria, and delirium. Delirium can last for up
to 12 hours.”
46 The document in the Executive Summary states:
“To minimise the risk of rapid
detoxification, the major measures are:
To delay the
procedure until there are minimal drugs left in the CNS – at least 48
hours after the last use of heroin, or seven
days after the last use of
patients are psychologically prepared and adequately supported; and,
patients with inter-current medical problems which would increase the risk of
the procedure.
In view of the unpredictable severity of
withdrawal reactions during rapid detoxification, it should only be performed in
where there are:
Nursing staff
adequate to deal with a severe reaction (which may require a
‘special’ nurse – 1:1 nursing –
for 4 hours in the event
of a severe reaction;
Medical staff
on site for 4 hours from induction;
medications;
basic resuscitation equipment – an airway and air viva and staff trained
in the use of this equipment;
The capacity
to retain a patient in in-patient care overnight in the event of a significant
These precautions, combined with careful assessment
and patient selection, repeated explanation of the procedure, provision of
symptomatic
relief based on clonidine and octreotide and good nursing support,
enable rapid induction on to Naltrexone to be accomplished straight-forwardly
and safely.”
47 In the Executive Summary the document also states that rapid detoxification
is appropriate for opioid-dependant patients who:
no contra-indications;
informed of the nature of the treatment and of treatment options; and
Express a wish
to undergo the treatment.
48 The document states that the contra-indications to rapid detoxification
A history of
cardiac disease or evidence of heart disease on clinical examination;
Chronic renal
impairment;
Decompensated
liver disease – jaundice and/or ascites, hepatic encephalopathy;
dependence on benzodiazepines, alcohol or stimulants; and
A history of
49 The document also states that relative contra-indications to rapid
detoxification are:
history of treatment for depression (patients may require psychiatric assessment
prior to Naltrexone); and
Unstable social
circumstances – patients who are homeless or in a highly unstable social
circumstances require a comprehensive
plan to stabilise their circumstances
preceding their undergoing rapid detoxification.
The document in
its discussion of antagonist-precipitated withdrawal for opioid dependant people
says that the withdrawal can be very
severe. It says that delirium can last for
up to 12 hours.
50 It reports that there have been reported psychotic episodes during
precipitated withdrawal, that patients without supportive treatment
dehydrated and develop electrolyte disturbances as a result of severe vomiting,
Precipitated withdrawal is associated with
significant physiological disturbances, including a marked increase in
circulating catecholamines.
The manifestation of precipitated withdrawal are
atypical and withdrawal scales do not provide an index of withdrawal
51 The Guidelines state:
In summary, antagonist-precipitated
withdrawal can produce severe physiological and psychological distress.”
52 The Guidelines also state that, as regards predictors of severity of
precipitated withdrawal:
The major factor associated with severity
of precipitated withdrawal is recency of opioid use – the greater the
interval between
opioid use and administration of Naltrexone, the less severe is
the precipitated withdrawal. This is because the severity of withdrawal
proportionate to the amount of drugs still circulating.
Heroin is a relatively short-acting drug. Heroin-dependant
subjects who receive Naltrexone within 12 hours of their last use of heroin
experience more severe withdrawal reaction than a subject in whom administration
of Naltrexone is delayed 24-48 hours. With long
half-life drugs such as
Methadone, much longer intervals are required.
“The severity of precipitated withdrawal is also influenced by the
level of dependence – people with high opioid tolerance
experience more
precipitated withdrawal.
“People maintained on Methadone tend to have very severe
precipitated withdrawal when given an antagonist. This reflects two
exposure to a high dose of opioid, meaning a high degree of neuro adaption to
opioids; and
half-life means that there is still circulating Methadone up to 80 hours or
longer after the last dose. This means that
when Naltrexone is administered,
there is an abrupt displacement of Methadone from receptors leading to severe
precipitated withdrawal.”
53 The Guidelines reported that there had been several documented fatalities
associated with ROD, “mostly associated with the
administration of
multiple medications”.
54 Professor Mattick, a witness in the
Complainant’s case, gave evidence. The Tribunal accepts him as an expert
the area of drug and alcohol treatment and research. He described in
his report of 27 June 2012 issues he believes are significant
highlighted as follows:
“3.5.1 Specifically,
heroin dependent patients are very complex individuals with long-standing
difficult histories, often with
child sexual, physical or emotional abuse, much
marginalised backgrounds, poor educational achievement, very poor vocational
and they are vulnerable and unstable.
3.5.2 They are patients who are seriously affected by having significant
problems with depression, anxiety, and sometimes with psychosis,
and having very
significant current health problems.
3.5.3 It was for these reasons that when rapid opioid detoxification was
first introduced into Australia there was a high level of
concern by all
associated with the procedure, both those who were advocates and those who were
less convinced about the utility of
such an approach to the very complex
problems of heroin dependence.
3.5.4 In particular, there were strong concerns about Naltrexone use being
associated with elevated levels of dysphoria as an adverse
event, of high risk
of over-dose because of loss of tolerance as a consequence of exposure to
Naltrexone, of high risk of suicide
in individuals whose lives were very
marginalised and who became potentially more depressed through the dysphoric
effects of Naltrexone,
and to physical and other concerns, particularly
cardio-vascular risk, and risk of relapse in the longer term.
3.5.5 It was because of these issues and problems that the need for very
detailed assessments were written into the various guidelines
which have been
referred to in my first report on this matter. That there was such a high level
of concern about assessment, about
comprehensive understanding of the individual
and about risk, highlights the need in this particular area of any clinical
psychologist
or other psychologist to be more vigilant than normal to ensure
appropriate professional practice.”
55 It is well known that people with opiate addictions are often unreliable at
providing a history of their drug use, disclosing
the extent of their current
drug use, or providing history of other associated problems such as depression,
or other psychological
problems, and criminal activity. There is a clear need
in determining whether a patient is suitable for ROD to seek out, as far
reasonable, objective evidence from other collateral sources in relation to
their past and present drug use, their health,
their social stability and their
history of associated problems. Examples of how this can be done are blood
tests, urine drug scans,
interviewing a close family member, a friend, a person
the patient lives with or has lived with, or a support person, consulting
patient’s general medical practitioner, consulting the patient’s
methadone prescriber, consulting the patient’s
employer and access to
medical records, and records of prior rehabilitation attempts.
danger to be considered is that a patient might be subjected to the risks of ROD
where the patient’s addiction might
be addressed by other treatment that
does not expose the patient to the same level of risk. It is therefore
important that the patient
is fully informed about the other treatment options
and advantages and disadvantages and the possible alternatives are fully
with the patient.
57 A further area of danger to the patient is if
the patient is released prematurely from the clinic, or released without a
carer/supporter
or into the care of lay people not equipped to provide the care
58 A particular area of danger is if a patient were released after
ROD treatment without arrangements having been made for the patient
to have some
competent person to supervise and assist him. There are the risks of the
patient not complying with instructions as
to the various medications provided
to counter some of the side effects of the ROD that will occur after the
treatment. There is
also the risk that the patient may use opiates, stimulants
or other drugs and the adverse consequences of such combinations with
Naltrexone treatment and the after-treatment medications.
59 The Deputy
Director General of Public Health and Chief Health Officer distributed the NSW
Health Guidelines for Rapid Detoxification
from opioids in 2005. In the letter
circulating the document, he stated:
Guidelines apply subject to the following conditions:
They refer to
a procedure intended for a carefully selected clinical population.
They do not
relate to detoxification under anaesthetic .
They are for
application in specialist detoxification facilities.
The procedure
should only occur in a facility that has the capacity to retain people as
in-patients in the event of severe withdrawal.
The procedure
is NOT recommended for use in primary care or other non-specialist
The procedure
should only occur in a facility following the drugs approval for use in
detoxification by that facility’s drug
committee or other formal approval
The procedure
should only occur following the patient being properly informed and consent
obtained, which includes information that
use of Naltrexone in detoxification is
off indication.”
61 The following statements are made in the Guidelines:
“Antagonist precipitated withdrawal can be very severe.
Untreated the acute phase of precipitated withdrawal involves two major
of symptoms -
Gastrointestinal
symptoms, comprising unremitting vomiting and diarrhoea, often with cramping,
abdominal pain, lasting many hours.
Psychological
disturbances with agitation, dysphoria, and delirium. Delirium can last for up
to 12 hours.”
“To minimise the risk of Rapid Detoxification, the major measures
delay the procedure until there are minimal drugs left in the CNS – at
least 48 hours after the last use of heroin, or 7
days after the last use of
ensure patients are psychologically prepared and adequately supported
exclude patients with inter current medical problems which would increase the
risk of the procedure”
“In view of the unpredictable severity of withdrawal reactions during
Rapid Detoxification, it should only be performed in settings
where there is the
capacity to retain a patient in in-patient care overnight in the event of a
significant reaction.”
“Rapid Detoxification is appropriate for opioid dependant patients
no contra-indications;
been informed of the nature of the treatment and of treatment options;
a wish to undergo the treatment.”
Contra indications to Rapid Detoxification are:
history of cardiac disease, or evidence of heart disease on clinical
examination
renal impairment
decompensated
liver disease – jaundice and/or ascites, hepatic encephalopathy
dependence on benzodiazepines, alcohol or stimulants
of psychosis
Relative contra-indications to Rapid
Detoxification are:
of treatment for depression (patients may require psychiatric assessment prior
to Naltrexone)
social circumstances – patients who are homeless or in highly unstable
social circumstances require a comprehensive
plan to stabilise their
circumstances preceding their undergoing rapid detoxification.
Patients most likely to benefit from Naltrexone treatment are those
who are strongly committed to abstinence, have good social support
(employment,
stable relationship, family support), and do not have serious psychological
impairment.
“The most severe withdrawal reactions occur when an opioid antagonist
is administered to a dependent patient who at the time
has a high level of
circulating opioid agonist.
By competitively inhibiting the
agonist, the administration of Naloxone or Naltrexone abruptly blocks agonist
effects – instead
of declining over many hours, drug effects are reversed
in minutes. The result is a very severe withdrawal reaction with profound
physiological and psychological effects.”
have been reports of psychotic episodes during precipitated withdrawal
supportive treatment patients may become dehydrated and develop electrolyte
disturbances as a result of severe vomiting
Precipitated
withdrawal is associated with significant physiological disturbances, including
a marked increase in circulating catecholamines.
The manifestations of
precipitated withdrawal are atypical and withdrawal scales do not provide an
index of withdrawal severity.”
“To minimise the physiological stress, severity of withdrawal and to
minimise the risk of delirium, the major measures to increase
the safety of
rapid detoxification are:
1) to delay the administration of
antagonist until there is no circulating opioid drugs – patient must have
been opioid free
for at least 48 hours after the last use of heroin or other
short half-life drugs, or 7 days after the last use of Methadone.
2) to ensure patients are psychologically prepared and adequately
supported. They need to be clearly informed about procedure, what
and to receive supportive nursing care during the procedure and for a period
afterwards.
3) to exclude people with concomitant dependence on Benzodiazepines or
alcohol as simultaneous withdrawal from multiple drugs is a
high risk approach
– alternative forms of detoxification are indicated.
4) to ensure when antagonists are to be administered, there is an
appropriate level of care in the event of a severe reaction. This
Nursing staff
adequate to deal with a severe reaction which may require a
‘special’ nurse – 1:1 nursing –
for 4 hours in the event
of a severe reaction
Medical staff
on site for 4 hours from induction
medications
basic resuscitation equipment – an airway and air viva, and staff trained
in the use of these devices
The capacity
to retain a patient in in-patient care overnight in the event of a significant
5) to exclude patients with a history of significant
medical problems which may increase the risk of adverse events during rapid
detoxification,
such as heart disease, psychosis, advanced liver
“There have been several documented fatalities associated with rapid
detoxification, mostly associated with the administration
of multiple
medications.
Although those descriptions of rapid
detoxification concentrate on the medications used to support patients, critical
ingredients
assessment beforehand
and repeated explanation of the procedure and what is to be expected
during and after the acute phase of withdrawal”
“The relative contra-indications to rapid detoxification are:
of treatment for depression (needs psychiatric assessment prior to
Naltrexone)
social circumstances – patients who are homeless or in highly unstable
social circumstances require a comprehensive
plan to stabilise their
circumstances preceding their undergoing rapid
detoxification.”
Patients dependent on heroin (and who have not used Methadone in the
last 2 weeks) need to complete 48 hours opioid-free before undergoing
detoxification. Patients who have used Methadone need to have 7 days
opioid-free before the procedure. Failure to observe
these intervals can lead
to severe reactions and serious complications. It is not acceptable to
compromise safety in the hope of
a good outcome.”
“In patients seeking to withdraw from Methadone, it is both
courteous and necessary for safety to discuss the patient’s
treatment with the Methadone doctor or clinic.
There have been incidents
when failure to do this had a fatal outcome.
PATIENT A – RELEVANT HISTORY
Respondent completed the initial in-take interview of the patient on 2 May 2007.
The patient’s father attended the interview
with him on 2 May 2007. His
father signed some of the documentation and paid a deposit of $1,000 for the
respondent on the last page of the questionnaire recommended ROD treatment
– a 12 month implant – at a price of $5,900.00.
The patient was
that day scheduled for the treatment on 16 May.
same day (2 May 2007) Dr Tan conducted a medical examination and assessment. He
noted that the patient was currently taking 28
mg per day of Buprenorphine and
0.2 gm per day of heroin. He conducted an electrocardiogram and that was
submitted to a pathology
laboratory for report. Blood and urine samples were
taken from Patient A by the clinic and sent to a pathology laboratory for tests.
same day Dr Tan wrote to the patient’s methadone prescriber informing him
that the patient would undergo ROD on 17 May and
from 2 May required no further
methadone. The same day (2 May) Dr Tan prescribed MS Contin for the patient to
take before the treatment.
Respondent alleges that the same day (2 May) Patient A also had a counselling
session with the Respondent. The Respondent says:
was to take him through the pre-detox information to prepare him for
detoxification, to ensure adequate support was in
place and look at the safety
issues around the use of Naltrexone. I also had him complete a DASS 21 to
determine the likelihood
of him suffering from Depression or Anxiety currently.
I spoke to him about the need to come back for follow-up counselling and
arrangements for him to see Ms Linda Magson, one of our D&A counsellors
following his detoxification. He also attended
for another counselling session
with me on 14 May.”
electrocardiograph report was within the normal range. The urine drug screen
results on 3 May showed positives for the amphetamines
group and the opiates
group. Specific tests for methamphetamine and morphine showed positive. Codeine
was not detected. The patient
had denied he was taking amphetamines and had not
disclosed use of methamphetamine at all.
4 May the patient’s father paid the balance of the charge for the
treatment, $4,900. The patient signed the form called “
Agreement and Informed Consent”
ROD treatment of Patient A occurred on 16 May 2007. The patient’s father
took him to the clinic at about 7.30am. The
father signed the
“Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent”.
When admitted to
the clinic the patient said his last dose of MS Contin had been 100gm at 5pm on
was given a 12 month Naltrexone implant. The medical practitioner who oversaw
the treatment was Dr Donald Tan. He was also responsible
for the release of
Patient A the same day.
father returned at 5pm and was told that the patient was not ready to be
discharged yet. The clinical records show that he was
and did not settle, even when given sedation. When the
father returned at 6pm the patient was still not ready. He returned later
the patient’s mother at about 6.30pm and they were told they had to take
the patient as the clinic had no facilities and
no nursing staff to care for him
over-night. The parents did not have any contact with the medical practitioner.
A was released into the care of his parents. His father was given a series of
medications for the patient for the week after
the procedure with instructions
a record of what
those medications were.
father was about 69 and his mother about 63. The patient’s speech was
very slurred and he could not walk by himself without
support by his parents
from both sides. He was staggering. They had difficulty getting him into their
car. The father described
“His body was out of control”,
“His arms and legs were out of control”
. The patient
was not responsive to any directions given to him. “He was pushing his
legs into the dashboard. We were not
even able to leave our parking spot
because of his lack of physical control.”
were unsuccessful with attempts to have him sit in the front of the vehicle and
eventually he sat in the back of the vehicle
with his mother. In the car he was
extremely agitated. At times he was putting his feet on the ceiling. He did
not say anything.
His mother tried to cuddle him, soothe him and calm him down,
but he kept attempting to climb into the front seat and bumping into
his father.
the drive from Ultimo to the patient’s flat at Bondi, Patient A attempted
to exit the car while it was moving.
the patient’s flat, he continued to be out of control. With the
assistance of the patient’s sister, the parents tried
to hold the patient
down in a bed, but he was jumping up and banging the wall. He was running at
furniture and the walls. They
were trying to protect him from hurting himself.
The patient’s mother made three phone calls to the Respondent. In the
call the Respondent told them to give the patient a little more time and
he should settle down. On the second call he suggested
giving the patient drugs
in the kit provided to them for the patient when he was discharged from the
clinic. In the third call the
Respondent suggested that they call an ambulance
and have the patient taken to hospital. They called an ambulance.
patient was taken by ambulance and admitted to Prince of Wales Hospital. When
he arrived at the Emergency Ward, it took two Ambulance
officers to manage him.
He was admitted to intensive care. He was given sedation. His father stayed
the night with him. The patient
spent two days in intensive care at the Prince
of Wales Hospital before being released.
PATIENT B –
RELEVANT HISTORY
B was referred by his general practitioner in Canberra to the clinic. He was
47. He was interviewed by the Respondent at
an initial interview on 20 February
patient was a freelance journalist and by an agreement negotiated with the
Respondent on 20 February, he was charged only $1,500
for the ROD. That was
because after detailed discussions with the respondent, they had agreed that he
would write some positive
articles about the ROD program offered by Psych
‘n’ Soul Clinic and submit them for publication in various
Psychological Assessment Summary
” prepared by the Respondent
from the answers to the questionnaire recommended the patient undertake on 7
March ROD treatment
by way of oral Naltrexone tablets.
Daood consulted with Patient B on 22 February 2008. He prescribed MS Contin 100
mg for short term use prior to attending the clinic
for detoxification. The
purpose of this was to wean Patient B off Methadone to reduce the withdrawal
effect. Dr Daood discussed
with Patient B the importance of stopping the MS
Contin for some time prior to his scheduled detoxification or he would
severe withdrawal effects.
29 February 2008, Dr Daood conducted a medical examination and assessment of
Patient B. He submitted an electrocardiograph to
a pathology laboratory for
report. That report stated the results were within normal limits. Blood and
urine samples were taken
on 29 February 2008 and sent to a pathology laboratory.
The reports from the laboratory were sent to the clinic on 29 February.
urine drug screen detected both Methadone and Morphine.
B turned 48 on 1 March 2008.
Daood of the Clinic made the medical decision to administer the ROD. Dr Daood
made that decision in reliance upon (among other
things) the assessment by the
Respondent that the patient was suitable for ROD by administering monthly
Naltrexone tablets.
patient attended the clinic on 7 March 2008 and underwent ROD. He was at the
clinic from 8.30am in the morning until 7.30am the
following morning, Saturday,
8 March 2008.
carer or support person attended the clinic at any time or signed any of the
treatment documentation or had any contact with the
Daood did not examine the patient on the morning of 8 March before discharge.
He did, however, speak to a registered nurse who
had been on duty overnight as
to the fitness of the patient for discharge.
support person or carer attended the clinic. On Saturday, 8 March 2008, the
Respondent drove Patient B from the clinic to a boarding
house where the patient
was staying alone and left him outside. He left the patient with a supply of
medications provided by the
clinic for the seven days after treatment. These
included the following:
Rafen – for the relief of pain
Diazepam – for anxiety
Pramin – for nausea and vomiting
Buscopan – for stomach pain
Alodorm – to help the patient sleep
Gastro-stop – for diarrhoea
Baclofen – for leg and back pain
patient was found two days later unconscious in his room at the boarding house.
He was conveyed by ambulance to the Prince of
Wales Hospital and treated in
intensive care. He was incontinent of urine and faeces. Extensive tests were
done, his chest was
drained and an aortic aneurism was diagnosed. On 14 March
2008 various further procedures were undertaken.
regained some consciousness by 17 March 2008. His condition improved and he was
moved from intensive care. But he deteriorated
on 19 March 2008 and was
returned to the intensive care unit. He lost consciousness and subsequently was
diagnosed as suffering
a subarachnoid haemorrhage. He died in intensive care on
28 March 2008.
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINTS
factual matters alleged in the complaints are as follows:
1 On 16 May 2007 Patient A underwent Rapid Opiate Detoxification (ROD) at the
Clinic. The practitioner was both the Authorising Officer
for the Clinic's ROD
Protocol as well as Patient A's assessing psychologist. In relation to the ROD
treatment provided to Patient
1.1 The practitioner failed to adequately assess Patient A's suitability for
(a) by failing to take sufficient account of Patient A's pre-existing
conditions and other relevant factors including his:
(i) drug use behaviours (both historical and recent)
(ii) current depressive disorder
(iii) level of anxiety
(iv) level of stress
(v) history of psychosis
(vi) level of social stability
(vii) previous attempts at withdrawal
(b) by failing to utilise DSM IV or otherwise ensure that a full
psychological and/or psychiatric assessment of Patient A was undertaken
(i) results on the DASS21 questionnaire
(ii) current depressive disorder
(iii) history of hallucinations
(iv) history of suicidal thoughts
1.2 The practitioner's conduct as set out in 1.1 above breached General
Principle I and Section A of the
Australian Psychological Society Code of
Ethics 2003 (APS Code of Ethics 2003),
2.1 The practitioner developed a treatment plan for Patient A which included
ROD treatment despite recording Patient A as having:
(a) a current dependence on stimulants (contraindication)
(b) a history of psychosis (contraindication)
(c) a history of depression (relative contraindication)
2.2 By his conduct as set out in 2.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines on Rapid
Detoxification from Opioids (NSW Health Guidelines)
which specify that ROD
is suitable for a patient with no contraindications
(b) failed to be cognisant of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of his
actions and to ensure that the treatment plan was appropriate
in breach of
General Principle I of the
APS Code of Ethics 2003.
3.1 The practitioner failed to adequately discuss the treatment plan with
Patient A and/or failed to record such discussions. In
particular, the
practitioner failed to adequately discuss and/or record:
(a) a full explanation of the nature of the treatment and what is to be
(b) the potential risks and benefits of the treatment
3.2 By his conduct as set out in 3.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) breached General Principle I of the
APS Code of Ethics 2003.
4.1 The practitioner failed to adequately discuss alternative treatment
options with Patient A and/or failed to record such discussions.
In particular,
the practitioner failed to adequately discuss and/or record discussions
(a) gradual buprenorphine reduction
(b) inpatient or residential options
4.2 By his conduct as set out in 4.1 above, the practitioner failed to
comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines.
5.1 The treatment plan formulated by the practitioner did not comply with
NSW Health Guidelines
in that the plan did not provide for intensive
follow up care, including daily review of Patient A for three days and at weekly
thereafter.
6.1 The practitioner co-signed, along with Patient A, the 'Treatment
Agreement and Informed Consent' form that required Patient A
abstained from opiates for the prescribed period. (usually 12 hours)
NSW Health Guidelines
specifying that patients dependent on
heroin need to complete 48 hours opiate-free before undergoing rapid
detoxification, and
(b) the Clinic's own
Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy and procedure
requiring patients to be opiate free for 24 hours before undergoing
rapid detoxification
6.2 By his conduct as set out in 6.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) failed to comply with the Clinic's
Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy
and Procedure Manual
(c) failed to be cognisant of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of his
actions and to ensure that the provision of ROD treatment
services to Patient A
was appropriate in the circumstances, in breach of General Principle I of the
APS Code of Ethics 2003
7.1 The practitioner failed to adequately communicate with other
practitioners who were involved in the treatment of Patient A when
communication was indicated. In particular, the practitioner failed to
adequately communicate with Patient A's:
(a) General Practitioner
(b) buprenorphine prescriber, if different to (a),
(c) anti-depressant prescriber, if different to (a) and/or (b).
8.1 The practitioner failed to make and maintain adequate clinical records in
relation to Patient A, including a comprehensive record
of the counselling
session on 2 May 2007, a full substance use history and comprehensive
psychosocial and psychological assessment.
On 7 and 8 March 2008 Patient B underwent Rapid Opiate Detoxification (ROD)
at the Clinic. The practitioner was both the Authorising
Officer for the
Clinic's ROD Protocol as well as Patient B's assessing psychologist. In relation
to the ROD treatment provided to
1.1 The practitioner failed to adequately assess Patient B's suitability for
(a) by failing to take sufficient account of Patient B's pre-existing
conditions and other relevant factors including his:
(i) drug use behaviours (both historical and recent)
(ii) history of depression
(iii) history of anxiety disorder
(iv) level of social stability
(b) by failing to utilise DSM IV or otherwise ensure that a full
psychological and/or psychiatric assessment of Patient B was undertaken
(i) history of depression
(ii) history of anxiety disorder
(iii) history of suicidal thoughts
1.2 By his conduct as set out in 1.1 above, the practitioner failed to act
with the care and skill expected of a competent psychologist,
in breach of
Standard 8.3.(a) of the
Australian Psychological Society Code of Ethics 2007
(APS Code of Ethics 2007).
2.1 The practitioner developed a treatment plan for Patient B which included
ROD treatment despite recording Patient A as having:
(a) a history of depression (relative contraindication)
2.2 By his conduct as set out in 2.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines an Rapid
Detoxification from Opioids (NSW Health Guidelines)
which specify that ROD
is suitable for a patient with no contraindications
(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring to Patient B,
in breach of Standard 8.3.(0) of the
APS Code of Ethics 2007.
3.1 The practitioner failed to adequately discuss the treatment plan with
Patient B and/or failed to record such discussions. In
particular, the
practitioner failed to adequately discuss and/or record:
(a) a full explanation of the nature of the treatment and what is to be
(b) the potential risks and benefits of the treatment
3.2 By his conduct as set out in 3.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) breached Standard A.3.3.(a) and (b) of the APS
Code of Ethics
4.1 The practitioner failed to adequately discuss alternative treatment
options with Patient B and/or failed to record such discussions.
In particular,
the practitioner failed to adequately discuss and/or record discussions
(a) gradual methadone reduction
(b) transfer to buprenorphine and cessation
(c) inpatient or residential options
4.2 By his conduct as set out in 4.1 above, the practitioner failed to
comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines.
5.1 The treatment plan formulated by the practitioner did not comply with
NSW Health Guidelines
in that the plan did not provide for intensive
follow up care, including daily review of Patient 8 for three days and at weekly
thereafter.
6.1 The practitioner co-signed, along with Patient B, the 'Treatment
Agreement and Informed Consent' form that required Patient B
abstained from opiates for the prescribed period, (usually 12 hours)
NSW Health Guidelines
specifying that patients dependent on
heroin need to complete 48 hours opiate free before undergoing rapid
detoxification, and
(b) the Clinic's own
Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy and Procedure
requiring patients to be opiate free for 24 hours before undergoing
rapid detoxification
6.2 By his conduct as set out in 6.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) failed to comply with the Clinic's
Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy
and Procedure Manual
(c) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring to Patient B,
in breach of Standard B.3.(c) of the
Australian Psychological Society Code of
Ethics 2007.
7.1 The practitioner failed to adequately communicate with other
practitioners who were involved in the treatment of Patient B when
communication was indicated. In particular, the practitioner failed to
adequately communicate with Patient B's
(a) General Practitioner
(b) methadone prescriber, if different to (a)
(c) treating psychologist
(d) anti-depressant prescriber, if different to the above practitioners.
8.1 The practitioner failed to comply with the Clinic's
Rapid Opiate
Detoxification Policy and Procedure Manual
in not communicating with Robyn
Butler and Joan Poole, Patient B's nominated support persons.
9.1 Following Patient B's discharge from the Clinic, the practitioner drove
patient B to a boarding house where he knew, or ought
reasonably to have known,
that Patient B would not be adequately supported due to the fact that the
practitioner:
(a) had not made contact with any support person nominated by Patient B
(b) had not ensured that the 'Treatment Agreement and Informed
Consent form was signed by a support person and that the 'Support Person
Compliance' section of that form was initialled by that
(c) was informed by email from Patient B on 28 February 2008 that although
he had an elderly aunt in Sydney he could not stay with
her and he would be
staying in a unit
"on my own"
9.2 By his conduct as set out in 9.1 above, the practitioner failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring to Patient
B, in breach of Standard
8.3.(c) of the
APS Code of Ethics 2007.
10.1 The practitioner failed to make and maintain adequate clinical records
in relation to Patient B, including a full substance use
history and
comprehensive psychosocial and psychological assessment.
11.1 On 22 February 2008, prior to Patient B undergoing ROD, the
practitioner sent a letter to Dr Michael Lavacheck advising that
Patient B no
longer requires methadone dosing and requesting that he be exited from the
11.2 By his conduct as set out in 11.1 above, the practitioner acted outside
the boundaries of his profession and thereby breached
Standard 8.1.2 of the
APS Code of Ethics 2007.
THE COMPLAINANT’S EXPERT WITNESS
its letter of 16 June 2010, the Health Care Complaints Commission requested
advice regarding these complaints from Professor Richard
following is the brief over-view of Professor Mattick’s qualifications
provided and verified by him:
Professor Richard P. Mattick is the
Professor of Drug and Alcohol Studies and the Director (2001-2009) of the
National Drug and Alcohol
Research Centre in the Faculty of Medicine at the
University of New South Wales. He is a Member of the Prime Minister's Australian
National Council on Drugs, and has served on numerous expert panels on alcohol
and drug misuse, being a member of the NSW Health
Minister's Expert Advisory
Committee on Drugs, and of the NSW Department of Health's Quality in Treatment
He is a registered psychologist in NSW, and has a B.Sc. (Hons.) in
Psychology, a Master of Psychology (Clinical) degree and a Ph.D.
in Clinical
Psychology (including extensive training and experience in neuropsychological
and psychometric assessment). He has a
Certificate in Neuroanatomy for
Neuropsychologists from the University of NSW.
He has trained in diagnosis using the DSM-IV and other procedures, in
Australia and overseas. He has completed The University of Sydney/MAA
Training in the Assessment of Permanent Impairment in Mental & Behavioural
He has authored over 200 scientific articles and books on the assessment,
nature and treatment of emotional, cognitive and psychological
neuropsychological problems. He has held various hospital appointments,
including being Honorary Consultant in Clinical Psychology,
St Vincent's
Hospital, Sydney.
He has been a regular consultant and adviser to the World Health Organization
since 1988. He supervises Ph.D. research, in a number
of areas including mental
disorders and neuropsychology/
cognitive functioning.
He has 25 years experience in the assessment and treatment of anxiety
disorders, post-traumatic stress, depression, drug/alcohol dependence,
has consulted extensively on the assessment of adults and children suffering
from cognitive and emotional/personality impairment
following injury.
Mattick was an impressive witness. He had expertise in psychology and in
treatment of people with drug addictions. The
Tribunal did not form a view that
he was biased in favour or against either party. His opinions appeared to be
fair and balanced.
He particularly recognised the needs and interests of the
opiate addicted people seeking or being given ROD treatment. He impressed
Tribunal as a most reliable witness.
CREDIT OF THE RESPONDENT
important contextual aspect of these proceedings is the evidence of the
Respondent at various stages of the hearing is that before
dealing with Patient
A and Patient B, he and his Clinic had been the object of numerous complaints
concerning ROD treatment of other
patients that had resulted in numerous
investigations. The Respondent made it clear that he believed these complaints
to the Health
Care Complaints Commission, to be malicious unmeritorious
complaints by other health care practitioners who did not accept that ROD
treatments should continue. The Tribunal would expect a reasonable
professional would be motivated to be extremely careful to ensure
practices of the Clinic did not provide any cause for its critics to make
further complaints.
Mattick in his evidence testified that he has checked on the internet for the
publications of the Respondent that the Respondent
alleged had been published in
a variety of ways. He said: “
However, a search of his name in the
University of NSW catalogue, which searches the world, yielded no
.” He said later in his oral evidence that he had been the
Research Director of the National Centre for Drug and Alcohol Studies
University of NSW and a clinician at the time when the Federal Government sought
advice regarding the use of Naltrexone.
He did give such advice and he also
provided the Tribunal a copy of the National Health and Medical Research Council
“Naltrexone Implant Treatment for Opioid Dependence
which is a literature review of the research reports.
review refers to only one research paper of which the Respondent was an author,
being an article comparing oral and implant Naltrexone
outcomes at 12 months
which was published in 2005 in the Journal of Opioid Management. Professor
Mattick said the content of the
NHMRC report about using Naltrexone was
controversial and he was asked to comment on it. He said that so far Naltrexone
been included on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme for opiate addiction
were some areas, such as inadequate clinical notes where the Respondent admitted
that his professional conduct was not of an
adequate standard. Generally he
strongly sought to defend his conduct in relation to both patients. However,
the more the Tribunal
heard from the Respondent in evidence and submissions, the
more the Tribunal was concerned that he did not give adequate recognition
interests of his patients and their needs for safety. He gave scant recognition
to the fact that some of his conduct placed
his patients at serious risk.
Another concern the Tribunal had was that he did not appear to be seriously
contrite or regretful
the hearing, he appeared to believe that he knows more about ROD treatment than
anyone else (at least in NSW). He argued
that some requirements of the Practice
and Procedure Manual of his clinic, the Australian Psychologists Society Code of
Ethics, and
the NSW Health Department Rapid Opiate Detoxification from Opiates
Guidelines, with which he had not complied, should be recognised
to be merely
advisory and, because of his superior knowledge of the field, for him were
discretionary. Many of the Respondent’s
submissions to the Tribunal were
of 30 August 2012
he did not agree with the guidelines and did not accept that
he should comply with them.
Substantial
parts of the Respondent’s submissions made factual allegations that were
not established by the evidence. One example
was his allegation that 40% of
opiate addicts who undergo ROD will still be abstinent 6 months later, even
without follow-up counselling
“compliance to Naltrexone
Another was his submission repeated many times during the hearing and also in
his written submissions that the previous
complaints about the clinic
investigated by the Department without any disciplinary proceedings resulting,
constituted an endorsement
of the practice and procedures of the clinic at the
time of the inspection. There was no evidence to establish such a proposition.
his cross examination the Respondent was often evasive and often volunteered
unresponsive material or speechified. His evasiveness
continued despite
cautions from the chair to avoid it. He was not an open and frank witness.
Respondent represented himself at the hearing. Without legal advice and
representation he was disadvantaged. His cross examination
of Professor Mattick
and some other witnesses at times involved the Respondent raising an argument
involving several propositions,
but not allowing the witness time to answer each
proposition that was put. Despite advice from the Chair to ask short questions
and wait for an answer before the next question, the Respondent continued in
times when he was in cross examination of a witness the Respondent made
submissions on factual issues.
serious handicap that the Respondent suffered because of his lack of legal
representation and the considerable body of material,
was that he had difficulty
distinguishing relevant material from irrelevant material. For example, he
sought to rely upon extensive
irrelevant evidence about his conduct on other
occasions and about his reputation.
were many serious issues where the Tribunal found that it did not believe the
Respondent’s version of events.
such issue was in relation to his evidence that he believed that he was
delivering Patient B to the home and supervision of his
aunt. He had never met
or spoken to any person who might be regarded as a support person for Patient B.
When he completed the questionnaire
with Patient B, under “
” he inserted the name and address (in Canberra) of the wife
from whom the patient had separated in 2007 and the name of the
aunt of the
patient and after the name, the word “
” and her phone
number. He did not meet or speak to either of those people.
an e-mail of 28 February, 2008 Patient B wrote to the respondent to confirm the
booking for ROD on Friday, 7 March. He said:
“I wish to organise my Sydney accommodation ASAP
and so want to ensure that I have been properly booked in. I will then make
payment into your Commonwealth Bank account Broadway as detailed in the
Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent Form, and e-mail
a PDF of the
“Although I have an elderly aunt in Sydney, her situation is not one
where I could stay over-night on March 7 after the procedure
is completed and so
I will need to rely on the over-night stay option at your facility, unless I am
assessed at the end of the day
to be okay to go back to the unit I am staying in
where, although staying on my own, I will be in phone contact and can make a
if anything possibly problematic occurs during the night. I will leave to
your professional assessment. I also would like your
advice as to whether it
might be sensible for me to stay in Sydney for at least the next few days after
completing the ROD. This
would also mean that I would be available to come into
your surgery for a post-ROD follow-up on Monday 10
March if you think this would be desirable. As discussed, I
have a solid support system in place for when I get back to Braidwood.”
Respondent testified that when he received the e-mail from the patient advising
that he would not have a support person or carer
to assist him after the ROD
treatment, he had a discussion with the patient and insisted that he had to stay
with someone, to which
the patient told him he would stay with his aunt.
clinical records include a note dated 6 March, the day before the ROD and the
day patient B signed the “
Treatment Agreement and Informed
That note is apparently in the handwriting of the
Respondent. It apparently was written after the document had been signed. It
that they “went through” the document “
and checked on
[name of aunt] is elderly but he would be staying with
her—also his friend Neil Scapone would be living nearby and would be
calling in to see him – not concerned about carer – would pick him
up on Saturday morning after detox-- discussed compliance
with oral detox
– assured me he was never going to use opiates again – never a
heroin addict - and was [indecipherable
4 words] He also said he would
continue his counselling with his psychologist who had helped him.”
aunt was 81 years of age. Although it appears the Respondent might not have
been told her age, given the Respondent knew the
patient was 48 and had
described his aunt as “elderly’ and said he could not stay with her,
it is clear that that the
Respondent had no basis to be satisfied that such a
person would be suitable or willing to provide the care and supervision that
form of Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent which Patient B and the
Respondent (on behalf of the Clinic) signed on 6 March
nominated the aunt as the
support person for the patient and stated her address at Bondi Junction. From
comparison with the Respondent’s
handwriting in the questionnaire
document, it appears that that information is in the handwriting of the
Respondent. On the evidence
he inserted the aunt’s address at Bondi
Junction in the form on 6 March 2008 for the patient to sign it.
the questionnaire completed on 20 February 2008 included next to the heading
Support Persons
” the name and address of the patient’s
wife, for the aunt it included only her name and telephone number; not her
It did not state even the suburb she resided at or even
”. The Typed 1 page
“Psychosocial Assessment
showed the wife as the
“Support Contact”
and made no reference to the aunt at all.
the email the patient sent the Respondent on 28 February 2008 the only address
he gave for the aunt was
The clinical records do
not show the patient providing the Clinic, or the Clinic using, any address for
the aunt except
when provided in the email. There
are some very brief notes of counselling on 22 February 2008 but they make no
reference to the
aunt. It appears that it was not until the meeting on 6 March
that the Respondent obtained the Bondi Junction address of the aunt
and thus it
was not previously in the document.
form provided for the support person to also sign, but she did not sign as she
was not approached to sign. The Clinic made no
patient’s aunt.
what is not recorded in the clinical notes is that at some stage on or before 7
March 2008 the Respondent agreed to Patient
B staying the night of 7 March 2008
in the Clinic because he did not have any other adequate care arrangements.
Daood recorded on 7 March 2008,
“to keep overnight under our
observation & no one to care for him overnight.”
clear that the Respondent and the clinic did not have any basis to believe that
Patient B would have adequate support
on the night of 8 March if he left the
one came to collect the patient from the clinic on the morning of 8 March. That
is why the Respondent undertook to drive him.
The accommodation to which the
Respondent delivered Patient B on 8 March 2008 was in fact St Mark’s Lodge
in Randwick, a boarding
house where the patient had stayed the night of 6 March.
He had also stayed there before his first appointment at the clinic. There
no suggestion that the Respondent saw the aunt there. He knew it was not the
aunt’s address at Bondi Junction.
Sunday, 9 March 2008, the Respondent telephoned Patient B’s wife in
Canberra. He said that he had tried to contact Patient
B by telephone that
morning, but the patient was not answering his telephone. The wife’s
evidence is that when she spoke with
him he referred to having delivered Patient
“his aunt’s place in Randwick”
. But she corrected
him and said:
“No, you mean Bondi Junction?”,
to which the
Respondent replied,
“No, at the accommodation place in Randwick, St
Mark’s Lodge”.
He then told her that Patient B should have been
staying with someone after the treatment because there could be side effects.
He said he would go round and check on the patient at St Mark’s Lodge.
The Respondent denies saying
“the accommodation place at Randwick, St
Mark’s Lodge”
and that the patient should have been staying with
someone. The Tribunal accepts that evidence of the wife.
his Police Statement of 4 April 2008 when the death of Patient B was being
investigated, the Respondent did not raise this allegation
of a discussion with
the patient in which the patient agreed to stay with his aunt. He there said
“Mr Poole had nominated his aunt....as his carer and had arranged for
me to take him to his residence at Randwick where she
lived nearby
This contradicts his evidence before the Tribunal that he thought he delivered
the patient to the aunt’s place.
para 10 of page 4 of his letter to HCCC of 22 April 2009 (Exhibit R28) the
Respondent says that patient B “
nominated two support people who were
to be with him in the days following the detoxification; ... his aunt and [a
friend]. He also
said his wife would be supporting him when he returned to
Canberra. He had initially told us he would be staying with his aunt.
later email to me he stated that he would not stay with his aunt on the night of
the detoxification as it might be too stressful
for her and he needed
confirmation to arrange his accommodation and would be on his own. In a
telephone call to him I clarified
this with him saying that he should stay with
his aunt in the days following the detoxification and he told me this would be
Tribunal does not accept the claim that the patient “
said he would stay with his aunt. The clinic records put the lie to that.
There is no record of the telephone conversation with the
patient that the
Respondent alleges occurred, even despite the serious issue that he said was
resolved by it. Furthermore there
is the evidence of the patient’s wife
with the Respondent’s claim that he thought he had delivered the
patient to his aunt’s home. There is also the evidence
from the record by
Dr Daood that the patient had no one to care for him overnight and the
Respondent’s awareness that no one
attended the Clinic to collect the
patient after the treatment.
Tribunal does not believe the Respondent’s evidence that he had the
alleged telephone conversation with the patient after
the email from the patient
of 28 February 2008. It is clear the Respondent knew on 8 March 2008 when he
took the patient to St Mark’s
Lodge at Randwick that he was not delivering
Patient B to his aunt’s place or into her care or supervision. He knew the
would be alone there, and he didn’t know for how long.
Respondent gave sworn evidence concerning Patient B in para 29 of his affidavit
“his ex-wife came to at least one session of
counselling”.
In her statement Patient B’s wife denies
attending the Clinic. The Clinic records do not record that the wife ever
the Clinic or had contact with it. The wife did not sign any of the
forms that made provision for a support person to sign, even
questionnaire nominated her as a support person and the Psychosocial Assessment
Summary nominated her as the only support
person. The surname for the wife
used in the Questionnaire, Treatment Agreement and Psychosocial Assessment
Summary is Patient
B’s surname, but her evidence is that she has never
used that surname. The Tribunal does not believe the Respondent’s
evidence that the wife attended.
Respondent told the Tribunal that he is not a clinical psychologist and has not
trained as a clinical psychologist, but in his
police statement of 4 April 2008
(Exhibit A25) he said
“I am a practising Clinical
Psychologist
” and Exhibit A15 includes a letter of 22 February 2008 he
wrote to Dr Lavacheck where he described himself as “
Clinical Director,
Registered Clinical Psychologist”.
When asked about the latter in
cross examination, he did not give any valid reason.
answer to questions from a member of the Tribunal, the Respondent conceded that
when he does medico-legal reports, he sometimes
describes himself as a
“Clinical Psychologist”.
Respondent in his submission (p.7.) contended that the Clinic always had the
facility for patients to stay overnight and gave
reasons. But the Tribunal
accepts the evidence of the father of Patient A that on the day Patient A was
treated he was told by staff
that Patient A could not stay over night as the
necessary staff had not been rostered to be there.
Respondent’s Curriculum Vitae listed 15
“Academic publications
and papers”
, which he authored or co-authored. Seven of these were
before 2010 and related to the use of Naltrexone for opiate detoxification.
the National Health and Medical Research Council literature review of
“Naltrexone Implant Treatment for Opioid Dependence”
referred to only one of those papers, which was published in 2005. In addition,
Professor Mattick conducted a search of
the University of NSW’s catalogue,
which searches the world, under the Respondent’s name. That yielded no
Professor Mattick’s evidence is that whilst he does not doubt
that the articles were published, he believes that they have
not been part of
the accepted academic literature.
Furthermore
the NSW Health Department Guidelines for ROD include a 3 page list of
references. The Respondent is not listed as an
author or co-author of any of
cross examination the Respondent admitted that the clinic advertises
As well as being innovative Addiction Treatment and Psychology
Services (Psych ‘n’ Soul) also adheres to Departments of
Pharmaceutical Agency regulations and Guidelines
when asked what was meant by that, he said
“We comply with
those to the extent that we judge as reasonable. More than that. I mean we
make every effort to comply with
those guidelines, but clearly something like a
history of psychosis, to rule someone out, or if someone didn’t have a
time job, or all of these sort of issues, would mean that no-one did the
detox, and I think that’s what the professor was getting
at yesterday, was
that they are written in such a way to virtually preclude anyone from being
His evidence of the Clinic making
“every effort to comply”
was shown by his own evidence, and also by the other evidence, to be false.
sworn evidence of the Respondent in his affidavit (para.21) was that after he
saw Professor Mattick’s report and an internal
review of the Clinic, he
had modified the questionnaire form in accordance with recommendations from Mr
Mark Anns. He alleged that
this had been reviewed by Professor Sitharthan,
and the new assessment form has been found to meet the purpose it was
designed for.”
He also told the Tribunal on 18 July 2012 that Mr Anns
had developed an improved questionnaire. But in his evidence on 18 July 2012,
Mr Anns testified that he had no recollection of preparing any questionnaire.
Professor Sitharthan adhered to his evidence:
Mr Colquhoun
has made some attempts to modify his clinical practices (including gathering
information and recording) but I do not
consider that he is competent to
independently engage as a methodical practitioner.”
Sitharthan gave this opinion notwithstanding that he acknowledged in oral
evidence that he had made suggestions to the Respondent
for improvements to his
assessment tools and the respondent had adopted them. He said, though, that the
Respondent had not acted
on his suggestion that he use software commercially
available for patient record keeping, which was significantly superior to the
tools being used by the Respondent.
Respondent gave evidence that his patients were “a better class” of
people than the opiate addicts that Professor
Mattick described. The Respondent
offered this as justification for him accepting the uncorroborated word of his
patients as to
their drug use history, their social stability and other issues
relevant to whether they were suitable for ROD treatment.
the evidence emerged the Tribunal formed the view that Patient A and Patient B
were similarly vulnerable people to those who abuse
a variety of drugs and have
multiple serious problems. The Respondent’s assessment documents for
Patient A did not include
the fact that he had been stealing from each of his
parents. His assessment of Patient B did not include details of his Codeine
addiction. Patient B’s casual part time work was an indicator of social
instability, typical of many opiate addicts because
of their unreliability. He
said when Patient B told him he was staying with his elderly aunt, the
Respondent did not see any need
to talk to the aunt to verify that or to go into
the building where he delivered the patient and brief the carer. Both patients
some extent were dishonest in the information they gave to the Respondent.
Patient A denied any current use of amphetamines. This
was untrue. The
assessment form for Patient B recorded: “
F – violent”,
in response to the question whether any family member suffered from substance
abuse or gambling problems and also in response to
the question:
any family member been treated for emotional problems?”
. The form did
not record more detail regarding the violence and particularly what involvement
the patient had. Professor Mattick’s
evidence is that many opiate addicts
have in their youth suffered physical or sexual abuse which renders them
vulnerable to drug
the assessment summary which the Respondent prepared in relation to Patient B,
the reference to “
” was expanded a little when he
[Patient B’s] father was violent with him whilst growing
up but they now have a good relationship.”
Tribunal came to the view that both patients more likely fitted the descriptions
that Professor Mattick gave in his evidence of
opiate users and their problems,
rather than then being of a “
better class”
as the Respondent
Respondent facilitated Patient A’s father signing the Treatment Agreement
next to the words: “
Support Person / Witness signature”
His evidence purported that Patient A’s father witnessed Patient A sign
the Treatment Agreement. But the father did not
witness the patient sign the
document. The father signed the documents two days after the patient had signed
his Affidavit the Respondent sought to justify his assessments of each of the
patients by detail about them. But those details
he relied upon for each
patient in his affidavit of March 2012 were much more extensive than the
information recorded in the questionnaire,
his assessment summary, and the other
clinical records of the clinic, all made in 2007 or 2008.
Tribunal does not accept that the Respondent would accurately recall such detail
4 or 5 years after the dealings with the patient,
particularly given his
evidence that he has interviewed 2,000 people seeking ROD. The Tribunal is
comfortably satisfied that the
new detail is either from the evidence of
witnesses in the Complainant’s case, which he had read before preparing
his Affidavit,
or from reconstruction, rather than recollection.
Respondent sought to defend the complaint that he instructed Patient
B’s Methadone prescriber to cease prescribing for the patient and that
such conduct involved him acting
“outside the boundaries of his
profession”.
The letter he sent to the Methadone prescriber was
accompanied by no signed authority of the patient or by the medical
practitioner,
Dr Daood, although the faxed header sheet of the clinic name in
the heading and under “
”, had a hand-written “
”. The header sheet was not signed by anyone. There was no
authority from the patient referred to in the letter or enclosed
with it. In
his submissions, the Respondent sought to justify this action. He disputes the
finding that it was conduct
“outside the boundaries of his
profession”.
his written submissions of 30 August 2012, well after the proceedings had
concluded, the Respondent said in paragraph 2.17: “
The relevant fact
is that the Respondent no longer engaged in ROD in any form, the clinic has been
independently monitored by the
Department of Health and Mr Anns to ensure that
and the Respondent has given assurances that he does not want to or intend to
this practice in view of the findings of the Tribunal.”
However, the Respondent did not acknowledge in his evidence before the Tribunal
until prompted by a question from the Complainant,
that he was still involved in
procedures involving Naltrexone implants. It appears that his view at that
stage was that if he was
not involved in providing ROD to patients, then he does
not present a risk to the public. This demonstrated that he had not gained
complete understanding of the Tribunal’s findings, and he does not accept
full responsibility for his conduct.
his affidavit sworn 23 March 2012, the respondent swore that he had prepared
“Medico Legal Reports”.
Goudkamp said in his statement of 8 March 2012 that the Respondent had prepared
“more than 80 reports”
since December 2001. In his oral
evidence in July 2012 the Respondent several times testified he has done
“over 1000 medico/legal reports”.
The Tribunal notes the Respondent has no medical qualifications and there is
no corroboration of the volume of his report writing
for legal proceedings other
than by Mr Goudkamp.
EVIDENCE IN RESPONDENTS CASE
The respondent relied on a considerable volume of statements and oral
evidence by psychologist and others as to his skills practices
professionalism. There were two problems with that evidence:
of it was irrelevant to the particular allegations made in the complaint,
because it concerned other conduct at other times and
in relation to other
patients; and
some of it was
hearsay evidence rather than from direct observation.
FACTUAL FINDINGS AND REASONS - PATIENT A
is common ground that at all relevant times the Respondent was a registered
psychologist and was the Clinical Director, Addiction
Treatment and Psychology
Services, of the Psych ‘n’ Soul Clinic in Ultimo.
is also common ground that Patient A underwent ROD at the clinic on 16 May 2007.
The Respondent was both the authorising officer
for the clinic’s ROD
protocol as well as the assessing psychologist for Patient A.
1.1 of the complaint is:
The practitioner failed to
adequately assess Patient A's suitability for ROD:
(a) by failing to take sufficient account of Patient A's pre-existing
conditions and other relevant factors including his:
(i) drug use behaviours (both historical and recent)
(ii) current depressive disorder
(iii) level of anxiety
(iv) level of stress
(v) history of psychosis
(vi) level of social stability
(vii) previous attempts at withdrawal
(b) by failing to utilise DSM IV or otherwise ensure that a full
psychological and/or psychiatric assessment of Patient A was undertaken
(i) results on the DASS21 questionnaire
(ii) current depressive disorder
(iii) history of hallucinations
(iv) history of suicidal thoughts
patient was 29. At the assessment interview he told the Respondent he had used
cannabis daily for 8 years from age 18, but no
longer used it. He said he had
been using heroin for 10 years and his current use was 0.2 grams per day, which
was costing him about
$150 per day. He had been on 65mg of methadone daily for
3.5 years until about 18 months previously but was not currently. He
using 28 mg per day of other opiates (buprenorphine) for the last 6 months. He
had used hallucinogens when he was 19, but
not now. He used amphetamines
daily for 4 years but not for about 6 years. He had been a binge user of
alcohol when he was “young”
but now drank only
”. He said he had used cocaine “on and off
since he was 19, but was not still using it. He said his nicotine consumption
was currently from 20 cigarettes per day.
said he had 4 detoxification attempts including 3 residential programmes and 4
months on buprenorphine, which resulted in 3 months
clean before he used
” for 4 years. His last residential programme had
been for 3 weeks in 2006.
the questionnaire the Respondent recorded that the patient had had a depressive
disorder since his parents separated when he was
15. He recorded that he had
been suffering the depressive disorder in the last 30 days and that he had been
taking anti depressant
medication for 2 months. He also recorded that the
patient had suffered anxiety disorder and suicidal thoughts. The Respondent
recorded that both were associated with drug use and did not occur in the last
30 days. He did not record any reasons as to why
he attributed these problems
to drug use rather than any other cause. He did not in the proceedings provide
any convincing justification
for such attribution.
is noted that the typed Psychosocial Assessment Summary of the Respondent is
misleading in that separation of the patient’s
parents appears linked to
him suffering depression “
in the last 30 days
”, as if the
separation were recent. It is also misleading in that it appears from the
questionnaire that the patient had been
suffering a depressive disorder since
age 15 (i.e. about 14 years) but this is not stated in the Summary document.
results of the DASS 21 Questionnaire regarding depression, anxiety and stress
being experienced by the patient should have been
of serious concern. In
addition the Respondent knew the patient was suffering from a depressive
disorder and had had a problem with
depression for about 14 years. He knew the
patient had been taking anti-depressants for the last 2 months.
knew that the patient had reported suffering drug induced hallucinations in the
past. He also knew that the patient had suffered
suicidal thoughts since age
19. He interpreted these as “drug related”. He did not justify why
that causal explanation
applied rather than any other or others.
patient told him that the depression commenced at age 15 when his parents
separated. The Respondent did not seek any objective
evidence on that issue
from the patient’s father, who attended on him on 2 May 2007 and 16 May
2007, or the patient’s
General Practitioner, whose details the patient
gave him in answering the questionnaire and to whom the Clinic wrote on 2 May
a letter signed by Dr Tan advising of the proposed ROD treatment of Patient
A and requesting the doctor to cease prescribing methadone
for him. The
Respondent did not consult the patient’s general practitioner at all. He
did not invite him to impart any information
or any opinion.
the Respondent had required the patient to sign an authority to permit him to
consult with and obtain documentation from
the patient’s parents, General
Practitioner, and his methadone prescriber, the Respondent did not consult with,
or obtain documents
from, any of them.
A had not married or lived in a de facto marriage and had no children. The
respondent in relation to Patient A’s social
stability ticked the
column of the questionnaire as describing the
patient’s relationship with each
of “mother”,
“father”. “siblings”
Respondent also recorded on the questionnaire that Patient A was at 2 May 2007
living “with friends” at a unit in
Bronte, NSW. The Respondent he
did not identify or consult any of Patient A’s flatmates. The Respondent
noted that the patient
had been there a year and prior to that he had lived with
his father. His father’s address given was in the ACT. He did
ascertain the names or whereabouts of the Patient A’s mother or siblings.
No explanation was obtained from the patient
or the father as to the reason for
the change of residence. Nor did he ascertain how long he had previously lived
with his father
or the reasons he had gone to live with his father.
Respondent did not seek information from Patient A’s father or anyone
other than the patient about his drug history, relationships
arrangements. He noted that the patient had been employed as a store manager
for 5 years. The evidence of his mother
his work has not been
good. Hasn’t been consistent throughout his working life.....he
didn’t have continual work for many
years. And he worked at different
things. He might last 3 or 4 weeks, he might last 3 or 4 months, he might last
.” She said his life was in turmoil. His father gave evidence
of Patient A using methamphetamine, particularly from when he
was 20 to 24 and
delusional and paranoid episodes of Patient A even in 2006. Patient A’s
father also testified that he had
taken the patient to a psychiatrist, Dr
Apathy, before approaching the Clinic because of the patient suffering delusions
and paranoia
after he stopped using methamphetamine.
A’s mother’s evidence in these proceedings is that Patient A was
difficult to manage as a child and had difficulty
at school. His parents
separated when he was about 8. From about age 12 he was smoking and sneaking
out of his bedroom window at
night. He was using drugs from about 15 and
graduated to heroin at 20 or 21. (The patient said 19.) The mother’s
is that while the patient used heroin, he stole from each of his
parents, attempted to break and enter a bakery and “
got into trouble
with the police
Respondent made no attempt to explore with any of the patient’s parents,
siblings, friends or others their knowledge of
the patient’s drug use
history, his recent use of stimulants, his problems with depression, anxiety and
stress, his history
of psychosis, his previous attempts at withdrawal, the
history of his relationships and his level of social stability.
information obtained by the Respondent from the patient regarding his 4 prior
detoxification attempts was cursory. It was:
in about 1997
with Buprenorphine followed by 3 months clean and then 4 years of using
amphetamines;
2003 outpatient
programme for 2 months and stated the provider;
2003 outpatient
programme for 2 weeks and stated the provider; and
2006 outpatient
programme for 3 weeks and stated the provider.
Respondent did not record or obtain any further details of the detoxification
attempts including the patient’s explanation
of the effects and apparent
failure of last 3 attempts. He did not consult any health professional
involved in any of those attempts
or seek access to any health records of the
2 May 2007 the Respondent administered the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale.
Even with his current antidepressant medication, the
patient’s score of
19/35 indicated moderate depression, but was at the top of that range ((13-19)
and just below a “
” score (20 – 26). His anxiety
score was in the “
extremely severe range
” indicating his
likely symptoms were “
apprehensive and panicky, shaky, aware of dryness
in the mouth, breathing difficulties, pounding of the heart, sweatiness of the
and worried about performance and possible loss of control”.
His stress score was in the moderate range indicating his likely symptoms
“over arousal and tense, unable to relax, easily upset,
irritable, easily startled, fidgety and intolerant of interruption or
is no record in the file of the Clinic of the Respondent having conducted any
assessment under DSM IV of Patient A. Nor is
there any other record of such an
assessment being done or of a psychiatric assessment being obtained or carried
out. Nor is there
any record of purported results of such an assessment. In
para 28 of his affidavit the Respondent gave sworn evidence that “
IV was fully utilised
his evidence, the Respondent purported that he is so familiar with DSM IV that
he in effect does an assessment using DSM IV criteria
in his head. The Tribunal
does not accept the evidence that he applied the DSM IV.
his affidavit the Respondent swore, “
There was no need to have patient
A referred for a psychiatric examination as it is conceded that the Respondent
had the requisite
skills to do that
.” He also testified in cross
examination (see T235-236) that he can give the same level of assessment as a
psychiatrist.
Given his lack of medical or psychiatric training and his failure
to keep adequate records in relation to his assessments of these
2 patients, the
Tribunal does not accept that opinion.
“Psychosocial Assessment Summary”
Respondent prepared from the questionnaire was not revised when the urine drug
screen revealed that the patient, contrary
to the drug history he had given the
Respondent, was also using stimulants (Methamphetamine). The patient had
reported prior stimulant
addiction for 4 years to age 23. He had admitted
continuing use of cocaine (another stimulant) “on and off” since he
was 19, but not currently. He falsely had said he was not using amphetamines
and had not used them for about 6 years. There was
ample evidence that the
patient had a dependency on amphetamines.
evidence is that when the patient completed the questionnaire he was using
heroin, morphine and stimulants (Methamphetamine).
Health Rapid Detoxification from Opioids Guidelines provide on the issue of
suitability for ROD that a DSM IV criteria check list
should be used and in
relation to alleged Methadone treatment, self-report should be confirmed from
the Pharmaceutical Services Branch
of the NSW Department of Health. It provides
that the patient should not be dependent upon, intoxicated by, or withdrawing
Amphetamines. It provides that the patient should have a suitable social
environment and in particular, not be homeless. It also
states that commonly
cited exclusion criteria in the research include dependence on stimulants and
serious psychiatric or mental
on stimulants is said by the Guidelines to be a contra-indication to ROD, and a
history of treatment for depression or
unstable social circumstances is a
relative contra-indication to ROD. In cross examination the Respondent
conceded that when the
pathology results detected Methamphetamine the prudent
course of action would be to determine what level of such drug was present
whether the patient was dependent upon, intoxicated by or withdrawing from
amphetamines. He said he did this, but then claimed
it was done by asking the
patient, who said he was an intermittent user. But the clinic records do not
include any record of such
a conversation and the
“Psychosocial
Assessment Summary”
made no reference to Methamphetamine or the
pathology result. Then he said it wouldn’t have helped to have done a
test. When it was put to him that finding out the level of drug would
go to the question of dependence, intoxication or withdrawal,
he avoided the
question. Later he denied that it would have been useful to check the level of
amphetamines in Patient A’s
system. Later he conceded that he could have
asked Patient A to come back on a later date.
Notwithstanding
the patient’s results on the DASS questionnaire, his current depressive
disorder, his history of hallucinations
and suicidal thoughts, the Respondent
failed to carry out or obtain in assessing patent A’s suitability for ROD
a full psychological
and/or psychiatric assessment of Patient A or to utilise
the DSM IV.
1.2 of the complaint is:
The practitioner's conduct as set
out in 1.1 above breached General Principle I and Section A of the
Psychological Society Code of Ethics 2003 (APS Code of Ethics 2003),
2003 version of the Australian Psychological Society Code of Ethics applied at
that time. General Principle 1 of the Code of
Ethics provided that members
remain personally responsible for the professional decisions they make and
particularly:
a) Members are expected to be cognizant of
the reasonably foreseeable consequences of actions and to endeavour to ensure
services are used appropriately; and
Members shall have ultimate regard for the highest standards of their
profession.”
requirements of Section A of the Code, which is headed “Psychological
Assessment Procedures” include:
“1 Members must
ensure that assessment procedures are chosen, administered and interpreted
appropriately and accurately.
6 Members must not compromise the effective use of psychological tests
The Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Respondent did not adequately
assess Patient A’s suitability for ROD and that
conduct breached each of
paras (a) and (b) of General Principle 1 and paras 1 & 6 of Section A of
the Australian Psychological
Society APS Code of Ethics, 2003.
2.1 & 2.2 of the complaint are:
2.1 The practitioner
developed a treatment plan for Patient A which included ROD treatment despite
recording Patient A as having:
(a) a current dependence on stimulants (contraindication)
(b) a history of psychosis (contraindication)
(c) a history of depression (relative contraindication)
2.2 By his conduct as set out in 2.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines on Rapid
Detoxification from Opioids (NSW Health Guidelines)
which specify that ROD
is suitable for a patient with no contraindications
(b) failed to be cognisant of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of
his actions and to ensure that the treatment plan was appropriate
in breach of
General Principle I of the
APS Code of Ethics 2003.
Respondent admits in document 2 in the list of evidence, and other evidence also
establishes, that he developed a treatment plan
for Patient A which included ROD
and he did that having recorded that the patient had:
(a) a current
dependence on stimulants (contraindication);
(b) a history of psychosis
(contraindication); and
(c) a history of depression (relative
contraindication).
patient was currently being medicated for depression and still suffering from a
high level of moderate depression despite the
medication.
the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD, ROD is considered appropriate only for opioid
dependant patients who have no contra-indications.
A current dependence on
stimulants is a contra-indication, as is a history of psychosis (hallucinations)
and a history of treatment
for depression is a relative contraindication. The
evidence establishes that the practitioner developed a Treatment Plan despite
those contra-indications and thereby failed to comply with the NSW Health
Guidelines for ROD.
addition, by this conduct, he breached General Principle 1 of the APS Code of
Ethics 2003 by not being cognizant of the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of
his actions and not ensuring that his services were used appropriately. He did
not have ultimate regard
for the highest standards of the profession. He failed
to ensure that the Treatment Plan was appropriate and thereby failed to be
cognizant of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of his actions. He failed
to take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring
to Patient A.
3.1 & 3.2 of the complaint are:
3.1 The practitioner
failed to adequately discuss the treatment plan with Patient A and/or failed to
record such discussions. In
particular, the practitioner failed to adequately
discuss and/or record:
(a) a full explanation of the nature of the treatment and what is to be
(b) the potential risks and benefits of the treatment
3.2 By his conduct as set out in 3.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) breached General Principle I of the
APS Code of Ethics
The obligation is about obtaining informed consent from the patient. The
Respondent and his staff have the obligation to provide
the patient with the
information necessary. It is the Respondent and his staff, not the patient,
that have the knowledge necessary
to know what information needs to be given to
the patient to provide “
a full explanation of the nature of the
treatment and what is to be expected
“the potential
risks and benefits of the treatment”
obligation of the Respondent to have such discussions with the client in seeking
the patient’s consent to the treatment
is not discharged by having the
patient sign a Treatment Agreement which includes, as this one does, purported
acknowledgements by
the patient and/or a support person that the patient had a
full explanation of the nature of the treatment and what is to be expected
the potential benefits and risks of the treatment explained to him in detail.
The patient is not a person who would know those
question is whether such explanations were actually given. The documents do not
make such disclosure. The Respondent’s
diary records that the Patient and
his father attended on the Respondent on 2 May 2007. But it does not confirm
that any explanations
were given or for how long or what was done. Similarly,
the diary shows that the patient attended on 14 May 2007 and signed the
Treatment Agreement. But it does not record that any explanations were given to
him or how long the attendance took.
his affidavit at page 19 item 3.1(b) the Respondent alleged that on 2 May 2007
All the risks and benefits were thoroughly spoken about and documented
in the Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent....
document does not contain an adequate discussion of all the potential risks and
benefits. It is fairly limited
in that regard. If, as he alleges, his
explanations were limited to the risks and benefits raised in the agreement,
then that would
not be adequate to ensure the patient was sufficiently informed
to give a valid consent.
Respondent alleged in his oral evidence and his affidavit that he in fact made
full disclosure of those matters in the interview(s)
with each prospective ROD
patient. The Respondent’s evidence in his affidavit and orally assuring
us that the discussions
complied with the requirements is in general terms only
and his case does not provide evidence of what was said, except that he read
Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent aloud to the patient.
is a very serious responsibility because without the patient being adequately
informed, the consent to the procedure is not informed
and therefore not real.
Presumably the Respondent, and/or staff of the Clinic, might then be liable in a
claim for damages for assault
as well as a possible claim in negligence. The
Tribunal accepts that the Respondent may have, as he alleges, read the whole of
treatment agreement to the patient before it was signed. But the contents
of the agreement do not provide a full explanation of
the nature of the
treatment, what is to be expected and the potential risks and benefits of the
is a one page document headed
“Consent for Slow Release
Naltrexone”
signed by the patient that makes some of the required
disclosures, but there is no document or documents of the Clinic in evidence
that make all the disclosures under these requirements. The evidence does not
include any record by the clinic of anyone having provided
such explanations in
writing or otherwise.
his affidavit the Respondent states:
A very thorough explanation
of the treatment was provided to both Patient A and his father. They were given
copies of the Treatment
Agreement and Informed Consent to take home and discuss
and Patient A was then taken through the Treatment Agreement and Informed
Consent reading it aloud and he signed it and it was witnessed by his
evidence is misleading. The father did not sign the Agreement as a witness, but
as a support person, as he was not present when
Patient A signed the Agreement
on 14 May 2007. He signed the document 2 days later on 16 May 2007.
Tribunal does not accept that if the Respondent took the trouble to have such
important and detailed discussions with the patient,
he would not have recorded
that he did so. The Tribunal believes that he did have some discussions with
the patient about the treatment,
what could be expected and the risks and
benefits, but, consistent with the Tribunal’s findings about other
conduct falling
short of what professionalism required, the Tribunal is
comfortably satisfied that he did not provide the patient with sufficient
explanation of the treatment, what could be expected and the potential risks and
benefits to ensure the patient’s consent was,
as regards these matters, an
informed consent.
failure of the Respondent to provide an adequate explanation of the nature of
the treatment and what was to be expected and an
explanation of the potential
risks and benefits of the treatment was in breach of General Principle 1 of the
APS Code of Ethics,
page 3 of the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD one of the 4 objectives of the
guidelines is said to be “
to obtain informed consent to
”. At page 4 in the Executive Summary of the guidelines it
“practitioners offering this treatment have an obligation to
fully and accurately inform patients of:
The potential
risks and benefits of the procedure;
Alternative
treatment approaches; and
patients are able to give informed consent to the treatment.”
Tribunal finds that the failure of the Respondent to properly inform the patient
also breached the requirements of the NSW Health
Guidelines for ROD.
4.1 and 4.2 of the complaint are:
4.1 The practitioner
failed to adequately discuss alternative treatment options with Patient A and/or
failed to record such discussions.
In particular, the practitioner failed to
adequately discuss and/or record discussions regarding:
(a) gradual buprenorphine reduction
(b) inpatient or residential options
4.2 By his conduct as set out in 4.1 above, the practitioner failed to
comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines.
the Treatment Agreement, particularly Paragraph 2, purported to be an
acknowledgement by the patient that alternative treatments
had been discussed.
The issue is whether such discussions actually occurred. The Respondent says he
read out the Treatment Agreement
to the patient. The content of the agreement
would not satisfy the need to adequately discuss with Patient A the
possibilities and
implications of alternatives such as gradual methadone
reduction, transfer to buprenorphine and cessation or inpatient or residential
options. There is no record in the clinic records of any discussion by anyone
from the Clinic with the patient of the options of
gradual buprenorphine or
morphine reduction or in-patient or residential options.
the provisions of the Standard Treatment Agreement Form and the
Respondent’s claims that he did in fact have such discussions
patient, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that he did not “
and accurately inform”
Patient A of other treatment options. That
omission is consistent with other conduct of the Respondent that was below the
required to protect the patient. By that omission the Respondent failed
to comply with the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD.
5.1 of the complaint is:
The treatment plan formulated by
the practitioner did not comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
the plan did not provide for intensive follow up care, including daily review of
Patient A for three days and at weekly intervals
thereafter.
page 23 of the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD, it is stated that
“vigorous attempts to follow up patients are indicated after rapid
detoxification. Generally patients should be seen daily
for 3 days, then at
weekly intervals”
Treatment Agreement prepared by the Respondent and executed by the patient and
the Respondent sets out the inclusions for the
fee of $5,900.00. It does not
include intensive follow-up care. It does not include daily review for 3 days
after treatment or
at weekly intervals thereafter. The Treatment Plan does not
comply with the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD.
6.1 and 6.2 of the complaint allege:
6.1 The practitioner
co-signed, along with Patient A, the 'Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent'
form that required Patient A
abstained from opiates” for the
prescribed period. (usually 12 hours)”
NSW Health Guidelines
specifying that patients dependent
on heroin need to complete 48 hours opiate-free before undergoing rapid
detoxification, and
(b) the Clinic's own
Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy and procedure
requiring patients to be opiate free for 24 hours before undergoing
rapid detoxification
6.2 By his conduct as set out in 6.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) failed to comply with the Clinic's
Rapid Opiate Detoxification
Policy and Procedure Manual
(c) failed to be cognisant of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of
his actions and to ensure that the provision of ROD treatment
services to
Patient A was appropriate in the circumstances, in breach of General Principle I
APS Code of Ethics 2003
Respondent by Document 2 in the list of evidence set out earlier in these
reasons admitted the contents of para 6.1. Those facts
are also established by
the records of the Clinic.
is clear that by that conduct, the Respondent failed to comply with the NSW
Health Guidelines and the Clinic’s Rapid Opiate
Detoxification Policy and
Procedures Manual. In addition, that conduct was a breach of General Principle
1 of the APS Code of Ethics
2003 in that he did not have ultimate regard for the
highest standards of the profession and he was not cognizant of the reasonably
foreseeable adverse consequences of such action on Patient A and did not
endeavour to ensure that his services were used appropriately.
7.1 of the complaint alleges:
The practitioner failed to
adequately communicate with other practitioners who were involved in the
treatment of Patient A when such
communication was indicated. In particular, the
practitioner failed to adequately communicate with Patient A's:
(a) General Practitioner
(b) buprenorphine prescriber, if different to (a),
(c) anti-depressant prescriber, if different to (a) and/or (b).
evidence establishes that the Practitioner did not make any effort to consult
any other health practitioners involved in the treatment
of Patient A when such
communication was likely to have provided objective information to assist him in
deciding whether the patient
was suitable for ROD treatment. In particular, the
evidence establishes that he made no attempt to seek information from the
general practitioner (and methadone prescriber), the
patient’s Buprenorphine prescriber, if different to the general
practitioner,
and the Patient’s anti-depressant prescriber, if different
to the general practitioner and methadone prescriber.
his evidence the Respondent seemed not to recognise any purpose in communicating
with any such people for either patient,
except for the purpose of notifying a
buprenorphine or methadone prescriber of the proposed naltrexone treatment and
requesting that
the doctor cease prescribing buprenorphine or methadone.
it would be clearly in the patient’s interests to have input from such
person or the person’s records about the
patient, particularly factors
going to their suitability for ROD, he did not ask. Even in his affidavit of
23 March 2012, he still
had not acknowledged the importance of such professional
consultation. He offered no response to para 7.1 of the complaints in
to Patient A, other than his denial in document (2).
his submissions of 30 August 2012 the Respondent claimed that the privacy
considerations “
and autonomy
” were the reason he did not
consult persons other than the patient. However, the Respondent had the patient
sign at the first
appointment an
“Authority to Release
Information
” which amongst other things authorised the Clinic
to exchange documentation and speak with”
his parents
“concerning my addiction and treatment” and his GP and/or methadone
prescribing doctor/clinic
“concerning my addiction and treatment, as
necessary”.
7.1 of the complaint is established.
8.1 of the complaint is:
The practitioner failed to make
and maintain adequate clinical records in relation to Patient A, including a
comprehensive record
of the counselling session on 2 May 2007, a full substance
use history and comprehensive psychosocial and psychological assessment.
comprehensive psychosocial and psychological
assessment”.
What was recorded included the DASS 21 and Profile Sheet,
the questionnaire administered to the patient, and the “
Psychosocial
Assessment Summary”
of a little over 2 pages almost entirely comprises
recorded responses to the questionnaire administered to Patient A.
cross examination about Patient A the Respondent agreed that in assessing
Patient A he made continual observations of his speech
patterns, behaviour,
presentation and speech content. He conceded that he made no record of any of
Respondent made no records in relation to any counselling sessions for Patient
A. One might have thought that a counselling session
of any length would have
elicited some relevant and important information to supplement, qualify, support
or refute information collected
in the questionnaire. But there is no evidence
that any information obtained from counselling was used in the
“Assessment Summary
” or was considered in relation to the
Respondent’s recommendation of treatment by ROD.
APS Guidelines on Record Keeping (document 24) provide that the most important
reason for records is “
service to and benefit of
” the patient
(Para 1.2). Para 6.6 requires “
Members should make every effort to
maintain accurate, current, and complete records of psychological services.
There should be sufficient
detail to permit planning for continuity in the
delivery of psychological services in the event that another psychologist takes
that responsibility, including in the event of death, disability, or
retirement. In addition, members need to maintain records in
sufficient detail
to allow for review of psychological service delivery.”
evidence clearly establishes that the clinical records, particularly in relation
to the services the Respondent personally provided,
were far short of
”. In cross-examination on 4 July 2012 the
Respondent admitted that his clinical records were inadequate.
8.1 is established.
FACTUAL FINDINGS AND REASONS - PATIENT B
is common ground that on 7 and 8 March 2008 Patient B underwent Rapid Opiate
Detoxification at the Clinic. The Respondent was
both the Authorising Officer
for the Clinic’s ROD protocol as well as Patient B’s assessing
psychologist.
1.1 & 1.2 of the complaint concerning Patient B
1.1 The practitioner failed to adequately assess
Patient B's suitability for ROD:
(a) by failing to take sufficient account of Patient B's pre-existing
conditions and other relevant factors including his:
(i) drug use behaviours (both historical and recent)
(ii) history of depression
(iii) history of anxiety disorder
(iv) level of social stability
(b) by failing to utilise DSM IV or otherwise ensure that a full
psychological and/or psychiatric assessment of Patient B was undertaken
(i) history of depression
(ii) history of anxiety disorder
(iii) history of suicidal thoughts
1.2 By his conduct as set out in 1.1 above, the practitioner failed to
act with the care and skill expected of a competent psychologist,
in breach of
Standard B.3.(a) of the
Australian Psychological Society Code of Ethics 2007
(APS Code of Ethics 2007).
Respondent denied both these allegations.
Respondent recorded on 20 February 2008 in the patient interview that the
patient had not used heroin, but had been taking methadone
since he was 44 (more
than 3 years) and his current use was 65mg per day. Patient B had been using
alcohol from when he was 14.
He said he used cannabis from when he was 16, and
his most frequent use was in his 20’s but he was not using it currently.
For the period of about 10 years between his 30’s and his 40’s, he
was binge drinking. He reported that he was no longer
using alcohol. He
reported using methamphetamines once at age 16 and using cannabis from when he
was 16 until in his 20’s.
He reported using amphetamines when he was 17.
He said he had been smoking since he was 43 and was smoking 7-10 cigarettes a
patient denied that he was taking any other opioids. He denied any use of
sedatives, tranquilisers, barbiturates or cocaine.
an extra sheet attached to the questionnaire the Respondent recorded:
“2004 stressed with work pressure and isolated from wife and family.
Went to doctor. Trouble with anti depressants. Taking
codeine every 2 days
– Put on methadone.”
Codeine is derived from morphine.
Apparently the patient entered the methadone programme because of an opioid
addiction from using
codeine. However, neither the use of codeine nor Morphine
was included in the section of the form dealing with the patient’s
history. Nor was either mentioned in the “
Psychosocial Assessment
Respondent recorded in the interview that the patient was suffering a depressive
disorder for a year from when he was 46. He
was experiencing anxiety and had
thought of suicide. He had mental health treatment for it. The patient also
told him that the depression
symptoms first appeared when he was 32 years of
age. The Respondent recorded that the depressive illness had not occurred in
last 30 days. The Respondent also recorded that the patient had suffered an
anxiety disorder and had thought of suicide, but neither
of these had occurred
in the last 30 days.
“Psychosocial Assessment Summary
” prepared by the
Respondent and distributed to the medical practitioner and other staff of the
Clinic regarding this patient
did not include any reference to the use of
codeine but stated that the patient’s current methadone use as 65 mg per
It did not disclose that he was using any drug other than methadone.
records of the clinic do not disclose that the Respondent used any test or other
diagnostic tool in relation to issues of depression,
anxiety or stress of
Patient B. We are comfortably satisfied that he did not.
the initial consultation the Respondent recommended in the questionnaire form
that Patient B undergo ROD. The questionnaire
was complete on 20 February 2008.
It includes a recommendation for ROD on Friday 7 March by Naltrexone tablets to
be administered
orally. The first dose was for one month. On 22 February Dr
Daood, of the Clinic, prescribed MS Contin for Patient B to take in
preparation
for the ROD.
Tan saw Patient B on 29 February. He took samples of blood and urine for
pathology tests and also conducted an ECG and sent that
to a physician for a
pathology results showed that the Patient B was using Methadone and also
Morphine and the ECG report showed sinus rhythm within
normal limits. (It is not
clear whether the morphine detected was from codeine or the MS Contin or both.)
Respondent’s “
Psychosocial Assessment Summary
than a page. It did not disclose that the Patient B was or had been using
answer to the questionnaire the Respondent recorded that the Patient B had first
suffered depression at age 32, about 16 years
ago and been suffering from a
depressive disorder for a year for which he had been having treatment by a
psychologist. The Respondent
recorded in a sheet attached to the questionnaire
that the patient was clinically depressed. He had spent the last year in
counselling
for his depression. For the first 6 months he took anti-depressants
but stopped taking them. At the time of the interview he was
psychological medication and had not experienced symptoms in the last 30 days.
Counselling with the psychologist was continuing.
Patient B did not have a support person with him at the interview on 20 February
2008, nor did he introduce any support person
to the Respondent or anyone at the
Clinic. The Respondent recorded in answers to the questionnaire:
“Support – aunt in Sydney
psychologist in Canberra.”
In the questionnaire
form under “
support person
” the Respondent also inserted the
name, address and telephone numbers of the wife of Patient B, from whom Patient
B was separated.
He also recorded the name of the aunt and her telephone
the questionnaire the Respondent recorded that the Patient B had been separated
from his wife after being married for 14 years.
He did not ascertain how long
Patient B had been separated. The Patient B said that he was a journalist and
had been working in
that area for 15 years. He had a degree in Political
Science but his employment was only part time with irregular hours. It appears
that he may have been a free-lance journalist.
Respondent did not ascertain where Patient B worked and his employer.
Respondent noted that the patient had lived alone for the last year. He had 2
children, 1 sister and 3 brothers. He reported
his mother died 2 years before.
He reported a good relationship with his father, siblings, estranged wife,
children, close friends
and his aunt. He also reported that his brother had
been using opiates and his father had a problem with violent behaviour and had
been treated for that.
the typed “
Psychosocial Assessment Summary
” the respondent
said [Patient B’s] father was violent with him whilst growing up but they
now have a good relationship.”
Patient B’s estranged wife was
living in the Australian Capital Territory and the Patient B was residing about
half an hour
drive from his wife in New South Wales. The Respondent did not
record in the questionnaire or the Assessment Summary where the aunt
Psychosocial Assessment Summary
” prepared by the Respondent
and recommending ROD for the patient nominated the Patient B’s wife as
the “support
the Respondent and the Clinic had had no contact with her.
Respondent, in assessing the suitability of Patient B for ROD, did not consult
Patient B’s medical practitioner, his methadone
prescriber, any medical
records, his treating psychologist, his employer or any person at his place of
employment, his wife, his
aunt, either of his children or any of his siblings in
relation to the patient’s alleged drug use history, his history of
depression,
his anxiety, or his level of social stability. He relied solely on
what Patient B told him.
the form of
“Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent
Respondent prepared and he and the patient signed the day before the ROD
treatment, the Respondent included the name and
Bondi Junction address of the
Patient B’s aunt as his nominated support person, although on the evidence
she had never agreed
to undertake that role, the Respondent and his Clinic had
had no contact with her and she did not sign or even see the form.
is no record in the file of the Clinic of the Respondent having conducted any
assessment under DSM IV of Patient B. Nor is
there any other record of such an
assessment being done or of a psychiatric assessment being obtained or carried
out. Nor is there
any record of purported results of such an assessment.
his evidence, the Respondent purported that he is so familiar with DSM IV that
he in effect does an assessment under that tool
in his head. The Tribunal does
not accept that evidence.
Respondent did not carry out any psychological tests and did not utilise DSM IV.
He did not ensure that a full psychological and/or
psychiatric assessment of
Patient B was undertaken, notwithstanding that Patient B had a history of
depression, a history of anxiety,
and a history of suicidal thoughts.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the allegations in Para. 1.1 of the
Complaint in relation to Patient B have been established.
Tribunal is also satisfied that by the conduct described above the Practitioner
failed to act with the care and skill expected
of a competent psychologist in
breach of Standard B.3.(a) of the Australian Psychological Society Code of
Ethics 2007 (“APS
Code of Ethics 2007”), which
“Psychologists provide psychological services in
a responsible manner. Having regard to the nature of the psychological services
they are providing, psychologists:
(a) act with care and skill expected of a competent psychologist;
failing to take adequate steps to assess the suitability of Patient B for ROD,
the Respondent failed to act with the skill and
care expected of a competent
psychologist.
2.1 and 2.2 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B
2.1 The practitioner developed a treatment plan for
Patient B which included ROD treatment despite recording Patient A as having:
(a) a history of depression (relative contraindication)
2.2 By his conduct as set out in 2.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines an Rapid
Detoxification from Opioids (NSW Health Guidelines)
which specify that ROD
is suitable for a patient with no contraindications
(b) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring to Patient
B, in breach of Standard B.3.(c) of the
APS Code of Ethics 2007.
Tribunal is also satisfied that by the conduct described above the Practitioner
failed to act with the care and skill expected
of a competent psychologist in
breach of Standard B.3.(c) of the Australian Psychological Society Code of
Ethics 2007 (“APS
Code of Ethics 2007”), which
“Psychologists provide psychological services in
a responsible manner. Having regard to the nature of the psychological services
they are providing, psychologists:
......................................
(c) take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring as a result of their
developing a treatment plan for Patient B that included ROD despite Patient B
having a history of depression, the Respondent failed
to take reasonable steps
to prevent harm occurring to Patient B.
Tribunal has set out above in relation to Patient A the relevant provisions of
the NSW Health Guidelines on ROD. His conduct
also breached the requirements of
the NSW Health Guidelines which specify that ROD is suitable for patients with
no contra-indications
and that a history of depression is a contra-indication.
3.1 and 3.2 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B state:
3.1 The practitioner failed to adequately discuss the
treatment plan with Patient B and/or failed to record such discussions. In
particular, the practitioner failed to adequately discuss and/or record:
(a) a full explanation of the nature of the treatment and what is to be
(b) the potential risks and benefits of the treatment
3.2 By his conduct as set out in 3.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) breached Standard A.3.3.(a) and (b) of the APS
Code of Ethics
The obligation is about ensuring any consent of the patient is properly
informed. The Respondent and his staff have the obligation
to provide the
patient with the information necessary. It is the Respondent and his staff, not
the patient, that have the knowledge
necessary to know what information needs to
be given to the patient to provide “a full explanation of the nature of
the treatment
and what is to be expected” and “the potential risks
and benefits of the treatment”.
obligation of the Respondent to have such discussions with the patient in
seeking consent to the treatment is not discharged by
having the patient sign a
Treatment Agreement which includes, as this one does, purported acknowledgements
by Patient B that he had
a full explanation of the nature of the treatment, what
is to be expected and the potential benefits and risks of the treatment
to him in detail. Patient B is not a person who would know those
things. The limited disclosures in the Treatment Agreement do not
constitute or
“full explanation of the nature of the treatment and what is
to be expected”
or description of
“the potential risks and
benefits of the treatment”.
question is whether such explanations were actually given. The
Respondent’s diary records that Patient B attended the Clinic
February, 22 February 2008 and 6 March 2008, before the ROD on 7/8 March 2008.
None of the diary notes indicate that such
discussions occurred. The notes of
the counselling on 22 February 2008 and discussions on 6 March 2008 do not
mention any such discussions.
They do not confirm that any explanations were
given or the duration of the appointment or what was done.
Respondent alleged in his oral evidence that he in fact made full disclosure of
those matters in the interview(s) with each prospective
ROD patient. It is a
very serious responsibility because without the patient being adequately
informed, the consent to the procedure
is not informed and therefore not real.
Presumably the Respondent could then be liable in a claim for damages for
assault as well
as a possible claim in negligence. The Tribunal accepts that
the Respondent may have, as he alleges, read the whole of the treatment
agreement to the patient before it was signed. But the contents of the
agreement do not provide a full explanation of the nature
of the treatment, what
is to be expected and the potential risks and benefits of the treatment.
is no document or documents of the Clinic in evidence that purports to the
required disclosures. The evidence does not include
any record by the clinic of
anyone having provided such explanations in writing or otherwise. The Tribunal
does not accept that
if the Respondent took the trouble to have such important
discussions with the patient, he would not have recorded that he did so.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that he did not have those discussions with
failure of the Respondent to provide a full explanation of the nature of the
treatment and what was to be expected and a full
explanation of the potential
risks and benefits of the treatment was in breach of General Principle 1 of the
APS Code of Ethics,
page 3 of the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD one of the 4 objectives of the
guidelines is said to be “
to obtain informed consent to
”. At page 4 in the Executive Summary of the guidelines it
“practitioners offering this treatment have an obligation to
fully and accurately inform patients of:
The potential
risks and benefits of the procedure;
Alternative
treatment approaches;
patients are able to give informed consent to the treatment.”
find that that failure of the Respondent to properly inform the patient also
breached the requirements of the NSW Health Guidelines
4.1 and 4.2 of the complaints in relation to Patient B
4.1 The practitioner failed to adequately discuss
alternative treatment options with Patient B and/or failed to record such
discussions.
In particular, the practitioner failed to adequately discuss and/or
record discussions regarding:
(a) gradual methadone reduction
(b) transfer to buprenorphine and cessation
(c) inpatient or residential options
4.2 By his conduct as set out in 4.1 above, the practitioner failed to
comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines.
the Treatment Agreement, particularly Paragraph 2, purported to be an
acknowledgement by the patient that alternative treatments
had been discussed.
The issue is whether such discussions actually occurred. The Respondent says he
read out the Treatment Agreement
to the patient. The content of the agreement
would not satisfy the need to adequately discuss with Patient B the
possibilities and
implications of alternatives such as gradual methadone
reduction, transfer to buprenorphine and cessation or inpatient or residential
options. The Respondent says he had such discussions with Patient B. There is
no record in the Clinic records of any discussion
by anyone from the Clinic with
Patient B of the options of gradual buprenorphine or morphine reduction or
in-patient or residential
the provisions of the Standard Treatment Agreement Form and the
Respondent’s claims that he did in fact have such discussions
patient, we are comfortably satisfied that he did not “
accurately inform”
Patient B of other treatment options. By that
omission the Respondent failed to comply with the NSW Health guidelines for ROD.
5.1 of the complaint is:
The treatment plan formulated by
the practitioner did not comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
the plan did not provide for intensive follow up care, including daily review of
Patient B for three days and at weekly intervals
thereafter.
page 23 of the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD, it is stated that
“vigorous attempts to follow up patients are indicated after rapid
detoxification. Generally patients should be seen daily
for 3 days, then at
weekly intervals”
Treatment Agreement prepared by the Respondent and executed by the patient and
the Respondent sets out the inclusions for the
fee of $1,500.00. It does not
include intensive follow-up care. It does not include daily review for 3 days
after treatment or
at weekly intervals thereafter. The Treatment Plan does not
comply with the NSW Health Guidelines for ROD.
6.1 and 6.2 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B
6.1 The practitioner co-signed, along with Patient B,
the 'Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent' form that required Patient B
abstained from opiates for the prescribed period, (usually 12 hours)
NSW Health Guidelines
specifying that patients dependent
on heroin need to complete 48 hours opiate free before undergoing rapid
detoxification, and
(b) the Clinic's own
Rapid Opiate Detoxification Policy and Procedure
requiring patients to be opiate free for 24 hours before undergoing
rapid detoxification
6.2 By his conduct as set out in 6.1 above, the practitioner:
(a) failed to comply with the
NSW Health Guidelines
(b) failed to comply with the Clinic's
Rapid Opiate Detoxification
Policy and Procedure Manual
(c) failed to take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring to Patient
B, in breach of Standard B.3.(c) of the
Australian Psychological Society Code
of Ethics 2007.
Respondent by Document 2 in the list of evidence set out earlier in these
reasons admitted the contents of para 6.1. Those facts
are also established by
the records of the Clinic.
is clear that by that conduct, the Respondent failed to comply with the NSW
Health Guidelines and the Clinic’s Rapid Opiate
Detoxification Policy and
Procedure Manual.
Tribunal is also satisfied that by the conduct described above the Practitioner
failed to act with the care and skill expected
of a competent psychologist in
breach of Standard B.3.(c) of the Australian Psychological Society Code of
Ethics 2007 (“
APS Code of Ethics 2007
“Psychologists provide psychological services in
a responsible manner. Having regard to the nature of the psychological services
they are providing, psychologists:
......................................
(c) take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring as a result of their
7.1 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B states:
practitioner failed to adequately communicate with other practitioners who were
involved in the treatment of Patient B when such
communication was indicated. In
particular, the practitioner failed to adequately communicate with Patient
(a) General Practitioner
(b) methadone prescriber, if different to (a)
(c) treating psychologist
(d) anti-depressant prescriber, if different to the above
practitioners.
Respondent denies this allegation.
evidence establishes that the Practitioner did not make any effort to consult
any other health practitioners involved in the treatment
of Patient B when such
communication was likely to have provided objective information to assist him in
deciding whether Patient
B was suitable for ROD treatment. In particular, the
evidence establishes that he made no attempt to contact Patient B’s
practitioner, his Methadone prescriber, if different to the general
practitioner, his anti-depressant prescriber, if different to
the general
practitioner, and his treating psychologist.
his evidence the Respondent seemed not to recognise any purpose in communicating
with any such people for either patient,
except for the purpose of notifying a
Methadone prescriber of the proposed naltrexone treatment and requesting that
the doctor cease
prescribing methadone. He did not appear to recognise that it
would be in the patient’s interests to consult such persons
suitable for ROD.
appears to assume that he will himself know if the patient is not being frank or
being dishonest without assistance from any such
people. That is another aspect
of what appears to be his belief that he knows more about ROD than others. It
ignores the risk of
the patient withholding relevant information from him or
giving him false information, which is conduct which opiate addicts are
employ frequently.
his submissions of 30 August 2012 the Respondent claimed that the privacy
considerations
“and autonomy”
were the reason he did not
consult persons other than the patient. However, the Respondent had the patient
sign on or before he
wrote to the patient’s Methadone prescribing doctor,
Dr Lavachek, on 22 February 2008, an
“Authority to Release
Information”
which amongst other things authorised the Clinic
“to exchange documentation and speak with”
his wife and his
“concerning my addiction and treatment”
exchange documentation with and speak to my GP and/or Methadone prescribing
“concerning my addiction and treatment, as
necessary”.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that complaint 7.1 has been proved.
8.1 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B states:
practitioner failed to comply with the Clinic's
Rapid Opiate Detoxification
Policy and Procedure Manual
in not communicating with .................,
Patient B's nominated support persons.
Respondent in document (2) admits this allegation. His evidence admits that he
didn’t have any contact with either of Patient
B’s support persons,
when he should have. But more serious problem was that he knew that neither of
them had been contacted
by anyone from the clinic and neither of them was
suitable to provide the support needed by the patient.
knew that the Clinic Manual, that he wrote, required that the psychologist meet
with the support person and the patient together
“discuss the
program with both of them”
. But he did not comply with that
requirement which was clearly designed for the purpose of ensuring safety for
the patient.
8.1 was proved.
9.1 and 9.2 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B
9.1 Following Patient B's discharge from the Clinic,
the practitioner drove Patient B to a boarding house where he knew, or ought
reasonably to have known, that Patient B would not be adequately supported due
to the fact that the practitioner:
(a) had not made contact with any support person nominated by Patient
(b) had not ensured that the 'Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent
form was signed by a support person and that the 'Support
Person Compliance'
section of that form was initialled by that person
(c) was informed by email from Patient B on 28 February 2008 that
although he had an elderly aunt in Sydney he could not stay with
would be staying in a unit
"on my own"
9.2 By his conduct as set out in 9.1 above, the practitioner failed to
take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring to Patient
B, in breach of
Standard 8.3.(c) of the
APS Code of Ethics 2007.
contents of each of 9.1 and 9.2 were admitted by the Respondent at the hearing,
except for subparagraph (c) of paragraph 9.1.
However, for reasons set out
earlier in relation to the credit of the Respondent, the Tribunal finds
paragraph 9.1(c) has been established,
despite his denial.
Tribunal finds that the evidence has established the whole of paragraphs 9.1 and
9.2 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B.
10.1 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B states:
practitioner failed to make and maintain adequate clinical records in relation
to Patient B, including a full substance use history
and comprehensive
psychosocial and psychological assessment.
Respondent’s record of Patient B’s responses to the questionnaire,
which he told the tribunal were obtained from an
interview of 90 minutes to 2
hours, even with the additional page attached, was extremely limited. Most
questions were answered
by a tick to a box with no explanation or additional
detail or particulars. Other answers were only one word or few.
answer to the question of what the patient‘s primary reasons for seeking
the treatment were, one was “
methadone 65mg 1 year
ready to move on – health”.
He did not state that the
patient’s drugs of choice were opiates. He did not include in the
substance use history any mention
of the patient’s use of Codeine. In
providing details of a family member who had suffered from substance abuse he
bro – drugs – opiates
”. The only
information he provided about the patient’s father’s violent
behaviour (including towards the patient)
”. His typed “
Psychosocial Assessment
” was only 3 quarters of a page including the recommendation
for oral ROD. The section “Present and Previous Drug Use”
lines and didn’t state why he came to be prescribed methadone,
didn’t state that he had been on it for 3-4 years
and made no mention of
his codeine use. There was also no mention of the results of the pathology
results for current drug use,
as the document was not revised when the pathology
results were received.
his notes of his time with the patient on 22 February 2008 are less than 15
lines. His notes about his time with the patient
on 6 March 2008, when the
patient signed the Agreement and “
Informed Consent
reference to the documents or explanations to the client. Those notes mainly
concern the issue of a support person
for after the treatment.
his interviews of Patient B the Respondent would have observed his speech
patterns, behaviour, presentation, and speech content,
but he made no notes of
The evidence does not establish that any information that the Respondent
obtained regarding the patient from any counselling session
interaction, other than the appointment when the questionnaire was completed,
was used in preparation of the “
Psychosocial Assessment Summary”.
There was no record of a full substance use history. There was no record of
comprehensive
” psychosocial and psychological
assessment. The Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that no comprehensive
assessment was performed.
The records did not adequately record what was done.
B.2.1 of the APS Code of Ethics 2007 provides that psychologists must
make and keep adequate records
”. The Respondent’s
conduct described was in breach of that requirement.
11.1 and 11.2 of the Complaint in relation to Patient B
11.1 On 22 February 2008, prior to Patient B
undergoing ROD, the practitioner sent a letter to Dr Michael Lavacheck advising
Patient B no longer requires methadone dosing and requesting that he be
exited from the program.
11.2 By his conduct as set out in 11.1 above, the practitioner acted
outside the boundaries of his profession and thereby breached
Standard 8.1.2 of
APS Code of Ethics 2007.
document 2 of the list of evidence the Respondent admitted the allegations in
para 11.1 and denied para 11.2.
relation to Patient A the Clinic’s letter to his Methadone
prescriber/general practitioner advising that the patient was
to undertake ROD
treatment and that “
he will no longer require Methadone
”, was signed by Dr Donald Tan of the Clinic. A similar letter
sent by the Clinic to Patient B’s methadone prescriber
by the Respondent
on 22 February 2008 was signed by the Respondent, not a medical practitioner.
cross examination the Respondent denied it was “inappropriate” for
him to sign such a letter. He said,
“Probably as the clinical
director, an administrative letter, yes, indeed it was appropriate – in
fact, essential, that
we wrote to the prescriber to make sure that – and
it was not just me, it was other people.
” And when asked whether it
was appropriate for him as a person without medical qualifications to tell a
doctor to stop prescribing
medication for a patient, he thought it was. He
I was under instructions of the patient that I do so, and the
pharmaceutical branch of the clinic to do so.”
In further cross
examination he avoided questions and denied it was “
more than an
administrative letter
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that by that conduct the Practitioner acted
outside the boundaries of his profession. Ethical
Standard B.1.2 of the APS
Code of Ethics 2007 provides:
“Psychologists only provide
psychological services within the boundaries of their professional competence.
This includes, but
is not restricted to:
within the limits of their education, training, supervised experience and
appropriate professional experience;
their service on the established knowledge of the discipline and profession of
psychology;
to the Code and the Guidelines;
with the law of the jurisdiction in which they provide psychological services;
that their emotional, mental and physical state does not impair their ability to
provide a competent psychological service.
allegations in paragraphs 11.1 and 11.2 have therefore been established.
have therefore found that all of the particulars of the Complaints set out
earlier in relation to Patient A and Patient B have
been established on the
should be stated that some of the Complaints were clearly established and
involved very serious inadequacies in the Respondent’s
services to the
patients and his regard for their safety needs. They include:
his failure to
recognise both patients’ need for him to either apply DSM IV or ensure a
full psychological or psychiatric assessment
was undertaken in view of problems
of the patient of which he became aware at the interview when the questionnaire
was answered;
his serious
disregard for the patients’ interests in proper records being kept of the
assessment process, counselling and any
other services he provided the
his failure to
seek information regarding the suitability of an opiate addicted patient for ROD
treatment, other than from the patient
himself. He appeared to have no serious
regard for the notoriety of people with opiate addiction to be unreliable in
providing a
history of their drug use, health and other aspects;
his failure to
recognise the importance of obtaining objective information from health records,
health professionals, family members,
support persons and others in order to
make a careful decision as to the suitability of a patient for ROD treatment;
what appeared to
be like a rule of thumb to attribute, without reasonable enquiry and
justification, Patient A’s anxiety disorder,
and suicidal thoughts to his
drug use. His evidence in cross examination seemed to infer that because such
problems are common
with addicts, they should not be regarded as so
his preparation
of treatment plans for both patients including ROD, notwithstanding his
awareness that the patients had one or more
contraindications;
his conduct in
writing to Patient B’s Methadone prescriber instructing him to cease
prescribing Methadone;
his form of
treatment plan in respect of both patients suggested the abstention period was
usually 12 hours, despite the 48 hours
suggested by the Guidelines and the 24
hours suggested by his own Policy and Procedure Manual;
his form of
treatment plan in respect of both patients failed to provide intensive follow up
care as require by the NSW Health ROD
Guidelines;
his failure to
comply with the Clinic’s Practice and Procedure Manual by failing to
communicate with either of the support persons
nominated in the answers to the
questionnaire in respect of Patient B;
his disregard
for the safety of Patient B by leaving him at a boarding house after ROD
treatment and failing to ensure he had the
assistance and supervision of a
support person.
findings set a context within which weighed in favour of us being comfortably
satisfied of the other complaints, such as failing
to provide the patients
adequate information about the treatment and the alternatives.
PROFESSOR MATTICKS’S OPINIONS
his report of 2 August 2010, Professor Mattick gave his opinion regarding some
of the complaints about the conduct of the Respondent.
opinion was that the questionnaire contents were insufficient “
really understand the nature of the problems facing [Patient A]
said the substance use history table was poorly completed. The quantity and
frequency of use, the history of use, the
pattern of use over time, particularly
recent time, was important.
said the information concerning psychological well-being was “
” with a series of boxes ticked but no information concerning
the extent of psychological distress apart from a self-report
questionnaire
(DASS). He said the questionnaire was important first because the history of
depression is a relative contra-indication
for ROD and also because although the
Respondent did not tick the “past 30 days” box regarding anxiety,
but it was apparent
that Patient A reported an extremely severe level of anxiety
and further investigation of this was warranted. He criticised the
ascertain the number of hours that Patient A worked or where he was working and
any problems he had with work.
relation to the questionnaire concerning Patient B, Professor Mattick again said
that the drug use history was “
particularly poor, with extremely
limited information on each of the drug types and no information about typical
quantity and frequency
of use and the table is incomplete with the frequency of
use column not being used in any meaningful way
.” He said that the
section on the use in the last three days was also not utilised.
said that in relation to the psychological assessment information for Patient B
there was no information about symptoms of depression
in the last 30 days and no
information about the treatment episode of one year at 46 years of age.
Mattick also said that information concerning Patient B and his social or other
stability in the document was “
quite limited
”. He said that
there was “
no clarity as to the stability of Patient B
Mattick was particularly critical of the questionnaire forms. He said,
“The willingness to tick boxes and write extremely brief notes on some
of the items is inappropriate in patients who are known
to present with very
complex histories
Mattick’s opinion was that because Patient A reported psychological
problems including a depressive disorder, thoughts
of suicide and
hallucinations, taking into account his opioid dependency, a full clinical
psychological or psychiatric assessment
was warranted. “
number of boxes does not approach an acceptable level of assessment.”
Current depression and a history of psychosis (both of which were present) are
both contra-indications to ROD. He was also critical
that despite the presence
of Methamphetamine in a urine drug screen the day of the assessment by the
Respondent no further assessment
for the possibility that the Patient was
suffering from a stimulant dependence was undertaken that day or later (despite
dependence being a contra-indication for the procedure).
Mattick’s opinion is that the standard reasonably expected for assessment
for the suitability of Patient A was a full
psychological assessment with
details of at least the past 12 months and current symptoms and DSM-IV diagnosis
for depressive disorders,
psychotic disorder and amphetamine-related disorders.
His opinion was that the departure was significantly below the standard
expected and invited strong criticism.
Mattick said that it may have been helpful for the Respondent to have discussed
the mental health history of Patient A
with his father, but he did not consider
that to be essential because although some may argue corroboration is required
in this patient
The role of a support person is to support, not
necessarily to be a corroborative source about pre-detoxification
well-being.”
Professor Mattick did not consider the failure to
consult with the father to be significantly below the standard reasonably
and did not consider that he had invited strong criticism.
Mattick made the following comments regarding the treatment given to Patient
to the ROD Counselling and Group Therapy Pty Ltd Rapid Detoxification Policy and
Procedure Manual (p5) on arrival (on 15.05.07)
an opiate withdrawal scale was to
be administered to “
indicate those patients already suffering opiate
withdrawal and to indicate compliance with opiate-free period of 24
However, instead of ensuring a 24 hour opioid-free state,
[Patient A] had ingested 200 mg MSContin at 5pm. He was allowed to undergo
Rapid Opioid Detoxification procedure despite staff being aware that he had not
abstained for the required period (see also below).
relevant to Mr Colquhoun, however, is the fact that Mr Colquhoun (14.05.07)
co-signed a Treatment Agreement and Informed Consent
form wherein a different
time period which requires a patient to have “
abstained from opiates
for the prescribed period, (usually 12 hours)
” (p1, section 3).
fact, as [Patient A] had his last opioids at 5pm (2 x 100mg MSContin) on the
night before the procedure (and ignoring the great
inter-patient variability in
elimination of morphine), his peak morphine concentration would have probably
occurred 4 to 5 hours
post-dose with therapeutic levels persisting for a 12 hour
period. Therefore he was implanted with 376 mg of Naltrexone at 10.45am
16.05.07, just 45 minutes after peak morphine levels may have started to wane.
It is this process which set him up for a very
severe and sudden opioid
withdrawal (which probably worsened once the symptomatic medications given at
the clinic on 16.05.07 started
to wear off). Mr Colquhoun’s treatment
plan, Mr Colquhoun’s treatment agreement, and the ultimate procedure used
significantly from the NSW Health Guidelines on rapid detoxification
from opioid (27.01.05).
are other concerns about discharge without further overnight management at the
clinic when NSW Health Guidelines require that
“setting must be one
where there is the option of keeping people overnight”
(p.20). This
latter issue may relate to the medical practitioners, but Mr Colquhoun should
have ensured that the requirements of
NSW Health Guidelines were adequately met.
Professor Mattick said that the standard reasonably expected was the
requirements of the
NSW Health Guidelines, but the Respondent recommended a
treatment plan and signed a treatment agreement which did not comply with
guidelines or with his own clinic’s procedure manual. He said that this
conduct was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected and invited
strong criticism.
Mattick also was of the opinion that failure to fully inform Patient A of
alternate treatment approaches was a departure
significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner and invited a strong criticism, as did the
failure to record
such discussions.
Mattick’s view is that contacting the methadone prescriber and dosing
staff about general stability, psychological
preparedness/problems, current
non-prescribed opioid use, and other illicit drug use
“is courteous and
is clinically indicated”
for patients such as Patient A. He said that
was the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner and the
Respondent’s behaviour
was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected and invited strong criticism.
Professor Mattick advised that the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner would be to contact the prescriber of
the anti-depressant for
Patient A about the psychological well-being of the patient, especially in light
of the limited assessment
by the Respondent. He said the failure of the
Respondent to do this was conduct significantly below the standard reasonably
of a practitioner and warranted strong criticism.
relation to the absence of clinical records Professor Mattick expressed the
opinion that the Respondent should have made full written
notes of the
counselling appointment with Patient A on 2 May 2007 and his departure from that
requirement was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner and warranted strong criticism. He said in relation to the overall
standard of
the Respondent’s assessment and documentation, that they were
well below expectation. He said the reasonably expected standard
practitioner would be “
complete and detailed written notes, which can
be read by others, representing a comprehensive assessment of the patient prior
treatment and requiring a ‘full consumption’ history and
comprehensive psychosocial and psychological assessment
.” He said the
departure was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner and invited strong criticism.
relation to Patient B, Professor Mattick said that the treatment plan for
Patient B was based on limited assessment, did not involve
the use of DSM-IV or
other criteria to assess adequately for psychological disturbance, the drug
history was very poor, and he did
not consider the contra-indications, including
the history of depression. He said the Respondent’s notes and records
devoid of detail”
. Notwithstanding this, the treatment
plan and associated treatment agreement allowed Patient B to have ingested
opioids for up to
12 hours before the procedure and in fact he ingested 100mg of
MSContin 16 hours before the procedure on 07.03.08, “
out of keeping
with the NSW Health Guidelines”.
He said that adherence to the NSW
Health Guidelines is the reasonable standard and the Respondent took on the role
as an assessor
of contra-indications, formed the treatment plan and signed the
treatment agreement which did not comply with the Guidelines or even
Clinic’s Policy and Procedure Manual. He said that the Respondent’s
conduct in this regard was significantly
below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner and invited strong criticism.
relation to informing the patient of other treatment options Professor Mattick
said that the Respondent should have “
fully informed
B of the alternate treatment approaches, as required by the guidelines. His
failure to do so was a departure significantly
below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner and invited strong criticism. He said:
These patients need to be apprised of options, especially as they
often misperceive that rapid detoxification ‘offers quick,
detoxification’ (NSW Health Guidelines, 2005 p.4), which it does
In relation to the failure of the Respondent to contact any
support person for Patient B, Professor Mattick said the standard reasonably
expected is that the Respondent should have ensured the support people were
willing and able
“to supervise and oversee”
Patient B as
required by the Clinic’s treatment agreement, especially as the clinic was
unable to provide counselling or medical
support once Patient B returned to
Canberra. He said that the departure was significantly below the standard
expected of a practitioner,
but he said it did not attract strong criticism as
it was not required by the NSW Health Guidelines that contact be made with
relation to the question of whether the Respondent should have contacted the
Patient’s aunt to verify her involvement in
dosing MSContin to Patient B,
Professor Mattick said that although arguably the Respondent was not personally
responsible for contacting
the aunt to ensure that she would be willing and able
to dispense MSContin to him prior to the ROD procedure, he should have a role
ensuring that someone did so (arguably a medical practitioner), he said his
failure to do so was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a
practitioner, but not invite strong criticism as it was not required by the NSW
Health Guidelines.
relation to the question of the Respondent contacting treating health
practitioners in relation to Patient B, Professor Mattick’s
opinion was
that the Respondent should have had contact with the treating practitioners in
Canberra to confirm the history of depression
and to ascertain the
patient’s mental health status and suitability for ROD. He noted that the
Respondent did not administer
any questionnaire to determine Patient B’s
psychological well-being and did not appear to have used any standardised
such as the DSM-IV or any check-lists to determine the presence or
absence of psychological symptoms. He said:
individuals who are notorious for problems with mental health co-occurring with
drug use and drug dependence, such a failure is
surprising." He said the
Respondent should have better assessed the level of depression and in the
absence of so doing he should
have contacted Patient B’s treating
practitioners to ensure that depression was in remission. This was particularly
because depression was a contra-indication to ROD.”
Mattick said that the Respondent’s failure to contact the treating
practitioner(s) was a departure significantly below
the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner and invited strong criticism.
relation to the question of suicidal ideation with Patient B, Professor Mattick
said that the difference in the questionnaire to
did not establish the patterning of suicide thoughts or when
these last occurred. He said:
I do not believe that
this meets reasonable clinical enquiry or record keeping.
He said that the
Respondent: “
should have better documented suicidal ideation frequency
and pattern, and whether the patient had occasional thoughts, vague plans,
plans or clear intent to suicide. This need is highlighted by the fact that
depression is a contra-indication to rapid detoxification.
He said that the departure from this by the Respondent was behaviour
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
invited strong criticism.
relation to the conduct of the Respondent in delivering Patient B to a boarding
house in Randwick where there was no support person
available to him, Professor
Mattick said that the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner would be to
ensure that Patient
B had access to a support person, according to the
patient’s own treatment agreement, especially as he took the patient to
the boarding house. He said the departure by the Respondent was behaviour
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of
a practitioner and
invited strong criticism.
his submission of 30 August 2012 the Respondent
“4.9 The Respondent has already made significant
changes to practices that involved:
a) 6 months supervision;
auditing of the practice to ensure no ROD is being carried out and that changes
to assessment and record keeping practices
implemented;
complete re-writing of the assessment questionnaire to comply with the
recommendations of Mr Anns.
4.10 The Respondent has now
implemented further changes to ensure best practice including:
supervision to rectify any short-comings as required of on-going professional
development;
purchase and installation of the ICA Notes software and training in the proper
use of the software;
have the practice of the clinic audited to ensure compliance with the
development and maintenance of professional
part of that audit to undertake a review of all previous practices to identify
problems and to take action to remedy them; and,
undertake research and implement evidence-based
practices.”
was no evidence before the Tribunal of the changes alleged in 4.10 above when
the hearing concluded. We therefore do not accept
that submission.
findings that the Tribunal makes about changes that the Respondent has
implemented based on the evidence are as set out in the
following material.
Mattick’s opinion was that “
the overall standard of Mr
Colquhoun’s assessment and documentation of
[Patient B’s]
drug use history, psychological well-being and general well-being is
He said that the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner was “
complete and detailed written notes, which can be
read by others, representing a comprehensive assessment of the patient prior to
treatment and requiring a ‘full consumption history’ and
comprehensive psychosocial and psychological assessment”.
the Respondent’s departure from this standard was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
and invited strong criticism.
PROFESSOR SITHARTHAN’S EVIDENCE
December 2011, the Respondent has been practising under supervision. The
supervisor has been Professor Raj Sitharthan, an Honorary
Professor in the
Department of Psychiatry at the University of Sydney.
Professor’s previous positions comprise:
April 2009 to
November 2011 Professor of Clinical Psychology, University of Western Sydney
2006 to 2009 Clinical Associate Professor, Dept of Psychiatry, University of
1995 to 2009 Director of Clinical Programs Development – Drug and
Alcohol Services – Western Sydney Area Health Service
1985 to 1995 Senior Clinical Psychologist, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital Drug
and Alcohol
Professor holds the following degrees:
1) MA Psychology (Hons)
– Counselling - University of Madras
2) M Phil – Psychology – University of Madras
3) Master of Psychology – Clinical Psychology – University of
4) PhD – Psychology – University of Sydney
Professor has published extensively and has done many presentations in Australia
and also overseas.
Professor gave written and also oral evidence at the hearing. His written
evidence dated July 2012 recited that he had supervised
the Respondent in
”. The sessions were
of one hour per fortnight. He had not collected any fee for the supervision.
He said that the Respondent
had told him there was some criticism about his
assessment and note taking/recording ability.
“He informed me that he
relied heavily on his memory”. The Professor said:
“I pointed out that it is essential that he keeps
accurate records to: (a) ensure good clinical practice; (b) map client/patient
progress over time; (c) assist other clinicians if they have to take over his
cases; and (d) for the purposes of clinical auditing.”
323 He followed this up by requesting the Respondent to provide him with the
clinical assessment forms he uses in his practice and
any other relevant
information including samples of case notes. The Professor said:
noted from the assessment form he uses that they are reasonably limited in
gathering vital information. I also noted that
the wording of some assessment
forms he has developed need to be changed. I provided suggestions to improve.
I pointed out certain
other deficiencies (e.g. no clinical ‘flow’,
failure to keep copies of clinical measures in the main file, using photocopy
versions of questionnaires that are copyright protected, etc); and offered
appropriate suggestions.”
said that Respondent should familiarise himself:
various common clinical tools that are commonly used to conduct clinical
assessments. Mr Colquhoun was not familiar with some
of the major assessment
measures. I discussed with him the “clinical domains” that need to
be part of a comprehensive
assessment package. I have also discussed the used
of standardise clinical interview schedules to gain reliable and meaningful
information
recommended that the Respondent:
“compile a comprehensive assessment
package including psychometrical measures and have clear indicators of inclusion
and exclusion
criteria etc.”
He said he noted that the Respondent did
not have specific clinical hand-outs for clients such as education materials and
self-monitoring
forms for obtaining information about patients’
depression/anxiety. He said that he suggested that the Respondent compile
defendable clinical package
” and ensure he has copies of all
relevant information. But the Respondent expressed the view that this exercise
to engaging in too much paper work and did not give him time to engage
in therapy.
Professor discussed with the Respondent the need to accurately record his notes
and suggested he consider subscribing to “
ICANotes or a similar
web-based mental health information recording software
Professor described the advantages of using such a system. It allows a clinician
to ask questions in a logical manner
all relevant clinical
” and record the session notes quickly and accurately. He told
the Respondent that the subscription is about $40 per month.
But the Respondent
said the subscription was “
too expensive for him
professor also urged the Respondent to video record sessions so that he was able
to observe the Respondent conduct a comprehensive
clinical assessment and engage
in therapy. He reported:
I asked him to seek the
permission from a new client to record the session(s). I also stressed that I
need to see him and his client
in the video and to be able to hear the
conversation relating to assessment/therapy.”
But the recording that the Respondent later provided to the Professor was
defective and the Professor was not able to see or hear
anything on the
recording. The Professor provided some feed-back in respect of a few case
studies that the Respondent presented
Professor advised the Respondent that he needs to be aware that working in the
drug and alcohol/substance misuse area “
is very sensitive and he should
be in a position to defend his clinical actions relying on state of the art
clinical and research
literature.”
Mr Colquhoun has repeatedly informed me that
he has worked in the drug, alcohol/substance misuse area for several years.
he was not familiar with various professional organisations or their
clinical policy position or clinical practice guidelines.
“I was surprised that for someone who has worked in the drug and
alcohol area for several years he has not heard of these web
sites or resources.
Hence, I suggested that he becomes familiar with the clinical practice
guidelines and position statements as
represented by Cochrane Reviews, National
Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA), National Institute for Health and Clinical
Incidents (NICE).
“Discussions frequently focussed on Mr Colquhoun’s preference
for Naltrexone treatment for the opioid dependant client
population. I made it
very clear from the first session that leading clinicians and researchers in
Australia have expressed grave
concerns regarding the use of Naltrexone and
pointed out to him to familiarise himself with limitations/reservations (eg an
in the Medical Journal of Australia). Mr Colquhoun was not aware of
these articles/resources.”
Professor concluded his written evidence with the
Observations
Colquhoun has made some attempts to modify his clinical practices (including
gathering information and recording), but I do not
consider that he is competent
to independently engage as a methodical practitioner.
I pointed out above, my request to observe his assessment/therapy skills via
recorded video did not occur, hence, I had to rely
on his case presentations.
My view is that there are limitations, for example, in case formulations non-use
of psychometrically
sound instruments, lack of provision of homework tasks (e.g.
self-monitoring forms) etc.
Colquhoun was not aware of several clinical tools/measures and clinical practice
guidelines, hence, he was referred to these sources.
But it is impossible for
me to state how much of these resources he is actually familiar with or has
incorporated the recommendations
into his practice.
Colquhoun is well aware that he needs to modify his practices and it is my
impressions that he is willing to
Recommendations:
Colquhoun requires additional clinical supervision, preferably offered through a
‘placement’ in a multi-disciplinary
clinic or medical setting (e.g.
Drug Health Services, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, overseen by the head of the
department Associate
Professor Paul Haber).
believe a 12 month placement (2 days per week) will provide Mr Colquhoun a
decent opportunity to observe and engage with a range
of services
(psychological, medical, clinical, research, case conferences, and case
presentations etc). The placement has the potential
to assist Mr Colquhoun to
be aware of the current literature, engage in evidence-based practices, prepare
and present clinical cases,
and discuss clinical management issues in a
multi-disciplinary context.
Colquhoun’s practice methods can be formally re-assessed at the end of 12
months to measure progress.”
his oral evidence Professor Sitharthan said that while he was a Director of
Clinical Programs at the Westmead Hospital there was
the first trial of
Naltrexone and a lot of his staff were involved. He supervised the project. He
said that otherwise he does not
have experience as a clinician in relation to
Naltrexone.
cross-examination Professor Sitharthan said that there is a need for the
Respondent to overcome professional isolation by engaging
with other members of
the profession through conferences, seminars, meetings etc. He said that he
considers the Respondent needs
more experience in a multi-disciplinary situation
with medical practitioners, medical specialists, and occupational therapists
He said that the Respondent needs supervision in a multi-disciplinary
asked who would be best to supervise the Respondent, he said a drug and alcohol
service of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital or
Royal North Shore Hospital or
Westmead Hospital. He said that if the Respondent was placed with one of those
services he does not
think he would need other supervisions.
Professor testified that if the Respondent was working in a public hospital or a
public health facility he would have to keep
good notes of his work.
Professor in answer to questions from the Panel said that he decided not to
charge for the supervision, in order to be
independent
answer to questions from the Panel about the general competence of the
Respondent, the Professor said that although he had general
confidence in
“general counselling
” he did not have it in drug and alcohol
work, he needed supervision. When asked whether the Respondent was complying
his recommendations, he said,
“seven to eight out of
Professor said in answer to a question that he could not say whether the
Respondent posed an
“unacceptable risk to public
UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT OR PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND
relevant provisions in the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No.
“139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct” of
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
(1) "Unsatisfactory professional conduct" of a
registered health practitioner includes each of the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of
a provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is
subject; or
ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of
a decision or order made by a Committee or Tribunal in relation
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on
behalf of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for-
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the
health service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation
to a health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from
another person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration
or reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does
not include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration
or reward for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in over-servicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection
with the practitioner’s professional practice) who
is not a registered
health practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in
respect of matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health
practitioner has a "pecuniary interest" in giving a referral or recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health
product, to which the referral or recommendation relates is a
public company and
the practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health
product, to which the referral or recommendation relates is a
private company
and the practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health
product, to whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
is a partner of the practitioner; or
(d) In any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular class.
(4) In this section-
"benefit" means money, property or anything else of value.
"recommend" a health product includes supply or prescribe the health
"supply" includes sell.
139E Meaning of “professional misconduct” [NSW]
For the purposes of
this Law, "professional misconduct" of a registered health practitioner means-
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
the relevant events occurred in relation to Patient A and Patient B, the
Respondent had been registered as a psychologist for
had full registration for 8 years or more. He had been involved since 1998 in
the use of Naltrexone
in the treatment of opiate dependence.
of the conduct particularised in the Complaint and proved at the hearing was
conduct that demonstrated judgment possessed and
care exercised by the
practitioner in the practice of his profession significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of psychologists
of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
the conduct complained of establishes a pattern of behaviour and attitude of a
sufficiently serious nature that might justify
cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration. The conduct was professional
misconduct.
CONCLUSIONS
question we are confronted with first is what outcome is required to protect the
his submissions of 30 August 2012 the Respondent attached additional evidence,
but the evidence had closed. He made no application
to reopen this case, so we
have not taken that evidence into account. But he made among others, the
following submissions in that
343.1 we should take into account that he has had no previous determination
against him of a disciplinary nature;
343.2 the fact that previous
investigations by the Health Department had not resulted in any disciplinary
proceedings meant that
each investigation had found that the whole of the
practices and procedures of the clinic were acceptable to the Department. (This
proposition was not accepted by the Tribunal as there was no reliable evidence
to that effect and also because it is inherently unlikely
that any investigation
of a complaint would make the broad findings he suggested.)
343.3 he is
proposing to not be further involved in ROD treatment and his registration
should be conditional upon that. If the
tribunal makes his registration
conditional upon him not being involved in ROD treatment, protection of the
public does not require
any further action by the Tribunal;
skill as a psychologist has not been challenged; (This is clearly wrong. For
example his skills in psychological assessment,
record making, record keeping,
obtaining informed consent and ensuring that his professional conduct did not
expose his patients
to unacceptable risks were all found to be inadequate.)
343.5 “the HCCC has sought to exaggerate the serious (sic) of any
breach of the Guidelines or Code of Ethics by implying that
the Respondent was
dishonest or deliberately disregarded the standards that applied”. (But
the Respondent did not by response
to any of those complaints alleging breach of
any provision of the Guidelines or the Code of Ethics say that he was ignorant
requirement. And his own direct evidence established that he knew many
of them, such as the requirement to inform the patient of
the benefits and
disadvantages of ROD, what could be expected, and the advantages and
disadvantages of alternative treatments, the
guideline of 48 hours of abstention
from the opiate of addiction before the treatment and the contraindications in
the guidelines
that excluded ROD. Clearly he knew what was required by the
relevant Guidelines and the Code, but didn’t comply. Also there
suggestion that he didn’t know that the Code required that he should give
the patient’s need for safety priority
over any commercial interest of his
343.6 The safety of the public is not in issue. (The Tribunal does not
would have expected that the Respondent would by 2007 and 2008 have ensured his
Clinic and its personnel adopted best practice
and complied with the Guidelines,
the APS Code of Ethics and the Clinic’s Practice and Procedure Manual
because of:
344.1 The number of years of experience he had in
Naltrexone treatments;
344.2 The evidence of the Respondent is that he has assessed more than 2,000
people who sought ROD treatment and approved about 1,800
and other psychologists
had approved others;
344.3 The substantial income the Clinic had derived from its ROD patients,
which could be at stake if a further inspection resulted
in disciplinary
proceedings against him;
344.4 His extensive academic qualifications;
344.5 His published research;
344.6 His maturity;
344.7 His participation in leadership and activities of professional
associations;
344.8 The work he had done training psychologists; and
344.9 His awareness that other professionals in the Drug and Alcohol were of
the belief that ROD was not a proven success and had
made complaints about the
clinic’s work resulting in investigations by the Department.
346 But despite those reasons to expect better professional conduct from him, he
has engaged in such serious professional misconduct.
conduct and attitudes both involve a disregard of the needs of the patients,
particularly their need for him to give them the
benefit of his professional
skills and judgment and ensure to the best of his ability their safety from the
risks involved with ROD.
regard to his failure to seek any objective evidence in relation to the
questions of the suitability of the patient for ROD, the
Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that he preferred to not seek input from possible objective sources,
such as medical records, health
professionals, or associates of the patient, as
such evidence might indicate ROD was not appropriate for them.
these 2 patients most of the incidents of misconduct occurred where the
Respondent’s commercial interests conflicted with
those of the patient
(particularly as to safety) and he failed to give priority to the
patients’ interests.
complaints we have established reflect extremely badly on his ethics and his
integrity generally.
Tribunal has no confidence that even with a period of supervision the Respondent
would develop sufficient insight, make such serious
changes to his work habits
as a psychologist, embrace honesty, integrity and ethical approaches, and be
reliable to put his patients’
safety and other interests before his own
commercial interests.
reasons include:
a the attitudes he has retained and limited insight he has developed in the 5
years since the events involving Patient A and 4 years
since the events
involving Patient B;
b his persistence in denying almost all of the
complaints;
c his very limited changes made in his practices in the 5 years
since the events involving Patient A and 4 years since the events
Patient B and while the proceedings were current;
d the limited improvements
in his practices despite the help and supervision of Professor Sitharthan;
e the Respondent’s rejection of the Professor’s recommendation
that he develop a comprehensive assessment package and
a defendable clinical
f his rejection of the Professor’s recommendation that he
subscribe to a web-based mental health information recording software;
failure to comply with the Professor’s request that he video record a
comprehensive clinical assessment for him to review;
h the Professor’s
opinion that he is not competent to engage as a methodical practitioner without
at least a year of supervision
working 2 days per week in a public hospital or
like service; and
i this situation prevails despite the list of reasons the
Tribunal has recited that would have supported an expectation that the
would have ensured best practice in the clinic.
Tribunal does not consider that the Respondent’s present skills and
integrity are such that he could be relied upon to provide
members of the public
an adequate standard of professional service as a psychologist, whether in
relation to ROD or otherwise. The
Tribunal does not accept that if he had
supervision of full time work as a psychologist in a public hospital for a year
then be relied upon to provide an adequate level of professional
service to patients.
standards are required of psychologists in the practice of their profession.
The relationship between a psychologist and a patient
requires the patient to
have confidence that the psychologist will safely and skilfully perform his/her
professional duties. The
Tribunal considers that the Respondent is unlikely to
achieve such levels of professionalism if he continues to practice as a
psychologist.
Tribunal accepts the submissions from the Complainant that the totality of the
evidence shows that the Respondent is: “
unwilling to accept advice and
slow to change. He makes such changes only when there is no alternative and not
because of any insight
on his part.
” Indeed, in his last submission
to the Tribunal he argued that safety of the public is not an issue if he is not
in ROD treatment.
Complainant also submits, and the Tribunal accepts, that the need to deter other
registered psychologists from such professional
misconduct also supports the
Respondent’s registration being cancelled. The respondent’s
professional misconduct is
likely to cause damage to the reputation of the
profession in this State, particularly in the Drug and Alcohol services. That
a relevant factor that weighs in favour of cancellation of his registration.
misconduct is very serious. The practitioner denied most of the allegations,
and still denies some of them after the Tribunal’s
findings. The Tribunal
does not consider that the practitioner has “
made serious changes that reflect the seriousness of the misconduct. Nor does
the Tribunal consider that he has accepted
responsibility or shown any serious
contrition about the misconduct.
149C(1) of the Act sets out 4 situations where this Tribunal can make an order
cancelling the Respondent’s registration
as a psychologist. The evidence
establishes 3 of those:
(a) he is not competent to practice as a
psychologist;
(b) he is guilty of professional misconduct; and
(c) he is not a suitable person for registration in the profession.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s registration as a psychologist should
be cancelled.
Respondent’s professional misconduct, poor credit before the Tribunal,
failure to comply with ethical obligations, and general
lack of integrity
persuade the Tribunal that he should be restricted from practising as a
psychologist. The Tribunal also finds
that he is unsuitable to work in
associated fields. The Complainant seeks an order that:
The practitioner is prohibited from providing the
following health services, whether provided as public or private services:
Health Services (including counselling, assessments, and screening of
Health services; and,
Services necessary to implement (a) and (b).
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the evidence establishes that protection
of the public requires such an order.
13 of Schedule 5D of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No
86a gives the Tribunal power to make a cost order.
Complainant seeks an order that the Respondent pay the Complainant’s costs
of the proceedings. The Complainant raised this
issue in its submissions of 10
August 2012. In his subsequent submissions of 30 August 2012, the Respondent
did not address the
issue of costs and did not oppose a costs order.
view of the findings as to the poor credit of the Respondent, the findings of
serious misconduct, and the fact that the Respondent
has been wholly
unsuccessful in the proceedings, the Tribunal issues an order that the
Respondent pay the Complainant’s costs.
orders of this Tribunal are:
1) The Respondent’s registration
as a psychologist is cancelled.
Respondent is prohibited from providing the following health services, whether
provided as public or private services:
Health Services (including counselling, assessments and screening of
b) Community Health Services; and,
c) Welfare Services necessary to implement (a) and (b).
Respondent must pay the costs of the Complainant, as agreed, or in default of
agreement as assessed.
Signed by the members of the
......................................................
......................................................
......................................................
......................................................
Frances Taylor
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter