URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Woolworths Group Limited v Moriarty [2025] NSWPICPD 64; (8 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Woolworths Group Limited v Moriarty
[2025] NSWPICPD 64
Woolworths Group Limited
RESPONDENT:
Timothy Moriarty
Self-insured
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W4087/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
8 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
to appeal the interlocutory decision dated 29 November 2024 pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation
is granted.
determination that the respondent suffered a work-related injury on 11 May 2016
is confirmed.
for the appellant in respect of the allegation that the injury on 13 August 2017
resulted from the injury on 11 May 2016.
respondent’s employment was a substantial contributing factor to the
injury on 11 May 2016.
referral to a Medical Assessor dated 29 November 2024 for assessment of the
respondent’s whole person impairment is revoked.
Matter is remitted to a different member for determination as to whether the
seizures after 11 May 2016 result from the injury
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Section 352(5) of the
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) – the
correct approach to be adopted on appeal in determining allegations of factual
State of New South Wales v Culhana
[2025] NSWCA 157
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
considered and applied – section 294 of the 1998 Act;
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
– adequacy of reasons –
Beale v Government Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
(1991) 21 NSWLR 725
Pollard v RRR Corporation Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 110
Ming v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Liang
[1996] HCA 6
considered and applied – inferential findings –
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
[2000] NSWCA 29
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
considered and applied –
Workers Compensation Act 1987
– whether employment a
substantial contributing factor to the injury –
Badawi v Nexon Asia
Pacific Pty Ltd t/as Commander Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 324
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr B Jones, counsel
BBW Lawyers
Respondent:
Ms E Grotte, counsel
Somerville Laundry Lomax Solicitors
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Moriarty v Woolworths Group Limited
W4087/24, 29 November
Mr M McGrowdie
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
29 November 2024
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Timothy Moriarty (the respondent) was employed by Woolworths Group Limited (the
appellant) as a butcher. On 11 May 2016, in the
course of his employment, the
respondent was stacking frozen chickens and chicken products that were stored in
the cold room in boxes
on trolleys into the public fridges and freezers. The
respondent could not recall what occurred next. His next recollection was that
he became conscious in Tweed Heads Hospital with a severe laceration to his
respondent formed the view that one of the boxes must have fallen on his head
when he was bending down to retrieve chicken from
the trolley. He lodged a claim
for workers compensation, which was denied by the appellant.
respondent commenced proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission (the
Commission), asserting injury to his lumbar spine, cervical
spine and nervous
system and claiming lump sum compensation pursuant to s 66 of the
Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act), as well as treatment expenses pursuant
to s 60 of the 1987 Act. The injury was described as:
injury on 11 May 2016 being a traumatic head/brain injury resulting in
persistent dizziness, headaches, vertigo and
instability/recurrent falls and
seizures. On 13 August 2017 the [respondent] received a further traumatic brain
injury/subdural haematoma
as a result of a fall resulting from the injury on 11
May 2016. The further traumatic brain injury has caused further seizures as
as physical and cognitive/neurologic deficits.
In the alternative, in addition the [respondent] has sustained an incomplete
cervical cord lesion resulting in physical and cognitive/neurologic
dispute proceeded to conciliation before Member McGrowdie who directed the
parties to lodge written submissions. The Member delivered
an oral decision and
issued a Certificate of Determination on 29 November 2024 in which he found in
favour of the respondent in respect
of the injury on 11 May 2016 and the
incident on 13 August 2017 and remitted the matter to the President of the
Commission for referral
to a Medical Assessor for assessment of his whole person
impairment of the nervous system.
appellant appeals the Member’s decision.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content for the appeal to be determined on
the basis of the documents and submissions made
and they agree that an oral
hearing is not required.
have had regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents and the
submissions by the parties, including the submissions
that the appeal can
proceed to be determined on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I
have sufficient information to
proceed ‘on the papers’ without
holding any conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
Workplace Injury Management
and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) have been met.
parties are of the view that the decision appealed is not an interlocutory
decision as the Member made a final determination
in respect of the question of
injury, so that leave pursuant to s 352(3A) of the 1998 Act is not required.
Subsection 352(3A) of
the 1998 Act provides:
“There is no
appeal under this section against an interlocutory decision except with the
leave of the Commission. The Commission
is not to grant leave unless of the
opinion that determining the appeal is necessary or desirable for the proper and
effective determination
of the dispute.”
A “decision” is defined in subs 352(8) of the 1998 Act to include
“an award, interim award, order, determination,
direction”. The meaning of “interlocutory” in subs 352(3A) is
proceedings remain on foot and the respondent’s claim for lump sum
compensation and treatment expenses have yet to be determined.
The decision,
therefore, does not truly finally determine the rights of the
It is thus an
interlocutory decision.
leave is not granted, the matter will require assessment by a Medical Assessor
and a Medical Assessment Certificate and subsequently
a Certificate of
Determination will be issued, before the appellant can appeal the decision. This
would involve significant delay
in the resolution of the proceedings, and, if
the appeal was successful, the expenses and other resources utilised in
a medical assessment would have been wasted. I therefore grant leave
pursuant to s 352(3A) of the 1998 Act for the appellant to appeal
interlocutory decision.
THE EVIDENCE
The respondent’s statement evidence
respondent completed an Injured Worker Statement Form on 30 June
He indicated that he was
packing shelves in the meat department at the time of the injury. He said he
suffered a hole in his head
but he could not recall how that occurred or what
happened and could not recall if there were any witnesses.
respondent provided a statement dated 4 July
He gave a history of his
continuous employment as a butcher in various locations leading up to his
employment with the appellant.
He stated that, prior to the injury on 11 May
2016, he had never experienced any epileptic or neurological symptoms at all. He
his pre-injury recreational activities, which included surfing, body
surfing, paddleboarding and skateboarding with his daughters.
He said that he
had been unable to engage in those activities since 11 May 2016.
respondent said that on 11 May 2016, he commenced work at 7.00 am, stacking
frozen chickens and chicken products from boxes on
a trolley into the public
freezer. He said that the boxes weighed between 10 and 20 kilograms each and he
was required to continually
transfer the product from various places on the
trolley to the shelves. He indicated that he did not remember anything further
he woke up in hospital.
respondent surmised that while performing the task of stacking the shelves, one
of the boxes near the top of the trolley may have
moved and fallen on his head
when he was kneeling or crouching to retrieve product from the lower shelves of
the trolley. He advised
that there were cameras throughout the store, but the
appellant had not made the CCTV footage available. He stated that he had asked
several of the appellant’s employees about what had happened, but they
advised that they had been told not to speak about it.
respondent said that he was in hospital for a day but was feeling quite unwell
after being discharged and was experiencing dizziness
and light-headedness. He
stated that he was off work for 6 weeks before returning to full time work,
performing his pre-injury duties.
He said that while he was off work, he had
been re-admitted to hospital several times, and when he returned to work, he
difficult to perform his usual duties and regularly had to take time
off work because of severe difficulties and persistent headaches.
He indicated
that the symptoms of vertigo, headaches and unsteadiness persisted.
respondent described a further incident that occurred on 13 August 2017 after he
attended the local tavern which was about 200
metres from his home, where he had
consumed about three or four beers between 6.30 pm and about 8.00 pm. He
indicated that he bought
a pie from the local pie shop and was walking home but
could not recall anything after that until he woke up in the Gold Coast
He advised that he underwent surgery to remove a blood clot in his
brain and remained in hospital for four weeks.
respondent indicated that after he was discharged from hospital, he continued to
experience headaches, dizziness, vertigo and
unsteadiness, which had all been
present since 11 May 2016, and he had suffered three seizures. He said that on
he was again admitted to Gold Coast University Hospital
after a further seizure.
respondent reported that he returned to work with a different employer, working
15 flexible hours per week making sausages and
crumbing products in a
butcher’s shop owned by a friend. He said that despite the fact that those
duties were very light, he
struggled with them until he suffered a stroke in
early August 2019 and was re-admitted to the Gold Coast Hospital. He indicated
that after the stroke, he developed semi-paralysis down his right side, which
had not happened before and persisted, and because
he could not hold a knife in
his right hand he could not return to work.
respondent completed an earlier statement dated 26 September 2019, which was
consistent with the statement summarised by me
Ms Sonia Mahoney, Store Services Compliance Officer
Mahoney provided a statement dated 10 July
She stated that she was the
appellant’s Store Services Compliance Officer and was employed by the
appellant when the incident
occurred on 11 May 2016. She indicated that she did
not witness the incident, but she was at work that day and attended the
immediately afterwards. She said that when she arrived the respondent
was lying on the shop floor in front of the meat section and
there was a pool of
blood under his head. She indicated that she did not recall seeing any boxes of
chicken in the vicinity and did
not know of any witnesses to the incident. She
observed that the area where the respondent lay was the meat section in the
public area which was not where staff would be carrying or unpacking
frozen chickens.
The NSW Ambulance records
NSW Ambulance medical record dated 11 May 2016 recorded that the ambulance crew
attended the appellant’s premises at 7.15
am on the date of the injury.
The notes indicate that on arrival, the respondent was laying on the floor after
having been found
on the ground by a shopper and had a laceration in the
parietal region. The notes recorded “fitting episode 30 seconds”
that the respondent was “amnesic” to the event. Reference was made
to “Seizures” and “Head
Incident Detail Report
referred to
“FITTING” and indicated that “this is apparently a generalised
‘grand mal’ fit.”
A fall was noted, and that the respondent
had “ALSO HIT HEAD ON THE
(emphasis in the
The medical evidence
The Tweed Hospital clinical notes
Tweed Hospital discharge summary and referral notes were in
The documents recorded
that on 11 May 2016 the respondent was brought in by ambulance suffering a head
injury and was experiencing
seizure activity. The notes recorded that he had
been found by co-workers on the floor of the cold room at work and he appeared
have been suffering a seizure. It was recorded that the respondent had
recently cut down on alcohol intake, having previously imbibed
approximately 12
standard drinks per night, had stopped drinking any alcohol two days prior but
had four standard drinks the night
before admission. It was noted that the
respondent had previously had a section of his right lung removed because of
melanoma but
was otherwise well and he had not seen a doctor for four years. The
injury was recorded as a laceration to the right occiput. An
MRI scan disclosed
no metastatic melanoma lesions, no intracranial haemorrhage or fractures and a
CT scan of the brain and cervical
spine showed no spinal fracture or acute
intracranial pathology. The orthopaedic intern queried whether the seizure was
to a traumatic injury or resulted from an underlying condition.
CT scan of the brain was conducted on 11 May 2016 and showed no
abnormality.
A further CT scan
of the head dated 19 May 2016 showed a small right parietal haematoma as the
only abnormality.
The Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service clinical
discharge summary from the Gold Coast Hospital dated 20 May 2016 recorded that
the respondent had presented to the hospital on 19
May 2016 with a seven-day
history of worsening dizziness, vertigo and vomiting following a head injury. A
CT scan of the head was
reported as normal, and it was considered that an MRI
scan of the head should be performed in order to exclude brain metastases due
further discharge summary dated 29 August 2017 recorded that the respondent had
been admitted to that facility on 13 August 2017
following a fall “with
headstrike and LOC in the setting of intoxication”. The principal
diagnosis was of an “acute
right traumatic subdural haematoma”,
“left temporal bone fracture with burst temporal lobe” which
required an emergency
decompressive craniotomy and removal of a floating
Robina Medical Centre & Dental Care clinical
respondent consulted Dr William Josephsen, general practitioner at the above
medical practice, on 12 May 2016. Dr Josephsen recorded
that the respondent had
suffered a head injury and had probably been hit on the head, was knocked out
and subsequently suffered a
seizure. He noted that the respondent complained of
a headache.
16 May 2016, Dr Kevin Chamberlain, general practitioner, who was practising from
the same medical centre recorded that the respondent
continued to experience
headaches. He said that it appeared from the photo of the wound that the
respondent had been hit with something
sharp. He noted that the respondent had
no recall of what happened.
Chamberlain provided a report dated 4 April 2018 directed to Windsor Income
Protection Pty Ltd.
He indicated
that the respondent had a long history of alcohol abuse and in those
circumstances had no memory of the fall on 11 May
2016, in which the respondent
was found on the floor of the appellant’s premises with a laceration to
Chamberlain reported that the respondent presented to Gold Coast University
Hospital on 13 August 2017 following another fall in
the context of
intoxication, in which he lost consciousness. Dr Chamberlain said that the
respondent suffered a temporal bone and
subdural haematoma requiring
Chamberlain advised that the respondent attended his surgery on 19 February
2018, having suffered a further seizure after he ceased
taking Dilantin, which
was anti-seizure medication. Dr Chamberlain expressed the view that on the basis
of the time that had elapsed
since the injury on 11 May 2016, and the severity
of the injury on 13 August 2017, the epileptic incident on 4 February 2018 was
likely to have been attributable to the injury on 13 August 2017. He indicated
that he had been encouraging the respondent to cease
alcohol since his first
consultation with him. He asserted that he had never advised the respondent to
cease his medication.
28 March 2018, Dr Josephsen recorded that the respondent’s situation was
very complicated. He noted:
“In May 2016 he was found
unconscious with subdural haematoma which required surgery. There was puncture
wound in skull. He
is long standing alcoholic which I have told him to cease.
His problem is that if he ceases he could have grand Mal epilepsy. He
continue on therapy.”
Dr Joseph Garcia-Redmond, neurosurgery Registrar, Gold Coast
University Hospital
Garcia-Redmond reviewed the respondent on 3 October 2018 in respect of the
surgery performed in 2017 to evacuate the respondent’s
haemorrhage following the respondent’s traumatic brain injury. He
described the respondent’s history as “complex”,
with a tonic clonic seizure in February of 2018, which was precipitated by the
respondent ceasing his anti-seizure medication
and withdrawal from
Dr Paul Teychenné, consultant neurologist
Teychenné examined the respondent and provided a report dated 30
September 2018 at the request of the respondent’s
representatives.
history of the injury on 11 May 2016, noting that the respondent could not
recall what had happened. He noted that the
treating physicians had surmised
from the fracture of the skull that “Apparently, he was hit over the back
of the right occipitoparietal
region with a steel ball
Dr Teychenné said that the respondent reported that when the
respondent awoke in hospital, and for about three days thereafter,
paralysed from the mid-chest down which improved after six months.
Teychenné recorded that when the respondent became conscious, he had an
intense throbbing headache and on the following
day felt quite faint, his head
was spinning, he had an imbalance on the left and right-hand sides, and he was
very unstable for about
a month. He said that the respondent complained of
continuing instability and dizziness, headache associated with nausea and
loss of balance and a tremor in his limbs. He added that from about
three months after the injury, the respondent began to experience
episodes of
numbness and pins and needles from the upper chest, down the left side and into
the left arm and left leg, with weakness
in the left arm.
Teychenné recorded the history of, and the circumstances surrounding, the
second injury on 13 August 2017. He noted that
since that injury the respondent
experienced difficulty with concentration, became forgetful and was easily
distracted.
Teychenné performed a physical examination. He reviewed the clinical
notes of the Tweed Hospital and Gold Coast Hospital,
the CT scans of the brain
and cervical spine and the respondent’s alcohol intake at around the time
of the injury. He said
that the CT scan of the brain undertaken on 14 August
2017 showed a large right-sided sub-dural haematoma, a left haematoma and a
temporo-parietal bone fracture. He noted the history of the injury on
11 May 2016 and the respondent’s presentation to the
University Hospital two weeks prior to the consultation with him, after the
respondent had a seizure following withdrawal
of anti-epileptic medication.
Teychenné said that the size of the head injury that occurred on 11 May
2016 was consistent with being hit with the ball
of a hammer.
Teychenné observed that “A chronic subdural haematoma eventually
resulting in such a significant midline shift would
likely have been symptomatic
prior to the fall on 13 August
He commented that
the respondent’s urinary and bowel symptoms and muscle weakness may have
been more in keeping with a cervical
cord lesion. He added that the
respondent’s excessive consumption of alcohol would render him more
susceptible to suffering
a traumatic subdural haematoma following a fall
involving a strike on the head.
Teychenné assessed the respondent’s loss of balance, tremors and
slow responses. He observed that those symptoms could
be consistent with a
cervical spinal lesion but would also be consistent with a previous acute
subdural haematoma and midline shift.
He considered that the symptoms were more
likely attributable to a spinal lesion. He described the symptoms that indicated
the presence
of a spinal lesion and recommended further radiological
investigations in the form of MRI scans of the brain, cervical spine and
thoracic spine. Dr Teychenné considered that the respondent’s
injuries resulted from the incident on 11 May 2016, and
that that injury was
consistent with an impact on the head by a ball hammer. He added that the
respondent’s unsteadiness could
have been attributable to a combination of
alcohol use and the acute traumatic subdural haematoma with a midline
Teychenné provided a supplementary report dated 9 June
He observed that the
photograph that was taken of the respondent’s skull following the May 2016
injury showed a deep laceration
through the skin and probably to the scalp bone.
He considered that the laceration could well have been caused by the respondent
being hit on the head by a box of chickens, particularly by the corner of the
box, which could have caused the respondent’s
unconsciousness. He said
that the respondent had never experienced an epileptic fit before that incident,
however, he noted that
the respondent was said to have been suffering seizures
at the site of the incident. He said that the respondent did have a history
alcohol intake and conceded that that could cause seizures.
Teychenné considered that it was possible that the mechanism of being
injured by the corner of the box falling on his head
could have led to seizures,
dizziness, light-headedness and paraesthesia. He observed that the seizures may
have occurred because
the respondent’s alcohol intake made him more prone
to those occurring, although there had not been any seizures before the
He further observed that the dizziness and light-headedness could have been the
result of the concussive head injury. He described
the respondent’s injury
as a mild traumatic brain injury, which he said could have caused the
respondent’s blackout and
a further seizure on 19 May 2016 when he
re-presented to hospital.
Teychenné provided a further report dated 2 November
He took a detailed history
of the incidents in May 2016 and August 2017, and the symptoms attributed to
those injuries. He performed
a thorough physical examination. He repeated the
circumstances surrounding the injury on 11 May 2016, as set out in his report
30 September 2018. He summarised the information recorded in the discharge
summaries from the Gold Coast Hospital dated 19 May 2016,
13 August 2017 and the
Gold Coast University Hospital dated 4 February 2018.
Teychenné referred to the history provided by the respondent to him at
the assessment (which was on 23 March 2022) and the
clinical picture presented.
He considered that the clinical picture was “quite” consistent with
an incomplete cervical
cord syndrome. He indicated that the respondent was
experiencing “upper motor neuron weakness in the upper limbs and intrinsic
hand muscle weakness and myelopathic weakness in the lower
He provided a
detailed account of the respondent’s difficulties throughout his body.
Dr Teychenné observed that features
of the respondent’s
presentation were consistent with an incomplete cervical lesion, however he
noted that the respondent had
also suffered an intracranial haemorrhage with
midline shift which could potentially result in upper motor neuron weakness,
myelopathic
weakness and the respondent’s imbalance.
response to queries made by the respondent’s legal representatives, Dr
Teychenné indicated that it was “extremely
difficult” to
conclude whether the incident on 13 August 2017 and the stroke suffered by the
respondent in August 2019 were
causally related. He observed that the respondent
had a history of drinking alcohol to excess and had consumed four glasses of
prior to the fall on 13 August 2017, and the respondent most likely
sustained a head injury causing an intracranial haemorrhage.
He indicated that
the respondent’s prior history of drinking alcohol would probably make him
more susceptible to an intracranial
haemorrhage. He added that imbalance was
also common following an incomplete cervical lesion and in the August 2017
incident the
respondent may have tripped because of that imbalance.
Teychenné concluded that if the respondent had an incomplete cervical
lesion that resulted from the first injury, then the
two later incidents in
August 2017 and August 2019 could be causally related to the first injury which
occurred at work. He considered
that the apparent stroke suffered by the
respondent in August 2019 may have been a consequence of the combination of a
brain injury and an incomplete cervical cord lesion. He said that the
respondent’s slurred speech, drop of the right lip and
dribbling was
indicative of a brainstem lesion, probably sustained on the right-hand side, and
the clenching and flexing of his limbs
was consistent with an incomplete
cervical cord lesion. He concluded that it was thus arguable that the incident
on 13 August 2017
and the apparent stroke in August 2019 were causally related
to the injuries sustained at work on 11 May 2016.
Teychenné proceeded to assess the respondent’s whole person
impairment.
Teychenné provided a further lengthy report dated 27 July 2023 which
appears to be a reproduction of the earlier report
dated 2 November 2022. That
report adds nothing further to his
17 May 2024, Dr Teychenné responded to further queries from the
respondent’s legal representatives in respect of the
question of
“In a note on 5 June 2020 to [the respondent’s
legal representative] I agreed that the laceration and deep puncture wound
well have been caused by a box of chickens falling onto [the respondent’s]
head. I noted that while he had a history
of alcohol intake, he had not had any
seizures prior to the injury. He was apparently fit at the time of the accident.
I considered
that it was feasible that he was hit over the top of the head
by the corner of a chicken box and this rendered him unconscious with
seizure activity. It is apparent that if there was CCTV footage it should be
made available to clear this dispute as to
whether [the respondent] was hit over
the head and had a seizure or whether he had a seizure and fell to the ground.
It does appear
from the description that he was probably hit over the top of the
head by the corner of a chicken box. Apparently, his head wound
was consistent
with a potential impact from the corner of a chicken box. This is the best that
I can conclude considering the limited
data available in regard to the
Dr Paul Robinson, orthopaedic surgeon
Robinson was asked by the appellant’s legal representatives to examine the
respondent and provide a report. He reported on
He referred to the opinion
expressed by Dr Teychenné in his first report and observed that, because
Dr Teychenné assessed
the respondent in terms of the central and
peripheral nervous system, which was not Dr Robinson’s area of
expertise, he would
not comment on Dr Teychenné’s opinion.
Robinson took a consistent history of the circumstances in which the injury on
11 May 2016 occurred, noting that the respondent
could not recall what had
actually happened. He reported that, following the first injury, the respondent
complained of headaches,
dizziness, experienced numbness and weakness in his
hands, and was unable to walk properly. He further noted that the respondent
complained of bowel and urinary issues.
Robinson took a history of the further fall on 13 August 2017 which resulted in
surgery to treat the intercranial haemorrhage,
hospitalisation for 17 days,
followed by numerous falls resulting from unsteadiness and loss of balance. He
noted the respondent’s
ongoing complaints of constant headaches, neck
stiffness, paraesthesia down the left arm and occasionally in the ring and
fingers. He referred to the respondent’s past history of heavy
alcohol intake, cigarette smoking and occasional cannabis use.
He recorded that
at the time of writing the report, the respondent continued to drink between
three to six schooners per day.
Robinson examined the respondent and reviewed the photograph of the
respondent’s skull as well as the radiological investigations.
Dr Robinson
noted that the exact cause of the fall had still not been identified. He said
that the respondent subsequently experienced
more falls resulting in further
pathology and instability. Dr Robinson considered that the history provided by
the respondent was
not reliable. He said that he believed that the May 2016 fall
was caused by a metabolic or medical problem rather than an incident
attributable to his employment, or an external trauma, although that was a
subjective, rather than a definitive opinion.
Robinson observed that he did not believe that the respondent suffered an acute
injury to his cervical or lumbar spines. He was
of the view that there was no
evidence of a radicular problem with either the cervical or lumbar spine and
there were underlying
degenerative changes in the cervical spine reported in the
radiology. He reiterated that the fall occurred at the respondent’s
of work and the cause of the fall was unknown so that he believed there was a
constitutional or metabolic issue. He observed
that the incident on 13 August
2017 caused an intracranial haemorrhage which required operative intervention,
however the respondent’s
employment could not have been a contributing
factor to that injury.
Robinson considered that the injury on 11 May 2016 may have produced the
problems identified by Dr Teychenné but the cause
of the accident was
unknown and thus could not be attributed to a work injury. He pointed out that
metabolic problems could have
caused the fall and the subsequent problems. He
considered that there was no doubt that alcohol intake, if used at the time,
have contributed to all of the respondent’s problems, particularly
to the incident in 2016 and even more so to the incident
in August 2017. Dr
Robinson said that he believed that the respondent had a constitutional problem
and advised that the respondent
should continue to receive neurological
treatment from his treating doctors.
Dr Paul Carney, neurosurgeon
Carney was asked by the appellant’s legal representatives to examine and
provide an opinion. He reported on 5 June
Dr Carney took a brief
history of the injury on 11 May 2016. He examined the photograph taken of the
respondent’s skull, which
he thought looked suspiciously like a blow to
the head, rather than from a fall. Dr Carney noted that the respondent
thereafter complained
of dizziness, headaches and an inability to walk
Carney took a history of the incident on 13 August 2017 when the respondent had
attended the local hotel and consumed four beers
before walking home. He
recorded that the respondent could not recall what happened, but was apparently
found in a laneway and taken
to hospital, where he underwent a major craniotomy,
remained in hospital for 3 to 4 weeks and was prescribed Dilantin, an
anti-epileptic
medication.
Carney referred to the respondent having a further seizure while watching
television on 1 October 2018. He said that the respondent
could not recall
what had happened and he woke up in hospital. Dr Carney said that the respondent
was put under the care of a neurologist
and provided with medication but
experienced a number of further falls causing injury.
Carney reported that the respondent complained of dizziness and loss of balance
and experienced issues with his memory and concentration.
He said that the
respondent was advised to give up alcohol but that he continued to drink 3 or 4
schooners per day and continued
to infrequently smoke cannabis. Dr Carney
conducted a cognitive examination, noting that the respondent showed some
cognitive deficit,
and noted that there was no generalised neurological
abnormality on observations of the limbs, other than minor imbalance.
Carney referred to the reference in the ambulance note that the respondent was
having “seizure activity” when discovered
by co-workers on the floor
of the appellant’s premises and that the respondent had cut down on his
previous intake of 12 schooners
per day, had abstained from the Sunday prior to
the injury but had 4 standard drinks the night before the incident in May
Carney noted that the history of the incident on 13 August 2017 as recorded by
Dr Teychenné was consistent with the respondent’s
description
and, in his view, suggested that the respondent had either a seizure or a fall
causing a blow to the head.
respect of the injury on 11 May 2016, Dr Carney did not consider it likely that
a blow to the head from a hammer was the cause
because there was no record of
any skull fracture and such a blow was unlikely to cause a person to lose
consciousness. He said that,
in the absence of further information, he was
unable to say whether the respondent’s employment was a substantial
contributing
factor to the injury, other than to say that the injury occurred at
Carney said that the injury on 13 August 2017 appeared to have been either an
epileptic seizure or a fall causing a blow to the
head, complicated by a
subdural haematoma requiring surgery. He considered that, if the first injury
caused the epilepsy, and the
incident on 13 August 2017 was epileptic, then
the respondent’s employment would be a substantial contributing factor. He
however, that there were multiple potential causes of epilepsy, including
alcohol intake and alcohol withdrawal, and it may be a
contributing factor that
the respondent ceased taking his medication.
Carney indicated that he did not find any evidence of an incomplete cervical
cord lesion and opined that there was no basis for
the theory that the
respondent suffered weakness in the lower limbs which contributed to the fall on
13 August 2017. He concluded
that there was no work-related connection to that
fall. He remarked that the respondent suffered from epilepsy and that it was
possible that the epilepsy caused both, or even all of the falls. He
added that excessive alcohol intake, particularly if combined
with ingestion of
Diazepam or with withdrawal from Diazepam, may have contributed to the epilepsy.
He observed that, provided the
respondent continued to take anti-convulsive
medication, he was unlikely to suffer further epileptic seizures.
Dr Ross Mellick, neurologist
Mellick was asked by the appellant to examine the respondent and to provide an
opinion on causation. He reported on 2 November
He recorded a history of
the respondent’s duties on 11 May 2016, which involved the respondent
filling shelves with chickens
from boxes that were stacked on a trolley which
was about six feet high, at times having to kneel to put the boxes on the lower
He noted that the respondent had no recollection of what occurred from
that time, however, he was found in an unconscious state on
the floor of the
appellant’s premises. He said that the respondent regained awareness in
the ambulance as he was taken to Tweed
Heads Hospital.
Mellick said that the respondent’s daughter attended the hospital that
afternoon and observed that the respondent was a little
unsteady on his feet and
appeared confused. Dr Mellick noted that the respondent discharged himself
from hospital with symptoms of
nausea but over the following ten days he began
to experience increasing headaches, so presented at Robina Hospital and was
for about one week. Dr Mellick recorded that the headaches improved to
the extent that he was able to return to easier aspects of
his pre-injury job on
reduced hours of work but had difficulties with dizziness and unsteadiness.
Mellick took a history of the injury on 13 August 2017 when the respondent fell
heavily, hitting his head, and was rendered unconscious.
He recorded that the
respondent was taken by ambulance to the Gold Coast University Hospital with an
acute traumatic subdural haematoma
requiring decompressive craniotomy and
evacuation of the blood clot.
Mellick noted that the respondent suffered two further falls in 2018 caused by
loss of balance and suffered a stroke at home on
24 August 2019 when he was
again transferred by ambulance to Gold Coast University Hospital. He further
noted that the respondent
had suffered several seizures, including the history
recorded by Dr Carney that the respondent was experiencing seizure-like activity
when he was lying on the floor unconscious on 11 May 2016. He reviewed the CT
scan reports dated 13 August 2017 and 22 April 2018,
as well as the report by Dr
Carney, which he described as being detailed. He observed that Dr Carney
recorded that there was “minor
imbalance when tandem walking indicating
the presence of ataxia at that
and commented that,
as Dr Carney did not record that the respondent was affected by alcohol at that
time, those observations ought
to be considered relevant to the neurological
observations as to the effects of trauma, brain injury, and the consumption of
He referred to the history of the respondent having previously been
drinking 12 standard drinks per night, that he stopped completely
Sunday and drank four standard beers the night before the 2016 injury. He
considered that that history suggested that the
respondent’s alcohol
consumption had not ceased at the time Dr Carney wrote his report. Dr Mellick
also referred to screening
done on 21 June 2016 that showed liver damage due to
Mellick indicated that, following a physical examination of the respondent, he
could find none of the specific diagnostic signs
necessary to diagnose an
incomplete cervical cord lesion which Dr Teychenné diagnosed as having
occurred in the fall on 11
May 2016. He referred to the evidence of Dr Carney,
who also could not find evidence of an incomplete cervical cord lesion.
Mellick concluded that the most probable explanation for the May 2016 injury was
that the respondent was kneeling down putting
a box in a lower shelf and another
box fell and struck the respondent in the back of the head. He observed that a
CT scan performed
on 19 May 2016 revealed no intracranial haemorrhage and
mentioned that an earlier scan performed on the day of the incident was also
normal. Dr Mellick considered that the incident on 13 August 2017 was
considerably more severe, given that it resulted in intracerebral
bleeding and
the need for urgent surgery. He added that the temporal gliosis found on the CT
scan dated 22 April 2018 ought to be
considered as consequential to the
fall on 13 August 2017 while the respondent was intoxicated, and not the 2016
Mellick indicated that the first evidence of epilepsy may have been associated
with the fall in August 2017 when the respondent
was intoxicated, however the
ambulance records referred to “fitting” on 11 May 2016. He was of
the view that the respondent’s
heavy alcohol consumption may have been a
contributing factor to the fall in August 2017 and was relevant to the episodic
Dr Mellick considered that the May 2016 injury may have resulted in a
vestibular injury causing unsteadiness which was said to have
commenced at that
time. He said that the seizures occurring in 2020 should be considered to be
connected to the August 2017 injury
and the ischaemic stroke on 24 August 2019
should be considered as unrelated to the May 2016 injury.
Mellick agreed that a blow to the head could cause epilepsy. He noted that
investigation undertaken following the May 2016 injury
indicated that there was
no injury to the brain. He said that on the evidence, there was the possibility
that that fall may not have
caused the seizure, but it may have been due to a
blow on the head, or that the seizure resulted from alcohol consumption or
withdrawal.
He said that it was possible for a blow to the head to cause a
seizure but not result in ongoing seizures. He said that in this case,
seizures have occurred in the absence of intracranial pathology caused by the
May 2016 injury. He observed that the respondent’s
alcohol consumption
commenced long before the May 2016 fall and was an important factor which may of
itself have caused epilepsy.
Mellick remarked that there was no plausible evidence that the respondent was
assaulted. He reiterated that there were no specific
physical signs that would
support a diagnosis of an incomplete cervical cord lesion, which was the same
conclusion reached by Dr
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member delivered his reasons and findings orally and a transcript was provided
to the parties.
Member summarised the factual circumstances surrounding the respondent’s
allegation of injuries and identified the issues
for determination, which he
said required a consideration of what actually occurred to the respondent at
work on 11 May 2016 and
whether the fall suffered by the respondent on 13 August
2017 was causally related to the effects of the injury on 11 May 2016. He
provided a detailed summary of the tasks the respondent was performing on 11 May
2016. He noted that the respondent had no recall
of the incident in which he was
injured. He further noted that the respondent hypothesised that he must have
been hit in the head
by the corner of a box that fell from the trolley.
Member referred to the entry in the ambulance records where it was recorded that
the respondent was found fitting on the ground,
and a further entry noting a
“fitting episode” with no head trauma. The Member commented that the
record of there being
no head trauma was contrary to the wound in the
respondent’s head.
Member observed that the respondent attended his general practitioner the day
following the injury, who considered that the headwound
appeared to be
consistent with the respondent having been hit in the head by a ball hammer and
recommended that the respondent report
it to the police. The Member referred to
the description of events provided in the respondent’s statement to police
the Injured Worker Statement Form.
Member reviewed the statement evidence provided by Ms Mahoney and observed that
she could not recall seeing boxes of chickens
and stated that staff would not be
performing that work in that section of the premises. The Member noted that Ms
statement was made some considerable time after the event and
from a very early stage the respondent had described his duties of
filling the
freezers with chickens from the boxes stacked on the trolley.
Member said that the respondent stated that he continued to suffer vertigo,
dizziness, headaches and unsteadiness. He also noted
that, following the injury
on 11 May 2016, the respondent attended his general practitioner on 19 May 2016,
20 May 2016 and 27 June
2016 and complained of those symptoms, as well as
vomiting. He noted that the respondent returned to work but frequently would
to leave because of the symptoms. The Member referred to the CT scan dated
19 May 2016 which showed a small right parietal hematoma.
Member referred to the subsequent injury on 13 August 2017. He observed that the
respondent fell and hit his head after having
three or four beers at a local
tavern. He said that the respondent was taken by ambulance to Gold Coast
Hospital and was in hospital
for four weeks. The Member noted the pathology and
referred to the entries in the hospital records, which included that the
suffered a fall while significantly intoxicated and had a history of
recurrent falls as well as dependence on alcohol and prescription
Member referred to a consultation at the hospital clinic the following day where
the cause of the fall was recorded as
“multifactorial”, but alcohol
related. The Member observed that it was apparent that alcohol had been an issue
respondent for some considerable time. The Member concluded that the
cause of the fitting on 11 May 2016 “was most likely as
a result of the
injury to his head on that day rather than a seizure causing the fall with the
head injury suffered during the course
concluded that the respondent had consumed some alcohol on the night before the
injury so that it was unlikely that he
suffered from symptoms of alcohol
withdrawal at the time of the fall. The Member reasoned
“The wound to the head had the appearance of being a
puncture wound and would be consistent with the hard corner of a falling
cardboard box hitting the back of the top of the [respondent’s] skull and
causing the [respondent] to fall to the ground
and suffer a seizure. There is no
evidence that the [respondent] had suffered any seizure or fitting prior to this
It is a plausible and a likely explanation of what happened on 11 May 2016.
This version of what occurred on this day is more plausible
than that the
[respondent] struck his head on an object during the course of the otherwise
unexplained fall and the nature of the
Member observed that the Gold Coast Hospital admission records made mention of a
past history of the respondent suffering recurrent
falls prior to August 2017.
The Member added that the respondent was examined by Dr Mellick at the request
of the appellant, who,
on 2 November 2023 reported that the injury at work may
have resulted in a vestibular injury which caused unsteadiness that had been
present since. The Member also referred to Dr Mellick’s observation
that the history of alcohol consumption may have been an
additional contributing
factor to the fall, and that Dr Mellick was of the view that a blow to the head
may precipitate an epileptic
fit at the time of the blow without causing
permanent seizures.
Member considered the evidence provided by Dr Teychenné in his report
dated 30 September 2018. He noted that Dr Teychenné
recorded the
history that the respondent developed weakness in the left arm and left leg
approximately 3 months after the 2016 injury
and had been experiencing flexing
down of the left leg. The Member pointed to Dr Teychenné’s
opinion that the injury
in May 2016 possibly caused weakness and loss of
strength, and that the respondent potentially sustained an incomplete cervical
lesion in the incident. The Member observed that both Dr Mellick and Dr
Carney found no evidence of an incomplete cervical cord lesion.
Member referred to Dr Teychenné’s view that there was a possibility
that the weakness and loss of strength in the
left leg which was present after
the 2016 injury resulted in the respondent’s leg giving way or the
respondent tripping, causing
the fall in the 2017 incident, although the picture
was complicated by the respondent’s intoxication. The Member noted that
Teychenné took the further history that after the fall on 13 August 2017,
the respondent’s balance continued to be
badly affected and he continued
to experience vertigo, dizziness and headaches, which were symptoms present
since the 2016 injury,
but since the 2017 incident, he began to suffer seizures.
Member pointed out that there was no evidence that the respondent had
experienced vertigo, dizziness or unsteadiness prior to
the 2016 injury, and
prior to that injury the respondent had maintained regular employment as a
butcher. He added that the respondent’s
evidence was that he had good
balance and enjoyed surfing, paddleboarding and skateboarding but was unable to
perform those activities
after the 2016 injury, and after the 2017 incident he
was unable to return to work as a butcher.
Member concluded that he accepted that on 11 May 2016 the respondent was
carrying out the duties described by him. He considered
that the likely
mechanism of injury was that the corner of a heavy box struck the respondent on
the back of his head. The Member
referred to Spigelman CJ’s observation in
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
“often difficult to distinguish between permissible inference and
conjecture” and Spigelman CJ’s reference
to Lord McMillan’s
reasoning in
Jones v Great Western Railway
that “the dividing
line between conjecture and inference is often a very difficult one to
draw” and “An inference
in the legal sense ... is a deduction from
the evidence, and if it is a reasonable deduction it may have validity as legal
Member further concluded that on the basis of the available evidence, it was
probable that the 2016 injury occurred as asserted
by the respondent. He
accepted that the injury had a continuing effect on the respondent in particular
in relation to the respondent’s
unsteadiness, which Dr Mellick considered
may have been a vestibular injury suffered in the 2016 injury. The Member
reasoned that
the respondent may have been intoxicated on 13 August 2017,
however the vertigo and unsteadiness constituted a material contribution
respondent falling and suffering injury.
Member noted that Dr Teychenné was of the view that it was possible that
the respondent suffered an incomplete cervical
cord lesion, however Dr Mellick
and Dr Carney disagreed. He expressed the view that he was not satisfied that
there was evidence
of an incomplete cervical cord lesion. The Member concluded
that the respondent suffered injury to his head on 11 May 2016 and as
consequence of that injury, suffered a further injury to his head on 13 August
Certificate of Determination issued on 29 November 2024
“The determination of the Commission in this matter
is as follows:
matter is remitted to the President to refer the matter to a Medical Assessor
(Neurologist) to assess any WPI (Nervous System)
as a result of injury on
11/05/2016 and the consequential injury on 13/08/2017.
Medical Assessor should be furnished with:
(a) The Application to Resolve a Dispute,
(b) The Reply,
(c) All Late Documents, and
(d) A copy of this [Certificate of Determination].
that the parties will have the opportunity to review the referral as drafted by
the Commission and can raise with the Commission
any issue that may arise.
matter is to be scheduled for a [post Medical Assessment Certificate preliminary
conference] to deal with [the respondent’s]
claim for medical
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant brings three grounds of appeal as follows:
(a) Ground One: The Member erred by failing to provide adequate reasons for:
(i) finding that a compensable injury, particularly a neurological injury, was
sustained on 11 May 2016;
(ii) finding that the respondent suffered a consequential injury on 13 August
(iii) failing to address s 4 and s 9A of the 1987 Act, which is also a failure
to exercise his statutory function;
(b) Ground Two: The Member erred in making his factual findings, and
(c) Ground Three: The Member erred in the formulation of the terms of the
referral by referring the matter to a Medical Assessor
to assess whole person
impairment:
(i) resulting from a neurological injury sustained on 11 May 2016 without having
made a finding of injury or the nature of the injury,
(ii) resulting from the consequential injury sustained on 13 August 2017 without
having made any finding as to the nature of that
LEGISLATION
294 of the 1998 Act provides:
294 Certificate of
Commission’s determination
(1) If a dispute is determined by the Commission, the Commission must as soon
as practicable after the determination of the dispute
issue the parties to the
dispute with a certificate as to the determination.
(2) A brief statement is to be attached to the certificate setting out the
Commission’s reasons for the determination.”
78 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the 2021 rules) relevantly
(2) A determination of the appropriate decision-maker in applicable
proceedings to which this rule applies is to be accompanied by
a brief statement
of the appropriate decision-maker’s reasons for the determination that
includes the following—
(a) the appropriate decision-maker’s findings on material questions of
fact, referring to the evidence or other material on
which those findings were
(b) the appropriate decision-maker’s understanding of the applicable
(c) the reasoning processes that led the appropriate decision-maker to the
conclusions made.
(3) Without limiting subrule (2), the reasons are to be stated sufficiently,
in the opinion of the appropriate decision-maker, to
make the parties to the
proceedings aware of the appropriate decision-maker’s view of the case
made by each party.”
4 of the 1987 Act provides:
Definition of
In this Act:
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of employment,
(b) includes a
disease injury
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing factor
to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in the course
of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease, and
9A of the 1987 Act provides:
No compensation payable
unless employment substantial contributing factor to injury
(1) No compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury (other
than a disease injury) unless the employment concerned
was a substantial
contributing factor to the injury.
In the case of a disease injury, the worker’s employment
must be the main contributing factor. See section 4.
(2) The following are examples of matters to be taken into account for the
purposes of determining whether a worker’s employment
was a substantial
contributing factor to an injury (but this subsection does not limit the kinds
of matters that can be taken into
account for the purposes of such a
determination)—
(a) the time and place of the injury,
(b) the nature of the work performed and the particular tasks of that work,
(c) the duration of the employment,
(d) the probability that the injury or a similar injury would have happened
anyway, at about the same time or at the same stage
of the worker’s life,
if he or she had not been at work or had not worked in that employment,
(e) the worker’s state of health before the injury and the existence of
any hereditary risks,
(f) the worker’s lifestyle and his or her activities outside the
(3) A worker’s employment is not to be regarded as a substantial
contributing factor to a worker’s injury merely because
of either or both
of the following—
(a) the injury arose out of or in the course of, or arose both out of and in
the course of, the worker’s employment,
(b) the worker’s incapacity for work, loss as referred to in Division 4
of Part 3, need for medical or related treatment,
hospital treatment, ambulance
service or workplace rehabilitation service as referred to in Division 3 of Part
3, or the worker’s
death, resulted from the injury.
(4) This section does not apply in respect of an injury to which section 10,
11 or 12 applies.”
SUBMISSIONS
appellant acknowledges that s 352 of the 1998 Act limits an appeal to a
determination of whether the decision appealed against
was, or was not affected
by an error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of such error. The
appellant refers to
Northern NSW Local Health Network v
as authority to say
that there must be error and not merely a preference for a different result, and
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v
in which Basten JA
observed that in determining whether there was error in respect of findings of
fact, the line between preferring
a different result and the identification of
error is difficult to draw. The appellant adds that the principles applicable to
a finding of fact were cited by Roche DP in
Raulston v Toll Pty
respondent also relies upon the principles set out in
that those principles were drawn from
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2)
this appeal was lodged and the timetable for submissions was closed, the Court
of Appeal (Bell CJ, Leeming, Kirk, McHugh and
Free JJA) in
State of New South
Wales v Culhana
re-visited a
consideration of the effect of the 2011 amendments to s 352(5) of the 1998
and determined that a series
of decisions (including
Hill and Raulston
) misunderstood
the effect of the amendments by applying an unduly narrow test in determining
errors of fact. The Court also gave
consideration to Allsop P’s summary of
the propositions relevant to disturbing an error of fact in
concluded that that approach was inconsistent with what is required to establish
error in accordance with s 352(5).
that Ground Two of this appeal involves an allegation of error on the part of
the Member in the process of fact finding, I considered
it appropriate to allow
the parties to make submissions as to the application of
appeal. A summary of the parties’ submissions is included in the
submissions made in respect of that ground of appeal
(Ground Two).
As to Ground One
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Member erred by finding that a compensable injury,
particularly a neurological injury, was sustained
on 11 May 2016.
appellant refers to the discussion of the principles applicable to the
requirement to provide adequate reasons set out by Snell
BGV v Waverley
Snell DP quoted from and applied
Beale v Government Insurance Office of
v RRR Corporation Pty Ltd
Ming v Director of Public Prosecutions
appellant also refers to other Presidential decisions involving the application
of those authorities in the context of the Commission.
appellant submits that, while the reasons were given ex tempore, the Member was
still required to provide adequate reasons in
order to ensure that the decision
maker above is not left to speculate from the collateral observations of the
Member what the basis
was for the finding, citing
appellant points to the Member’s observations at paragraphs [20] to [22]
and [30] to [35] of the
transcript.
The appellant
asserts that the Member gave no reasons for concluding that the respondent would
have been unlikely to be suffering
from alcohol withdrawal at the time the fall
occurred. The appellant says that the inference drawn by the Member was
dependent upon
the respondent’s self-reporting, but in any event the
Member did not grapple with the appellant’s submissions in paragraphs
to [29] of its submissions made below, which were contrary to that proposition,
which constitutes a failure to afford the appellant
procedural fairness.
appellant asserts that the Member fell into further error when he determined
that the wound was more consistent with a blow to
the head from a box when there
were various other explanations offered, including from the respondent. The
appellant cites
which Beazley JA (as her Excellency then was) observed that while experience
with medical terminology and conditions will provide
decision-maker, that familiarity will never make the decision-maker the expert
in the case. The appellant
submits that, in accordance with
Kirby P’s observations in
JLT Scaffolding International Pty Ltd (in
Liq) v Silva
even though
the Commission is a specialist tribunal, it is not permissible for the Member to
use that knowledge to fill gaps in the
evidence or determine the aetiology of a
disease if there is no evidence to support the conclusion. The appellant asserts
Member impermissibly filled in the gap in the evidence and used his own
interpretation of the nature of the wound in the photograph.
appellant submits that the Member provided no explanation for his conclusion
that it was more likely that the wound was caused
by a blow to the head by a
falling box, rather than the very plausible explanation that the respondent hit
his head when falling.
The appellant submits that there was no medical evidence
to support the Member’s conclusion. The appellant asserts that the
controversy was therefore not properly resolved by the Member’s
appellant refers to the Member’s citation of the relevant authorities in
respect of the drawing of inferences from the facts.
The appellant says that the
Member did not explain why the evidence permitted such inferences to be
appellant submits that the fact that the respondent did not complain of symptoms
of vertigo, dizziness or unsteadiness prior to
11 May 2016 does not assist
because it was only after the respondent suffered a fall or blow to the head
that the symptoms manifested.
The appellant refers to the Member’s
observation that the respondent was performing his work duties (including
handling boxes)
when the injury occurred and submits that that fact was
insufficient to support the inference drawn and it was equally probable that
there was some other cause of the injury.
appellant refers to the evidence of Ms Mahoney, who said that she could not
recall any boxes in the vicinity of where the respondent
was lying and the area
where the respondent was found was not a location where the staff would be
unpacking boxes. The appellant
notes that the Member discounted that evidence
because it was provided a long time after the event. The appellant submits,
that it is unclear as to whether the Member made any finding in
relation to that evidence.
appellant asserts that Dr Teychenné did not provide an opinion that
established the necessary link and queries whether
the Member placed any
reliance on the reports of Dr Teychenné in circumstances where the
Member rejected the notion put forward
by Dr Teychenné that the
respondent suffered an incomplete cervical cord lesion.
appellant submits that the Member’s reasons fell well short of the
necessary standard required.
appellant asserts further error on the part of the Member by finding that the
respondent suffered a consequential injury on 13
August 2017.
appellant refers to the Member’s observation that after the 2016 injury,
the respondent continued to experience vertigo,
dizziness, headaches and
unsteadiness. The appellant further refers to the Member’s observation
that when the respondent fell
on 13 August 2017 he had a significantly high
blood alcohol count, and that the Member concluded that the respondent had a
with alcohol for some time.
appellant points to the Member’s reasoning that he accepted that the
respondent’s injury had a continuing effect on
the respondent,
particularly in relation to unsteadiness and that Dr Mellick suggested
there may have been a vestibular injury on
11 May 2016, and that the
respondent’s vertigo and unsteadiness made a material contribution to his
fall in August 2017. The
appellant refers to the Member’s conclusion that
followed in which the Member found that the respondent suffered an injury
head on 11 May 2016 and the injury on 13 August 2017 was a consequence of
the May 2016 injury.
appellant submits that the Member failed to explain why the respondent’s
ongoing symptoms were material to the fall in August
2017 when there was no
evidence that those symptoms had caused earlier falls. The appellant asserts
that it submitted to the Member
that there were other more probable causes such
as significant intoxication and the effects of the alcohol consumption. The
says that there was no explanation as to why that evidence was
discounted when there was contemporaneous evidence and expert evidence
that intoxication was a causative factor. The appellant submits that proper
reasons should have been provided as to why the
appellant’s submission on
that point was rejected.
appellant complains of further error on the part of the Member by failing to
address s 4 and/or s 9A of the 1987 Act. The appellant
asserts that the Member
erred by failing to provide any reasons as to how those provisions were
satisfied and, on a fair reading
of the Member’s reasons, it is not
possible to understand exactly how the provisions were satisfied. The appellant
in failing to provide any reasons for finding that the respondent
suffered a compensable injury, the Member also failed to perform
his statutory
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the ground of appeal should be rejected. The respondent
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty
authorities to say that it is unnecessary for a decision-maker to refer to all
of the evidence or to indicate whether that evidence
is accepted or rejected.
The respondent also sets out the principles that apply to a consideration of the
obligation to give reasons
as summarised in
respondent submits that the Member fulfilled those obligations. He identifies
the issues for determination as firstly, whether
the respondent suffered a
work-related injury on 11 May 2016 that caused ongoing dizziness, headaches,
vertigo and instability and
secondly, whether that injury materially contributed
to the incident on 13 August 2017 in which the respondent received a traumatic
head and brain injury with a subdural haematoma requiring surgery, and resulted
in increased seizures and physical and cognitive
impairments. The respondent
indicates that the Member identified the issues for determination, after which
he proceeded to set out
the relevant evidence from the respondent, the general
practitioner, NSW Ambulance, NSW Police, Ms Mahoney, the Discharge Summary
Tweed Heads Hospital, and the CT scan dated 19 May 2016. The respondent submits
that the picture that was emerging from that
evidence was that the respondent
continued to complain of symptoms after the May 2016 incident.
respondent asserts that the Member proceeded to make his finding of fact that
the respondent’s seizures on 11 May 2016 were
caused by the fall, in which
the respondent suffered an injury to his head. The respondent says that the
Member’s conclusion
clearly shows that he appreciated the case put to him
by the appellant that the injury was occasioned by the seizures which caused
respondent to fall and injure his head.
respondent says that the Member then considered the evidence about the incident
on 13 August 2017, including the evidence as to
the respondent’s
alcohol consumption, and the hospital records from Gold Coast Hospital. The
respondent refers to the Member’s
conclusion that the respondent’s
blood alcohol reading was significantly high and the observation that the
respondent’s
alcohol consumption had been a long-term problem.
respondent refers to the Member’s process of reasoning in respect of the
injury on 11 May 2016 that:
(a) given that the respondent had imbibed in a few drinks the night before, it
was unlikely that the respondent was suffering from
withdrawal of alcohol;
(b) the appearance of the wound was consistent with the respondent being hit in
the head by a heavy cardboard box;
(c) the hit on the head caused the respondent to fall to the ground and suffer a
(d) the respondent had not experienced seizures before this event, and
(e) this explanation of what occurred was more plausible than that put forward
by the appellant, which provided no explanation of
why the respondent fell.
The respondent submits that it was apparent that the Member based his conclusion
on the determinative factors which were:
(a) the wound had the appearance of a puncture;
(b) the description of the wound was consistent with the general
practitioner’s clinical notes;
(c) there was no past history of seizures, vertigo, dizziness or unsteadiness
prior to the fall;
(d) the respondent had not withdrawn from alcohol;
(e) the respondent had previously participated in sporting activities requiring
(f) the respondent was expected to perform the physical requirements of his work
activities;
(g) the respondent’s location when he suffered the injury, and
(h) the respondent had worked for many years as a butcher.
respondent asserts that the Member’s reasons were logical, rational and
understandable and there was ample evidence to support
his conclusions. He adds
that the Member explained any conflict in the evidence. The respondent says that
the Member discussed the
various authorities in respect of drawing inferences
from the evidence and that an inference is a deduction from the evidence, which,
if reasonable has the “validity of legal proof”, citing McColl JA in
Tudor Capital Australia Pty Ltd v
Christensen
The respondent
asserts that the Member applied the correct principles when drawing inferences
and says that there was no error in
the Member’s reasoning.
respondent refers to the Member’s finding that after the injury on 11 May
2016, the respondent continued to complain of
unsteadiness, dizziness,
headaches, vertigo and recurrent falls. The respondent says that the Member
based this finding on the contemporaneous
evidence of the respondent’s
general practitioner and the complaints made to the Tweed Heads Hospital on 19
May 2016, 20 May
2016 and 27 June 2016.
respondent referred to the Member’s consideration of the injury on 13
August 2017 and asserts that the Member referred to
all of the relevant
evidence, including the evidence of Dr Mellick that the injury on that date
may have resulted in a vestibular
injury causing unsteadiness which had been
reported since the injury on 11 May 2016. The respondent indicates that the
Member noted
that Dr Mellick considered that the respondent’s alcohol
consumption was an additional contributing factor and that Dr Mellick
considered that a blow to the head may cause epilepsy at the time of the impact
but did not result in permanent ongoing seizures.
The respondent asserts that Dr
Mellick’s evidence supported the notion that the blow to the head on 11
May 2016 likely caused
the seizures and the complaints of ongoing unsteadiness,
vertigo, dizziness and recurrent falls, which materially contributed to
on 13 August 2017.
respondent points out that, although the Member rejected the diagnosis of an
incomplete cervical cord lesion (which was not the
respondent’s primary
case), he relied upon the evidence of Dr Mellick, but additionally relied upon
the history recorded by
Dr Teychenné, who also noted a continuation of
symptoms following the injury. The respondent concedes that medical histories
may be inaccurate or incomplete, however he submits that
Dr Teychenné specifically focused on the history of the effects and
continuing symptoms and that history was consistent with other evidence.
respondent refers to the Member’s reference to Dr Mellick’s evidence
that the unsteadiness may have resulted from
a vestibular injury on 11 May 2016
and that the vertigo and unsteadiness was a material contribution to the fall
and injury on 13
August 2017. The respondent submits that the Member was correct
to conclude there was a material contribution and thus a link between
complaints and the injury on 13 August 2017.
respondent refers to the appellant’s allegation of error in failing to
provide reasons as to why s 4 and s 9A of the 1987
Act were satisfied. The
respondent submits that:
(a) the injury on 11 May 2016 occurred while the respondent was carrying out his
work activities of unpacking and stacking shelves;
(b) he was struck on the head by a box that fell from a trolley, and
(c) the injury occurred in the course of and arose out of his employment;
thus, s 4 of the 1987 Act was satisfied.
respondent adds that s 9A of the 1987 Act was clearly satisfied because the
respondent was struck on the head by a box and there
was no other contributing
factor, but even if there was another factor, the requirement is only that the
employment be a substantial
contributing factor, which was satisfied. The
respondent asserts that that conclusion was clearly implicit in the
analysis of the evidence and his findings.
respondent submits that the appellant’s complaints are not made out and
should be rejected.
As to Ground Two
The appellant’s submissions
appellant asserts that the Member’s failure to provide adequate reasons
creates a difficulty in identifying error in the
fact-finding process. It
submits, however, on the basis of the submissions made in respect of the errors
described in Ground One,
it is apparent that the Member’s factual findings
were in error and against the weight of the evidence.
appellant contends that the Member appears to have rejected Dr
Teychenné’s ultimate diagnosis and it can be implied
from that that
the Member rejected the whole of the opinions expressed by Dr Teychenné.
The appellant says that Dr Teychenné
was the only expert who drew a
causal link between the injury on 11 May 2016 and the injury on 13 August 2017,
yet the Member did
not accept that opinion, so that there was no proper
evidentiary basis upon which the Member could find that there was a material
contribution to the fall.
The appellant’s submissions on the effect of
appellant cites Leeming JA’s observations at paragraphs [91] to [92] of
that the proper approach to take in respect of s 352(5) of the
1987 Act and the identification of error in the fact-finding process
is that set
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed because it was
“open” to the Member to reach that conclusion.
appellant acknowledges that
overturned the previous Court of
Appeal authorities of
and the decision of Deputy
President Roche in
appellant submits that there are no implications in respect of Ground One or
Ground Three of the appeal because those grounds
involve errors of law. The
appellant submits, however, that there are implications in respect of the
alleged factual errors referred
to in Ground Two. The appellant asserts that the
correct approach is that taken in
Warren v Coombes
. The appellant states that the Member did not hear or observe any
witnesses, so that the Member was in no better position than a
Presidential
Member to make factual findings and, citing
no deference should be
given to the Member’s factual conclusions. The appellant submits that a
real review of the evidence
is necessary to determine whether the Member’s
conclusions were erroneous.
appellant asserts that, for the reasons already provided, the Member’s
conclusions were erroneous. The appellant further
asserts that the approach now
required by
does nothing less than strengthen the
appellant’s case.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Member referred to the evidence, analysed it and
explained why he accepted some evidence and not the
other. The respondent says
that the Member relied upon probative, logical evidence that was relevant to the
issues. The respondent
asserts that there was no error demonstrated in the
Member’s findings of fact and says that the appellant is merely
with the outcome.”
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that Dr Teychenné
was the only expert who drew a link between the
injury on 13 August 2017 and
that of 11 May 2016 and that there was no proper basis for the Member to find
that the injury on 11
May 2016 made a material contribution to the fall in 2017.
The respondent asserts that the submission is misconceived. The respondent
submits that what was required of the Member was for him to evaluate the
evidence, adopting a common-sense approach, and all the
respondent was required
to do was to establish a causal link between the injury on 11 May 2016 and the
fall on 13 August 2017. The
respondent asserts that the causal link must be
material and not just de minimus or negligible. The respondent says that the
established that connection in that it showed that the respondent
continued to experience recurrent falls, as recorded in the clinical
in the reports of Dr Teychenné, and the Member was satisfied on that
evidence that the causal link was established.
respondent contends that this ground of appeal is not made out and should be
The respondent’s submissions on the effect of
respondent also relied upon
, but concedes that
, the Court rejected the narrow approach previously taken in
Presidential appeals as to whether the Member’s finding of fact
“open” or “available” to the Member. The respondent
contends that
requires the Presidential Member to determine
factual challenges by a review of all of the evidence, while paying regard to
the advantages
a primary decision-maker would have if oral evidence was
respondent quotes from Leeming JA’s judgment at paragraphs [91] to [92],
in which he said that the approach taken in
Warren v Coombes
should be followed, with appropriate allowance for any advantage the
Member had at first instance, such as that identified in
respondent submits that if, after making that allowance, the Presidential Member
reached a different conclusion in respect of
a question of fact, the
Presidential Member should not “shrink from giving effect to
respondent asserts that an appellate court may conclude that the finding of the
primary decision-maker was “glaringly improbable”
or “contrary
to compelling inferences”
and that an appeal court is usually in just as good a position to evaluate the
evidence as the trial judge.
respondent contends that the inferences drawn by the Member were “neither
‘contrary to compelling inferences’
nor ‘glaringly
improbable’.” The respondent refers to his submissions made to the
Member in reply and submits that,
for those reasons, the inferences drawn by the
Member were compelling and more probable than the hypothesis put forward by the
The respondent says that those inferences were supported by the
evidence and the established facts, and thus the Member did not fall
into error.
As to Ground Three
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Member erred in the formulation of the terms of the
referral by seeking a referral of the respondent’s
nervous system because
the Member did not make a finding that the respondent suffered a neurological
injury on 11 May 2016 and in
fact did not make a finding as to the precise
injury or body part. The appellant submits that it was therefore not open to the
to make the referral when it is not a matter for the Medical Assessor to
discern what injury or body part is to be assessed.
appellant asserts that it was incumbent upon the Member to make a finding as to
the actual injury noting that the respondent suffered
a wound and had scarring,
which does not appear to have been referred for assessment. The appellant adds
that the Member did not
indicate what evidence he relied upon to find a
neurological injury resulting from the injury on 11 May 2016, which is a further
indication that there was a failure to provide adequate reasons.
appellant points out that it is even more obvious that there was an error in
relation to the referral of the consequential injury
in August 2017 because
there is no body part identified as to be assessed or what that injury actually
was. The appellant says that
it was a matter for the Member to identify the
injury, which he did not do, so that the parties were unable to appreciate what
injury was, and neither would the Medical Assessor be in a position to do
The respondent’s submissions
respondent refers to the appellant’s complaint that the referral to a
neurologist should not have been made without a finding
as to the actual injury.
The respondent points out that he claimed injury to the head and brain on 11 May
2016 causing persistent
dizziness, headaches, vertigo and instability, which
resulted in recurrent falls and seizures.
respondent further points out that he suffered a further head and brain injury
and a subdural haematoma on 13 August 2017, which
resulted in physical and
cognitive issues as well as increased seizures. The respondent submits that
those are the injuries to be
assessed. The respondent asserts that, having found
the injuries were compensable, the remaining dispute, which was the extent of
the respondent’s whole person impairment, required a referral for
assessment. The respondent says that it follows that as the
injury was to the
head and brain, a neurologist was appropriate to make the assessment. The
respondent adds that the Member was not
required to make a diagnosis.
respondent submits that the referral was appropriate and no error on the part of
the Member is made out.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant lodged submissions in reply to the respondent’s submissions,
limited to the submissions made in respect of Ground
Three of the appeal. For
the reasons set out by me below in respect of Ground One and Ground Two of the
appeal, it is not necessary
to provide a summary of the further submissions.
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the appeal upheld, the Certificate of Determination set
aside and an award in its favour be made. The
appellant adds that if the
Commission finds error but cannot decide the substantive dispute, then the
parties should have the opportunity
to make further submissions or the matter
should be remitted to a different Member for re-hearing.
respondent submits that the appeal should be dismissed, and the Certificate of
Determination should be confirmed.
CONSIDERATION
appellant asserts error on the part of the Member in reaching his conclusion
that it was more probable that the respondent was
hit in the head by a falling
box (Ground Two of the appeal) and that the Member failed to provide adequate
reasons for reaching that
conclusion (Ground One). The appellant also complains
that the Member denied the appellant procedural fairness by failing to address
its submissions, although that complaint is not explicitly pleaded as a ground
of appeal. The appellant relies on his submissions
made under Ground One of the
appeal to address the alleged factual errors complained of in GroundTwo.
that Ground Two of the appeal asserts error in the Member’s findings of
fact, it is important at this point to consider
the recent NSW Court of Appeal
decision of
the Court set out the proper
approach to be taken by a Presidential Member in the application of s 352(5) of
the 1998 Act and the
identification of error in the fact-finding process. The
Court determined that the approach taken in
Whiteley Muir
was too narrow a test and was wrong, and it was not
sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that it was
to the Member to reach his or her conclusion. Leeming JA
(with Bell CJ, Kirk, McHugh and Free JJA agreeing)
“Future appeals under s 352 should apply the approach in
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
. Appropriate deference is to be
given to members where their findings are based on evidence in respect of which
they have an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
over the Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it is not sufficient for an
appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was ‘open’ to
the member, as if the member were a jury and there was some evidence supporting
Presidential member, after making appropriate allowance for the
advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a different conclusion
question of fact, he or she should not shrink from giving effect to it.
Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
an appeal but without
fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
Fox v Percy
, the High Court observed:
“Appellate courts
are not excused from the task of ‘weighing conflicting evidence and
drawing [their] own inferences and
conclusions, though [they] should always bear
in mind that [they have] neither seen nor heard the witnesses, and should make
allowance in this respect’. In
Warren v Coombes
, the majority
of this Court reiterated the rule that:
‘[I]n general an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial
judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from
facts which are
undisputed or which, having been disputed, are established by the findings of
the trial judge. In deciding what is
the proper inference to be drawn, the
appellate court will give respect and weight to the conclusion of the trial
judge but, once
having reached its own conclusion, will not shrink from giving
effect to it.’”
where the relevant fact is an inference to be drawn from the established facts,
a Presidential Member is required to determine
the correct outcome in respect of
the relevant issue, while giving due allowance for any advantage the Member at
first instance may
have had. The High Court in
Steven Moore (a pseudonym) v
referred to this approach as the “correctness
In the present
case, there was no oral evidence given and the dispute was decided on the basis
of the written submissions of the
parties. In those circumstances, I do not
consider that the Member had any advantage over a Presidential Member in terms
of evaluating
the evidence of the witnesses and reaching factual conclusions. I
therefore need to determine whether the Member’s findings
were correct.
Ground Two: Whether the Member erred in making his factual
The alleged injury on 11 May 2016
it is necessary to examine whether the Member made an error of fact in reaching
his conclusion as to the mechanism of injury
on 11 May 2016, as asserted by the
appellant in this ground of appeal.
respondent’s undisputed evidence was that he had no recall of how the
injury occurred, and that he had not previously experienced
any epileptic or
neurological symptoms prior to the incident on 11 May 2016. There were no
identified witnesses to the incident and
no CCTV footage of that area. It is not
clear what, if any, investigations were undertaken by the appellant to ascertain
injury occurred. If there had been, one might expect that evidence to be
adduced. Indeed, in the circumstances of a fall occasioning
a head wound,
followed by episodic fitting and the need for the respondent to be taken by
ambulance to hospital, some internal safety
investigation or intervention by
Safe Work NSW perhaps ought to have been initiated. Curiously, the CCTV cameras
in that area appear
to have been non-functional for some time.
respondent clearly suffered an injury to his head in the course of his
employment, described in the Tweed Heads Hospital notes
as a laceration to the
right occiput, but whether that was a compensable injury within the meaning of s
4 and whether the respondent’s
employment was a substantial contributing
factor to that injury pursuant to s 9A of the 1987 Act requires a close
evaluation of the
available evidence as to the cause of the injury.
CT scan of the brain was conducted on 11 May 2016 and showed no
abnormality.
On 19 May 2016
the respondent attended the Gold Coast Hospital complaining of symptoms of
dizziness, vertigo, imbalance and headaches,
present for 7 days. Similar
complaints of those symptoms appear throughout the contemporaneous evidence.
CT scan of the head dated 19 May 2016 showed a small right parietal
respondent attended Dr Josephsen on 12 May 2016, who recorded that the
respondent had probably been hit on the head, was concussed
and suffered a
seizure. On 28 March 2016, Dr Josephsen described the injury to the head as a
puncture wound.
16 May 2016 Dr Chamberlain inspected the photograph of the wound and considered
that the respondent had been hit in the head by
something sharp.
Teychenné initially thought that the wound was consistent with a blow
from the ball of a hammer. He subsequently observed
that it could well have been
caused by being hit in the head and knocked unconscious by the corner of a box
of chickens, in turn
causing the seizures. He observed that the CCTV footage
would help to clarify whether that happened, or whether the respondent suffered
a seizure and then fell.
Carney examined the photograph of the head wound and expressed the view that it
looked “suspiciously” like a blow to
the head, rather than the
result of a fall.
Mellick considered that the most probable explanation for the May 2016 injury
was that the respondent was kneeling down putting
a box in a lower shelf and
another box fell and struck the respondent in the back of head. He said that the
injury may have resulted
in a vestibular injury causing unsteadiness, which had
been present from that time.
Robinson, who also viewed the photograph of the wound, expressed the opinion
that the 2016 fall was caused by a metabolic or medical
problem rather than an
incident attributable to his employment or an external trauma. He opined that
metabolic problems could have
caused the fall and the subsequent problems and
that alcohol intake could have contributed to the problems. He added that it was
entirely possible that the epilepsy caused both the fall on 11 May 2016 and on
13 August 2017, or even all of the falls.
appellant points to the Member’s reasoning (partly reproduced at [83]
above) that:
“The [respondent] fitting on 16 May 2016 was most
likely as a result of the injury to his head on that day rather than a seizure
causing the fall with the head injury suffered during the course of the
The [respondent’s] history was that he had had some drinks the night
before so it is unlikely that the [respondent] was suffering
from withdrawal
symptoms as a cause of the fall. The wound to the head had the appearance of
being a puncture wound and would be
consistent with the hard corner of a falling
heavy cardboard box hitting the back of the top of the [respondent’s]
causing the [respondent] to fall to the ground and suffer a seizure.
There is no evidence that the [respondent] had suffered any
seizure or fitting
prior to this event.
It is a plausible and a likely explanation of what happened on 11 May 2016.
This version of what occurred on this day is more plausible
than that the
[respondent] struck his head on an object during the course of the otherwise
unexplained fall and the nature of the
wound. A nurse at the Tweed Hospital took
a photo of the wound and this is annexed to the [respondent’s] statement
Member was required to draw inferences from the available evidence, which I have
summarised. The Member acknowledged the observations
of Spigelman CJ in
as to the difficulty in distinguishing between permissible
inferences and conjecture. Spigelman CJ said (citations
“The law in Australia is, in my opinion, as stated
by Glass JA in this Court in
Fernandez v Tubemakers of Australia
‘The issue of causation involves a question of fact upon which opinion
evidence, provided it is expert, is receivable. But a
finding of causal
connection may be open without any medical evidence at all to support
Nicolia v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
, or when the expert
evidence does not rise above the opinion that a causal connection is
EMI (Australia) Ltd v Bes
; appeal dismissed. The
evidence will be sufficient if, but only if, the materials offered justify an
inference of probable connection.
This is the only principle of law. Whether its
requirements are met depends upon the evaluation of the evidence.’
It is often difficult to distinguish between permissible inference and
conjecture. Characterisation of a reasoning process as one
or the other occurs
on a continuum in which there is no bright line division. Nevertheless, the
distinction exists.”
“The test is whether, on the basis of the primary facts, it is
reasonable to draw the inference.
In my opinion, evidence of possibility, including epidemiological studies,
should be regarded as circumstantial evidence which may,
alone or in combination
with other evidence, establish causation in a specific
Luxton v Vines
Fullagar and Kito JJ in their joint judgment observed that, in matters involving
the civil standard of proof:
“... where direct proof is not
available, it is enough if the circumstances appearing in evidence give rise to
a reasonable
and definite inference: they must do more than give rise to
conflicting inferences of equal degrees of probability so that the choice
between them is a mere matter of conjecture. ... But if circumstances are proved
in which it is reasonable to find a balance of probabilities
in favour of the
conclusion sought then, though the conclusion may fall short of certainty, it is
not to be regarded as a mere conjecture
Jones v Dunkel
J observed that:
“One does not pass from the realm of
conjecture into the realm of inference until some fact is found which positively
that is to say provides a reason, special to the particular case under
consideration, for thinking it likely that in that actual
case a specific event
happened or a specific state of affairs existed.”
Member noted the factual evidence that the respondent had not withdrawn from
alcohol at the time of the 2016 injury and that he
had no previous history of
seizures or fitting. He considered the evidence of Ms Mahoney, noted it was
inconsistent with the respondent’s
evidence as to what he was doing at the
time of injury and further noted that her evidence was provided years after the
can readily be inferred that the Member preferred the evidence of the
respondent over that of Ms Mahoney.
Member’s conclusion that the wound to the head had the appearance of being
a puncture wound and would be consistent with
the hard corner of a heavy
cardboard box which fell, hitting the back of the respondent’s skull,
causing him to fall to the
ground and suffer a seizure, was explicitly drawn
from the medical evidence. That conclusion was precisely consistent with the
as to what likely occurred expressed by Dr Teychenné, Dr
Mellick, and Dr Josephsen and was supported by the opinions of Dr
Carney that
the wound looked more like a blow to the head than the result of a fall, and of
Dr Chamberlain that the respondent had
been hit in the head by something sharp.
of that evidence positively suggested that the incident likely happened as
described and as the Member concluded. The preponderance
of medical opinion
supported the conclusion reached by the Member. Dr Robinson stood alone in
respect of his concluded view that
the injury was attributable to a medical
problem and not an external trauma.
appellant asserts that the Member impermissibly allowed himself to fill the gaps
in the evidence as to how the injury occurred.
The appellant relies upon
. In that case, Beazley JA said that although the familiarity
gained by experience in respect of medical matters may be of assistance,
not make the judge a medical expert entitled to fill gaps in the evidence where
there is an absence of expert evidence to
support the judge’s view. In
this case there was ample consistent evidence from a plethora of medical experts
as to the nature
of the wound in the respondent’s head and as to the more
probable explanation of the sequence of events surrounding the blow
to the head.
The Member provided a detailed summary of that evidence in his reasons. There
was no absence of expert opinion to support
the inference drawn by the Member
and on a proper reading of the Member’s reasons as a whole, he did not
enter into the arena
of filling in any gaps in the medical evidence.
appellant asserts that there was no medical support for the conclusion that the
blow to the head was more likely to have been
caused by the corner of a box. In
the light of the views expressed by the plurality of the medical experts, that
submission must
be rejected.
appellant asserts that the Member erred by finding that the respondent suffered
a neurological injury on 11 May 2016. A CT scan
undertaken on 19 May 2016
disclosed a small right parietal haematoma. The Gold Coast Hospital and Health
Service clinical notes recorded
a seven-day history of worsening dizziness,
vertigo and vomiting, in the context of the head injury that occurred on 11 May
Dr Josephsen recorded on 12 May 2016 that the respondent was suffering
from headache, as did Dr Chamberlain on 16 May 2016. Although
Teychenné, Dr Carney, Dr Mellick and Dr Robinson examined the respondent
some time after the May 2016 injury, they all
recorded a history of the onset of
those symptoms immediately following the May 2016 injury. Dr Mellick considered
that the respondent’s
symptoms may have been attributable to a vestibular
injury, or injury to the brain. The respondent points to no evidence that
the presence of complaints of neurological symptoms of imbalance,
dizziness, vertigo and nausea referrable the head injury. There
is no basis upon
which the assertion that the respondent did not suffer a neurological injury on
11 May 2016 can be sustained.
appellant submits that the fact that the respondent did not experience those
symptoms prior to the fall is of no assistance. On
the contrary, that fact, in
the absence of any factual inconsistency, is indicative that the fall caused the
immediate onset of those
neurological symptoms.
appellant further asserts that the Member rejected part of Dr
Teychenné’s evidence (that the respondent had suffered
incomplete cervical cord lesion) so that it is not clear whether the Member
rejected the whole of his evidence. Given the Member
inferred from the evidence
that the respondent was hit on the head by the corner of a box of chickens which
caused him to fall to
the ground and experience seizures, which was considered
by Dr Teychenné to be the most probable scenario, it is obvious that
the Member accepted Dr Teychenné’s evidence, apart from the
proposition that the respondent suffered an incomplete cervical
cord lesion.
That evidence was consistent with the views of the other medical experts
referred to above and there was no error by
the Member in rejecting part only of
the expert’s opinion. The Member was not bound to accept or reject the
whole of the evidence
appellant has failed to identify any error of fact in the Member’s finding
that the respondent suffered a work-related injury
on 11 May 2016. For the above
reasons, I am of the view that the Member did not err in his fact-finding
process in relation to the
occurrence and causation of a work-related injury on
11 May 2016.
The alleged consequential injury on 13 August
with the May 2016 injury, the respondent could not recall what happened on 13
August 2017 and there were no witnesses as to what
appellant points to the Member’s reference to the evidence that the
respondent continued to experience vertigo, dizziness,
headaches and
unsteadiness following the injury on 11 May 2016 and returned to work after that
injury. The appellant adds that the
Member also noted that at the time of the
fall on 13 August 2017, the respondent had a significantly high blood alcohol
The appellant quotes from the Member’s reasoning in which he
“The [respondent] was reviewed by Dr Gatty on 6
December 2017 at a clinic presumably connected with the hospital who reported
the [respondent’s] treating doctor that the [respondent] presented post
seizure most likely multifactorial, alcohol-related,
subtherapeutic medication
and hypermetropia. Clearly alcohol had been a problem for the [respondent] for
quite some time.”
appellant refers to the Member’s consideration of the evidence from the
Gold Coast Hospital notes, where the respondent
attended after the 13 August
2017 injury, and the evidence of Dr Teychenné and Dr Mellick. The
appellant reproduces the Member’s
following reasons:
accept that the [May 2016] injury had a continuing effect on the [respondent],
particularly with regard to unsteadiness which
Dr Mellick says may have resulted
from the [respondent] having suffered a vestibular injury on 11 May 2016.
Whilst the [respondent] may have been intoxicated on 13 August 2017, he was
proceeding on his way home and the vertigo and unsteadiness
from which the
[respondent] suffered constituted a material contribution to him falling and
suffering the injury.”
“In conclusion, I find that the [respondent] suffered injury to the
head on 11 May 2016 and as a consequence of that injury
suffered a further
injury to the head on 13 August
appellant submits that the Member did not refer to any history of those symptoms
causing falls prior to the fall in August 2017
and the Member did not provide
any explanation as to why the symptoms referrable to the injury on 11 May 2016
were material to the
is well documented that the respondent suffered what can be accepted as
neurological disturbance of worsening imbalance, dizziness,
vertigo and vomiting
following the head injury on and from 11 May
respondent was discharged from the Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service in
respect of the August 2017 injury on 29 August 2017.
The injury was described as
a “fall with headstrike and LOC in the setting of
intoxication.”
his report dated 4 April 2018, Dr Chamberlain said that the respondent presented
to Gold Coast University Hospital on 13 August
2017 following another fall in
the context of intoxication, in which he lost consciousness. Dr Chamberlain
attributed the tonic clonic
seizure that occurred in February 2018 to the August
2017 injury because of the long absence of seizures between May 2016 and August
2017 and because of the severity of the August 2017
Teychenné considered that imbalance was common following an incomplete
cervical lesion and in the August 2017 incident the
respondent may have tripped
because of that imbalance. Dr Teychenné concluded that if the respondent
had an incomplete cervical
lesion that resulted from the first injury, then the
two later incidents in August 2017 and August 2019 could be causally related
the first injury occurring at work. He said that, on the basis of a diagnosis of
an incomplete cervical cord lesion, it was arguable
that the incident in August
2017, as well as the apparent stroke in August 2019 were causally related to the
May 2016 injury.
Robinson observed that the incident on 13 August 2017 caused an intracranial
haemorrhage, however, the respondent’s employment
could not have been a
contributing factor to that injury. That conclusion was, of course, on the
background of Dr Robinson’s
view that the injury in May 2016 was not
work-related.
Carney considered the mechanism of the injury in August 2017. He was of the view
that the injury on 13 August 2017 appeared to
have been either an epileptic
seizure or a fall causing a blow to the head. He said that if the injury in May
2016 caused the epilepsy,
and if on 13 August 2017 the respondent suffered an
epileptic fit causing him to fall, then the fall was work-related. Dr Carney
qualified that view by saying that there were multiple potential causes of
epilepsy, including excessive alcohol intake and alcohol
withdrawal, and it may
have been a contributing factor that the respondent ceased taking his
anti-epileptic medication. Dr Carney
concluded that there was no work-related
connection to the fall in August 2017.
Mellick was of the view that the respondent’s heavy alcohol consumption
may have been a contributing factor to the fall in
August 2017 and to the onset
of seizures, and was relevant to the episodic dizziness. Dr Mellick took a
history of subsequent falls
in 2018, which the respondent could remember, and
which were attributable to his loss of balance. Dr Mellick did not otherwise
a view as to whether the August 2017 fall resulted from the injury in May
Member noted the respondent’s statement evidence that prior to the fall on
13 August 2017, he had consumed three or four
beers. The Member further noted,
however, that the respondent’s alcohol reading showed a significantly
higher reading of 0.25
percent and the hospital notes recorded that the
respondent fell while intoxicated.
Member referred to the opinion of Dr Mellick that the incident in May 2016 may
have caused a vestibular injury resulting in unsteadiness
although Dr Mellick
referred to intoxication as a complication, and Dr Teychenné’s view
that there was a “possibility”
that the respondent’s weakness
in the left leg caused it to give way or caused the respondent to trip on 13
August 2017.
Member concluded that while the respondent may have been intoxicated when he
fell in August 2017, the vertigo and unsteadiness
that had been present since
the May 2016 injury “constituted a material contribution” to the
fall and thus the injury
on 13 August 2017 was a consequence of the May 2016
highest the medical opinion reaches is to the level of a possibility that there
was a causal connection between the injury in
May 2016 and the fall in August
2017. Dr Teychenné was of the view that a connection was
“arguable”, but that
opinion was based on the presence of a cervical
cord lesion, evidence of which was correctly rejected by the Member. Dr
opinion was couched in presumptions that “if” the May
2016 incident caused the epilepsy and “if” the respondent
August 2017 because he suffered an epileptic fit. Neither of those presumptions
is founded in the evidence and, in any event,
Dr Carney reached the ultimate
conclusion that there was no work-related connection to the fall in August 2017.
was thus insufficient expert or other factual evidence to support the
Member’s conclusion that the vertigo and unsteadiness
resulting from the
injury in May 2016 materially contributed to the fall in August 2017. There was
also no evidence that the fall
was caused by a seizure. Accordingly, the
Member’s conclusion that the fall on 13 August 2017 resulted from the
injury on 11
May 2016 was erroneous.
conclude that, in respect of Ground Two of the appeal, the Member did not err in
concluding that the respondent suffered a compensable
work-related injury on 11
May 2016 when the respondent was hit in the head, fell to the ground and lost
consciousness. I further
conclude that as a result of that injury the respondent
suffered imbalance, dizziness, vertigo and nausea. The Member’s finding
respect of that injury is therefore confirmed.
further conclude that the Member erred in determining that the injury on 13
August 2017 was consequential to and resulted from the
11 May 2016 injury. The
Member’s finding in relation to that incident is revoked.
Ground One: Whether the Member provided adequate reasons for
his conclusions
appellant asserts error on the part of the Member by failing to provide adequate
reasons for his findings that the respondent
suffered a compensable injury on 11
May 2016 and that the incident on 13 August 2017 was a consequence of the May
2016 injury. The
appellant asserts further error on the part of the Member by
failing to address s 4 and s 9A of the 1987 Act.
4 of the 1987 Act defines what constitutes an “injury” and s 9A of
the 1987 Act requires that, for the injury
to be compensable, the injured
worker’s employment must be a substantial contributing factor to the
injury. As the fall occurring
on 13 August 2017 was alleged to have occurred as
a consequence of the symptoms referrable to the May 2016 injury, the test in
of the August 2017 incident is not whether s 4 and s 9A applied but
required a consideration of whether the May 2016 injury materially
contributed
to the subsequent fall.
the appellant’s complaint that the Member failed to address the
application of s 4 and s 9A is only relevant to the finding
of injury on 11 May
2016. Additionally, in circumstances where the Member’s finding in respect
of whether the fall on 13 August
2017 was compensable was erroneous, it is not
necessary to consider the adequacy of the Member’s reasons for reaching
conclusion.
294 of the 1998 Act provides that “A brief statement is to be attached to
the certificate setting out the Commission’s
reasons for
determination.” Rule 78 of the 2021 rules (reproduced at [94] above)
requires that the Member set out his or her
findings on material questions of
fact, referring to the evidence upon which those findings are based, the
Member’s understanding
of the relevant law and the reasoning process that
led the Member to the conclusions made. The reasons are to be sufficient, in the
opinion of the Member, to enable the parties to be aware of the Member’s
view of the case made by the parties.
useful analysis of the principles in respect of a duty to give reasons was
provided by McColl JA (with Ipp JA and Bryson AJA agreeing)
, in which her Honour said as follows
(citations omitted):
“The Court is conscious of not picking
over an ex tempore judgment and, too, of giving due allowance for the pressures
which judges of the District Court are placed by the volume of cases
coming before them. However a trial judge’s reasons must,
minimum ... be adequate for the exercise of a facility of appeal’. A
superior court, ‘considering the decision
of an inferior tribunal, should
not be left to speculate from collateral observations as to the basis of a
particular finding’.
The giving of adequate reasons lies at the heart of the judicial process.
Failure to provide sufficient reasons promotes ‘a
grievance’ and denies ‘both the fact and the appearance of justice
having been done’, thus working a miscarriage
of justice.
The extent and content of reasons will depend upon the particular case under
consideration and the matters in issue. While a judge
is not obliged to spell
out every detail of the process of reasoning to a finding, it is essential to
expose the reasons for resolving
a point critical to the contest between the
The reasons must do justice to the issues posed by the parties’ cases.
Discharge of this obligation is necessary to enable the
parties to identify the
basis of the judge’s decision and the extent to which their arguments had
been understood and accepted
... it is necessary that the primary judge ‘
‘enter into’ the issues canvassed and explain why one case is
State Rail Authority of New South Wales v Earthline Constructions Pty
Kirby J observed that where there is evidence in support of a party’s
case, that evidence must be considered in the reasoning
process in a
satisfactory way.
Samuels JA said:
“... it is an incident of
judicial duty for the judge to consider all the evidence in the case. It is
plainly unnecessary for
a judge to refer to all the evidence led in the
proceedings or to indicate which of it is accepted or rejected. The extent of
duty to record the evidence given and the findings made depend, as the duty
to give reasons does, upon the circumstances of the individual
Additionally,
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v
the High Court
observed that the reasons for the decision were “not to be construed
minutely and finely with an eye keenly
attuned to the perception of
appellant asserts that the Member failed to provide any explanation for finding
that the respondent suffered a neurological injury
on 11 May 2016. The appellant
refers to the Member’s finding that the injury was unlikely to have been
caused by alcohol withdrawal.
Member noted that the respondent’s evidence was that he had consumed three
to four beers the night before the injury and
the history recorded by the Tweed
Heads District Hospital was that the respondent had abstained from alcohol for
two days until the
evening before the injury, when he had four standard drinks.
The Member observed that:
“The [respondent’s] history
was that he had had some drinks the night before so it is unlikely that the
[respondent] was
suffering from withdrawal symptoms as a cause of the
appellant submits that the amount of alcohol the respondent consumed was a
matter of the respondent’s “self-reporting”.
respondent’s unreliable report of alcohol consumption on the night of 13
August 2017, which was objectively noted
to be “intoxication”, the
history recorded in the Tweed Heads Hospital notes as to the respondent’s
alcohol consumption
in the days leading up to the May 2016 injury was
unchallenged. The conclusion that the respondent had not withdrawn from alcohol
is plainly consistent with the evidence as a whole and was a sufficient basis to
explain why the Member made that finding. I note
that the appellant did not
mount a case that excessive alcohol consumption on the night prior to the May
2016 injury was a cause
of the seizures.
appellant submits that the Member did not grapple with its submissions made to
the Member that:
(a) there was no direct evidence that the fall was occasioned by a box falling
on the respondent’s head and the respondent
had no recall of the event, so
that the proposed scenario has no merit, the proposition is mere conjecture and
there was no expert
evidence to support that notion;
(b) the Member was left to draw an inference in circumstances where the
fallibility of human memory is well recognised and the version
respondent’s self- interested explanation was given long after the
(c) there was no compelling reason why the respondent’s version was more
likely than that he had suffered a seizure for unrelated
reasons, such as
alcohol withdrawal and a seizure consequent upon alcohol withdrawal was the most
compelling conclusion;
(d) the respondent could not prove that his employment was a substantial
contributing factor to the injury pursuant to s 9A of the
(e) the prospect that the wound was caused by a fall could not be discounted
when the respondent could have fallen striking his head
on a hard object;
(f) the absence of seizures was immaterial because the respondent had been a
heavy drinker but ceased drinking shortly before the
(g) there was no expert evidence to support the notion that the wound was
inconsistent with a fall.
Member clearly appreciated the appellant’s case when he recorded that the
“fitting on [11] May 2016 was most likely
as a result of the injury
to his head on that day rather than a seizure causing the fall with the head
injury suffered during the
course of the
After reviewing the
evidence, the Member concluded that the latter proposition was less likely. The
Member did not conclude that
the former proposition was more likely simply on
the basis of the respondent’s “recollection” some years after
the event. He explained his path leading to that inference from a consideration
of the medical evidence and what those experts considered
was the most likely
explanation of the injury.
Member acknowledged the lack of direct evidence as to what occurred and that he
was required to determine the matter on the basis
of inferences drawn from the
available evidence. The Member considered the fine line between inference and
conjecture, before drawing
the inference that the fitting on 11 May 2016 was
most likely as a result of the injury to his head on that day rather than a
causing the fall, as opined by the various medical experts.
appellant argued that there was no expert evidence to support the notion that
the wound was inconsistent with a fall. The Member
dealt with that proposition
in his analysis of the evidence and his conclusion, which was squarely based on
the opinions of Dr Teychenné,
Dr Mellick, and Dr Josephsen and found
some support in the opinions of Dr Carney that the wound looked more like a blow
to the head
than the result of a fall, and Dr Chamberlain that the respondent
had been hit in the head by something sharp.
appellant submits that the fact that the respondent did not experience those
symptoms prior to the fall is of no assistance. As
I observed at [179] above,
that fact, in the absence of any factual inconsistency, is indicative that the
fall caused the immediate
onset of those neurological symptoms. How that
complaint relates to this ground of appeal is unclear. However, contrary to the
that the Member failed to provide adequate reasons for his findings,
in my view, the Member’s observation that the neurological
symptoms were
not present prior to the injury is an example of the Member’s appropriate
reasoning process.
Member’s reasoning process was sufficient to explain his findings in
respect of the injury on 11 May 2016.
appellant asserts that the Member failed to address s 4 and s 9A of the 1987
Act. Once again, it is difficult to ascertain how
this allegation of error falls
within the ambit of an alleged failure to provide reasons. In any event, the
whole process of the
Member’s determination involved a consideration of
the causation of the head injury and its consequences. The Member was not
required to specifically spell out the terms of s 4 of the 1987 Act.
Member observed that the respondent suffered the injury while he was performing
his work duties as described, and that the injury
occurred when the respondent
was hit in the head by a box of chickens. The Member’s reasoning and
conclusions were sufficient
to address the question of injury as defined by s 4
of the 1987 Act.
my view, the Member provided adequate reasons for reaching his conclusion that
the respondent suffered a work-related injury in
the course of his employment
with the appellant. The Member did not make any finding as to whether the
respondent’s employment
was a substantial contributing factor to the
injury on 11 May 2016. Although his findings that the respondent was injured
was performing his work duties and that the injury occurred when the
respondent was hit in the head by a box of chickens might be
indicative that he
did turn his mind to a consideration of the factors identified in s 9A, he did
not deal with s 9A, which is required
to be satisfied independently of s
352(5) of the 1998 Act provides that an appeal is limited to a determination of
whether the decision was or was not affected
by error, including an error of
law, and to the correction of such error. Thus, a consideration of whether the
Member’s omission
has resulted in error is
Consideration
9A(3) provides that the employment is not to be regarded as a substantial
contributing factor to the injury merely because
the injury arose out of or in
the course of employment, although it is
Examples of the
matters that are to be taken into account are set out in s 9A(2) of the 1987
Act. That is:
(a) the time and place of the injury;
(b) the nature of the work performed and the particular tasks of that work;
(c) the duration of the employment;
(d) the probability that the injury or a similar injury would have happened
anyway, at about the same time or at the same stage of
the worker’s life,
if he or she had not been at work or had not worked in that employment;
(e) the worker’s state of health before the injury and the existence of
any hereditary risks, and
(f) the worker’s lifestyle and his or her activities outside the
requirement for the employment to be a substantial contributing factor does not
exclude a contribution from other factors, including
non work-related
and the causal
connection must be “real” and “of
substance”.
this case, the injury clearly occurred in the course of the respondent’s
employment. The mechanism of injury was accepted
as the respondent being hit in
the head by a falling box of chickens, while the respondent was performing the
duties of removing
chickens from the boxes and filling the shelves with those
chickens. It was that injury that set in train the respondent’s
of dizziness, imbalance, vertigo and nausea.
respect of the factors identified that are to be taken into account, the
respondent was attending to the particular tasks of his
employment in the course
of his employment and the respondent had been employed by the appellant and as a
butcher for some time before
the injury. The respondent’s consumption of
alcohol may have been a factor indicating that at some stage the respondent
have developed dizziness, imbalance, vertigo and seizures, but there is no
medical evidence to support an assertion that the injury
(the hit on the head
causing neurological effects) would probably have occurred at the same stage in
the respondent’s life,
or would have occurred whether or not the
respondent was at work. The respondent’s state of health before the injury
although he had a problem with alcohol, he lived an active lifestyle
which he was unable to pursue after the injury.
accordance with
, even if there was another contribution to the
injury, even a substantial contribution, that does not negate a finding that the
was a substantial contributing factor. On the available facts, I am
of the view that the respondent’s employment was a substantial
contributing factor to the injury on 11 May 2016 pursuant to s 9A. In those
circumstances, the Member’s conclusion that the
respondent suffered a
compensable injury pursuant to s 4 of the 1987 Act is not affected by his
omission to consider s 9A of the
1987 Act, the omission is not material to the
outcome and therefore the Member’s decision is confirmed.
Ground Three
appellant challenges the terms of the Member’s referral of the
respondent’ s claim pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act.
I have found that
the Member’s determination that the injury on 13 August 2017 resulted from
the injury on 11 May 2016 was
erroneous. In those circumstances, the parties
have not had the opportunity to address the question of whether the seizures
after the May 2016 injury and the ongoing need for anti-epileptic
medication and other treatment for seizures resulted from the injury
the referral included an assessment of the injuries resulting from the incident
on 13 August 2017, the referral requires revocation
in any event. It is
therefore not necessary for me to consider this ground of appeal.
Member’s determination that the respondent suffered a work-related injury
on 11 May 2016 is confirmed and the respondent’s
employment was a
substantial contributing factor to that injury. The finding that the
respondent’s injury on 13 August 2017
resulted from the injury on 11 May
2016 is revoked, as is the referral to a Medical Assessor dated 29 November
2024. The issue of
whether the seizures after 11 May 2016 result from the injury
on 11 May 2016 requires determination by a member and is to be remitted
accordingly.
determination that the respondent suffered a work-related injury on 11 May 2016
is confirmed.
respondent’s employment was a substantial contributing factor to that
referral to a Medical Assessor dated 29 November 2024 for assessment of the
respondent’s whole person impairment is revoked.
Matter is remitted to a different member for determination as to whether the
seizures after 11 May 2016 result from the injury
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
8 September 2025
Licul v Corney
[1976] HCA 6
P & O Ports Ltd v Hawkins
[2007] NSWWCCPD
Reply to Application to
Resolve a Dispute (reply), pp
Application to
Resolve a Dispute (ARD), pp
Application to Admit
Late Documents dated 11 July 2024, p
report dated 30 September 2018, p
ARD, p 21, report dated
30 September 2018, p 8.
ARD, pp 120–133.
Transcript of reasons,
Moriarty v Woolworths Group Limited
29 November 2024), T 6.10–13,
(1930) 47 TLR 39
[2013] NSWCA 255
) per Sackville AJA,
[2020] NSWCA 54
NSWWCCPD 25
Workers Compensation Legislation Amendment Act
[2024] NSWPICPD 2
[121]–[126].
(1991) 21 NSWLR 725
[2022] NSWCA 209.
[2009] NSWCA 15
South Wales Court of Appeal, 30 March 1994,
unreported.
(1987) 10 NSWLR
[2017] NSWCA
[1979] HCA 9
Fox v Percy
[2019] HCA 28
Respondent’s submissions on the effect of
Fox v Percy
[2024] HCA 30
Australian Postal Commission
[1990] HCA 47
Chanaa v Zarour
T 10.11–23,
11.5–8, [40].
Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
Kumar v Royal Comfort
Bedding Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWWCCPD 8
, [35]–[49] and
[1999] HCA 3
(1991) 21 NSWLR 725
[1996] HCA 6
Nexon Asia Pacific Pty Ltd t/as Commander Australia Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA
), [48(3)].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter