URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/194.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hudson v R [2025] NSWCCA 194 (17 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 194
Hearing Date(s):
29 October 2025
Date of Orders:
17 November 2025
Decision Date:
17 November 2025
Adamson JA at [1]
Chen J at [2]
Coleman J at [103]
(1) Extend the time for the filing of the applicant’s Notice of
Appeal to 1 August 2025.
(2) Grant leave to appeal.
(3) Dismiss the
Catchwords:
SENTENCING — appeal against sentence — relevant factors on
sentence — Form 1 offences — whether sentencing
judge impermissibly
took Form 1 offence into account when assessing the objective seriousness of the
principal offence — whether
sentencing judge failed to make finding
accepting or rejecting case advanced by the applicant — where appeal
resentence — where a greater sentence ought to have been
imposed than that given by the sentencing judge
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
Weapons Prohibition Act 1998
Cases Cited:
Abbas, Bodiotis, Taleb and Amoun v R
[2013] NSWCCA 115
(2013) 231 A Crim R
Attorney-General’s Application under
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(No 1 of 2002) (2002) 56 NSWLR 146;
[2002] NSWCCA
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa (2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v TH
[2023] NSWCCA
(2023) 307 A Crim R 149
DL v The Queen
(2018) 265 CLR 215
Kentwell v The Queen (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
(2017) 96 NSWLR 633
[2017] NSWCCA 284
[2011] NSWCCA 242
(2011) 219 A Crim R 104
[2013] NSWCCA 217
[2018] HCA 29
R v Ferguson
[2022] NSWCCA 147
R v Hemsley
[2022] NSWCCA 150
[2019] NSWCCA
Roulstone v R
[2025] NSWCCA 7
Stephens v R
[2010] NSWCCA 93
[2024] NSWCCA 84
Turnbull v R
[2019] NSWCCA 97
Vamadevan v R
116 NSWLR 195
[2024] NSWCCA 223
Principal judgment
Jake Hudson (Applicant)
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Respondent)
Representation:
T F Woods (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
William O’Brien & Ross Hudson
Solicitors (Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions NSW
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2022/00347522
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales at Sydney
Date of Decision:
6 December 2023
Judge O’Rourke SC
File Number(s):
2022/00347522
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
On 6 December 2023, Jake Hudson (‘the applicant’) was sentenced
to 7 years imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 4
years and 6 months, after
pleading guilty to knowingly taking part in the supply of a commercial quantity
of a prohibited drug, methylamphetamine,
contrary to
Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(NSW). In addition to that principal
offending, the sentencing judge also took into account three further offences on
namely, possession of money suspected to be the proceeds of
crime (less than $100,000), contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW); use a prohibited weapon in contravention of a prohibition order,
contrary to
Weapons Prohibition Act 1998
(NSW); and use or
possess a prohibited weapon (a taser) without a permit, contrary to
Weapons Prohibition Act
By Notice of Appeal filed 31 July 2025, the applicant sought leave to appeal
against his sentence, raising two grounds: first, that
the sentencing judge
erred in taking into account an offence on a Form 1 in assessing the objective
seriousness of the principal
offence; and, secondly, that the sentencing judge
erred in failing to make any finding accepting or rejecting the case advanced by
the applicant concerning his experience of abuse in juvenile detention and the
relevance of his mental health disorders in mitigation
of his sentence.
The Court held (Chen J, Adamson JA and Coleman J agreeing)
, extending
the time for the filing of the applicant's Notice of Appeal, granting leave to
appeal but dismissing the appeal:
(1) In relation to ground 1, the sentencing judge used the fact of the
applicant’s possession of the taser to contextualise
the principal
offence, which the applicant conceded was permissible. Given the manner in which
that fact was used and the structure
of the sentencing judgment, there was no
basis to infer that the sentencing judge impermissibly punished the applicant
argued: Chen J at [
] (Adamson JA agreeing at [
]; Coleman J agreeing at
Attorney-General’s Application under
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(No 1 of 2002)
(2002) 56 NSWLR 146,
[2002] NSWCCA 518
Abbas, Bodiotis, Taleb and Amoun v R
[2013] NSWCCA 115
(2013) 231 A Crim
Stephens v R
[2010] NSWCCA 93
[2019] NSWCCA 183
Tukuafu v R
[2024] NSWCCA 84
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v
[2023] NSWCCA 81
(2023) 307 A Crim R 149
[2020] NSWCCA
[2022] NSWCCA 150
(2) In relation to ground 2, the sentencing judge was not required to make a
finding, on the balance of probabilities, as to whether
alleged sexual assault
in juvenile detention occurred: Chen J at [
] (Adamson JA agreeing at [
]; Coleman J agreeing at
]). However, the
sentencing judge did err in failing to address the applicant’s argument
would make his time in custody more
onerous. Accordingly, this ground of appeal was upheld: Chen J at [
] (Adamson JA agreeing
]; Coleman J
agreeing at [
R v Hemsley
[2004] NSWCCA 228
(3) On resentence, notwithstanding that some findings favourable to the
applicant were made, the presence of aggravating factors including
applicant was on parole at the time of offending for what the sentencing judge
described as “very serious offending”
involving “serious
firearm and drug offences”, the objective seriousness of the Form 1
offences and the need to give
substantial weight to the principles of specific
and general deterrence as well as the protection of the community, meant that a
greater, rather than lesser, sentence than that imposed by the sentencing judge
was warranted: Chen J at [
] (Adamson JA agreeing at [
]; Coleman J agreeing at
R v Ferguson
[2022] NSWCCA 147
[2013] NSWCCA
[2011] NSWCCA 242
(2011) 219 A Crim R 104
[2025] NSWCCA 7
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1,
[2010] NSWCCA 194
Attorney-General’s
Application under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(2002) 56 NSWLR 146,
[2002] NSWCCA 518
Abbas, Bodiotis, Taleb and
[2013] NSWCCA 115
(2013) 231 A Crim R 413
Vamadevan v R
(2024) 116 NSWLR 195
[2024] NSWCCA 223
: I agree with Chen J. On re-sentence, I would also have imposed a higher
sentence than the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge.
circumstances, and for the reasons given in the authorities cited in
[2019] NSWCCA 183
(Beech-Jones J (Bathurst CJ and N Adams J
agreeing)) it would not be appropriate to reveal the sentence which I would have
: Following a plea of guilty entered in the Downing Centre Local Court on
10 August 2023, Jake Hudson (‘the applicant’)
was committed to the
District Court to be sentenced for one count that, on 17 November 2022, he
knowingly took part in the supply
of a large commercial quantity of prohibited
drugs, namely, methylamphetamine, contrary to
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985
(NSW). At the time of sentence, the applicant also
sought to have three further offences dealt with on a Form 1, in accordance with
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (‘CSP
quantity of methylamphetamine referable to this offending was 1,132.2 grams. The
maximum penalty for the offence is life imprisonment
with a standard non-parole
period of 15 years.
6 December 2023, the applicant was sentenced by her Honour Judge O’Rourke
SC (‘the sentencing judge’) to 7 years
imprisonment with a
non-parole period of 4 years and 6 months, commencing 18 March 2023. The
applicant’s non-parole period
expires on 17 September 2027.
Notice of Appeal dated 31 July 2025, the applicant seeks leave to appeal against
his sentence, raising two grounds:
(1) that “[t]he sentencing Judge erred by taking into account an offence
on a Form 1 in assessing the objective seriousness
of the principal
offence”; and
(2) that “[t]he sentencing Judge erred in failing to make any finding
accepting or rejecting the case advanced by the applicant
concerning his
experience of abuse in juvenile detention and the relevance of his mental
disorders in mitigation of the sentence”.
Extension of time
the applicant filed a Notice of Intention to appeal his sentence on 12 December
2023 (being six days after his sentence was
determined), the subsequent Notice
of Appeal was filed on 31 July 2025 – over 18 months later. In these
circumstances, the
applicant sought an extension of time from the Court for
leave to bring his appeal.
support of his application, the applicant relied on the affidavit of Christopher
Cole affirmed 29 October 2025 explaining the delay.
Further, he argues that
“[t]he delay is relatively limited”; that he has a “strongly
arguable” case; that
there is “no prospect of a retrial or
rehearing” and “no question arises as to the fading memory or
potential re-traumatization
of witnesses”: all factors which (he submits)
support the extension of time required (applicant’s submissions at
Crown opposes the application for an extension of time for “the same
reasons” as to why the substantive grounds of
appeal should be dismissed
(Crown submissions at [7]). Given I consider that the applicant has made good
ground 2, the interests
of justice support the extension sought – which
should be granted. Nevertheless, as I explain in what follows, although I would
grant leave to appeal, in my view the appeal should be
applicant was sentenced pursuant to a Statement of Agreed Facts (‘agreed
facts’) and what follows is drawn from those
agreed facts and the
sentencing judgment. Given the sentencing judgment does not have a medium
neutral citation and is in transcript
form, the references to the page numbers
in that judgment are expressed as J1 etc.
The offending
the evening of 17 November 2022, police were patrolling in South Coogee when
they pulled over a black Jeep, having formed the view
that the driver was being
evasive. Their initial intention was to conduct a roadside breath test. The
vehicle was being driven by
the applicant’s girlfriend and the applicant
was in the front passenger seat (J2).
pulling over the vehicle and establishing that it belonged to the
applicant’s mother, police conducted further checks
and ascertained that
the applicant, who had identified himself to them, was subject to both a
firearms prohibition order and a weapons
prohibition order (J2-3). The police
then asked the applicant and his girlfriend to exit the car and informed them
that they were
going to conduct a personal search of each of them and a search
of the car pursuant to the firearms prohibition order (J3).
conducting the personal search of the applicant, police “located a mobile
phone and a wallet containing $1,800 in cash”
(J3). When questioned about
why he had this amount of cash, the applicant replied that “he had won
$2,500” while playing
pokies (J3). The cash was later seized (J3). The
possession of that money resulted in the applicant being charged with dealing
property suspected of being the proceeds of crime (less than $100,000),
contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) (sequence 3).
conducting the search of the car, “police located a black freezer bag
containing a number of smaller black bags”
as well as “an
approximately 20-centimetre-long black taser with a charging cable” (J3).
When questioned by police, the
applicant said that “he did not know what
the taser was for” and also asserted that “it was not his and he did
not know it was there” (J3). Police then placed the applicant under arrest
for breaching the firearms prohibition order. The
applicant was charged with two
offences: first, use a prohibited weapon in contravention of a prohibition
order, contrary to
Weapons Prohibition Act 1998
(sequence 2); and, secondly, possess or use a prohibited weapon, namely a taser,
when not authorised by a permit, contrary
Prohibition Act
(sequence 6).
further inspection of the smaller bags within the black freezer bag, police
located the following: a plastic bag rolled up with
rubber bands containing
107.1 grams of methylamphetamine of unknown purity; a resealable plastic bag
containing 254.7 grams of methylamphetamine
at 79% purity; and a knotted plastic
package containing 40.7 grams of methylamphetamine of unknown purity (J3). They
also found a
black leather bag containing the following: a resealable plastic
bag containing 491.5 grams of methylamphetamine at 74% purity and
a resealable
plastic bag containing 239.2 grams of methylamphetamine at 76% purity (J3). The
total amount of methylamphetamine was
1,132.2 grams (J3).
applicant initially denied any knowledge of the contents of the black freezer
bag containing the methylamphetamine and the taser
(J3). Later, however,
following his arrest, the applicant participated in an electronic recorded
interview with police. During that
interview, the applicant was questioned about
the taser and the methylamphetamine located in the vehicle, and he “stated
they were located in a black bag that a man had paid him $2,000 to take
somewhere” (J4). The applicant agreed with police that
he “put the
bag in the back of the vehicle” but “did not recall the man’s
name” (J4).
number of the items seized from the vehicle were subjected to DNA and
fingerprint analysis. The DNA recovered from a swab of the
seal of the
resealable plastic bag containing 254.7 grams of methylamphetamine matched the
applicant’s DNA profile.
facts described above resulted in the applicant being charged with several drug
offences, including the drug supply offence under
Drug Misuse
and Trafficking Act
earlier referred to.
The sentencing
sentencing judge noted that, in relation to the drug supply offence, the offence
carried a maximum penalty of life imprisonment,
with a standard non-parole
period of 15 years (J1). Her Honour also noted that the applicant sought to have
three further offences
dealt with on a Form 1 – namely, the proceeds of
crime offence and the weapons offences (J1).
relation to the Form 1 offences, the maximum penalties were: for the proceeds of
crime offence, three years imprisonment (sequence
3); and for the weapons
offences, 10 years imprisonment (sequence 2) and 14 years imprisonment (sequence
6) respectively.
the sentencing judge, there was a contest about the objective gravity of the
applicant’s offending. The Crown submitted
that this should be assessed
“at mid-range”, whereas the applicant submitted that it “fell
below mid-range”
(J5). Her Honour made findings about the objective
seriousness of the applicant’s offending as well as findings about the
set out in the background facts (J4-5).
Additionally,
given various and competing arguments were advanced by the parties about the
applicant’s role in the offending,
the sentencing judge addressed that
specific issue, noting that where he was stopped by police “was near his
was driving with his girlfriend; and “the amount and type
of what [drug] was located and the evidence before [her Honour]”
“it [was] difficult to determine his role conclusively” (J5). The
sentencing judge nevertheless went on to make
the following further findings and
assessment of the objective seriousness of the offending (J5):
“However, he was clearly involved. He was entrusted to carry that amount
of methylamphetamine in such a high purity, and, to
the very least, he was
transporting the drugs from one location to another, together with a prohibited
weapon in his custody at the
time. Overall, I find the objective seriousness to
fall towards the mid-range of objective gravity. In relation to the form 1
I find that they all are objectively serious.”
note that the applicant, by ground 1 of his Notice of Appeal, argues that the
sentencing judge fell into error by referring to the
applicant having a taser in
his custody, it being suggested that her Honour contravened first principles by
taking into account
the offences
involving use or possession of the taser
(sequences 2 and 6) when determining the objective seriousness of the principal
to the summary of the sentencing judgment, having addressed these matters, the
sentencing judge turned to the applicant’s
subjective case which, as the
applicant did not give evidence, was based upon documents tendered on his
Honour noted that the applicant had a long history of abusing drugs and that,
“[o]ther than the buprenorphine program, which
he began in 2022, he ha[d]
not received treatment or rehabilitation for his drug use” (J7). Further,
in this respect, her Honour
also noted that Dr Lennings, the consultant
psychologist retained to provide an opinion for the applicant’s sentencing
“opined that [the applicant] appears ... to have chronic
difficulty ... in abstaining from methylamphetamine. He was assessed
as having a
medium risk of re-offending, according to the level of service inventory
revised” (J10).
sentencing judge noted that the applicant, who at the time of sentence was 34
years of age, was reported to have spent, since
turning 18, “about ten
years in prison. His longest sentence was six years seven months, and his
longest time in the community
was about 13 months” (J10). Her Honour
noted, at the time of committing the principal offence, that the applicant had
“released on parole on 16 February 2022 for serious firearm and drug
offences committed in June 2019” and that, in consequence
offending, the applicant’s parole was revoked (J1-2, J10). The sentence
imposed for that offending was an aggregate
sentence of 4 years, commencing 12
July 2019 and concluding on 11 July 2023, with a non-parole period of 2 years, 7
months and 5
days, commencing 12 July 2019 and concluding on 16 February 2022
Honour noted that, in relation to drug supply, the decision in
(2017) 96 NSWLR 633
[2017] NSWCCA 284
“indicates that the aspect of general deterrence looms large in any
finding or any assessment in relation to the sentencing
process” and,
further, in relation to the applicant, there was “also a need for specific
deterrence, noting the prior
criminal history of the [applicant] and the
repeated nature of his offending” (J10-11).
sentencing judge found there to be two aggravating features present. The first
was that the applicant “was on conditional
liberty. He was nine months
into his parole period, and for very serious offending” (J11). The second
was that the applicant
also had “prior convictions, which [were]
extensive” and included (J11):
“... goods suspected of being stolen, behaving in an offensive manner,
robbery in company, stealing, dishonestly obtaining
by deception, larceny, drug,
firearms, and significantly, he was sentenced to an aggregate term of four years
six months imprisonment
with two years seven months and five days for firearms
and a previous conviction for supplying commercial quantity of drugs. This
other offences are significant.”
Honour also found that the applicant’s criminal history indicated that the
present offending was “not an uncharacteristic
aberration” and that
it demonstrated a “continuing attitude of disobedience of the law, and
demonstrate[d], to [her Honour’s]
mind, the need for general and specific
deterrence” (J11).
sentencing judge noted the applicant’s plea, accepting that “he
[would] receive a 25% discount as statutorily defined”,
adding that
“it was a strong Crown case, and, effectively, he was caught
red-handed” (J11).
relation to remorse, the sentencing judge noted that the applicant had provided
a letter to the Court, albeit that the letter had
“limited weight”
in light of the fact that the applicant “[had] not given evidence”
before her Honour (J11).
Nevertheless, her Honour found that, coupled with his
“expressed ... remorse to other third parties, and, of course, his
there was “evidence of genuine remorse” (J11-12). In
relation to rehabilitation, “considering all aspects”,
sentencing judge found “it to be still guarded ... it [was] intrinsically
involved [in] whether or not he [could] remain
abstinent from illicit drugs. If
[the applicant] [could], then his prospects for rehabilitation [would]
improve” (J12).
sentencing judge accepted that the applicant’s childhood “clearly
had elements of hardship and difficulty” and
that, recently, the applicant
“ha[d] reported that he was sexually assaulted when in juvenile detention,
and there [was] some
evidence of [an] actual claim issued ... through the
reports prepared” (J12-13). Her Honour further accepted that the
applicant’s
“social disadvantage, the drug issues he was surrounded
by, the absence of his natural father and the times of neglect endured
younger years” combined to reduce “his moral culpability to some
limited extent” (J13).
sentencing judge also made “a finding of special circumstances of just
under 66% ... due to [the applicant’s] dire
need for supervision upon his
release, and also for the protection of the community, together with the risk of
institutionalism”
sentencing judge, taking into account the applicant’s plea and the Form 1
offences, imposed a sentence of 7 years imprisonment,
commencing 18 March 2023
and expiring on 17 March 2030, with a non-parole period of 4 years and 6 months,
commencing 18 March 2023
and expiring on 17 March 2030 (J14).
now turn to address the applicant’s grounds of
Ground 1: the use of the Form 1 offence when assessing
the objective seriousness for the principal offence
Introduction
this ground of appeal, the applicant argued that the sentencing judge erred
“in taking into account the applicant’s
possession of the taser in
assessing the objective seriousness of the principal offence, being an offence
of drug supply” (applicant’s
submissions at [31]). The
applicant’s essential submission was that the finding about the objective
gravity of his offending
was flawed because it impermissibly was informed by the
Form 1 offences relating to the weapons offences (sequences 2 and 6): that
it involved him being punished –
– for the conduct
encompassed by that offending (applicant’s submissions at [32]).
Crown submitted that no such error had been committed by the sentencing judge
and that this was readily apparent upon a fair reading
of the sentencing
judgment (Crown submissions at [45]). More particularly, the Crown submitted
that the sentencing judge did no more
than consider the circumstances of the
offending, including the possession of the taser, when considering the
applicant’s role,
but that consideration did not invalidate the sentencing
judge’s finding about the objective gravity of the offending (Crown
submissions at [50]-[54]).
Discussion and consideration
dealing with the arguments advanced, it is useful to give some brief explanation
of how the issue about the taser arose before
the sentencing judge and to
outline aspects of, and principles relating to, the Form 1
The relevance of the taser
the written submissions before the sentencing judge, the parties accepted that
the applicant’s role in the supply offence
was relevant to an assessment
of the objective seriousness of the offending, albeit that they adopted
different positions about what
findings could be made.
applicant, in the written submissions filed for the sentencing hearing,
submitted that “[t]he facts ... do not exclude him
being a courier and
might in fact be thought to actually support his assertions”. Further, the
applicant also submitted that
the fact he was not found in possession of other
matters which might indicate actual supply – such as “drug
ledgers/lists,
scales, or packaging for distribution (little drug bags or
similar)” – was also supportive of him being “a courier
drugs”, rather than a principal, which “would reduce somewhat the
objective seriousness”. The Crown, in
the written submissions filed for
the sentencing hearing, submitted to the contrary – arguing that the
applicant was
“merely a courier” and, to that end,
contested the account that the applicant gave, that was broadly to that effect,
when interviewed for the purposes of the Sentencing Assessment Report dated 28
November 2023.
submissions before the sentencing judge, the applicant’s counsel addressed
the applicant’s “role” in
the offending: consistent with the
written submissions, the applicant contested the Crown’s argument that he
than a courier”, emphasising that there was no
“indicia of supply”, albeit accepting that “[t]he taser was
obviously in the bag”.
stances adopted before the sentencing judge on this issue about the relevance
and subject matter of the surrounding circumstances
in drug supply offending
were no doubt informed by decisions such as
(2018) 264 CLR
[2018] HCA 29
, where it was said:
“Accordingly, as has been established by a succession of Australian
intermediate appellate court decisions, evidence that an
accused who is found in
possession of a prohibited drug is also found in possession of the accoutrements
of a drug trafficking business,
such as scales, re‑sealable plastic bags,
firearms, a multiplicity of mobile telephones or significant quantities of cash,
is admissible in proof of the charge. As Gleeson CJ explained in [
R v Sultana
(1994) 74 A Crim R 27]
, it is circumstantial evidence which, in conjunction
with the fact of possession and, possibly, other evidence, may found an
that the accused was engaged in the business of selling drugs.”
(Footnotes omitted)
The Form 1 procedure
applicant’s ground of appeal does not call for any fine-grained analysis
of the Form 1 procedure. It is sufficient, in order
to deal with the respective
arguments, to note the following three relevant features of that procedure.
where, as here, an offender that is to be sentenced for a principal offence asks
for offences to be taken into account under
ss 32 and 33 of the CSP Act, the
sentencing court takes into account those matters for which guilt has been
admitted “with
a view to increasing the penalty that would otherwise be
appropriate for the particular offence” – which it does by giving
greater weight to the need for personal deterrence and retribution:
Attorney-General’s Application under
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(No 1 of 2002)
(2002) 56 NSWLR 146;
[2002] NSWCCA 518
Attorney-General’s Application
Bodiotis, Taleb and Amoun v R
[2013] NSWCCA 115
(2013) 231 A Crim R 413
it is not permissible for offences on a Form 1, of themselves, to
“inflate” the objective seriousness of the
principal offence:
Stephens v R
[2010] NSWCCA 93
[2019] NSWCCA 183
Tukuafu v R
[2024] NSWCCA 84
although a Form 1 offence does not increase the assessment of the objective
seriousness of the principal offending, “the
facts and circumstances of
the Form 1 offence ... may be relevant to the assessment ... For example, such
circumstances might place
the substantive offence in context”:
of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v TH
[2023] NSWCCA 81
(2023) 307 A Crim R 149
[2020] NSWCCA 131
[2022] NSWCCA 150
is important to note the boundaries of the applicant’s argument in support
of this ground. The applicant expressly accepted
that his possession of the
taser was a fact or circumstance that was relevant to an assessment of his role
in the drug supply offence:
“... the applicant’s possession of the
taser was part of the context for his offence of knowingly taking part in drug
supply” (applicant’s submissions at [33]). During submissions in
this Court, the applicant again accepted that it was
permissible to take into
account the applicant’s possession of the taser so as to contextualise his
role in the supply of drugs
(T7.33-8.5).
Notwithstanding
that stance, the applicant argued that the sentencing judge’s use of that
fact or circumstance –
the offending for either or both weapons
offences (sequences 2 and 6) – “suggests” the infliction of
punishment” because there was an inflated finding of
objective seriousness (applicant’s submissions at [36]). He argued
the sentencing judge “did more than take the weapon into account as
context” by, in substance, impermissibly punishing
(T4.12-13, T8.1-8.45).
applicant’s submission was couched in terms of a suggestion (or inference)
of error – it being accepted that the sentencing
judgment contained
express statement that the sentencing judge took into account the
in the way argued. The applicant submitted that an inference of
error should be drawn because the sentencing judge addressed this
issue in the
context of her consideration of the objective seriousness of the offending and,
further, because her Honour made no
express statement, in effect, disavowing
that the applicant was being punished twice.
do not accept the applicant's arguments, for the following reasons.
once it is accepted, as it was here, that the fact or circumstance (being the
applicant’s possession of the taser) could
be used to contextualise the
principal offending, consistent with the authorities earlier referred to, then
any complaint about its
use substantively falls away. These authorities
recognise the legitimacy of viewing an offence in context and considering other
and circumstances of a particular offender when assessing the objective
gravity of the offending: see the discussion and the authorities
referred to in
Axiomatically, when used in that way, there is
contravention of any
sentencing principle. In particular, as the applicant accepted, it does
amount to using a Form 1
to inflate the objective
seriousness of the substantive offence.
that the sentencing judge discussed the applicant’s role in, broadly, the
part of the sentencing judgment that addressed
the objective seriousness of the
offending does not, in my view, bespeak any error, less still error of the kind
argued. Nor, in
my view, and contrary to what the applicant submitted, can (or
should) error be inferred merely because the sentencing judge did
not expressly
state that “the taser was only relevant as context” or, further,
“that care should be taken to avoid
double counting”
(applicant’s submissions at [37](ii)). The purpose and function of
providing reasons for a sentencing
decision is ordinarily not advanced by such a
requirement, nor was it required in this case given the manner in which the fact
that the sentencing judge did not commit the error argued is, I consider,
evident from a wider consideration of the sentencing
judgment – her Honour
separately made findings about the objective seriousness of the principal
offence and the Form 1 offences
(J5) and, later, took those Form 1 offences into
account in an entirely orthodox way when fixing the sentence imposed upon the
(J14). That the sentencing judge engaged in this approach tends to
negate, in my view, the suggestion that error should be inferred,
completeness, there is a final matter that should be noted. Although the
applicant’s argument was that the sentencing judge
impermissibly used the
Form 1 offences in finding that the applicant’s offending was
“towards the mid-range of objective
gravity”, whether, and if so to
what extent, that actual finding differed from the one that the applicant sought
from the sentencing
judge is not altogether clear and was not the subject of any
submission. As noted above, the Crown sought a finding that the
applicant’s
offending fell at “mid-range”, the applicant
sought a finding that it “fell below mid-range”, and the finding
the sentencing judge was that it fell “towards the mid-range”. Given
the conclusion I have reached, it is unnecessary
to address the matter
would not uphold this ground of appeal.
Ground 2: the failure to
make a finding about the applicant’s claim that he was sexually abused in
juvenile detention and the
“relevance of his mental health
Introduction
this ground of appeal, the applicant argued that the sentencing judge erred in
two overlapping and interrelated ways: first, in
failing to make
finding about his alleged experience of abuse in juvenile detention and,
secondly, the “relevance of his mental disorders in
mitigation of the
sentence” (applicant’s submissions at [40]). The applicant’s
essential argument, in relation
to the first error, was that the sentencing
judge simply omitted to make any finding “as to whether the sexual abuse
on the balance of probabilities” (applicant’s submissions
at [58]) and, in relation to the second error, as confirmed
during submissions
in this Court, the argument was that the sentencing judge failed to address, and
make findings about, the existence
of his mental health conditions and the fact
that a custodial sentence would weigh more heavily upon him (applicant’s
submissions
at [55]-[56]; T11.35).
Crown essentially submitted that, given the way these matters were raised during
the sentencing hearing, her Honour sufficiently
– and without error
– dealt with them and, further, emphasised that the sentencing judge was
obliged to accept the assertions made by the applicant as contained
in medical reports tendered on his behalf, nor to accept that
the custodial
environment for him would be more onerous because of his reported sexual abuse
(Crown submissions at [66]-[67], [70]).
Discussion and
consideration
is necessary to briefly address some matters of background relating to the
alleged abuse before dealing with the applicant’s
applicant, as has been noted, did not give evidence before the sentencing judge
and, although his letter dated 27 November 2023
refers to him having a
“claim going for what happened to [him] when [he] was a child ...”
and that until he made that
claim he had “never spoken about it to
anyone”, nothing else was said by the applicant about the alleged abuse.
the sentencing judge, however, the applicant relied upon a report dated 20 April
2023 from a consultant psychiatrist, Dr Susan
Brann, who was qualified by a
solicitor on his behalf to assist with pursuing a civil claim arising out of
that alleged abuse (‘Brann
report’). The history contained within
that report refers to the applicant alleging “he was subject to sexual
an unknown officer while detained at Cobham Juvenile Justice Centre ...
commencing either 3 November 2005, or 25 February 2006”:
Brann report at
[1], [54]ff. The applicant also relied upon a report dated 17 December 2021 from
a different psychiatrist, Dr Michael
Robertson, who was also qualified by a
solicitor on his behalf to assist with pursuing that claim (‘Robertson
Dr Robertson obtained a similar history: Robertson report at p
relation to the alleged abuse, Dr Brann expressed the opinion that the
applicant’s substance use disorder “was significantly
exacerbated by
the subject abuse” and that he consequently developed chronic
post-traumatic stress disorder with associative
symptoms, albeit that
“there were significant pre-existing and prejudicial factors” that
pre-dated the abuse: Brann report
at [214]. Dr Robertson similarly diagnosed the
applicant as having “developed chronic PTSD” in consequence of the
abuse, albeit that the applicant had an established “problematic
trajectory towards a personality disorder and substance use”:
report at p 10.
applicant, in the written submissions filed for the sentencing hearing,
submitted that it was relevant that his alleged abuse
occurred in a custodial
setting and referred to the fact that he reported to Dr Robertson that he was
“hypervigilant in his
interactions with fellow prisoners or Corrections
staff, often becoming intensely distressed when touched by the prisoners or
to pat downs or cell searches which trigger flurries of his PTSD
symptoms” and that he had had “several episodes of severe
panic” (applicant’s sentencing submissions at [33]; Robertson report
at p 6). The applicant’s written submissions
filed for the sentencing
hearing also referred to a similar report of difficulties in the custodial
setting, as contained in Dr Brann’s
report – namely, the applicant
“is angrier now with strip searches, because of the reminders to the
sexual abuse”,
including “flashbacks” (applicant’s
sentencing submissions at [34]; Brann report at [72]).
turn now to address the applicant’s arguments.
my view, contrary to what the applicant argued, the sentencing judge did not err
in relation to the way in which she dealt with
the applicant’s allegation
that he was sexually abused whilst in juvenile detention. That is for the
following reasons.
the asserted error was that the sentencing judge failed to make a finding about
, the abuse
. In my view, the sentencing
judge was not obliged to make that finding, nor is it entirely clear how she
could do so, given the way
the material was presented – which included the
fact that the applicant did not give evidence and the material relied on was
based upon self-reports contained in medical reports.
in my view, the way the sentencing judge approached this issue was entirely
appropriate. Her Honour referred to the fact
that the applicant
that he had been abused (J6) and that the claim had “issued” out of
the applicant’s report “that he was sexually
assaulted when in
juvenile detention” (J13). Additionally, having addressed the matter in
that way, it is, I consider, readily
apparent from a fair reading of the
sentencing judgment, particularly given these findings were made within that
part of the sentencing
judgment where the applicant’s childhood and
upbringing were addressed, that her Honour factored these matters into the
instinctive
sentencing synthesis.
applicant’s second argument was that, irrespective of whether the
sentencing judge made any
finding about whether the sexual
abuse occurred, his specific case to the sentencing judge – relating to
the onerous nature
of his time in custody by reason of his mental health issues
stemming from that alleged abuse – was
dealt with by the
sentencing judge, either expressly or inferentially: the applicant’s
essential submission was that it was
simply not apparent that the sentencing
judge took into account that factor (applicant’s submissions at [58]). The
applicant’s
case before the sentencing judge on that issue was summarised
may be accepted, as the Crown argued, that the sentencing judge “had
regard to the submissions and material advanced”
by the applicant,
including his social disadvantage and drug issues, and undertook a careful
review of the multiple medical reports
tendered. It may also be accepted, again
as the Crown essentially argued, that much – if not
the case that the applicant advanced relating to his mental health was put to
the sentencing judge in
terms – that is, without
specific submissions directed to the particular factual finding sought and
clear submissions about why they engaged a particular
sentencing principle so as to mitigate the severity of the sentence to be
In my respectful view, the sentencing judge should have been favoured
with appreciably more assistance than was provided to her.
Nevertheless, in my
view, the applicant did at least advance a clear case that sought factual
findings and, building upon that, to
invoke a particular principle to mitigate
his sentence – namely, citing
R v Hemsley
[2004] NSWCCA 228
, that “a custodial sentence may weigh more heavily on a mentally ill
person”. The argument was contained in the written
submissions filed (see
], above), albeit
not referred to
during oral submissions before the sentencing
judge by the applicant’s then counsel.
Crown argued that it was open to the sentencing judge to be unpersuaded by the
applicant’s account about his abuse including,
relevantly here, his
experiences in the custodial environment weighing more heavily upon him given
the abuse and its psychological
sequelae. That submission may be accepted.
However, the difficulty here, in my respectful view, is that the sentencing
not address the matter. If the argument was to be rejected – and
it was open to her Honour to do so – then it was necessary
to address it,
including to briefly explain why that conclusion had been reached.
follows, for the reasons I have given, that the applicant’s second
argument should be accepted and this ground of appeal
Introduction
having been demonstrated, it falls upon this Court to re-exercise the sentencing
discretion and determine the sentence to impose.
If, following the re-exercise
of the sentencing discretion, the Court is satisfied that a lesser sentence than
that imposed by the
sentencing judge should be imposed, then the appeal should
be allowed:
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
exercising the sentencing discretion, the sentencing court is required to be
mindful of the two legislative guideposts –
being the maximum sentence for
the principal offence and the standard non-parole period (which have been
earlier noted: see [
], above) – and to identify all factors relevant
to the sentencing task, consider their significance and then assess the
appropriate
v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
. Further, the sentencing discretion is exercised
without regard to the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge:
[2019] NSWCCA 97
at [81]-[89].
applicant invited this Court to revisit – and, thus, implicitly sought to
challenge – the objective seriousness and
moral culpability findings made.
Given the challenge raised by ground 2, it is also necessary to address the
applicant’s argument
that his time in custody is more onerous given the
alleged abuse, and should mitigate the severity of any sentence imposed. Subject
to these matters, and an invitation by the applicant to adopt a more generous
alteration of the statutory ratio, neither party sought
different findings from
those made by the sentencing judge. In the circumstances described, the exercise
of the sentencing discretion
proceeds upon the findings made by the sentencing
judge, supplemented by this Court’s findings in relation to the two
matters, together with “any relevant evidence of the offender's
post‑sentence conduct”:
DL v The Queen
[2018] HCA 32
applicant’s ultimate submission was that, upon resentence, this Court
would pass a lesser sentence. The applicant relied
upon the affidavit from his
solicitor, Christopher Cole, affirmed 15 October 2025, which was read on the
usual basis on appeal. That
affidavit set out a brief summary of the material
produced by Corrective Services, as well as attaching his case notes and case
Crown submitted that, undertaking a separate and independent exercise of the
sentencing discretion, this Court would not form
the opinion that a less severe
sentence is warranted in law.
The challenged findings
The objective seriousness of the offending
relation to the objective seriousness of the drug supply offence, the applicant
submitted that although the offending was serious,
warranting a substantial
sentence of full-time imprisonment, the objective circumstances did “not
suggest that this [was] a
particularly
serious offence of commercial drug
supply” (emphasis in original): the applicant emphasised there was no
evidence “indicating
that [he] was involved in November 2022 in an ongoing
enterprise with respect to the supply of prohibited drugs” and that whilst
the weight of the drug was significant, that should not be treated as a decisive
factor (applicant’s submissions at [65]-[66]).
The Crown, on the other
hand, submitted that the Court would find that the offence is “objectively
serious” for various
reasons including the quantity and purity of the drug
(Crown submissions at [76]).
background facts have been earlier set out.
large commercial quantity for methylamphetamine commences at 500 grams (
Misuse and Trafficking Act
, Schedule 1), whereas the applicant had in his
possession in the boot of his vehicle (which was registered in his
name) a total of 1,132.2 grams of the drug. The quantity of the
drug is relevant to an assessment of the objective seriousness of
the offending,
but not determinative:
R v Ferguson
[2022] NSWCCA 147
[2013] NSWCCA 217
drugs were contained in a number of separate bags: a black tote bag containing
clear plastic bags of the drug and a black leather
bag containing clear plastic
bags of the drug. The applicant’s DNA was located on the swab from the
seal of a resealable plastic
bag that was located within the black tote bag.
Further, as the agreed facts record, whilst the applicant initially denied any
of the contents of the freezer bag black (and, thus, the drugs within
it: agreed facts at [13]), when later interviewed by police
and questioned about
the “methylamphetamine located in the vehicle, the [applicant] stated that
[it was] located in a black
bag that a man had paid him ... to take
somewhere”, and that he agreed to do this and “put the bag in the
back of the
vehicle”: agreed facts at [17]. The purity of the drug was
high – between 74% and 76%.
relation to the applicant’s “role” in the drug supply, and
acknowledging the limitations in attempting to classify
the role of an offender
on limited material (see
[2011] NSWCCA 242
(2011) 219 A Crim
), the applicant also accepts, consistent with his submissions
directed to ground 1, that it is relevant to consider as part of the
his role in the offending the fact that he was in possession of a taser when
arrested by police. The applicant also conceded,
given the quantity of drugs
involved, that he was “trusted” by others to, at a minimum, handle
them (T13.30). The applicant’s
essential argument was that he was merely a
“courier” and should be sentenced as such. I do not accept this
given that I am unpersuaded that the applicant was simply a courier,
as he argued. However, beyond that I am unable to make a more
precise finding,
beyond reasonable doubt, about his “role”.
my view, this was a moderately serious case of drug supply.
Moral culpability
relation to moral culpability, the applicant accepted the finding made by the
sentencing judge that his moral culpability was reduced
“to some limited
extent” (see [
], above), but nevertheless submitted that this Court
“would give more weight to this factor in the exercise of
discretion”
and, furthermore, submitted that this Court should find
“there is a causal relationship between [his] mental disorders and
commission of the offence” (applicant’s submissions at [68]-[69]).
is important to note that the first limb of the applicant’s moral
culpability argument does not, at least clearly, involve
the finding – only a reassignment of the weight to be given to moral
culpability. There is reason to doubt the legitimacy
of the invitation, given
questions of weight are quintessentially matters for the sentencing judge and
not this Court and, relatedly,
absent a challenge to a finding, the re-exercise
of the sentencing discretion by this Court proceeds on the basis of the findings
made by the sentencing judge, as I have noted above. In this last respect, the
recent observations made by N Adams J in
Roulstone v R
[2025] NSWCCA 7
“Although it is not open to this Court to make a different factual finding
on resentence if that fact is not challenged (
Carroll v The Queen
(2009) 83 ALJR 579
Betts v The Queen
(2016) 258 CLR 420;
permissible to do so if the relevant fact
challenged:
DL v The Queen
(2018) 265 CLR 215
[2018] HCA 32
.” (Emphasis in original)
Independently
of the above, I would not depart from the finding of the sentencing judge.
relation to the second limb of the applicant’s moral culpability argument,
which involved inviting this Court to find a causal
relationship between
“[his] mental disorders and the commission of the offence”, the
applicant made no reference to any
evidence that was submitted to support a
finding in those terms, nor was the submission developed beyond the above.
Little regard
can be had to the applicant’s sentencing submissions given,
as I have earlier noted, these were put in general terms.
Dr Robertson’s report predates the offending, it can be put to one side.
In relation to Dr Brann’s opinion, the
substance of it appears from [210]
of her report where she was specifically asked to address specific issues in
connection with the
applicant’s “medical condition”. It is not
apparent, from the nature of the issues that Dr Brann was asked to address,
she offered any opinion about the suggested causal relationship between any
underlying mental health condition and “the
commission of the
offence” and no attempt was made in submissions to suggest to the
contrary. For completeness, I note that,
in the part of the report dealing with
“current circumstances”, the applicant gave a history of being held
because “there was a weapon in the back of the car”:
Brann report at [4]. There was no suggestion, in this part of the
report, that
the applicant disclosed to Dr Brann that he had been charged with a range of
offences including the principal offence.
in evidence before the sentencing judge was a report from Dr Christopher
Lennings dated 24 November 2023 (‘Lennings report’).
The report is
lengthy. No reference was made to that report, or any part of it, in the
applicant’s submissions in this Court
– written or oral. In the
applicant’s sentencing submissions, there were limited references to that
report and, of the
references that were present, they principally detailed the
history given by the applicant to Dr Lennings across a range of matters:
example, the applicant’s remorse, his role in the offending and his
“prospects” (applicant’s sentencing
submissions at [2], [8],
[41]ff). The submissions also invited the sentencing judge to review Dr
Lennings’ report at [39]-[40]
“as to the deficits in the
[applicant’s] executive functioning” which were noted “as
capable of shedding
significant light on the offending behaviour”
(applicant’s sentencing submissions at [18]). That is where the matter
am prepared to accept and find that the applicant’s moral culpability
should be slightly moderated, given the existence of
what Dr Lennings described
as “general disorganisation and impulsive elements associated with [the
applicant’s] behaviour”,
and, in that broad way, made some
contribution to the offending:
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194
’). This finding would supplement the moral culpability finding
made by the sentencing judge: see [
is necessary to return to the applicant’s argument that, given alleged
abuse and the psychological sequelae, his time in
custody should be found to be
more onerous with a consequent mitigation in the severity of any sentence
imposed upon him:
at [177]. The applicant relied upon the
histories contained in the reports from Dr Brann and Dr Robertson to make good
this argument
(applicant’s sentencing submissions at [31]-[35];
applicant’s submissions at [53]) – specifically, the history
contained in Dr Brann’s report at [72] and the history contained in Dr
Robertson’s report at [23]. It is convenient to
deal with these reports in
chronological order.
to the history in Dr Robertson’s report (following his interview of the
applicant on 2 August 2021), it records that the
applicant reported that he was
“hypervigilant” in his interactions with fellow prisoners or
Corrective Services officers
“often becoming intensely distressed when
touched by the prisoners or subject to pat downs or cell searches which trigger
of his PTSD symptoms. He has had several episodes of severe
panic”. There are difficulties with acting upon this evidence given
the frequency with which the symptoms arise is unknown, as is the nature and
extent of the symptoms that the applicant allegedly
experiences when they
to the history in Dr Brann’s report (following her interview of the
applicant on 27 February 2023), it records that the applicant
reported to Dr
Brann that he is “angrier now with strip searches, because of the
reminders to the sexual abuse, and because
they have changed in nature”.
The difficulties with acting upon this evidence are several and include the fact
that the frequency
with which “strip searches” are performed is
simply unknown, nor is it possible to make any clear finding about what
“angrier” actually involves.
is a further matter. The accounts relied on about the symptoms apparently
experienced by the applicant did not impress as being
consistent. It is possible
that, given Dr Brann’s report is more recent, the applicant’s
apparent symptomatology is more
in line with what is recorded in that report,
rather than what was recorded in Dr Robertson’s report prepared some years
No submissions were made about how these versions should be reconciled,
nor whether they were reconcilable. As the applicant did
not give evidence
adopting any or all of these histories, there was no means by which they could
be reconciled. Nor could they, in
the circumstances, be given much, if any,
the end, I remain unpersuaded that any psychological sequelae referable to the
alleged abuse results in the applicant’s time
in custody weighing more
heavily upon him so as to mitigate the sentence to be
Special circumstances
is, finally, necessary to refer to the applicant’s submission “that
it would be appropriate” to further reduce
the ratio under s 44(2) of the
CSP Act beyond the 66% determined by the sentencing judge, following the finding
that there existed
special circumstances (applicant’s submissions at
my view, absent any direct challenge to that finding, this invitation should be
rejected. To the extent this submission may be
taken to have implicitly involved
one, I would simply note that no arguments were advanced in support, and I do
not accept that the
statutory ratio could or should be changed. In any event, it
is unnecessary to say anything further about it given the conclusion
favour following the exercise of the sentencing discretion – addressed
further below.
Discussion and consideration
applicant, who is now 36 years of age, emphasised a number of matters that he
argued warranted this Court imposing a lesser sentence
upon him including the
finding that he had demonstrated remorse and the further reduced moral
culpability finding made (see [
], above). These matters may be accepted, as can the
fact that he is entitled to a 25% discount for his early guilty plea: s
of the CSP Act.
have considered the applicant’s subjective case, and the findings made by
the sentencing judge, earlier summarised.
all findings made by the sentencing judge favoured the applicant, however. The
following findings warrant emphasis. The sentencing
judge found that there were
two aggravating features present to be taken into account in determining the
appropriate sentence. The
first was that the applicant was on parole (having
been released on 16 February 2022) at the time of
offending for what
the sentencing judge described as “very serious offending” involving
“serious firearm and drug
offences committed in June 2019” (J10-11)
– the drug offences, it is to be noted, included a conviction for drug
The second was that the applicant had “prior convictions, which
[were] extensive” which her Honour considered was an
indication that the
applicant’s present offending was “not an uncharacteristic
aberration” but instead demonstrated
a “continuing attitude of
disobedience of the law” and the need for general and specific deterrence
it is to be recalled that the applicant had three offences placed on a Form 1
(the maximum penalties for these offences has
been set out: see [
], above). In that
situation, the sentencing court takes into account the matters for which guilt
has been admitted “with a
view to increasing the penalty that would
otherwise be appropriate for the particular offence” which it does by
giving greater
weight to the need for personal deterrence and retribution:
Attorney-General’s Application
at [22]-[23],
[35]. That should occur here. I note that, in relation to the Form 1 offences,
the applicant did not challenge the
sentencing judge’s finding that each
of them were “objectively serious” (J5).
sentencing judge made a guarded finding about the applicant’s prospects of
rehabilitation, considering it to be intrinsically
connected to whether or not
the applicant could remain abstinent from illicit drugs (J12). As the evidence
read on resentence demonstrates,
notwithstanding the applicant is in custody, he
has been unable to remain abstinent having,
, failed drug
screenings. That evidence provides practical confirmation of the currency of the
sentencing judge’s guarded rehabilitation
finding. It is also relevant to
note that the sentencing judge considered that, absent complete abstinence and
removing himself from
antisocial peers, the applicant’s “life will
be a revolving door of terms of imprisonment” (J12).
have had regard to the purposes of sentencing as expressed
in s 3A of the CSP Act. I am also mindful of the maximum penalty
standard non-parole period, each of which indicates the seriousness with
which Parliament views this offending. It is also important
to give substantial
weight to the principles of specific and general deterrence, as well as the
protection of the community, in any
sentence imposed for the drug supply
at [107]-[115]. Each of these matters are particularly
important sentencing considerations in the present case, as are the aggravating
factors as found by the sentencing judge.
the circumstances described, I consider, having exercised the sentencing
discretion, that a greater sentence is warranted than
the one imposed by the
sentencing judge: accordingly, no lesser aggregate sentence is warranted in law.
Given that conclusion, the
question that arises is whether it is necessary to
specify the sentence. Although there is no inflexible rule, it is generally
inappropriate to do so unless “some particular circumstance
warrants it”:
at [89] (and the discussion at [84]-[88]);
Vamadevan v R
(2024) 116 NSWLR 195
[2024] NSWCCA 223
view, there are no particular circumstances that warrant specifying the sentence
that would have been imposed.
the above reasons, I propose the following orders:
(1) Extend the time for the filing of the applicant’s Notice of Appeal to
1 August 2025.
(2) Grant leave to appeal.
(3) Dismiss the appeal.
: I agree with Chen J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (378 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter