URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2002/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gow v Patrick Stevedores [2002] NSWCC 60 (20 December 2002)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Gow v Patrick Stevedores
[2002] NSWCC 60
Russell Gow
Patrick Stevedores No 2
Pty Limited
CASE NUMBER: 58278 of 2001 of
CATCH WORDS: Entitlements & Liability; Proceedings to
Obtain Compensation
LEGISLATION CITED:
S 15, S 16, S 65, S 92(2),
S 92(4A), r 6(2)
CORAM: Geraghty J
DATES OF HEARING: 27/11/02;
EX TEMPORE DATE: 20/12/2002
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
MR B MCMANAMEY instructed by Turner
FOR RESPONDENT:
MR J PEARCE instructed by Hicksons
1. Russell Gow seeks weekly benefits for a closed period from 20 October 1991
(when he ceased work as a waterside worker employed
by the respondent) to 2
November 1992. He also seeks lump sum compensation for severe bodily and severe
facial disfigurement, and
payment of his medical expenses.
2. His claim is based on the provisions of s 15, or alternatively,
Workers’ Compensation Act 1987
, alleging that his employment either
caused or aggravated a disease by way of skin cancer during his period of
employment as a waterside
worker from 1964 to 1991.
3. Mr Pearce of counsel informed me that the matters in issue were: firstly,
injury; secondly, incapacity; thirdly, the quantification
of any bodily or
facial disfigurement; the application of the provisions of s 68A or
the rule in Sch 6
r 6. Also in issue was the comparable wages; and
finally, the implications of the applicant’s failure to give notice in
with s 92 of the
Workers Compensation Act
, or s 65 of the Workplace
Injury Management Act. Counsel for both parties submitted written submissions
and spoke to those submissions
over several hours.
4. On 27 November 2002, I viewed the worker’s face and parts of his
body, particularly his arms below the elbows and the neck
area. I observed
areas of skin pigmentation on his face and some evidence of what I took to be
skin cancers, though I am no expert
in identifying these. I concluded that his
face did not show signs of severe disfigurement. He is an elderly man with
obvious ageing
spots. He has fair Celtic skin which has obviously weathered and
become blotchy with time, as well as displaying some remnants of
skin cancers.
I do not regard these features as constituting severe facial disfigurement.
5. However, his arms below the elbows showed obvious signs of severe
disfigurement. They were brown, scaly, covered with marks or
areas where small
cancers had been removed. He said that he had had as many as 40 or 50 cancers
removed at one time, and at the same
rate over the years. He had had hundreds
removed, he said. I concluded from my viewing that his face was not severely
disfigured,
though the area of his arms were, and therefore was able to attract
some entitlement if he overcame the difficulties posed by the
respondent.
6. The respondent placed in issue the question of capacity.
7. The applicant retired as a waterside worker on 20 October 1991, when he
was 65 years of age. He said in evidence that he could
have continued to work,
that is, that his employer did not necessarily demand retirement, that he felt
able to continue but, he said
in evidence, that he wanted to leave the work to
younger ones to do the job, that he did not want to work any more. It appeared
from this blunt forthright evidence that Mr Gow was not incapacitated as at the
time he left work in October 1991. In that regard,
I enter an award for the
respondent in respect of weekly benefits.
8. Mr Gow was born on 9 November 1926. For some years he worked as a
boilermaker, until he gained employment as a waterside worker
in 1964. He said
that he had worked full time for the respondent at Glebe Island and Darling
Harbour between 1981 and October 1991
when he had been offered a redundancy
package. He said he had worked in a gang on rotation duties, driving a fork
lift, working on
the deck of a ship, in the hold and on the gang plank. A good
deal of the work was outdoors, and of course, during the day shifts,
he had been
exposed to the sun. He said he had worked on an on-call basis, being available
seven days a week, 24 hours a day, sometimes
working overtime, sometimes working
double shifts. He said he had worked with his sleeves rolled up because of the
sweat. He had
worn pants and shirts, but because of the heat and the sweat, he
had not kept his shirt buttoned around his wrists.
9. To begin with, he had not been provided with any head gear, but then he
had begun to wear a felt hat. Because this was too hot,
he had started wearing a
floppy hat like a cricket hat and, from about the mid 1980s, he had applied
sun-screen. He said that when
he had first started work as a waterside worker
in 1964, he had skin lesions on his hands and arms, and that he had had them
off by a nurse in about 1964 or 1965. He had also had them later on his
ears, his forehead, his nose and the back of his neck, and
from time to time,
had been treated by Dr Downey who had referred him to Dr Finlay and to Dr Beer.
Lesions had continued to develop
and have done since 1991.
10. In cross-examination, Gow said that as a child he used to engage in
swimming and soccer but he denied that as a child he had spent
a lot of time in
the sun. He has been engaged in lawn bowls for 30 years, but not on a regular
basis. He said he would do this now
sun as much as possible. Before 1987, Gow said he had hundreds of lesions
removed, 30
or 40 at a time, and since 1987 and up until 1991, hundreds also
Lump Sum Payment for Severe Bodily Disfigurement.
11. It is obvious from observing the worker’s forearms that he has been
struck by a skin disease, a disease which has developed
over a long period of
time, since before 1964. This disease was not caused or initiated by his
working conditions. It did not appear
after he had started as a waterside
worker. His is a disease of such a nature as to have been contracted by gradual
process, but
it is not a disease to which the worker’s employment was of
the nature to which the disease was due. The nature of his employment
waterside worker was not even the probable cause of the applicant’s skin
cancers. Consequently, s 15 is not the appropriate
section under which to award
lump sum compensation. S 16, given all the other matters raised in this claim
are in place, is the
relevant provision. This is an injury by way of an
acceleration or exacerbation of a disease.
12. According to s 16, compensation is payable by the employer, who last
employed Gow in employment that was a contributing factor
to the acceleration
and the exacerbation. I note that s 16 contains the notion of
substantial
contributing factor
. This notion was introduced in s 9 A and s 16 by Act
120 of 1996 which took effect on 12 January 1997. Whether this legislative
restriction applies to this claim would depend on the date of injury. If the
injury occurred before 12 January 1997, there would
be no need to consider
whether work made a substantial contribution to the disease. However, if on or
after 12 January 1997, one
would have to be satisfied that the working
conditions of a waterside worker did contribute substantially to the development
disease. In any event, there is no doubt on the evidence that the work
the applicant undertook from 1964 to 1991 was a substantial
contributing factor
to his diseased condition. I do not consider that I need to address that issue
When Did the Injury Occur?
13. Butterworths Practice at p 1902 contains a brief commentary on s 16
(1)(a)(ii). The author remarks that it is difficult to imagine
a set of facts
where there has been no incapacity or no death resulting from injury, and yet
the worker can claim compensation, other
than in matters of deafness (which is
ruled by s 17). Difficult as it may appear to imagine such a set of facts, it
seems to me
that this claim is based on just such a set of facts. The applicant
said that he was not incapacitated when he left work. Of course,
there was no
death. So the only possible provision which can be applied to the deeming
provisions as to when an injury occurred,
is to be found in s 16 (1)(a)(ii).
14. In its submissions, the respondent drew attention to the problem with the
deeming provisions of s 16. Ten years had elapsed between
the worker’s
retirement and the date of his claim. S 16(1)(a) deems the date of the
work-related injury to have occurred ten
years after Gow had retired. This
provision and this particular set of facts invite a certain degree of legal
imagination. One has
to suppress the dictates of logic and to put one’s
sense of reality to rest. The respondent called such a result
- and I agree. Mr Pearce, counsel for the respondent, submitted that despite
the legislative provisions, I should find the injury
to have occurred in October
1991 when Gow retired, rather than in October 2001 when he first made his claim.
15. There is a certain logical attractiveness about this submission. There
is also an attraction to the respondent because then it
can rely on a more
favourable, less beneficial state of the law, as was explored by Neilson J.
Miller v Skinner
[1998] NSWCC 12
16 NSWCCR 222.
But if I were to accept the
respondent’s submission, I would be ignoring the obvious, unambiguous
meaning of s 16 (1)(a).
No matter how ‘crazy’ it may appear, I am
bound to follow the clear deeming provisions of the Act. Gow made his claim
October 2001. He did not cease work because of incapacity and there was no
question of death. In these circumstances, it is
clear that his injury is
deemed to have occurred in October 2001.
The Question of Delay and of Prejudice.
16. S 65 of the Workplace Injury Management Act deals with making a claim for
compensation, and with the effect of failing to make
a claim within certain
periods. These provisions came into force on 12 January 1997. The provisions
in force before that date were
to be found in the
Workers Compensation Act
92, and they were the provisions in force relating to claims made in respect of
injuries before January 1997.
17. The applicant’s first submission was that I do not need to consider
the provisions about delay, about the reasons for delay
and about questions of
justice and prejudice. The applicant submitted that in respect to a disease,
there is no possibility of a
delay. The injury is deemed to have occurred when
the claim is made, so the legislation which provides that a claim must be made
within six months of the injury, just does not apply. The delay provisions do
not apply and cannot apply to disease cases, Mr McManamey
submitted. The worker
is obliged to claim within six months of the injury, but the injury is deemed to
have occurred when the claim
was made, since in this case, there is no question
of incapacity or death.
18. This appears on first blush, to be a wonderfully mad submission.
However, I think it is probably correct. It only demonstrates,
if one needs
further examples, that like mathematics, like logic, the law sometimes does not
synchromesh with the real world. It
is clear from the Act that the legislator
thought to require the worker to give notice within a reasonable time, and also
to require,
in certain circumstances, the respondent to pay award entitlements.
The legislator recognised that the respondent needed to have
notice of the
entitlement within a reasonable time. This seems to be the general pattern of
the legislation. However, when it comes
to disease, it seems that because of
the deeming provisions, no notice need be given, that a worker can leave work,
as this worker
has, be away for ten years, make a claim and find that he does
not need to give the respondent notice. In the usual case, the law-maker
employers to be notified within a reasonable time after an injury and, if not
notified, for some explanation of the delay to
be provided - for example,
ignorance or mistake. Yet, if Mr McManamey is correct, in this particular
disease situation, no notification
of injury is necessary. As I say, I think he
is probably correct.
19. However, if I am not correct in my interpretation of how
interact, I need to determine what provisions in respect of notice apply to an
injury deemed to have occurred in October 2001 when
the worker retired from work
in October 1991.
r 5 provides:
S 92(4A)(inserted by the WorkCover Legislation Amendment Act 1995) applies in
respect of an injury, death resulting from an injury,
received before the
substitution of that sub-section (but not before 4 pm on 30 June 1987), as if
par(a) of that section reads as
(a) The claim is made within 3 years after the commencement of this
sub-section (as inserted by the WorkCover Legislation Act 1995);
21. Consequently, s 92(4A) is retrospective. It applies to all injuries
after June 1987. Therefore, according to this section and
the schedule, a claim
has to be made within 3 years from the 1 January 1996. If I am correct in this
interpretation, the Court needs
in this case to consider the question of the
reasons for the delay and the question of prejudice or the interests of justice.
22. S 92(2) provides:
Compensation may not be recovered under this Act unless a claim for the
compensation has been made within 6 months after the injury
or accident happened
or, in a case of death, within 6 months of the date of death.
23. S 92(4A) provides:
The failure to make a claim within the period required by sub(2) is not a bar
to the recovery of compensation if it is found that
the failure was occasioned
by ignorance, mistake, absence from the State or other reasonable cause, and
a) the claim is made within 3 years after the injury or accident
happened or, in the case of death, within 3 years after the date
of death, or
b) the claim is not made within that 3 years but it is found that it is in
the interests of justice that the claim not be barred.
24. S 92(4A)(a) relates to Sch 6 Pt 6 r 5 and therefore demands that a claim
should be made within 3 years of 1 January 1996. This
claim was not so made,
unless one considers again that the injury is deemed to have occurred on the day
of the claim and so was made
well within the three years. If, on the other hand,
S 92(4A)(b) must be followed, namely since the claim was not made within the
years, I should consider whether, in the interests of justice, the claim should
not be barred. In these circumstances, I need
to consider two matters.
Firstly, the question of ignorance, mistake or other reasonable cause, and
secondly, the question of the
interests of justice. As to the first, Gow said
that he did not know he could make a claim, that he was informed only recently,
that is, some time near November this year, by a union representative. It seems
to me that he has established, since his evidence
was not challenged, that he
was ignorant of the possibility of making a claim and therefore he has satisfied
that branch of the
provision in s 92 (4A).
25. I turn to the question of the interests of justice. Despite the welter of
submissions in other regards by the respondent particularly,
this question as to
the interests of justice seems to be the most relevant, and the most difficult
of all. The respondent submitted
that because of the provisions of s 16(2),
there could result a real prejudice to a respondent. If there was a delay in a
and if there was another employer apart from the respondent, then, in the
circumstances such as exist here, there would be no chance
of claiming a
contribution from the other employer. Mr Pearce therefore submitted that there
is a possibility of real prejudice
to employers if the deeming provisions are
interpreted in the way I have proposed. However, in this case, there is no
of such a kind since there was no other employer within the 12 month
period. This is only an academic question.
26. Mr Pearce further submitted that if the worker had claimed when he should
have claimed, within six months of leaving work, or
even later, the respondent
could have had the advantage of an earlier incarnation of s 68 B, or of the
provisions of s 68 A for the
period before the enactment of s 68 B. He
submitted that if the worker had claimed earlier, the respondent might have been
to pay less by way of an award.
27. However, as against this submission: firstly, it is also possible had he
claimed earlier, the respondent would have had to pay
more because of the
interest provisions, and a substantial amount of interest might have accrued;
secondly, the respondent in any
event has had the benefit of the use of the
money for the ten year period; and thirdly, there was no submission and no
question that
the delay resulted in the unavailability of witnesses or of any
evidence to put the injury in issue. So there does not seem to be
evidentiary prejudice, and furthermore the worker in fact had a work-related
injury and in principle is entitled to an award.
It seems to me that in the
interests of justice, the failure to claim within the statutory three year
period should not be a bar
to the recovery of compensation.
The Question of Assessment and Deductions.
28. The respondent provided lengthy written and oral submissions as to how
the disfigurement should be assessed, how it was in fact
impossible to assess,
as to what version of various statutory provisions apply to this claim, and how
Neilson J’s decisions
Miller v Skinner
[1998] NSWCC 53
17 NSWCCR 275
undermine the applicant’s claim. With all the
Shane Warne,
the respondent bowled in the rough, over and
around the wicket, spinning right and left, feigning, varying its speed, hiding
flipper, trying to rob the worker of an award. With all the poise of
Tony Mundine,
it seems to me the respondent somersaulted, side-stepped,
threw little dummies, ran at obtuse angles to confuse the opposition, to
mesmerise and exhaust him, and to softly, gently massage the legislation.
29. On the other side of this performance, Gow had been a waterside worker
for many years. He had worked regularly, constantly in
the sun. He now suffers
from skin cancers, especially on his forearms. He has made a modest claim on the
basis of legislation which
was meant to benefit injured workers. The
legislature has expressed its wish to compensate people like Gow, though only to
extent of the damage, and even then, very modestly. Despite these simple
facts, the respondent asserted that the law is against
the worker and his claim,
and even if he is successful after a long contest, Gow can be awarded only
two-fifths of practically nothing
or, more precisely, as Mr Pearce says, four
twenty-sevenths of five per cent.
30. In his written submissions, Mr Pearce submitted in par 6 that the
applicant had worked for the respondent from 1981 to October
1991 when he
retired, and that he had had lesions on his arms from 1964. The applicant stated
in evidence that he had had a large
number of lesions removed prior to 1987, so
Mr Pearce submitted:
There is no evidence as to precisely what lesions he had and what lesions
had been removed prior to 30 June 1987. Because there were
lesions prior to the
relevant employment, if the applicant is to succeed it must be under s 16 of the
Act. In the respondent’s
submissions each lesion is a separate injury and
cannot be amalgamated with other lesions to give an accumulative assessment
31. Mr Pearce submitted that this Court cannot compensate Gow because each
little cancer is separate and cannot be conglomerated,
and because no-one can
determine whether a particular, discrete lesion occurred before or after July
1987, or whether a particular
one is work-related or not. The applicant has
been receiving treatment since 1964 (that is the year when he first became a
and the little cancers have all taken time to develop. Mr Pearce
submitted that each one of these tiny cancers has to be dealt with
separately,
each one identified, each one separated in time, each one treated in isolation.
He therefore submitted that the claim
is impossible to determine and that the
applicant has not satisfied the onus. However, one has to consider that Gow was
and exposed to the sun at work since 1964, that he had developed
cancers over the years, that he has received regular treatment for
hundreds of
little cancerous spots. I consider that Mr Pearce’s submissions in this
regard is devoid of common sense. This
is the reason why the disease provisions
have been included in the Act - to avoid the scenario detailed by Mr Pearce.
no need to identify each individual minor trauma. The very purpose of
the Act is to consider this as a disease which gradually develops.
32. In par 7 of his submissions, Mr Pearce submitted:
In the respondent’s submissions the first step to determining
whether or not an applicant is entitled to compensation pursuant
to s 66, is
that the Court must be satisfied that the disfigurement is severe. This can
only be determined on a
determining whether or not disfigurement is severe, the Court must only consider
those lesions that were caused by the
injury. In this case the
applicant’s condition is a mixture of pigment changes to the skin as a
result of procedures to remove
sun spots and skin cancers and changes to
pigmentation of the skin caused by the ageing process. There is nothing before
to enable the Court to determine which pigmentation changes are due to
the ageing process and which are due to removal procedures.
33. This submission, in my estimation, seeks to defeat the purpose of the
legislation as expressed in s 15 and s 16, and also offends
the dictates of
common sense. The process in my mind is simpler and more straightforward than
Mr Pearce would have it. The doctors
and myself, separately, examine the
evidence and the bodily condition of the worker to determine whether he is
suffering from a disease,
in this case a skin disease. With the aid of expert
evidence, the Court then seeks to determine whether this condition was caused
exposure of the body to sun or, more correctly, whether this disease could have
been caused, or probably was caused (since causation
is not required to be
proved) by exposure. There is no
result from
test in the disease
provisions, only a probability of causation test. (
Blayney Shire Council v
Lobley & Anor
1995, 12 NSWCCR 52)
34. Some people, of course, are especially vulnerable to skin cancers and I
think this man was since he has fair Celtic skin. The
question the Court must
decide is whether this disease is the kind of condition which can be caused by
employment of a certain type.
As far as disease is concerned, there is no need
to determine
results from
or causation, only the possibility of
causation. The test to be applied is whether the tendencies, incidents and
characteristics
of this employment were of a type which could give rise to an
injury by way of disease.
35. There is no doubt that the tendencies, incidents and characteristics of a
waterside worker’s employment, outdoors, were
of a type which could give
rise to sun cancer. Once these matters are determined, the Court, with the aid
of medical evidence, assesses
the condition as observed. The Court puts a
percentage on the disfigurement (given that it is severe), it then assesses the
according to a table, and makes any deductions in accordance with
provisions in force at the relevant time and as applicable to this
What Deduction Provisions Should Be Applied?
36. The respondent submitted, firstly, that any entitlement should be
assessed as at the date of ceasing work, not as at the date
of notice, and since
the injury occurred in reality in October 1991, though deemed to have occurred
in October 2001, there was no
s 68 B in force in 1991. Therefore the provisions
of s 68 A should apply, that is, deductions should be made for any part of the
injury before 30 June 1987.
37. The respondent further submitted, in the alternative, that if Neilson J
is correct in
Miller v Skinner
(though he failed to mention that s 68B
was not referred to in r 19 of Sch 6 Pt 6, where mention is only made of s 68 A
in his opinion, is considered to be retrospective) then the 1996
version of s 68B, that is the original version, was retrospective
and therefore
applied to injuries from 30 June 1987 to 12 January 1997. This, of course, is
dependent on whether Neilson J was correct.
The submission also asserts that the
new 2000 version of s 68B (the second version) applied only to injuries from 12
January 1997
to the date of operation of the third version in Act No 61 of 2001,
namely to 1 January 2002. Neilson J found that s 68 A was retrospective
1987, and consequently that s 68B was retrospective, even though it was not
mentioned in r 19.
of the respondent’s submissions would have me accept that,
since the applicant last worked in 1991, the original version of
s 68 B applies
and that the second version does not apply. The fallacy however is that the
injury is deemed to have happened in
October 2001, when the second version was
in operation.
39. The respondent further asserted, as a third submission in this regard,
that Sch 6 Pt 6 r 6 was still operative and that it operated
to read down the
second version of s 68 B(3)(b).
40. R 6 (2) provides that:
No compensation is payable in accordance with this part and this schedule for
the part of the loss resulting from the injury received
before “that
commencement” (namely 30 June 1987) whether or not compensation has been
paid or is payable under s 16 of
the former Act for that part of the loss.
41. There is some immediate attraction to the submission that this rule is
still operative, that therefore there has to be a deduction
for the part of the
injury before June 1987 and that this r 6 reads down the second version of s 68
B. However, again, in this case
there is no injury before 30 June 1987. The
injury is deemed to have occurred in October 2001 so that Sch 6 Pt 6 r 6 has no
application.
42. Consequently, the second version of s 68 B applies to this claim and,
according to that version, s 68 A applies, but with provisos
- namely those
provisos set out in sub s (3).
43. S 68 B provides that there should be deductions, but not all the ones
which would flow from s 68 A. There is to be no deductions
for loss due to
employment in
previous relevant employment
as defined, except for losses
payable, or paid already, or losses under s 16 of the former Act. Of course, in
this case, these exceptions
are not applicable because there was no entitlement
in the former Act for this particular loss.
44. Sub sub-section (b) defines
previous relevant employment
this case, would relate to employment from 1964 to 2001. Sub-section (3) deals
with back, neck and pelvis awards only,
and in those particular cases deductions
are made for part of the injury before June 1987, but of course the provision
does not apply
to this case since we are dealing here with skin cancers.
45. In the final analysis, some deductions have to be made pursuant to s 68
A, deductions for exposure to the sun before 1964. I
note as to this period
that the applicant was quite careful and restrained, he said. Deductions should
also be made for the sun
exposure after that date, but away from work. A
deduction should also be made for any age-related pigmentation.
46. I do not have any expert medical assistance as to how these deductions
are to be calculated. I simply record that Gow worked
for a long time as a
waterside worker, on a seven days-a-week basis of availability, that he worked
consistently and often in the
sun. There was not much evidence of consistent
sun exposure apart from work. I therefore propose to make the statutory
of 10 per cent.
The Medical Evidence
47. Exhibit A is a report of Dr Beer, who reports that he saw Gow once, that
he had a few keratoses all over his face and arms which
the doctor treated by
cryotherapy. He said that he tended to believe that these keratoses and his
skin cancer were contributed to
by the many years working on the waterfront.
48. Exhibit B is a report of Dr Meintjes who examined the worker in January
2002. He recorded a history of treatment for dozens of
skin cancers since 1964,
treatment initially by Dr Dowling, then by Dr Finlay in Macquarie Street. Dr
Meintjes examined Gow and saw
a man who had
solar damage to his face and
upper body.
He described the facial disfigurement as
looked at his chest and back, and again decided that he did not have severe
disfigurement in those areas. Examination of the
arms revealed solar damage and
scars on both forearms. I too have seen these areas, and though the doctor did
not say the damage
was minimal, he did not express an opinion about it.
49. In his diagnosis, Dr Meintjes stated that Gow had significant
disfigurement which had been caused by skin cancer. According to
doctor’s opinion, the work conditions had been a substantial factor
contributing to the condition which had been of gradual
on-set over years on the
waterfront. He assessed a 5 per cent severe facial disfigurement (though he did
say that he did not think
it was severe), and a 5 per cent severe bodily
disfigurement (which I propose to accept).
50. Then Gow was examined in March 2002 by Dr Shumack and Dr Gibson. Their
reports are Exhibit 2 and Exhibit 1.
51. Dr Shumack recorded a history that Gow had commenced developing sun spots
and skin cancers in the 1970s. On examination, he found
he had quite a
significant number of solar keratoses (or sun spots) over his face, arms and
hands. He also had a significant amount
of sun damage visible, with thinning of
the skin and blotchiness, particularly over his forearms and hands. This is
what I observed
too. He said there was some scarring present over the exposed
areas, consistent with previously treated skin cancers. Dr Shumack
solar skin damage related to sun exposure as well as solar keratoses or sun
spots, and skin cancers. In his opinion, work
carried out for the respondent
contributed only approximately 5 per cent of the current development of skin
cancer and solar keratosis,
and he felt that his employment was not a
substantial contributing factor. I have already addressed this issue.
52. Dr Gibson observed that Gow had generally a fair complexion. He observed
scattered pigmented patches and white patches on the
face, commenting that some
of the white patches, presumably, would be the result of cryotherapy. When he
examined the arms, he noticed
pigmented patches and scattered right patches on
the dorsal surface of both arms and hands. He also examined the
applicant’s
left leg, and observed 2 cm below scar number 1 that there was
a white patch about 1.5 cm in diameter, presumably the result of cryotherapy.
He also noted some pigmentation on the right leg. In his opinion, Dr Gibson
said that exposure to the sun as a waterside worker
would have been a factor in
the development of skin lesions, a few of which appeared to have been malignant,
though he thought that
Gow could not be regarded as having severe facial
disfigurement or severe permanent bodily disfigurement. I agree with one, but
not the other.
53. I make the following findings and award:
54. (1.) That the applicant has sustained an injury by way of an aggravation,
acceleration and exacerbation of skin disease in the
course of his
employment.
55. (2.) That the deemed date of injury is October 2001.
56. (3.) That the applicant was last employed by the respondent in
employment which was a contributing factor to the aggravation,
acceleration,
exacerbation of the disease.
57. (4.) That the applicant has no severe facial disfigurement, though he
does have some disfigurement on his face.
58. (5.) That he has severe bodily disfigurement, which I assess at 5 per
59. (6.) I propose to make a deduction pursuant to s 68 A of the statutory
10 per cent.
60. I enter an award in favour of the applicant, pursuant to s 66, in the
sum of $2250.
61. I order the respondent to pay the applicant’s medical expenses, and
his legal costs.
Mr B McManamey instructed by Turner Freeman appeared for
the applicant.
Mr J Pearce instructed by Hicksons Lawyers appeared for the
respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (40.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter