URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/302.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shoebridge v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force [2013] NSWADT 302 (31 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Shoebridge v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 302
Hearing Date(s):
25 February 2013, 19 June 2013
Decision Date:
31 December 2013
General Division
S Montgomery, Judicial Member
1. The decision under review is affirmed.
2. The application
for a referral pursuant to
section 111
Government Information (Public
Access) Act 2009
3. The application for a referral pursuant to
section 112
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
Catchwords:
Access to government information - access application - reasonable searches
section 111
referral - whether systemic issue in relation to the determination
of access application - whether bad faith -
section 112
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Government Information
(Public Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw [1938)
[1938] HCA 34
Camilleri v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force
[2012] NSWADT 5
Drake v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs [1979] AATA 179;
(1979) 46 FLR 409
Shepherd and
Department of Housing, Local Government and Planning
[1994] QICmr 7
(1994) 1 QAR 464
Principal judgment
David Shoebridge (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(Respondent)
Representation
J Lucy (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
D Shoebridge (Applicant in person)
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
DIVISION (S MONTGOMERY, (JUDICIAL MEMBER)): Mr Shoebridge ("the Applicant") made
an access application ("the access application")
to the Commissioner of Police
("the Respondent") under the
Government Information (Public Access) Act
("the GIPA Act"). The access application sought CCTV footage of an incident
at Rose Bay Police station on the morning of Sunday 5
June 2011. He specifically
requested footage from six CCTV for the period 2:20am and 4:00am on that
access application was made on 4 November 2011 and the Respondent received it on
8 November 2011. The Applicant's request was
initially refused but a further
Notice of Determination on 4 April 2012 granted access in full to the footage.
Applicant applied to this Tribunal for review of the determination. He expressed
concern as to material missing from the footage
that the Respondent had provided
("the missing footage"). He asserted that he had requested unedited CCTV footage
and that the footage
provided had been edited.
Applicant further asserted that Mr David Rook had viewed the CCTV footage at
Rose Bay Police station on 20 September 2011 and
made contemporaneous notes
viewing of the footage. The
Respondent subsequently provided a DVD with footage
and which Mr Rook viewed. Mr Rook said that when he watched the DVD provided
the Police it appeared to be edited and he believed that ten minutes had been
cut from the footage. His evidence was that the
footage did not have the editing
when he viewed it on 20 September 2011.
matter came before me for hearing on 25 February 2013. Mr Rook gave evidence
that the footage he had viewed on 20 September 2011
was different to the version
provided to the Applicant. Inspector Greene did not give evidence.
accepted Mr Rook's evidence and determined to remit the matter for
reconsideration by the Respondent pursuant to section 65 of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
"). This gave the
Respondent the opportunity to undertake further searches for the missing
section 65(2) of the
, where a decision is remitted to an administrator,
the administrator may affirm the decision, vary the decision, or set aside the
decision and make a new decision in substitution for the decision set
Manager of the Respondent's Information Access and Subpoena Unit redetermined
the matter on 27 March 2013. She concluded that
the Respondent does not hold the
missing footage, and did not hold the missing footage as at 8 November 2011. In
arriving at that
decision she stated:
... Sergeant Cameron Macraild of the State Electronic Evidence Branch was
directed to examine the computer onto which the CCTV footage
in question had
been saved, as well as a DVD purporting to contain the CCTV footage provided to
Mr Tanner on 18 October 2011.
Specifically, Sergeant Macraild was instructed to examine the video file of
the CCTV footage to determine whether it displayed any
indications of
modification using any applicable computer program(s) available at the State
Electronic Evidence Branch.
On 12 December 2011, Inspector Shane Woolbank at Rose Bay Police Station
provided the following items to Sergeant Macraild for his
examination:
1. A Lenovo Think Station computer tower, Model number MT-M 6483 DW5 (serial
number L2ABE2F) containing:
2. A Seagate ST31000340AS 1TB 3.5" SATA hard disk drive (serial number
9QJ3BZXL); and
3. A Seagate ST31000340AS 1TB 3.5" SATA hard disk drive (serial number
9C/J3KJV1); plus
4 A DVD labelled LM1 1102926.
Sergeant Macraild inspected the DVD (item 4) and found that it contained a
folder titled "CCTV_rose_bay_police_sta.txr which contained
1. 20110316.exe; and
2. a20110316.exe.
In a Certificate of Expert Evidence dated 21 December 2011, Sergeant Macraild
stated that both these files were self-executing video
files and were an exact
copy of the files located on the hard disk drives specified in items 2 and 3
above and had not been altered
in any way.
At the time of his examination, Sergeant Macraild "cloned" the hard disk
drive of the Lenovo Think Station computer tower. I am advised
that the cloned
hard disk drive is currently retained by Sergeant Macraild as a "compressed"
file that requires specific computer
software, called Encase, to run. I am
advised that this cloned hard disk drive is the same as the hard disk drive that
was provided
to Sergeant Macraild on 12 December 2011 and was the hard disk
drive from which Mr Rook was shown the CCTV footage on 20 September
from which a copy of the CCTV footage was made to provide to you in response to
your Access Application).
In order to complete my reconsideration, inquiries were also directed to Rose
Bay Police Station and a request was made to search
the hard disk drive of the
Lenovo Think Station computer tower as well as a physical search of the premises
at Rose Bay Police Station
for any additional copies of the CCTV footage (for
example, on DVD). In the annexed statement dated 26 April 2013, Inspector Greene
of Rose Bay Police Station advised that she had examined the folders on the
Lenovo Think Station computer tower (serial number L2ABE2F)
located in the
muster room of the Rose Bay Police Station. Inspector Greene was unable to
locate any files named "20110316.exe" or
"a20110316.exe" (or any similarly named
files), in any folder on that computer.
I am also advised that a physical search of the Rose Bay Police Station on 26
March 2013, by Inspector David Vidal, failed to locate
any additional copies of
the CCTV footage. Inspector Vidal also searched the folders on the computer
network drive of Constable Simon
Judge (who was the officer who originally
downloaded the CCTV footage from the CCTV recorder, but who has since left the
Force). Inspector Vidal has advised that no files matching the above
description were located in any of Constable Judge's folders.
A physical copy of the CCTV footage, which is identical to that provided to
you with the Notice of Decision dated 4 April 2012, is
currently held by the
legal representatives for the Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force, in
relation to the current Administrative
Decisions Tribunal proceedings.
On balance, I do not think there are reasonable grounds for believing that
the information which Mr Rook says is missing from the
CCTV footage existed as
at the time of your access application or afterwards, even though I accept that
Mr Rook believes that he
inspected a different version of the CCTV footage. ...
I am satisfied that the searches conducted by Inspector Greene, Inspector
and Sergeant Macraild for the video footage which Mr Rook gave evidence that he
saw have been reasonable and were conducted
using the most efficient means
available to the NSW Police Force as is the standard set out in section 53 of
the GIPA Act.
matter came before me for again on 19 June 2013. On that occasion I determined
that the matter would be determined without further
hearing and set a timetable
for the filing of any further material. Each party has provided written
submissions in support of its
case. None of th eofficers who conducted further
agreed that the matter is to be determined without further hearing.
Applicant has requested the Tribunal to refer the matter of the missing footage
to the Information Commissioner pursuant to section
111 of the GIPA Act and to
bring the matter to the attention of the Police Minister pursuant to section 112
of the GIPA Act.
Applicable legislation
objects of the GIPA Act are set out in section 3(1) -
In order to maintain and advance a system of responsible and representative
democratic Government that is open, accountable, fair
and effective, the object
of this Act is to open government information to the public by:
(a) authorising and encouraging the proactive public release of government
information by agencies, and
(b) giving members of the public an enforceable right to access government
information, and
(c) providing that access to government information is restricted only when
there is an overriding public interest against disclosure.
'Government
information' is given a wide meaning (section 4) being 'information contained in
a record held by an agency.' 'Agency'
is also defined in section 4. The
Respondent is an agency to which the GIPA Act applies. The footage is
'government information'
for the purposes of the GIPA Act.
GIPA Act establishes a presumption in favour of the disclosure of government
information unless there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure
(section 5). Applicants for access to government information have a legally
enforceable right to be provided
with access to that information, unless there
is an overriding public interest against disclosure (section 9).
limited exceptions, the Act establishes a principle that there is pubic interest
in favour of disclosure (section 12(1)). Section
12(2) says that public interest
considerations in favour of disclosure are not limited.
will only be an overriding public interest against disclosure when the public
interest test in section 13 is satisfied. It provides
There is an overriding public interest against disclosure of government
information for the purposes of this Act if (and only if)
there are public
interest considerations against disclosure and, on balance, those considerations
outweigh the public interest considerations
in favour of disclosure.
public interest considerations against disclosure are limited to those set out
in the Table to section 14.
53 of the GIPA Act provides:
53 Searches for information held by agency
(1) The obligation of an agency to provide access to government information
in response to an access application is limited to information
held by the
agency when the application is received.
(2) An agency must undertake such reasonable searches as may be necessary to
find any of the government information applied for that
was held by the agency
when the application was received. The agency's searches must be conducted using
the most efficient means
reasonably available to the agency.
(3) The obligation of an agency to undertake reasonable searches extends to
agency including
resources that facilitate the retrieval of information stored
electronically.
(4) An agency is not required to search for information in records held by
the agency in an electronic backup system unless a record
containing the
information has been lost to the agency as a result of having been destroyed,
transferred, or otherwise dealt with,
in contravention of the
State Records
or contrary to the agency's established record management
procedures.
(5) An agency is not required to undertake any search for information that
would require an unreasonable and substantial diversion
of the agency's
aggrieved by a reviewable decision may seek a review by the Tribunal (section
100). When this provision is read with section
, they confer
Tribunal's function on review under section 63 of the
is to make the
correct and preferable decisions having regard to the material before it, and
any applicable written or unwritten
law. It is well established that in
considering an application for review the Tribunal is not constrained to have
regard only to
the material that was before the agency, but may have regard to
any relevant material before it at the time of the review:
Drake v Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 179;
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
therefore able to take account of material that is now available but which was
not available at the hearing on 25 February 2013.
any review of a reviewable decision, section 105 places the burden of justifying
the decision on the agency concerned. In this
particular matter, the Applicant
has raised the issue of the sufficiency of the search undertaken by the
Respondent. It is for the
Respondent to show what steps were taken in the search
for information falling within the scope of the Access Application and to
satisfy the Tribunal that those steps were sufficient.
issue of what constitutes an adequate search has been considered in numerous
decisions under both the GIPA Act and the repealed
Freedom of Information
Shepherd and Department of Housing, Local Government and Planning
[1994] QICmr 7
, the Information Commissioner of Queensland identified a two limb
approach to the question of what constitutes an adequate search
(a) whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
requested documents exist and are documents of the agency and, if so,
(b) whether the search efforts made by the agency to locate such documents
have been reasonable in all the circumstances of a particular
decision in
has been affirmed in subsequent decisions of the
Tribunal on a number of occasions. In
Camilleri v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2012] NSWADT 5
, Judicial Member Isenberg discussed the
approach to be taken in determining whether the search undertaken by an agency
is sufficient.
In doing so she referred to a number of authorities that
considered that issue for the purposes of the now repealed
Information Act
"). She stated:
10 In deciding whether a sufficient search has been carried out, the ultimate
issue for the Tribunal is whether the agency's conclusion,
that it does not hold
the documents sought by the applicant, is sound.
11 What constitutes a sufficient search has been considered by the Tribunal
in a number of cases. In
Hemeon v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
Police Service
[2002] NSWADT 201
, the President said that the
approach of the Information Commissioner of Queensland in
Shepherd and
Department of Housing, Local Government and Planning
[1994] QICmr 7
(1994) 1 QAR 464
should be adopted in addressing sufficiency of search issues. In Shepherd the
Information Commissioner said at [19] that there were
two questions for
consideration were:
'(a) whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the requested
documents exist and are documents of the agency; and if so,
(b) whether the search efforts made by the agency to locate such documents
have been reasonable in all the circumstances of a particular
12 This approach has been followed by the Tribunal in a number of cases such
DQ v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
Patsalis v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2003] NSWADT 213
Chapman v Commissioner of
Police, New South Wales Police
[2004] NSWADT 35
O'Hara v North Sydney
[2005] NSWADT 100
Curtin v Vice-Chancellor,
University of New South Wales (No 2)
[2006] NSWADT 56.
13 It is not enough for the applicant to merely assert non-compliance on the
basis of a general distrust of the agency:
Cianfrano v Director General
Department of Commerce and anor (No 2)
[2006] NSWADT 195
14 With regard to the second part of the test set out in
President O'Connor considered the key factors in assessing whether a sufficient
Miriani v Commissioner of New South Wales
[2005] NSWADT 187
. These factors included, relevantly, the
ability to retrieve any documents that are the subject of the request. What
constitutes
a sufficient search will vary with the circumstances.
at [63], President O'Connor said that the standard of
have occurred. The fact that there may be weaknesses in an agency's
processes, did not
necessarily lead to the conclusion that the search had not been reasonable, or
sufficient, or adequate: see also
documents to which the applicant sought access had existed but were subsequently
lost. Numerous searches were conducted but
failed to find them and, ultimately,
his Honour concluded at [59] that 'it would be a waste of time to ask the agency
to do any more
Tribunal must come to a view whether there are reasonable grounds to believe
there is some further footage relevant to the access
application and, if so,
whether, in all the circumstances, the Respondent has made reasonable search
efforts to locate it.
111 of the GIPA Act provides:
111 Referral of systemic issues to
Information Commissioner
The ADT may refer any matter to the Information Commissioner that the ADT
considers is indicative of a systemic issue in relation
to the determination of
access applications by a particular agency or by agencies generally.
112 of the GIPA Act provides:
112 Report on improper conduct
If the ADT is of the opinion as a result of an ADT review that an officer of
an agency has failed to exercise in good faith a function
conferred on the
officer by or under this Act, the ADT may bring the matter to the attention of
the Minister who appears to the ADT
to have responsibility for the agency.
The Respondent's case
Respondent contends that there is no evidence that it held the missing footage,
when the Applicant applied for that information
on 8 November 2011. It further
contends that it has conducted reasonable searches for the missing
Lucy submitted that in effect the original decision to release the complete
footage was also implicitly a decision that the Commissioner
did not hold other
footage and that that decision has been affirmed in the Reconsideration
Lucy also submitted that the Applicant's requests for the Tribunal to issue a
report to the Police Minister and a referral to the
Information Commissioner are
without merit and should be refused.
Did the Respondent hold the missing footage on 8 November 2011?
Tribunal's task is now to decide what the correct and preferable decision is
having regard to the material before it. Dr Lucy
submitted that this material
includes the Reconsideration Decision and the evidence relied upon to make that
parties accept that the Respondent does not now hold the missing footage. Dr
Lucy submitted that there is no evidence that the
Commissioner held the missing
footage on 8 November 2011. She says that there is evidence to support the
findings of fact set out
in the Reconsideration Decision and referred to
Applicant's expert queried whether the CCTV footage provided to Sergeant
Macraild was what was originally recorded by the system.
Sergeant Macraild gave
evidence that it is not possible to confirm whether or not the CCTV footage had
been altered prior to his
receiving it.
a statement dated 26 April 2013, Inspector Greene stated that on 25 March 2013
she examined the computer on which the CCTV footage
was previously stored, and
which was used to show Mr Rook the footage on 20 September 2011 and that she
found no footage. She stated
that she was familiar with the footage because she
had facilitated Mr Rook in viewing it.
noted above, the Reconsideration Decision indicates that Inspector Vidal also
conducted a physical search of the Rose Bay Police
Station, including a search
of the folders on the computer network drive of the officer who originally
downloaded the CCTV footage,
and did not locate any additional copies of the
CCTV footage.
Lucy submitted that the only evidence suggesting that the Respondent held a copy
of the missing footage is Mr Rook's oral evidence.
She argues that even if the
Tribunal accepts Mr Rook's evidence that he saw the missing footage on 20
September 2011, this does not
establish that the Respondent held that
information when the Applicant made his GIPA application on 8 November
Lucy further submitted that the Respondent's obligation to provide access to
government information is limited to information it
held when the access
application was received: section 53(1) of the GIPA Act. She submits that the
Respondent has complied with the
obligation in section 53(2) of the GIPA Act to
conduct "such reasonable searches as may be necessary to find any of the
information applied for that was held ... when the application was
ultimate issue for the Tribunal is whether the Respondent's conclusion, that it
does not hold the information sought by the Applicant,
Camilleri v
Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force
[2012] NSWADT 5
at paragraph
Lucy contends that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that the requested
information existed as at the time of the Applicant's
GIPA application. Further,
the Respondent's staff have made reasonable search efforts to locate the
information. In these circumstances,
the correct and preferable decision is that
the Respondent did not hold the missing footage when the Applicant lodged his
GIPA application.
The Tribunal should therefore decide, pursuant to section
63(2)(a) of the
, to affirm the decision that the Respondent does not
hold the missing footage.
Section 111 Application
Lucy submitted that even if the Tribunal finds that the missing footage was
recorded but is now missing, there is no evidence on
which the Tribunal could
reach the view that this is "indicative of a systemic issue". The evidence only
relates to the Respondent's
handling of a single CCTV file.
Lucy further submitted that if loss of the footage occurred at all, it may have
occurred when the footage was downloaded from the
CCTV camera or at some later
point in the handling of the electronic information, before the Applicant's
access application was made.
There is nothing to suggest that the Respondent's
staff lost or deleted the information when determining an access application.
alleged loss of footage is therefore not an "issue in relation to the
determination of access applications".
Lucy contends that for these reasons, the Tribunal has no power to refer the
matter under section 111 of the GIPA Act and it would
not be desirable to do so
in any event. In these circumstances, the Applicant's request should be
Section 112 Application
Lucy submitted that there is no evidence that any officer in the Respondent has
failed to exercise any function in good faith.
argued that if the Tribunal finds that the missing footage was recorded and is
now missing, there are various possible explanations
for this, including a
computer malfunction or virus. In the absence of evidence as to how this
occurred, the Tribunal could not reach
a state of "reasonable satisfaction" that
a police officer has not acted in good faith, a state which may not be produced
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences:
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
60 CLR 336.
Lucy further submitted that the function must be one that was conferred under
the GIPA Act. In this case, there is nothing to indicate
that any of the
Respondent's officers exercising functions conferred under the GIPA Act
exercised their functions other than in good
faith. For these reasons, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to exercise the power in section 112 of the GIPA
Act and the Applicant's
request should be declined.
The Applicant's case
Applicant accepts that, as at the date of the Reconsideration Decision, the
Respondent did not have any further material to produce
to him. However, he does
not concede that the Respondent produced all the material it held that responded
to the access application
as at 8 November 2011.
notes that the Tribunal concluded that there was material held by the Respondent
as at 20 September 2011 that was not produced.
He submits that the issue is now
simply what if any orders are appropriate as a result of the earlier findings
and the Reconsideration
Applicant submitted that the Statement from Inspector Greene fails to address
the evidence given by Mr Rook and that the factual
determination should not be
permitted to be reviewed, or if reviewed it should be
is the Applicant's submission that as at 20 September 2011 the Respondent had
CCTV footage that was relevant to the Applicant's
GIPA but not produced to the
Applicant at any time. At some time between 20 September 2011 and 27 March 2013
the material was deleted
or removed from the Respondent's
further submitted that the evidence in this case is that there are systematic
failures in the police CCTV records at the Rose Bay
Police Station. Failings
that fundamentally undermine its utility as a reliable record of events at the
Station. Failings that lead
to many of the produced images giving false records
of movements and on other occasion the failure to record movements. Despite
given multiple opportunities to explain these failures, the two Police
experts were entirely at a loss to explain the deficiencies.
The Applicant
contends that in these circumstances a referral under section 111 of the GIPA
Act is both appropriate and essential.
is the Applicant's submission that these systemic failings make it impossible
for the Tribunal to have any confidence in the responses
by the Respondent to
either this access application, or any other GIPA Act access application seeking
CCTV footage. This is a systemic
issue that the Applicant seeks referred to the
Information Commissioner pursuant to section 111 of the GIPA
Applicant also seeks the Tribunal to issue a report on improper conduct by the
Respondent to the Minister for Police pursuant
to section 112 of the Act. The
basis for this submission is that sometime between 20 September 2011 and 8
November 2012 an officer
or agent of the Respondent appears to have acted to
edit the CCTV footage held by the Respondent such that the missing footage was
not available to the Police Information Access and Subpoena Unit at the time
those officers produced all the documents they had to
noted above, the onus lies with the Respondent to satisfy the Tribunal that
there has been compliance with the Act.
as previously stated I accepted Mr Rook's evidence with respect to his
observations when he viewed the CCTV footage at Rose Bay
Police station on 20
September 2011 and made contemporaneous notes about what he had viewed. I do not
propose to revisit that issue.
is common ground that the Respondent no longer holds the missing footage. There
is no evidence on which I could reasonably conclude
how the missing footage was
lost. However, it appears that it was no longer available on 12 December 2011
when Inspector Woolbank
provided the computer onto which the CCTV footage in
question had been saved to Sergeant Macraild for his
examination.
my view it is also probable that the missing footage had been lost prior to 18
October 2011 when a DVD purporting to contain the
CCTV footage was provided to
being the case, I am satisfied that it is also probable that the Respondent did
not hold the missing footage when it received
the Applicant's access application
on 8 November 2011.
53(1) of the GIPA Act limits the Respondent's obligation to provide access to
information to information it held when the
access application was received. It
must conduct such reasonable searches as may be necessary to find any
information that was held
at that time.
had regard to the material that is now before me, I am satisfied that the
Respondent's searches were reasonable.
find that the Respondent did not hold the missing footage when it received the
Applicant's access application on 8 November 2011.
It follows, in my view, that
the decision that the Respondent does not hold the missing footage should be
accept the Applicant's contention that the evidence in this matter identifies an
issue in relation to the recording and maintenance
of CCTV footage at the Rose
Bay Police Station. While the evidence only relates to the Respondent's handling
of a single CCTV file,
it would be prudent for the Respondent to review its
system in an effort to prevent similar issues arising in the future.
Nevertheless,
I agree with the Respondent's argument that the evidence in this matter does not
support the view that this is indicative
of a systemic issue 'in relation to the
determination of access applications'. Any issues identified relate to the
recording and
maintenance of CCTV footage, not to the determination of the
access application. In the circumstances, I do not agree that referral
matter under section 111 of the GIPA Act is warranted. The Applicant's request
that I make the referral is therefore declined.
also agree with the Respondent's argument that there is no evidence that any
officer in the Respondent has failed to exercise in
good faith any function
conferred on them by or under the GIPA Act. If in fact the missing footage was
lost between 20 September
2011 and 8 November 2011, it is improbable that any
officer with a function conferred on them by or under the GIPA Act would have
dealt with the CCTV footage. If they did, it would not have been in relation to
this access application.
am unable to identify any officer who could be said to have has failed to
exercise in good faith a function conferred on them. That
being the case, I do
not agree that a report to the Minister under section 112 of the GIPA Act is
warranted. The Applicant's request
that I make the referral is therefore
1. The decision under review is affirmed.
2. The application for a referral pursuant to
section 111
Government Information (Public Access) Act
is refused.
3. The application for a referral pursuant to
section 112
Government Information (Public Access) Act
is refused.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter