URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Annette Dao Quynh Do [2013] NSWMT 7 (29 April 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Annette Dao Quynh Do
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 7
Hearing Date(s):
29, 30, 31 October 2012; 17, 18, 19 December 2012; and, 19 March 2013
Decision Date:
29 April 2013
Colefax SC DCJ; Dr. M. Giuffrida; Dr. M. Walker; Ms. J. Houen
1. Complaints (x 2) of professional misconduct proved.
hearing for appropriate protective orders fixed for 7 June 2013.
Catchwords:
Medical practitioner - professional misconduct - onus of proof -
requirement for re-hearing if Deputy Chairperson retires before final
obligation of full disclosure by witness to the Tribunal, especially witnesses
other than the respondent.
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Medical Practice Regulation 2002
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Palmer v Dolman
[2005] NSWCA
Director General of Department of Community Services, Re Sophie
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Dr Annette Dao Quynh Do
(Respondent)
Representation
Mr. C. O'Donnell (Complainant)
- Solicitors:
Ms. F. Westwood (instructed by the Health Care Complaints Commission)
(Complainant)
Dr A. Do (self represented) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
4005 of 2011
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Annette Dao Quynh Do was born in New Zealand in 1968.
1995 she obtained bachelor degrees in Medicine and Surgery from the University
of Auckland.
in 1995 Dr Do was first granted conditional registration as a medical
practitioner in New South Wales. With some short exceptions
she was a registered
medical practitioner in this State continuously until 22 January 2009 when her
name was removed from the Register
because she had not paid her annual
registration fee.
the time of her registration Dr Do was not subject to any practising
conditions.
2005 Dr Do met Mr Daniel Siebler (who was then living in Melbourne) over the
internet (not a dating site) and a relationship through
that medium commenced.
At that time Dr Do was 37 years old and Mr Siebler 27 years
10 June 2006 Mr Siebler moved to Sydney to live with Dr Do in a de facto
relationship.
29 July 2006 Mr Siebler started to develop severe debilitating headaches and on
3 August 2006 Dr Do made a diagnosis of "cluster
headaches".
18 June 2008 Mr Siebler died from a self-administered overdose of
amitriptyline.
inquest was subsequently held into Mr Siebler's death.
a result of that inquest, the Health Care Complaints Commission ("the
Commission") undertook an investigation into the conduct
investigation resulted in the Commission filing a Notice of Complaint with this
Tribunal on 30 November 2010. An Amended Complaint
was filed on 21 March
26 and 27 March 2012 the Tribunal conducted an inquiry and at the conclusion of
that inquiry reserved its findings in relation
to the Amended
10 May 2012 the Tribunal delivered its findings to the effect that it was
satisfied that the particulars of each of the 2 complaints
in the Amended
Complaint had been made out. The Tribunal then adjourned in order to conduct a
further hearing as to what appropriate
protective orders ought to be made in the
light of those findings.
date for that further hearing was fixed for 16 July 2012.
16 July 2012, however, the Deputy Chairperson who had presided at the earlier
Tribunal hearing retired and resigned her judicial
commission and consequently
her Honour ceased to be a qualified person to be a Deputy Chairperson of this
16 July 2012 another Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal, Colefax SC DCJ,
delivered a decision in which he held that, by reason
of section 165C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
("the National
Law"), the retirement of the previous Deputy Chairperson effectively terminated
that previous inquiry and that a differently
constituted Tribunal would be
appointed to consider
the allegations made in the Amended
further hearing of the Amended Complaint commenced on Monday 29 October 2012
before this presently constituted Tribunal. None
of the members of this Tribunal
were members of the earlier Tribunal.
that hearing, the Commission was represented by Mr O'Donnell of counsel. Dr Do
appeared for herself unrepresented. Apparently (and
somewhat ironically) her
professional indemnity insurer declined to indemnify her because Dr Do contended
(contrary to one of the
allegations made against her in the Amended Complaint)
that she was not the treating practitioner for Mr Siebler.
hearing continued up to and including 31 October 2012 when it was adjourned to
enable the evidence of Dr Gronow to be obtained.
Dr Gronow had not previously
been interviewed in connection with the Amended Complaint. The significance of
his evidence will be
obvious later in these reasons. The hearing resumed for a
further three days on 17 December 2012. The final hearing day was on 19
Do was not present for that final hearing day. However, before that day she had
been served with the detailed written submissions
of the Commission; and had
herself filed and served detailed written submissions.
the conclusion of the hearing the Tribunal reserved its decision. The Tribunal
also directed the Registrar to provide a copy of
the transcript of the final day
of hearing to Dr Do.
the Tribunal reserved its decision, Dr Do on two separate occasions sought to
file further evidence and submissions. The Tribunal
refused leave for her to do
so on each such occasion, having regard to the well established principles of
finality of litigation.
The Nature of the Complaint:
Amended Complaint contains two discrete complaints.
1 in the Amended Complaint alleges that Dr Do has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning
of section 139B of the National
general terms the complaint alleges that Dr Do:
(a) has demonstrated that her knowledge, skill and judgment in the practice of
medicine is significantly below the standard reasonably
to be expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience;
(b) has contravened a provision or provisions of the
Medical Practice Regulation
(c) has engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of medicine.
2 alleges that Dr Do has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
meaning of section 139E of the National Law.
relation to both complaints (or either of them), the Commission contends that Dr
Do's registration should be either suspended or
particulars given for the two complaints are identical and (slightly recast by
us) are as follows:
(a) Whilst a general practitioner in private practice in New South Wales she
commenced a de facto relationship with Mr Siebler and
that whilst in that de
facto relationship she was his primary medical provider.
(b) In her capacity as Mr Siebler's primary medical provider, Dr Do regularly
prescribed medication for Mr Siebler, including morphine,
amitriptyline, other injectable pain relief, psychotropic medications and
various other medications and regularly injected
him with such medications. It
is the first three drugs that are of particular concern to the Commission. In
this regard, morphine
and pethidine are drugs of addiction as defined by the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
. Many of the other medications are
prescribed restricted substances as defined by the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002
(c) Further, she failed to maintain adequate records of consultations and
services provided to Mr Siebler, including records of prescriptions,
particularly of prescribed restricted substances including drugs of
(d) Finally, she prescribed those drugs of addiction without proper authority
and in circumstances where Dr Do was, or ought to have
been, of the opinion that
Mr Siebler was a drug-dependent person.
Do disputes that she has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct. Specifically, in relation
to the particulars of the two
complaints, she:
(a) admits that she was in a de facto relationship with Mr Siebler, but denies
that she was his primary medical provider (viz treating
practitioner);
(b) contends that the writing of the prescriptions and the administration of
(inter alia) morphine, pethidine and amitriptyline by
her was done either with
the express or implicit knowledge and approval of a number of specialists who
really were Mr Siebler's primary
medical providers - she was just a facilitator;
(c) admits that she failed to maintain adequate records of prescriptions which
she wrote for Mr Siebler, including drugs of addiction,
but she says there were
extenuating circumstances for that.
The Legislative Framework:
proceedings are brought under
of the National Law.
139B(1)(a) of the National Law defines "unsatisfactory professional conduct" of
a registered health practitioner as, including:
"Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner, in the practice of
the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience."
139E of the National Law defines "professional misconduct" as:
"(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration."
Commission has the onus of proving the matters alleged in the Amended Complaint.
The standard of proof is the civil standard.
However, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the gravity of their consequences, the civil standard is
that informed
by the principles articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Palmer v Dolman
[2005] NSWCA 361
Director General of Department of Community Services, Re Sophie
The Factual Background:
order to place the Amended Complaint in a proper factual context it is necessary
to expand upon the brief facts set out in the
introductory section of this
doing so, it is helpful to say something about "cluster headaches". They were
described in the hearing by Professor Paul Spira,
a consultant neurologist who
specialises in this condition:
"... [A] cluster headache is named cluster because of the fact that it
arrives in packets which in a normal cluster patient will go
on for something
like about six to eight weeks, during which time the individual suffers anywhere
between two and six headaches a
day. Each one of them excruciating in its
severity. And each one of them is subsiding within something like 30 to 90
minutes ...
[That] cluster will go on ... for about six to eight weeks in a
normal cluster case, during which time patients go through hell.
There's no way
of describing this pain; it has to be one of the worst pains imaginable. I've
seen grown men literally beating their
head against a wall for relief because
they find that a relief. The pain of hitting your head helps, excursion (sic)
extent, and these people never lie in bed, they can't keep still,
they're restless in pain, and once you've seen cluster, you never
witness it, let alone experience it.
Each cluster patient is scared of the next headache, and they know that their
in for two or three, or four in a 24 hour cycle." (T32)
In addition, Dr Do tendered a CD (exhibit 4) which showed three people
(including Mr Siebler) suffering cluster headaches.
we have said, on 29 July 2006 Mr Siebler started to develop severe debilitating
daily headaches and on 3 August 2006 Dr Do made
a diagnosis of "cluster
headaches". Notwithstanding the two dates to which we have just referred, Dr Do
wrote two prescriptions for
intramuscular injections of pethidine which were
dispensed on 28 and 31 July 2006 - each for 5 ampoules. The date on which each
prescribed is unknown but it must obviously have been written on or before
the date on which it was dispensed. It is not necessary
for us to resolve this
anomaly - not least because it was not put to Dr Do in cross-examination or
otherwise. However, because of
the importance which we attribute to the
prescriptions written by Dr Do and dispensed for Mr Siebler, as the history will
we take the opportunity of here making the following observations.
First, prescriptions are usually written with an intention that
they will be
dispensed - and the drugs so dispensed will be consumed. There is no reason for
us to believe that, with respect to
the prescriptions to which we refer in these
reasons, Dr Do had any other expectation. Nor is there any reason for us to
that most, if not all, of the dispensed drugs were not consumed by Mr
Siebler. Our conclusion in this regard is reinforced by the
fact Dr Do was in
serious financial difficulties and Mr Siebler was largely, if not totally,
financially dependent upon her. It is
unlikely (to say the least) that Dr Do
would have incurred the expense of paying for significant quantities of drugs,
on the PBS, unless she intended that they be
4 August 2006 Mr Siebler went to the Emergency Section of the Blacktown
Hospital. The next day (5 August) he and Dr Do attended
upon Dr Tang, a general
practitioner. Dr Tang apparently told Mr Siebler and Dr Do that he was
unfamiliar with, and therefore reluctant
to treat, cluster headaches. (There was
also a further consultation with Dr Tang on 19 August 2006, but nothing of
further significance
arises from that consultation - we have noted it, somewhat
out of chronological order, simply for completeness).
7 August 2006 Dr Do wrote a further prescription of 5 ampoules of intramuscular
injections of pethidine for Mr Siebler which was
dispensed on that date. It is
to be noted, however, given Dr Do's contention that she was not Mr Siebler's
primary medical practitioner,
that by this date she had written three
prescriptions for pethidine without any specialist intervention or
9 August 2006 Mr Siebler and Dr Do had a consultation with Dr Grant Walker, a
consultant neurologist. Dr Walker was the first of
seven specialists consulted
in the relevant period by Mr Siebler at the request of Dr Do.
the commencement of the consultation Dr Do handed a referral letter to Dr
Walker. The letter is not in evidence - Dr Walker did
not apparently keep the
original and Dr Do did not keep a copy. Dr Do submitted that Dr Walker had
deliberately destroyed the original
letter. There is no plausible reason why Dr
Walker would do so. We reject that submission.
is contended by Dr Do that this referral letter included a disclosure that she
was in a personal relationship with Mr Siebler.
Dr Walker did not recall the
letter containing that disclosure. Further, he said that if he had been aware of
it, he would have strongly
counselled Dr Do against being the treating general
practitioner. It is notable however that in later consultations with other
specialists
Dr Do did expressly reveal her relationship with Mr Siebler.
Accordingly, and notwithstanding Dr Walker's lack of recollection on
the Tribunal is not satisfied that Dr Do did not reveal her personal
relationship with Mr Siebler to Dr Walker.
Walker took a history of left retro-orbital headaches. In a written report to Dr
Do dated 9 August 2006, he diagnosed Mr Siebler
as having a combination of "true
cluster headache with super-imposed abnormal illness behaviour". He noted that
Dr Do had treated
Mr Siebler, amongst other things, with "significant
analgesia". The reference to "significant analgesia" was intended by him to be
reference to pethidine. He recommended treatment with "Isoptin" (verapamil) or
"Deseril" (methysergide) for a two month period
as well as "Imigran"
(sumatriptan) and/or oxygen "in the short term".
Significantly,
in his report Dr Walker stated that Mr Siebler "will almost certainly require
analgesia [which Dr Walker in evidence
said he intended to mean pethidine], but
given his abnormal illness behaviour, I am not sure how one can possibly monitor
that, apart
from being very careful not to get into a situation of
term Pethidine addiction
...". (emphasis added)
Walker in his evidence before the Tribunal accepted that he told Dr Do in this
consultation (consistently with his subsequent letter)
that pethidine would be
an appropriate medication "in the short term" - by which he told the Tribunal
that he meant about 3-4 weeks.
It is not clear that that time frame was
expressly provided to Dr Do in the consultation. Dr Walker's evidence was that
he told her
"several weeks at most" - although that term was not repeated in the
subsequent letter. However, we have no reason to doubt the accuracy
Walker's evidence in this regard. Dr Walker was emphatic in his evidence that at
no time either in this consultation, or in
the few telephone conversations
thereafter, was there any reference by either him or Dr Do to morphine being
used to treat Mr Siebler.
Again, we have no reason to doubt the accuracy of Dr
Walker's evidence in this regard.
our opinion, at the conclusion of this consultation, it would have been
reasonable for Dr Do to conclude that Dr Walker was satisfied
that short-term
administration of pethidine (i.e. several weeks "
" - emphasis
added) was an available treatment option (with some risk) and that he had
expressed no disquiet to Dr Do about treating
her own partner in this
Walker did not see Mr Siebler again, although he did provide a copy of the
report which he wrote to Dr Do to the Blacktown Hospital.
10 August 2006 Dr Do wrote two prescriptions for Mr Siebler. The first of those
prescriptions was dispensed on that date and was
for 10 ampoules of
intramuscular injections of pethidine. The second prescription was dispensed on
14 August 2006 and was for a quantity
of tablets of morphine. Dr Walker had not
made any reference to morphine use. As with pethidine, Dr Do decided to use this
drug herself.
14 August 2006 Dr Do wrote a prescription for Mr Siebler for 10 ampoules of
intramuscular injections of pethidine. This prescription
was dispensed on 15
August 2006.
on 15 August 2006 Dr Do wrote three more prescriptions for Mr Siebler. The first
was also dispensed on that day. It was for
10 further ampoules of injectable
pethidine. The second was dispensed on 16 August 2006. This was for 10 ampoules
of injectable morphine.
The third was dispensed on 17 August 2006. It was for 50
ampoules of injectable morphine.
some point after the consultation with Dr Walker, but before 7 September 2006,
Dr Do "contacted" Dr Gronow of the Sydney Pain Management
Clinic (probably
informally by telephone - there is no note in the clinic's records) who
apparently suggested medicating Mr Siebler
with "Lyrica" (pregabalin). This
medication was not effective (according to Dr Do) and consequently Dr Do
arranged for Mr Siebler
to be examined by Professor Spira on 7 September
preparation for the examination by Professor Spira, Dr Do completed a detailed
referral letter of six pages in length dated 7 September
2006. A number of
things should be noted about the contents of that letter.
it disclosed that Mr Siebler was Dr Do's "partner".
it recorded that Dr Do had made a diagnosis of "cluster
it recorded that she had initially prescribed "Tramal" (tramadol) and then
morphine and pethidine injections (this was referred
to six times in the letter
- two references were made on the second page, the third was made on the third
page, the fourth and fifth
on the fourth page and the sixth on the sixth
it recorded that a few days after Mr Siebler saw Dr Walker on 9 August 2006 his
"... condition got worse, the attacks increased
to 6-8 per day
requiring morphine or pethidine to stop the pain" (emphasis added).
it stated that because of those injections of narcotics Mr Siebler had developed
a dependency for them, which Dr Do was "weaning"
him off. (We note that this
"dependency" - or addiction, the distinction between the two being presently
irrelevant - was precisely
what Dr Walker had warned of four weeks
previously).
Notwithstanding
that Dr Do had prepared the detailed letter of referral, Professor Spira said in
his evidence that he did not fully
read it in the consultation. He accepted in
cross-examination that he read "maybe through half of it" (T40:35). If he
intended that
evidence to be literally true, Professor Spira must therefore have
read at least the second page - which included the passage quoted
at [55] above
- and possibly the third page. Professor Spira further said that as Dr Do, in
her capacity as the patient's general
practitioner (as he understood it), was
present at the consultation he would take an oral history from her and Mr
Siebler. Dr Do
contends, but Professor Spira in his evidence expressly and
firmly denied, that in that consultation reference was orally made by
fact that she was prescribing morphine and pethidine. Whether or not it was
orally referred to by her, there is no doubt
that it was revealed in detail in
the letter of referral. In his evidence before the Tribunal, Professor Spira
also said that he
had not read the letter after the consultation. Further in
that evidence, however, Professor Spira accepted that Dr Do might reasonably
have expected him to have done so; and he apologised to her for not doing
noted at [55] above a particular passage from the letter of referral. In our
view that sentence is unambiguous. In cross-examination
Dr Do denied that that
sentence was factually correct - notwithstanding that it was written by her. It
is however consistent with
the history subsequently given by Dr Do to Dr Gronow
(to which we refer at [70] below). Moreover, it is consistent with
contemporaneous
pharmacy records and which are the basis for our findings at
[47] to [49] above. Bearing in mind the standard of proof required by
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
, we are satisfied that the history in the letter
was correctly recorded by Dr Do.
the conclusion of the consultation Professor Spira asked Dr Do to prepare a
record of the dates on which Mr Siebler subsequently
had these problematic
headaches and the duration of them. A further consultation was fixed for 15
September 2006.
15 September 2006 Professor Spira had that second consultation with Mr Siebler
and Dr Do. Amongst other things, Dr Do provided
Professor Spira with the
requested handwritten schedule. It was a simple one-page document. On it Dr Do
clearly recorded that on
9 and 10 September she had treated Mr Siebler with
morphine. In his evidence to this Tribunal, Professor Spira said that he had not
read that part of that document.
this second consultation, Professor Spira wrote a letter to Dr Do dated 15
September 2006. In it he expressed doubt as to
whether Mr Siebler was in fact
suffering from cluster headache because of "... some of the atypical features
..." noted in his history.
Professor Spira raised the possibility that there may
be a psychogenic disorder "... which may of course be in association with
(a diagnosis not substantially different from Dr Walker's). There is no
reference in that letter to Professor Spira being aware that
Dr Do was treating
Mr Siebler with morphine or pethidine. Nor does it contain any concern about Dr
Do treating her partner in that
Do did not consult Professor Spira again.
noted above that Professor Spira in his evidence denied knowing that Dr Do was
treating Mr Siebler with injections of morphine.
We find that denial problematic
(a) the letter of referral - which was at least partially
(b) the handwritten schedule - which was specifically requested by Professor
(c) the oral evidence of Dr Myers concerning a telephone conversation he had
with Professor Spira on 5 December 2006 (see [88] below);
(d) the draft letter prepared by Professor Spira on 11 March 2009 (to which we
shall return at the conclusion of these reasons) in
which he wrote:
"... I was concerned to hear Dr Myers say that Dr Do had
continued to
Mr Siebler injections of morphine to deal with what she regarded as
cluster headaches." (emphasis added)
or not Professor Spira was (or ought to have been) aware by this date that Dr Do
was prescribing and injecting Mr Siebler
with morphine and pethidine, Dr Do
could reasonably have believed that he was so aware (and did not disapprove)
because of the documents
she had handed to him. Further, she could reasonably
have believed for the same reason that he, like Dr Walker, made no objection
her involvement in the treatment of her partner in that manner.
16 September 2006 (i.e. the day after the second consultation with Professor
Spira) Dr Do wrote a further prescription for Mr Siebler
which was dispensed
that day. It was for 50 ampoules of injectable morphine.
29 September 2006 Mr Siebler was examined by Dr Kwon, an eye physician and
surgeon. He subsequently sent a report to Dr Do dated
5 October 2006 but nothing
of significance for the purpose of these reasons arises from that examination or
that report - other than
that Dr Do sought the advice of such a specialist and
that Dr Kwon from his report at least regarded the consultation as a consequence
of a formal referral. Any letter of referral to Dr Kwon was not in evidence
before the Tribunal.
day after the consultation with Dr Kwon (i.e. 30 September 2006), a prescription
written by Dr Do for Mr Siebler (the date of
the prescription is not known) was
dispensed. This was for 10 ampoules of injectable pethidine.
10 October 2006 Dr Do wrote a prescription for Mr Siebler (which was dispensed
on 11 October) for a quantity of tablets of morphine.
24 October 2006 Dr Do and Mr Siebler had a formal consultation with Dr Gronow.
Dr Gronow is acknowledged to be one of Australia's
most senior pain specialists
- a fact known to Dr Do. Dr Do had prepared a letter of referral. That letter
was not as detailed as
the one prepared for Professor Spira but it did reveal
that Mr Siebler was Dr Do's partner and that morphine was being used by Dr
the treatment of Mr Siebler.
matters regarding that morphine use should be noted. First, Dr Do recorded that
Mr Siebler used to have "... at least 2 attacks
per day, often 3 or 4, sometimes
up to 6 a day, excessive use of triptans had caused rebound headaches and when
he does not use any
med the attack can last up to 3 hrs with very intense pain
needing 30mg to 60mg of Morphine IM to control". Secondly, later in the
when setting out "Current medications" Dr Do listed, amongst other things, "...
Morphine 30 mg IM prn,
recently almost daily
" (emphasis added).
this consultation the following was noted by Dr Gronow:
(a) Mr Siebler was being prescribed morphine 15-30 mg intramuscularly after each
cluster headache attack;
(b) Mr Siebler was living in a de facto relationship with Dr
(c) Dr Do and Mr Siebler were advised in the clearest and strongest terms not to
use intramuscular opiates and a transfer to Physeptone
5 mg morning and night
was recommended.
27 October 2006 Dr Do wrote a further prescription for Mr Siebler which was
dispensed on 28 October 2006. This was for 5 ampoules
of injectable pethidine.
Also on 28 October 2006 a further prescription (the date of which is unknown)
for the same amount of injectable
morphine was also dispensed.
Notwithstanding
Dr Gronow's firm advice against intramuscular opiate use, Mr Siebler apparently
was continuing to have access to such
drugs because not only were the
medications referred to in the preceding paragraph were prescribed and dispensed
but also on 31 October
2006 he overdosed on a combination of intramuscularly
injected morphine and "Methadone". This was his first relevant overdose. Dr
in her evidence denied that this was in fact an overdose. Her denial is contrary
to the contemporaneous records of the hospital.
We have no doubt that it was in
fact such an overdose. The fact of the overdose leads to the unavoidable
conclusion that Mr Siebler
had ready and unsupervised access to the drugs
prescribed for him by Dr Do - notwithstanding her evidence to the
2 November 2006, and despite the overdose two days earlier, Dr Do wrote a
prescription which was dispensed on that date for 50
ampoules of injectable
Siebler was reviewed by a psychologist from Dr Gronow's clinic on 7 November
2006 and a physiotherapist from that clinic on 8 November
on 8 November 2006 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed on 10 November
2006 for a quantity of tablets of morphine.
14 November 2006 Dr Do wrote two prescriptions which were dispensed on that
date. The first was for 5 ampoules of injectable pethidine.
The second was for a
quantity of tablets of morphine.
Siebler was supposed to be reviewed by Dr Gronow on 16 November 2006; however,
that review did not occur. It would appear that
Mr Siebler was in the Blacktown
Hospital with a perforated bowel at that time. We note that Dr Gronow's records
do not record that
he was ever informed of the overdose by Mr Gronow on 31
October - and the persistent contradiction of his earlier express
17 November 2006 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed on that date for
5 ampoules of injectible pethidine.
Siebler was reviewed by Dr Gronow on 4 December 2006. Dr Gronow's notes record
that he was told at that time that Mr Siebler was
taking up to 800 mgs of
morphine a day. According to a report dated 26 November 2012 which Dr Gronow
prepared for the purposes of
this present Inquiry, there was then a long
discussion concerning the inappropriate use of opiates by Dr Do for this
condition. Dr
Gronow recorded, and it is not in dispute, that he recommended
that Mr Siebler be admitted to the St John of God Hospital for in-patient
detoxification because of his dependency/addiction to those opiates. This
recommendation was not acceptable to Mr Siebler because
of an apparent phobia
which he is said to have had concerning hospitals and doctors. It was therefore
agreed that Dr Gronow would
provide a program for Dr Do to wean Mr Siebler off
opiates. This program involved twenty steps (one step per week) - so that by the
end of that period he should have completely ceased using opiates. Of
significance, the type of morphine to be administered was not
to be (even in
part) intramuscular but was to be totally oral (i.e. tablets).
program as scheduled and prepared by Dr Gronow assumed a current use of 800 mgs
of morphine per day and therefore the starting
point for Step 1 was a reduction
to 700 mgs per day. Dr Gronow said in his evidence that the current use level
was based upon express
information provided by Dr Do.
the hearing, Dr Do challenged the accuracy of Dr Gronow's evidence concerning
the alleged current use by Mr Siebler of opiates
as at 4 December. She denied
telling Dr Gronow that Mr Siebler was taking 800mg of morphine daily. She said
the correct figure was
in fact 100mg. Dr Gronow however pointed to his
contemporaneous note and also to the starting point of Step 1 of the program
was given to Dr Do) as confirming the accuracy of that note. By having
regard to the letter given to Professor Spira by Dr Do, the
experience of Dr
Gronow, the critical importance to him of getting the initial current dose
correct, his contemporaneous documents,
the lack of any immediate adverse
reaction by Mr Siebler to Step 1, and the contemporaneous pharmacy records, we
find that Dr Do
did tell Dr Gronow that Mr Siebler was taking 800mgs of morphine
daily. Moreover, if Dr Do had not so informed Dr Gronow, it is extremely
unlikely that such an "error" would have been unnoticed by her - the more so
because such an error could have had life-threatening
consequences to Mr
Siebler, a risk of which she would clearly have been alert to notwithstanding
her denial in the witness box -
yet she made no complaint to Dr
Siebler never saw Dr Gronow again after the consultation on 4 December 2006,
even though some appointments were made - they were
either cancelled by Mr
Siebler or Dr Do; or Mr Siebler just didn't turn up.
some point after the last consultation with Dr Gronow, Dr Do said she decided to
discontinue using morphine for Mr Siebler but
to increase the use of tramadol.
Just precisely when that occurred (if it occurred) is not clear on the evidence.
But what is important
to note is that if it occurred, it was done without any
specialist advice.
of the symptoms complained of by Mr Siebler during his apparently debilitating
headaches was vision impairment. Because Professor
Spira could find no
neurological cause for that impairment and suspected hysterical blindness, Dr Do
arranged for Mr Siebler to be
examined on 5 December 2006 by Dr Myers, an
ophthalmic surgeon.
again Dr Do prepared a letter of referral (dated 5 December 2006). Surprisingly,
there was no reference in it to Dr Gronow or
the regime of "reduced" morphine
that he had advised just the previous day. It did disclose that Mr Siebler was
her partner (in this
instance "fiancée") and that she had been treating
him with "narcotics painkillers". It further revealed that Professor Spira
been consulted but he could not find a neurological cause for the vision problem
and that he (Professor Spira) suspected hysterical
the course of that examination, Dr Do informed Dr Myers that earlier that day
she had injected Mr Siebler with morphine. This
was of course directly contrary
(yet again) to the advice given by Dr Gronow. (During the hearing before this
Tribunal it was revealed
that in fact Dr Do had injected Mr Siebler whilst in Dr
Myers' rooms, but not in front of Dr Myers and without his knowledge. Dr
expressed shock in the hearing that that had occurred.)
that consultation was concluded but on the same day, a telephone conversation
took place between Professor Spira and Dr Myers.
This conversation had been
initiated by Dr Myers because of his concern about Dr Do not only being the
treating practitioner for
Mr Siebler (as it at least appeared to him) but also
that that treatment involved the administration of morphine by injection. In
this conversation Dr Myers recalled Professor Spira acknowledging that he was
aware of Dr Do, at an earlier stage, prescribing morphine
for Mr Siebler.
Professor Spira denied making any such acknowledgment. At the conclusion of this
conversation, both Professor Spira
and Dr Myers agreed that Dr Do required
"serious counselling". Dr Myers agreed to undertake that task because of past
associations
he had with her.
11 December 2006 Mr Siebler was again reviewed by the physiotherapist and the
psychologist at Dr Gronow's clinic.
13 December 2006 Dr Myers had a second consultation with Mr Siebler at which Dr
Do was present. At the conclusion of that consultation
Dr Myers had a private
conversation with Dr Do in which he clearly stated to Dr Do that she should not
be Mr Siebler's treating general
practitioner. The gist of his clear advice on
that occasion was re-stated by him in his evidence. It encapsulates the essence
the Commission's complaints against Dr Do:
"... I saw the narcotic as being quite inappropriate and I saw your role,
particularly maybe your lack of objectivity in someone with
a psychiatric
illness, as perhaps leading you to mismanagement." (T152:18)
Although Dr Myers could not recall in his evidence her response to that
advice, Dr Do, before the Tribunal, asserted that her response
was to deny to Dr
Myers that she was Mr Siebler's treating practitioner.
26 December 2006 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed that day for 5
ampoules of injectable morphine.
2 January 2007 Dr Do again wrote a prescription which was dispensed that date
for 5 ampoules of injectable morphine.
5 January 2007 a prescription written by Dr Do (the date of which is unknown)
was dispensed in respect of 50 ampoules of injectable
10 January 2007 Dr Do wrote a prescription for 50 tablets of amitriptyline with
two repeats. The first prescription was dispensed
on 12 January
her evidence before this Tribunal, Dr Do stated that it had been her decision,
(as were her original decisions to prescribe pethidine,
morphine and tramadol)
unassisted by any specialist advice, to commence treating Mr Siebler with
amitriptyline (T349).
Amitriptyline
is a tricyclic antidepressant. It is a dangerous psychotropic medication. In her
evidence Dr Do acknowledged the dangerous
side effects which potentially could
occur from high doses of amitriptyline (T350ff). Those side effects include
potentially fatal
cardiac arrhythmias and coma in overdose. There are also
potentially serious adverse interactions with central nervous system depressants
which included pethidine and morphine and a specific adverse interaction with
addition to these matters, we note that Dr Do was aware of the interactions that
amitriptyline could have with other medications
which Mr Siebler was, from time
to time, taking and prescribed by her, including promethazine, morphine,
tramadol, olanzapine, carbamazepine,
gabapentin and pregabalin - "all of which
are potentially interactive in terms that they are psychotropic drugs that work
on different
neurotransmitters ..." (T379:15).
24 January 2007 the second of the three repeats of amitriptyline that Dr Do
wrote on 10 January 2007 was dispensed.
27 January 2007 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed that date for 5
ampoules of injectable morphine.
addition to Dr Myers "counselling" of Dr Do in mid-December 2006, Professor
Spira also "counselled" her in a telephone conversation
in early February 2007.
According to Professor Spira, whose evidence on this topic Dr Do agreed with and
we accept, he pointed out
in strong terms how inappropriate it was for Dr Do to
be medicating her partner with narcotic analgesia.
7 February 2007 Dr Myers wrote to Dr Do in which he concluded that although
there may have been an organic cause to Mr Siebler's
underlying cluster
headaches, there may also have been a significant superimposed
psychological/psychiatric component to his functional
visual loss - a conclusion
broadly shared by both Professor Spira and Dr Walker in the letters of advice
which they earlier sent
15 February 2007 the third of the three repeats of amitriptyline that Dr Do
wrote on 10 January 2007 was dispensed.
22 February 2007 a prescription was written by Dr Do for 200 tablets of
amitriptyline with four repeats. This prescription, including
the four repeats
(if all filled) was therefore for a total of 1,000 tablets. The first of these
prescriptions was dispensed on 27
February 2007.
9 March 2007 Dr Do and Mr Siebler attended a consultation with Dr Perica, a
psychiatrist. At the commencement of the consultation,
Dr Do provided Dr Perica
with a letter bearing that date. Although the letter revealed that Mr Siebler
was "living in defacto relationship",
it did not reveal that that relationship
was with Dr Do. Apart from the referral letter and some very brief notes made
by Dr Perica, there was no evidence before this Tribunal from Dr
Significantly,
however, in listing "current medications" there was no reference in the letter
Dr Do gave to Dr Perica to pethidine
or morphine. There was however a reference
to "Endep" - viz amitriptyline. In her evidence concerning the involvement with
and the use of amitriptyline, Dr Do was asked why she did not reveal
to him that in January 2007 she had prescribed morphine and
pethidine to Mr
Siebler she said:
"Because at that stage he was mainly on Tramal, very rarely that he needed
something like morphine or pethidine.
It wasn't like before when morphine or
pethidine was used frequently
. It was very rarely that he used them."
(emphasis added)
Do's evidence was that before she and Mr Siebler saw Dr Perica, she had started
on a low dosage of amitriptyline and then "slowly
worked it up" (T349:10) - and
that it was Dr Perica who increased the dosage of amitriptyline "to maximum".
This seems at odds with
the significant amount of amitriptyline covered by the
prescriptions written by Dr Do on 10 January and 22 February 2007. However,
there is some support for Dr Do's contention that it was his idea to increase
the dosage of amitriptyline in the very brief note
which Dr Perica apparently
made on 9 March 2007.
12 March 2012 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed that day for a
quantity of tablets of morphine.
19 March 2007 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed on 20 March for a
further quantity of tablets of morphine.
20 March 2007 the first of the four repeats for amitriptyline written by Dr Do
on 22 February 2007 was dispensed.
28 March 2007 the second of the four repeats for amitriptyline written by Dr Do
on 22 February 2007 was dispensed.
5 April 2007 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed that day for 5
ampoules of injectable pethidine.
13 April 2007 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed that day for 5
ampoules of injectable morphine.
16 April 2007 Dr Do wrote a prescription which was dispensed that day for 10
ampoules of injectable pethidine.
30 April 2007 the third of the four repeats for amitriptyline written by Dr Do
on 22 February 2007 was dispensed.
1 June 2007 Mr Siebler saw Dr Perica for a second time.
9 August 2007 Mr Siebler was examined by Profession Mitchell, a senior
psychiatrist. Professor Mitchell was the seventh and final
specialist who saw Mr
Siebler at the request of Dr Do. Professor Mitchell was aware that Dr Do was Mr
Siebler's partner. Mr Siebler
was diagnosed with rapid cycling bipolar disorder.
He was prescribed valproate, haloperidol and diazepam.
3 September 2007 the final of the four repeats for amitriptyline written by Dr
Do on 22 February 2007 was dispensed.
5 October 2007 a prescription for 200 tablets of amitriptyline was written by Dr
Do with two repeats. The prescriptions were dispensed
on 8 October and 21
December 2007.
second examination with Professor Mitchell had been arranged for 10 October 2007
but Mr Siebler did not attend.
28 October 2007 Mr Siebler was admitted to Blacktown Hospital as a result of an
overdose of medication for cluster headaches. This
was his second admission to
hospital for an overdose of medication dispensed on prescriptions written by Dr
Do. Again, this strongly
suggests he continued to have ready and unrestricted
access to the medications prescribed by Dr Do.
26 February 2008 Dr Do contacted the mental health team at the Blacktown
Hospital with concerns about Mr Siebler.
18 March and 4 April 2008 Mr Siebler was admitted as a psychiatric in-patient
where he was on a range of psychiatric medication.
12 June 2008 Mr Siebler was admitted to Blacktown Hospital following a further
overdoes of amitriptyline and unknown quantities
of valproate and venlafaxine.
He was discharged on 16 June 2008. This was his third admission to hospital for
an overdose of medication
dispensed on prescriptions written by Dr
on 18 June 2008 Mr Siebler took his fourth and final overdose of medication
dispensed on prescriptions written by Dr Do. On 19
June 2008 Mr Siebler was
found dead on a building site at Kellyville. The subsequent coronial
investigation determined that he had
died as a consequence of ingesting at least
two packets of amitriptyline. (We pause to observe that a box of amitriptyline
50mg strength
tablets contains 50 tablets. Accordingly, 2 boxes is 5000mg -
which is many times the lethal overdose. Given Mr Siebler's prior history
overdoses, prudent practice in our opinion would have been to stop prescribing
amitriptyline and changing to a safer antidepressant.
Mr Siebler in any event
should not have been given more than one script at a time - and certainly not
with repeats which could enable
him to build up a lethal store of medication.)
Was Dr Do as the de facto partner of Mr Siebler the primary medical
provider for him in the period covered by the Amended Complaint:
is no dispute that Mr Siebler was relevantly the partner of Dr Do and hence a
member of her "immediate family".
the following reasons we are firmly of the view that the Commission has
established that she was his primary medical provider;
and we reject the
contention that Dr Do was merely a facilitator or coordinator of his real
primary providers, they being the seven
specialists we have referred
the "revolving door" visits to seven different specialists (not only within
specialities but between specialities) in quick
succession did not provide any
one of those specialists with the opportunity to effectively be Mr Siebler's
primary medical provider.
the failure by Dr Do to adhere to the advice which those specialists had the
opportunity to provide. For example, the persistent
disregarding of the advice
of Dr Gronow that injectable morphine should under no circumstances be
administered to Mr Siebler.
the decision by Dr Do in advance of consulting any specialist to use particular
medications. For example, her decision to
administer pethidine was taken before
she consulted Dr Walker. Similarly, her decision to administer tramadol was
taken without reference
to Dr Gronow. Likewise, no specialist advised her to
commence using morphine or amitriptyline. All these decisions were (initially
least) taken by Dr Do - and acted on.
in addition to the prescriptions which she wrote for morphine, pethidine and
amitriptyline, Dr Do wrote a very significant
number of other prescriptions for
Mr Siebler in the period 7 August 2006 to 31 May 2008. The number and variety of
those prescriptions
are part of Schedule B to the Amended Complaint. They run to
almost 400 prescriptions. The nature of those prescriptions per se is
subject of complaint; but rather the Commission points to them to show that in
truth, quite apart from other considerations,
it was Dr Do who was the treating
medical practitioner for Mr Siebler in the subject period.
the Medicare billing records (almost 50 Medicare services provided in which Dr
Do claimed payment by reason of her being
the treating doctor); and the
extensive PBS prescribing records.
Dr Do's assertion in at least two documents that she was Mr Siebler's treating
doctor. In this regard, in exhibit A Tab 18
page 386, in a letter to the
Blacktown Hospital she wrote, "... being his GP ...". Further, in exhibit A Tab
7, un-paginated but
being in an e-mail to Mr Siebler's mother dated 10 August
2006, she wrote, "... and speaking as his treating doctor ...".
there was, perhaps unconsciously, an admission by Dr Do in her evidence before
the Tribunal ("... I am the doctor ...") (T350:2).
the time Dr Do was the primary medical provider for Mr Siebler, the New South
Wales Medical Board had published a guideline concerning
"Medical Practitioners
Treating Relatives And Self". It was dated August 2001. It was in the following
"1. Background
1.1 The New South Wales Medical Board is of the view that wherever possible,
medical practitioners should avoid treating members of
their immediate family,
because in these circumstances:
Professional objectivity may be compromised and their judgment may be
influenced by the nature of their relationship with the patient.
Medical practitioners may fail to explore sensitive areas when taking a
medical history or may fail to perform an appropriate physical
examination.
The patient may feel uncomfortable disclosing sensitive information or
undergoing a physical examination where the medical practitioner
is a family
Patient autonomy may be compromised when a medical practitioner treats a
member of their family.
The principles of informed consent may not be adhered to when a medical
practitioner treats a member of their family.
The Board endorses the following general principles:
2.2 It is not advisable for medical practitioners to initiate treatment
(including prescribing) for themselves or immediate family
2.3 In emergency situations or isolated settings where there is no help
available, medical practitioners may treat themselves or family
members until
another medical practitioner becomes available.
2.4 It is not advisable for medical practitioners to serve as primary or
regular care providers for immediate family members, although
circumstances in which they may work together with an independent medical
practitioner to maintain establishment treatment.
earlier in our reasons we noted that it might have been reasonable given the
circumstances then obtaining for Dr Do to conclude
that neither Dr Walker nor
Professor Spira (initially at least) had any problem with her treating Mr
Siebler (as a family member)
with, respectively, pethidine or morphine, that is
really quite beside the point. Whether or not Dr Do reasonably thought that that
was their opinion, any such opinion would have been contrary to the policy of
the New South Wales Medical Board - and Dr Do knew
that (T271). Dr Do did not
need Dr Walker or Professor Spira to tell her that her treatment of Mr Siebler,
especially with opiate
injections, was fundamentally inconsistent with the
guidelines issued by the New South Wales Medical Board.
any event, Dr Do cannot have been under any misapprehension in this regard
following the "serious counselling" which she received
from Dr Myers in late
2006 and Professor Spira in early February 2007.
are satisfied that in this respect alone, Dr Do's conduct in treating Mr Siebler
as a family member with pethidine, morphine and
amitriptyline in particular, but
also more generally having regard to the breadth of the medications prescribed
by her, was not merely
unsatisfactory professional conduct but professional
misconduct.
Has Dr Do demonstrated that her knowledge skill and judgment in the
practice of medicine is significantly below the standard to be
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience?
we have set out in some detail above, Dr Do, between late July 2006 and 19 June
2008, engaged in a prolonged treatment of Mr Siebler.
This treatment involved
the use of highly addictive opiates and powerful and dangerous psychotropic
medication and in circumstances
where Dr Do knew Mr Siebler was drug dependent -
if not addicted.
course of these medications was to say the least chaotic and
inconsistent.
evidence actually reveals a continuing pattern of grossly inappropriate
polypharmacy with multi anti-migraine medications, four
anti-psychotics and three benzodiazepines all of which work on the central
nervous system and therefore interact with and
potentiate the central nervous
system depressant effect of the excessive use of potent
Do deliberately ignored expert specialist advice (we exclude in this regard Dr
Walker and initially Professor Spira); and indeed
withheld vital information
from most of those specialists.
have no alternative but to accept the submission of the Commission that Dr Do,
in her treatment of Mr Siebler, was "erratic, contradictory,
irresponsible and
destructive and was not based upon carefully following the advice and
recommendations of the specialists consulted"
(Complainant's Submissions
this regard no clearer example can be given than her decision to embark upon
treating Mr Siebler with amitriptyline. In doing so
she knew that he: was
dependent on opiates; had overdosed recently on such medication; and had
unresolved psychological, if not psychiatric,
issues. Nevertheless, she embarked
upon a course of prescribing large quantities of this psychotropic medication
without any reference
to any of the leading specialists she had only recently
are satisfied that in doing so she has demonstrated that her knowledge, skill
and judgment in the practice of medicine is significantly
below the standard
reasonably to be expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience.
we regard that conduct to be not merely satisfactory professional conduct but
professional misconduct.
Did Dr Do fail to maintain adequate records of the consultations and
services provided to Mr Siebler?
Do admits that she failed to maintain such records.
requirement to keep such records is required by clause 5 of the
Practice Regulation
and clause 37 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
Do was unable to provide any real explanation or excuse for her failure in this
we regard the failure to keep these records as yet a further example of her
chaotic treatment of Mr Siebler.
failure to do so is made the more serious because of the large number of
different and potentially dangerous medications involved.
Do's lack of adequate record-keeping falls significantly below the standard to
be expected of a practitioner with an equivalent
level of training and
experience.
the overall context of the matters we have discussed, we regard this as not
merely unsatisfactory professional conduct but professional
misconduct.
Ultimate Conclusion:
the opinion of the Tribunal each of the particulars to the two complaints have
been established.
we are satisfied that not only do those particulars constitute unsatisfactory
professional conduct but also professional
misconduct within the meaning of
section 139E of the National Law.
the conclusion of the hearing we notionally set aside Friday 7 June 2013 at 2
p.m. for hearing submissions as to what protective
orders would need to be made
if we found the complaints or any part of them made out. We indicated that we
would vacate that hearing
date if we found no part of the complaints to be made
our earlier conclusions, we confirm that further hearing date.
the course of conducting its investigations, the Commission wrote to Professor
Spira on 19 February 2009, inter alia, requesting
"a report briefly detailing
the treatment you provided to [Mr Siebler]".
11 March 2009 Professor Spira prepared a draft letter for the Commission. Before
transmitting it, however, he sent a copy of it
(together with a copy of his
letter of 15 September 2006 to Dr Do) to Dr Klopfer of Professor Spira's medical
indemnity insurer.
It would appear that Dr Klopfer then requested a copy of
Professor Spira's notes - which were supplied on 12 March 2009.
on 12 March 2009 Dr Klopfer sent a redacted version of Professor Spira's
original letter to Professor Spira. The redacted version
removed references
(a) Professor Spira's knowledge that Dr Do was the partner of Mr Siebler as well
as the treating practitioner;
(b) knowledge that Dr Do had administered injections of morphine to Mr
(c) the contents of a conversation which Professor Spira had with Dr Myers on 5
December 2006 which concerned matters (a) and (b)
(d) the contents of a telephone conversation he subsequently had with Dr Do
after that conversation with Dr Myers in which there
was also reference to (a)
and (b) above;
providing the redacted document, Dr Klopfer advised Professor Spira, inter alia,
"You should read this amended draft carefully and satisfy yourself that its
content is accurate and truthful before sending it on
your letterhead above your
signature, or make any changes as you see fit. If you wish, please feel free to
call me or to return the
changes to me, before sending the response."
Spira sent an engrossed version of Dr Klopfer's redacted document to the
Commission.
7 November 2011 the Commission wrote to Professor Spira specifically raising
with him an allegation made by Dr Do that he had been
aware of the relationship
between herself and Mr Siebler and that he had indicated to her that the
administration of narcotics was
acceptable treatment in the short term. The
Commission sought Professor Spira's response.
Spira then wrote again to Dr Klopfer on 9 November 2011 and indicated that he
wished to send to the Commission the original
draft version of his letter of 11
March 2009.
2 December 2011 Professor Spira wrote to the Commission and, amongst other
things, enclosed a copy of that draft. In doing so he
said of that
"This was significantly edited by my professional indemnity provider so that
my final letter did not reflect, adequately, my own actions
with respect to the
prescribing of opiates in Mr Siebler's case."
make three observations in relation to this aspect of the
the extract from the letter of 2 December 2011 was not entirely accurate because
it did not reveal the advice given by Dr Klopfer
on 12 March 2009 that Professor
Spira should only send the redacted document if he were satisfied it was
accurate and truthful.
when this matter was raised directly with Professor Spira in the hearing, he
said that he was "not happy about the request
[to make the alterations] but ...
accepted it" (T28). Again, that answer did not accurately reflect the advice of
the insurer in
relation to the redacted document.
Professor Spira accepted that the redacted document "... left out some important
information" (T28). He stated that the contents
of the reacted and sent letter
were "... accurate and truthful, they're just not complete"
agree with the evidence of Professor Spira that the letter he sent on 4 March
2011 "left out some important information". We think
he made an error of
judgment in that respect.
have taken the step of highlighting this particular aspect because we wish to
make it clear to all who are required to provide
information to the Commission
in the course of its enquiries that the withholding of important information is
to be discouraged.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (348 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter