URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Imielska v Northern Sydney Local Health District [2013] NSWADTAP 49 (16 September 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Imielska v Northern Sydney Local Health District
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 49
Hearing Date(s):
16 September 2013
Decision Date:
16 September 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
A Scahill, Judicial Member
J McClelland, Non-Judicial Member
1. Appeal upheld
2. Tribunal's decision to summarily dismiss the
complaints is set aside
Catchwords:
APPEAL - appeal on question of law - whether Tribunal failed to take into
account full period of complaint - whether Tribunal applied
the correct test for
summary dismissal - whether Tribunal breached procedural fairness
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Principal judgment
Grazyna Imielska (Applicant)
Northern Sydney Local Health District
(Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
G Imielska (Applicant in person)
Curwoods Legal Services Pty Ltd
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
HONOUR: The background to this appeal is that on 9 May 2013 the Tribunal made a
decision dismissing a complaint of race discrimination
and a complaint of
victimisation made by Ms Imielska. The reason for the dismissal was that the
complaint lacked substance and did
not disclose a contravention of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
brief history is that the President of the Anti Discrimination Board referred a
complaint to the Tribunal on 27 February 2012.
The complaint went through a
series of case conferences and mediation was attempted. An application was made
by Ms Imielska to amend
the complaint to extend the period of the complaint. The
complaint as referred by the President was for a period from 17 November
6 August 2012. Ms Imielska applied for the complaint to be amended to go back to
a date in 2008. The Tribunal decided by
consent not to amend the complaint to go
the Tribunal
made on 5 September 2012 were pursuant to s 103 of the Anti
Discrimination Act 1977.
The Tribunal amends the complaints. The period of the complaint in
respect of both complaints, race discrimination and victimisation,
is amended to
17 November 2009 to 6 August 2012. The Tribunal notes the consent of both
parties to this amendment.
have before us the transcript of the proceedings in relation to the application
for dismissal. In that transcript the judicial
member correctly stated that the
period of the complaint was 17 November 2009 to 6 August 2012, however, when
writing the decision
the Tribunal apparently overlooked the fact that the
complaint had been amended and stated that the period of the complaint was 14
March 2010 to 14 March 2011. That appears at paras 1, 30 and 35 of the
Tribunal's decision.
the fact that the Tribunal did not acknowledge that the complaint went back to
2009 it did, at para 33, list the matters from
A to G which the applicant had
presented in her application for amendment as being the allegations of
victimisation. Despite the
fact that the Tribunal mentioned those matters, it is
our view that the Tribunal erred by not contemplating matters that occurred
prior to 2009 as being part of the applicant's complaints.
omission is evident from the Tribunal's reasoning at para 35 when it says "When
the applicant makes allegations against the respondent
there is no evidence
which causally connects the making of her complaint to the ADB on 17 November
2010 with any victimisation within
the time period alleged". The time period
alleged is the time period from 17 November 2010 not from the earlier date in
which the complaint has now been amended.
first ground of appeal is made out and that is that the Tribunal incorrectly
understood its jurisdiction because it did not take
into account that the
complaint extended over a longer period than was dealt with in the decision.
second ground of appeal, although not articulated as such, is that the Tribunal
incorrectly applied the legal test for summary dismissal.
The Tribunal correctly
stated the test in para 17 of its decision in the following terms:
The power to dismiss a complaint summarily pursuant to s 102 of the
Anti Discrimination Act has been the subject of numerous decisions
Tribunal. The Tribunal has adopted a cautious approach to the exercise of this
power. It has been noted in a line of decisions
that the power should be
exercised with exceptional caution and only if the circumstances clearly warrant
such action including.
then the Tribunal summarised a number of cases.
this case the application was that the complaint should be dismissed because it
was misconceived or lacking in substance or alternatively
that, if proven, it
would not disclose a contravention of the Act. It is also well-known that in
determining an application for summary
dismissal the complainant's evidence must
be taken at its highest.
the Tribunal came to applying this test to the complaint of race discrimination
the Tribunal made the following finding:
In this matter the complaint of race discrimination is limited to
the statement alleged to have been made on 9 November 2010. The
Tribunal finds
that the statement if proven would not amount to discrimination on the grounds
of race. A statement if proven could
easily have a more innocent
explanation.
at para 28:
The Tribunal does not accept that taken at its highest the
applicant's claim is capable of establishing that the respondent has
discriminated
against her on the grounds of race. The Tribunal was unable to
find that the conduct if proven would amount to a contravention of
are two weaknesses in the Tribunal's reasoning and in the application of the
test for summary dismissal. The first is that the
Tribunal finds that the
allegation of race discrimination if proven would not amount to discrimination
on the ground of race saying
that it could have a more innocent explanation. But
the Tribunal does not say what that more innocent explanation could possibly
and why the allegation on its face could not constitute race discrimination. The
Tribunal also appears to be saying that the conduct
would not amount to a
contravention of the Act rather than lacking substance. The Tribunal does not
provide a reason for concluding
that there would be no contravention even if the
comment were proved.
those reasons we do not agree with the Tribunal's application of the test for
summary dismissal to the particular circumstances
of the race discrimination
complaint. We make a similar finding in relation to the application of the test
for summary dismissal
to the complaint of victimisation.
Tribunal made the following finding in relation to the victimisation complaint
at para 35:
"It is clear that this complaint is based upon an allegation which
falls within the scope of para A in that she, meaning the applicant,
complaint in the ADB on 17 November 2010. There is however no probative evidence
before the Tribunal which establishes that
if there were any detriment to the
applicant that it occurred on the grounds that the applicant filed her complaint
to the ADB on
17 November 2010. The evidence before the Tribunal relates to
longstanding issues of performance and performance management in the
While the applicant makes allegations against the respondent there is no
evidence which causally connects the making of
her complaint to the ADB on 17
November 2010 with any victimisation within the time period alleged".
our view the Tribunal failed to consider whether or not, accepting the
applicant's evidence at its highest, an inference could
be drawn that the
allegations of misconduct were linked to a complaint of discrimination. Rather
the Tribunal appears to confine
its consideration to any direct evidence of a
link between an allegation of discrimination and the victimising behaviour.
is rarely direct evidence of a link between alleging discrimination and the
victimising behaviour. Respondents do not typically
tell an applicant that they
are being punished for having made a complaint. Nevertheless there may be
evidence from which such an
inference can be drawn and the Tribunal appears not
to have acknowledged that that was a possibility. In fact the Tribunal appears
to have made a finding, before hearing the matter, that longstanding issues of
performance and performance management were the reasons
for the respondent's
conduct. In doing so the Tribunal has not accepted the applicant's evidence at
its highest but rather has come
to a conclusion based on the material before it.
The Tribunal's task is merely to determine whether the complaint could not
or does not disclose a contravention of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
our view the Tribunal has misapplied the test for summary dismissal both in
relation to the complaint of race discrimination
and the complaint of
victimisation.
third ground of appeal, which was actually the applicant's second ground, is
that the Tribunal breached the rules of procedural
fairness. She alleged that
the respondent made an amended application for summary dismissal orally on the
day of the hearing and
that she was never provided with that amended application
in writing. Furthermore the applicant says that because the respondent
quickly, she found her difficult to follow and could not understand everything
that she was saying at the time. Thirdly the
applicant says she was not given an
opportunity to respond to further submissions that the respondent made following
the hearing.
applicant, indeed every party to proceedings, must be afforded procedural
fairness. That includes a reasonable opportunity to
respond to any matter that
is put against them. Having read the transcript and seen what the Tribunal did
in response to the oral
amended application we are satisfied that the applicant
was given an adequate opportunity to respond to that amendment. The Tribunal
so by giving the parties a further opportunity to make written submissions in
relation to the application and the respondent
did so. The applicant was given
an opportunity to respond and the respondent replied to the applicant's
response. We understand that
the applicant complains that she was not given a
further opportunity to respond to the respondent's response but that is not the
those circumstances we do not find that the Tribunal has breached the rules of
procedural fairness but we do find for the applicant
on the other two grounds of
appeal, namely, a failure to take into account the proper period of the
complaint and the failure to
correctly apply the test for summary dismissal. The
appeal should be upheld and the Tribunal's decision at first instance set aside.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter