URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/464.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moore trading as Piper Alderman v Hyland [2025] NSWDC 464 (13 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Moore trading as Piper Alderman v Hyland
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 464
Hearing Date(s):
24 October 2025
Date of Orders:
13 November 2025
Decision Date:
13 November 2025
Catsanos SC DCJ
(1) Pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
36.16 the default judgment entered against the defendant on 15 June 2025 is set
(2) The defendant has leave to file a defence and any
crossclaim upon which she proposes to rely by 20 November
(3) I reserve the question of costs and will make
directions in consultation with the parties for the determination of that
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – default judgment – setting aside –
discretionary factors
Legislation Cited:
Corporations Act 2001
Uniform Civil Procedure
Cases Cited:
[2013] NSWCA 412
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner
for Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
J & M McNamee
Holdings Pty Ltd v Mungerie Vale Pty Ltd (t/as Greenwood Group Realtors)
Procedural rulings
McKenzie Dove Moore and the persons listed as Partners and named in the
Schedule 1 together trading as Piper Alderman (Plaintiff/Respondent)
Anne Hyland aka Bhavani Ma (Defendant/Applicant)
Representation:
Mr J Parrish (Plaintiff/Respondent)
Mr A Mohseni
(Defendant/Applicant)
Solicitors:
Piper Alderman
(Plaintiff/Respondent)
Panetta Lawyers (Defendant/Applicant)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Notice of Motion filed 14 July 2025 the defendant moves the Court for orders
setting aside default judgment entered against her
on 15 June 2025.
plaintiff is a legal firm operated by the members of a partnership.
June 2023 the plaintiff entered into a costs agreement with Care A2 Pty Ltd
(Care A2) to provide legal services in relation to
certain Federal Court
litigation. The defendant, who was a director of Care A2, dealt directly with
the plaintiff in relation to
the legal services it provided.
the next six months the plaintiff rendered invoices for work performed pursuant
to its retainer. The plaintiff contends the costs
agreement in its terms also
bound the defendant as a recipient of those legal services. Consequently,
invoices were rendered to both
the defendant and Care A2.
time, a dispute arose in relation to the fees claimed by the plaintiff which, as
at December 2023, totalled $436,874.
A2 and the defendant retained new legal representatives who, in July 2024, filed
a Costs Assessment Application in relation to
the costs dispute, in accordance
with prevailing regulatory legislation. In the body of that application, the
legal representatives
acting on behalf of the defendant and Care A2 contended
the proper amount for costs payable to the plaintiff was the sum of $356,137.70.
that time, Care A2 was the subject of an application for winding up pursuant to
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) consequent upon a statutory
demand by another party in respect of an unrelated debt (the underlying winding
up proceedings).
August 2024, the plaintiff was substituted as plaintiff in those winding up
proceedings. This arose pursuant to an agreement between
the parties which was
ratified by Black J in the Supreme Court in a judgment delivered on 26 August
2024. In that judgment his Honour
noted the evidence that Care A2 was not
contesting some of the legal costs being claimed by the plaintiff.
11 October 2024, the plaintiff entered into separate Deeds of Settlement and
Release with Care A2 and the defendant.
defendant in her Deed agreed to pay the plaintiff $200,000 in return for a
release by the plaintiff of liability, inter alia,
for the debt being claimed by
the plaintiff in respect of legal fees.
defendant also provided the plaintiff with a broad release of any liability
related to the provision of legal services.
defendant failed to make the payment provided for under the Deed and so, on 21
February 2025, the plaintiff commenced proceedings
in this Court, suing for
breach of the Deed.
statement of claim was served personally on the defendant on 10 May 2025.
defendant failed to file a defence within the 28 days provided for under the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (UCPR), and on 15 June 2025, 35 days
after service, the plaintiff obtained default judgment.
21 June 2025, the plaintiff issued a bankruptcy notice against the defendant,
relying upon that judgment.
13 July 2025 the defendant, through her current solicitors, filed the
application presently before me to set aside the judgment
pursuant to UCPR
defendant also seeks leave to file a crossclaim against the plaintiff.
defendant’s application is contested.
principles governing the exercise of the Court’s discretion in a case such
as the present is ground well-travelled. Underlying
the disposition of such an
application is the question of whether it is in the interests of justice to
allow a party in to defend
a matter where default judgment has been obtained
against it.
the authorities make clear, each case must be determined on its own facts.
Nonetheless, three factors typically inform the exercise
of the Court’s
discretion. Firstly, and perhaps predominantly, a defendant must establish the
existence of a bona fide defence
to the claim being advanced. Secondly, the
Court will consider the defendant’s explanation for the delay which gave
the default judgment. Thirdly, it is relevant to have regard to the
respective prejudice to the parties arising from the outcome
determination made by the Court.
Existence of a Bona Fide Defence
statement of claim involves a straightforward pleading of breach of the Deed by
the defendant.
proposed defence admits the Deed but denies liability on the basis that the Deed
“procured by duress and unconscionable conduct on the part of the
plaintiff and is voidable at the election of the defendant,
which election has
been made”.
defendant alleges the plaintiff was negligent in the provision of legal services
which in turn exposed Care A2 to liability and
the application to be wound up in
the underlying winding up proceedings.
defendant pleads the unconscionable conduct and duress to which she was
subjected arose in circumstances where, having compromised
Care A2 and placed it
in a perilous position leading to the underlying winding up proceedings, the
plaintiff then applied to be substituted
as a creditor in those winding up
proceedings – thereafter using its position as petitioning creditor to
exert illegitimate
pressure on the defendant to agree to the terms of the Deed.
defendant contends the plaintiff’s actions were both negligent and in
breach of its fiduciary duties. As noted earlier,
she contends that being
procured by duress and unconscionable conduct, the Deed is voidable at her
Additionally,
the defendant argues the plaintiff’s conduct constituted unconscionable
conduct in equity, such that the Deed
ought not be enforced.
defendant also provides a draft crossclaim upon which she seeks to rely. In that
crossclaim, the defendant seeks a declaration
that the Deed was void ab initio
and has been validly rescinded, as well as damages for negligence and breach of
contract, along
with what is pleaded as “equitable compensation for breach
of fiduciary duty and an indemnity against any liability the defendant
to have to the plaintiff”.
plaintiff strongly advanced the position that the proposed defence is not bona
fide. In support of that argument, the plaintiff
contends the arguments the
defendant now seeks to advance were recently invented and arose only after the
defendant was confronted
with a bankruptcy notice. The plaintiff puts the
position that the defence upon which the defendant proposes to rely is hopeless
in the circumstances and, in the
sense, there is no
prospect of the defence succeeding.
the outset of the hearing of this application, I heard an application by the
plaintiff to cross-examine the defendant. That application
was opposed on the
basis that it was not appropriate to cross-examine in the context of the
determination of an interlocutory application.
the reasons I gave at the time, I declined to allow cross-examination of the
defendant. In short, I considered that in all the
circumstances
cross-examination would necessarily have gone to the merits of the defence in an
effort to establish it was not bona
fide. This, in my view, was beyond the scope
of the interlocutory task at hand.
the authorities speak of a defendant demonstrating a bona fide defence, the
question engaged is whether there is an arguable
speaking, to make good a
General Steel
submission, hopelessness must be
demonstrated on the face of objectively ascertainable facts. If it is necessary
to weigh evidence,
summary disposal will generally be inappropriate. In the
present case, the plaintiff’s position is not based on a proposition
the defences advanced are not available as a matter of law or undisputed facts
but, as I see it, is seated in the argument that
weighing the evidence leads to
the conclusion that there are no prospects of success. By definition it seems to
me that is embarking
upon a determination of the merits of the defence.
example, the plaintiff argues the defendant’s allegations of
unconscionable conduct and duress are so devoid of merit that
one would conclude
the defence is effectively a sham. Here the plaintiff relies on the fact the
defendant was legally represented
during negotiations, that the Deed achieved an
outcome to the defendant’s benefit, that the defence has only been
in recent times and that the allegations made by the defendant could
not, in any event, constitute unconscionability.
are, in my view, all matters for evaluation rather than demanding the
interpretation the plaintiff advances. As the transcript
of argument will show,
the parties, with some vigour, advanced competing arguments as to the bona fides
of the various aspects of
the proposed defence. Those exchanges serve to
demonstrate that the matters raised by the plaintiff said to go to the bona
of the defence can only be determined after a contest and consideration on
the merits of the matters pleaded. I am satisfied that
in her proposed defence
the defendant has established arguable, and thus bona fide defences, as
understood by the authorities. The
merits of the proposed defences are questions
for another day.
defendant’s explanation for delay is found in her affidavit evidence that
she was not legally represented at the time the
statement of claim was served
and did not have the financial resources or capacity to engage lawyers. She also
says she was under
immense financial and personal stress related to concurrent
bankruptcy proceedings brought by the plaintiff against her.
consider the defendant’s explanation for the delay to be less than
persuasive. One of the factors relied upon by the defendant
in support of this
application is the relatively short period of time between the date of default
and her application to set aside
the judgment, being a period of little more
than one month. That is something of a two-edged proposition for the defendant.
defendant was in a position to retain lawyers to make an application to
set aside judgment one month after the date of default, it
is in my view highly
questionable, without further explanation, whether she was genuinely not in a
position to obtain legal representation
prior to the expiry of the time for
filing a defence.
any event, the inability to obtain legal representation does not explain the
defendant’s failure to take any steps to protect
herself against judgment,
bearing in mind the statement of claim expressly gives notice of the need to
file a defence within 28 days
and directs a defendant as to various steps that
can be taken in response to the statement of claim.
defendant is clearly not unsophisticated, having regard to her business
background disclosed in the evidence before me. Simply
referring to the fact the
defendant was without legal representation, even if that is accepted, begs the
question why she did nothing
to protect herself. She appears to answer that
question by reference to the fact she was under immense stress due to the
bankruptcy proceedings. However, as the plaintiff points out, that
explanation is hardly believable given the bankruptcy proceedings
did not come
Accordingly,
I place very little store on the defendant’s explanation.
plaintiff argues that if the defendant establishes an arguable defence, which in
my view she has, setting aside the defence would
nonetheless be futile. This is
(1) The position would then revert to the defendant facing a claim by the
plaintiff for the outstanding costs exceeding $400,000,
(2) The defendant, through her former legal representatives, has made an
admission in the Costs Assessment Application that she is
indebted to the
plaintiff for substantially more than the amount the subject of the current
(3) Therefore, it is inevitable that the defendant will have a liability to the
plaintiff for the costs in question exceeding the
judgment she seeks to set
defendant does not accept the premise of the plaintiff’s submission. She
argues the matters she seeks to agitate in her
crossclaim, particularly the
negligence of the plaintiff, are matters which she would call in aid of her
defence to any subsequent
claim for the costs which were the subject of the
significantly, says the defendant, if the judgment is not set aside, then the
Deed, which underlies the judgment, would not be
open to challenge and would
effectively merge with the judgment. It is argued that in those circumstances,
because of the releases
provided to the plaintiff in the Deed, the defendant
would be unable to bring a subsequent claim against the plaintiff in respect
the causes of action she contends would otherwise be available to her.
defendant says if the judgment were set aside and she ultimately succeeded in
defending the plaintiff’s present claim on
the Deed, the outcome of a
subsequent action by the plaintiff to recover the outstanding costs is not a
foregone conclusion and she
has substantial defences to such a claim.
defendant says the plaintiff is well resourced to pursue any entitlements it has
once these proceedings are concluded, whereas
if the judgment is not set aside,
the consequences for her would be dire. The defendant says not only would she be
visited with a
liability she contends is unjust, but effectively her hands would
be tied in exercising rights she would otherwise have under the
crossclaim.
the end of the day, the prejudice the plaintiff faces is delay and additional
However, in circumstances
where it is arguable the defendant has a defence to a further claim by the
plaintiff, it cannot be said
that setting aside the judgment is futile. In my
view, any prejudice to the plaintiff is not such as would override the potential
preclusion of rights contended by the defendant.
Disposition
am left with the situation where I am satisfied the defendant has a bona fide
defence, in the sense of an arguable defence, to the
claim brought against her
by the plaintiff in these proceedings.
I am not satisfied the explanation given by the defendant for the delay is
reliable, nonetheless, although relevant, I consider
that to be a subsidiary
factor in the circumstances. The interests of justice are no doubt best served
by parties being able to advance
and defend claims on their merits.
the reasons I have outlined, I do not consider the plaintiff would suffer
prejudice were the judgment set aside such as to displace
the objective of a
determination on the merits.
Accordingly,
the defendant has satisfied me that judgment ought be set aside.
the circumstances, it is appropriate that the defendant also have leave to file
the proposed crossclaim.
observe that in the course of argument it was generally acknowledged the
crossclaim proposed by the defendant in seeking equitable
relief raises issues
which go to this Court’s jurisdiction to grant the remedies sought.
However, that has not been fully explored
and is an issue for another
I indicated during the course of argument, I propose to reserve the question of
costs to allow for any arguments the parties wish
to ventilate in light of these
Accordingly,
I make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 36.16 the default
judgment entered against the defendant on 15 June 2025 is set aside.
(2) The defendant has leave to file a defence and any crossclaim upon which she
proposes to rely by 20 November 2025.
(3) I reserve the question of costs and will make directions in consultation
with the parties for the determination of that issue.
See Dai v Zhu
[2013] NSWCA 412
referring to Adams v Kennick Trading (Int) Ltd
[2008] NSWSC 906
(1986) 4 NSWLR 503
506-7 per Hope JA.
M McNamee Holdings Pty Ltd v Mungerie Vale Pty Ltd (t/as Greenwood Group
[2019] NSWCA 283
General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR 125
See J & M McNamee
Holdings Pty Ltd v Mungerie Vale Pty Ltd (t/as Greenwood Group Realtors) supra
at [51] quoting from the decision
of Sackville AJA in Dai v Zhu supra at
It was accepted in
argument that the plaintiff is not at any time limit risk if fresh proceedings
are pursued to recover the outstanding
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (252 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter