URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2013/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v ROOPRA (No 2) [2013] NSWDT 3 (21 June 2013)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
CHAITAN SINGH ROOPRA
MATTER NUMBER: DT02/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
DEN0001247933
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE: COMPLAINT TWO &
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
____________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Roopra (No 2) [2013] NSWDT 3
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr Fernandez of Counsel instructed by Ms Lewis, Solicitor,
Health Care Complaints Commission.
Chaitan Singh Roopra
(Respondent) represented by Mr Stowe of Counsel
instructed by Mr Cockburn, Solicitor, McLachlan Thorpe Partners.
FILE NUMBER: DT02/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr George Wing AM (Dentist
Em. Prof. Keith Lester (Dentist Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 23 and 24 May 2013
DATE OF DECISION: 21 June 2013 (Re: Complaint Two & Orders)
FINDINGS (in summary): Having found all Particulars of all Complaints
established (reliance on Certificates of Conviction). Complaints
One, Three and
Four established. The Respondent has been convicted of nine criminal offences,
and is guilty of professional misconduct
and unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The Tribunal now finds Complaint Two (not a suitable person to hold
registration) established,
makes orders that the Respondent is not to re-apply
for re-registration until 6 January 2017, makes a Prohibition Order and a Costs
CATCHWORDS: Health practitioner - dentist – conviction for nine
criminal offences - aggravated indecent assault victim under
aggravated indecent assault victim under authority (s61M(1))
– conviction for criminal offences - not a suitable person -
unsatisfactory professional conduct – professional misconduct.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) –139B, clause 7 of schedule 5D;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Crimes Act 1900
Dental Practice Act 2001
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw (1938)
[1938] HCA 34
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association (1960)
[1960] HCA 40
HCCC v Roopra (No 1) [2012] NSWDT 5;
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
Health Care Complaints
Commission v
Karalasingham
Ex parte Tziniolis
Medical Practitioners Act (1966)
67SR (NSW) 448
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield (1997)
McBride v Walton
[1994] NSWCA 199.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Re: Complaint Two & Orders)
Introduction
Dental Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional Councils
Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney to
conduct an Inquiry
commencing on 21 November 2011 with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in
accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of
Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 28 June 2011
relation to a previously registered dentist, Chaitan Singh Roopra (the
Respondent).
Inquiry was held in two phases, hereafter referred to as phase one and phase
two. During phase one the Tribunal dealt with the
Particulars of Complaint and
Complaints One, Three and Four. The Reasons for Decision relating to that phase
of the Inquiry is
HCCC v Roopra (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT 5. The Tribunal notes
the Respondent admitted the Particulars of Complaint and did not contest
Complaints One, Three
Reasons for Decision document relates to phase two of the Inquiry which deals
with the Tribunal’s finding regarding Complaint
Two and the Orders that
should flow from the cumulative findings made by the Tribunal.
Respondent was incarcerated during phase one and was out on parole during phase
two, having been released from prison on 6 January
2013. The Respondent’s
sentence is due to expire on 15 January 2015.
The Complaint
Amended Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a dentist previously
registered under the
Dental Practice Act
(repealed):
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been convicted of nine criminal offences in New South Wales:
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
5 October, 2010 in Sydney NSW, the practitioner pleaded guilty and was convicted
of nine criminal offences, namely:
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 6 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South Wales.
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 6 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South Wales.
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 6 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South Wales.
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 16 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 16 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is not a suitable person to hold registration as a
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
COMPLAINT THREE
The practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of Section139B of the National Law in that
he has engaged in
other improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of dentistry.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
COMPLAINT FOUR
The practitioner has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
meaning of Section139B of the National Law, namely, improper
or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of dentistry in that he
(i) Engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration; and/or
(ii) Has engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together,
amount to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
Standard of Proof
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences .......
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed
intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which
in a civil issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects
the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
Protective not punitive
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Effect of serving a sentence of imprisonment
Tribunal relies upon the oft cited case of
which is appropriately
referenced in the attached submissions of the parties. The Tribunal further
notes that the Medical Tribunal
of NSW has considered this matter on a number of
occasions. One case in particular accords with this Tribunal’s view as to
the compatibility of serving a sentence of imprisonment and holding registration
as a health practitioner.
In the Matter of Paul Herbert Corbett
(No 40011 of 1995)
Medical Tribunal of NSW (7 December 1995) the Medical Tribunal was dealing with
an application for re-registration
where the Applicant was still on parole. The
Medical Tribunal made the following remarks at pages 19 and 20:
The Tribunal does not regard the fact that an applicant for reinstatement
is on parole as of necessity requiring that the application
be rejected. After
all, the parole period simply reflects the views of the sentencing court at the
time at which sentence is imposed
and there may be events occurring after the
imposition of such sentence which would indicate that a person is fully
rehabilitated
prior to the expiration of his or her parole. However whilst the
Tribunal does not regard the fact that an applicant is on parole
and subject to
supervision as of necessity preventing his or her re-instatement, it does regard
the fact that an applicant is on
parole and subject to supervision as a weighty
matter to be considered in determining whether he or she has regained good
to such an extent that he or she should be entitled to practise
medicine. When all is said and done adult mentally competent persons
character do not require supervision in the community to ensure that they do not
commit serious criminal offences.
in its Decision the Medical Tribunal also commented that the period of time that
the Applicant had been out in the community
(on parole) was not a sufficient
period given the multiplicity and gravity of the offences to allow the Tribunal
to be satisfied
as to rehabilitation in view of there being supervision
throughout that time.
Tribunal also notes that the Medical Tribunal in
took the view
that as the misconduct was actually committed in the course of his practice (as
a medical practitioner) and was not
merely personal misconduct that it had
greater relevance in the assessment of good character for the purpose of the
decision as to
whether to reinstate his registration (at page 21).
Medical Tribunal took the view that on the facts of this particular case the
Applicant would be unable to demonstrate that he
had overcome the defects in his
character as shown by his conduct until he had completed his period of parole.
This Tribunal notes
that the factual circumstances of this matter are not on all
fours with the current case so only takes general notice of this
Prohibition Order
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 149C(5)
of the National Law. This sub-section states:
Tribunal suspends or cancels a registered health practitioner’s or
student’s registration and it is satisfied
the person poses a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a "prohibition
order") do any one or
more of the following-
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently;
(b) place specified conditions on the provision of health services or
specified health services by the person for the period specified
in the order or
permanently.
Section 10AK(1)
provides that it is an offence for a person to provide a health service in
contravention of a prohibition order.
service’ is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
as including the following services, whether provided as public or
private services:
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths,
acupuncturists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the Health Care Complaints Regulation as a
health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
the relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in its meaning
depending upon the context in which it is used and the
subject matter in
relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions v Losurdo
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v Australasian
Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
at 348, Deane J observed
that the word “substantial” was not only susceptible of ambiguity,
but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of precision. In O’Brien Glass
Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty Limited
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447
referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and observed that, in selecting the word
“substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of section 149C(5) of the National Law the Tribunal is of the view
that ‘substantial’ requires something
more than a bare risk but is
less stringent than special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the maximum penalty
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months imprisonment
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes at the Inquiry. For a period of
time between the handing down of the decision in
HCCC v Roopra (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT 5 and this phase of the Inquiry the Respondent was
unrepresented.
Suppression Orders
phase one of the Inquiry the Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression
Order in relation to the names of Miss A, Miss
B and Miss C (being the victims
of the offences) and the names of other witnesses that may tend to identify Miss
A, Miss B and Miss
C in accordance with Schedule 5D Clause 7 of the Act as
indicated in the schedule annexed to
HCCC v Roopra (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT 5.
Any information beyond that contained in the Reasons for Decision documents
which may identify them is also not to
be published. Annexure C will only be
attached to the original Reasons for Decision held by the Registry and must not
be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
HCCC were essentially
four volumes of documents produced under summons. The documents initially relied
upon by the Respondent consisted
of two volumes, which were consolidated into
one volume with exhibits R1 to R19.
following people gave evidence before the Tribunal: the Respondent, Mrs Dharini
Roopra (the Respondent’s wife) and Dr Christopher
Lennings OAM
(Psychologist).
information
Background of the Respondent
of the background of the Respondent was set out in
HCCC v Roopra (No1)
However, since that time the Respondent undertook a CORE course whilst in gaol
and has been subject to the supervision of the Parole
Service since his
Respondent has resided with his parents since his release and the evidence
before the Tribunal indicates he has complied with
the conditions of his
evidence before the Tribunal also indicates that the Respondent has received
some benefits from Centrelink and has successfully
sought suitable employment,
at least on a part time or casual basis. The Respondent has resumed social
community and with some of his previous friends and
colleagues. The Respondent has also resumed contact with his immediate family
Respondent gave evidence that he wished to return to the practice of
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence as well as
the attendance of Dr Lennings, Mrs Roopra and the
Respondent.
Evidence of Mrs Roopra
Roopra provided a statement for the purpose of phase two of the Inquiry. This
statement is dated 19 April 2013 and formed exhibit
R13. Mrs Roopra also gave
evidence during phase two.
this statement Mrs Roopra gives her address as that of the Respondent’s
parents – the address at which the Respondent
currently resides. In her
oral evidence Mrs Roopra clarified that she had moved out of this address quite
a while ago to reside with
a friend. Further, she had recently completed the
purchase of a home in Penrith and would be moving into that home in the near
Mrs Roopra gave evidence that this purchase was a result of
consideration of a number of factors including the convenience of the
(for reasons disclosed to the Tribunal which the Tribunal does not consider need
to form part of the public record) and
as a result of financial and other advice
she had received regarding the advantage of buying at this particular price
point as opposed
to renting.
Roopra stated in her oral evidence that having secured stable full-time
employment for a period of over six months she was in
a position as at April
2013 to secure a loan to complete the purchase of the home. She stated that the
decision to purchase this
particular home was a decision made by her and the
Respondent (T95.2). She further stated that the Respondent was aware of her
and plans regarding the purchase of this home
‘all the way
answer to questions from the Tribunal Mrs Roopra stated that settlement of the
purchase had occurred a week or two prior to her
giving evidence and that they
were currently undertaking some painting and minor repairs and would be moving
into the home in a ‘few
weeks’ (T127).
Tribunal explored with Mrs Roopra the difficulties that the Penrith location may
present to the Respondent given the terms of
his parole and the indication in
his evidence of the unlikelihood of him receiving permission to live in this
suburb as it was where
the offences had been committed and some of the victims
lived in the area (see cross-examination around T110 and questions of the
Tribunal around T128).
Roopra indicated that this may not be the long term residence for the family as
there was the option of renting this property
out and renting elsewhere or, if
circumstances permitted, purchasing another property in another location. She
saw the home as being
the best solution to other practical considerations and it
also provided a place for her and her husband to be ‘a couple’
the home she was currently living in is the home of a friend
Roopra’s evidence was that there had been many factors to weigh up in the
circumstances and ultimately it was decided that
it would be best for the
Respondent to reside with his parents as this would provide him with company and
support during the day
as she had obtained full time employment some ten months
ago with long commuting hours.
the exchange of contracts for the purchase of the home in Penrith occurring in
in paragraph 9 of her 19 April 2013
Chaitain and I are considering moving to a residence in Penrith...
questioned about this statement Mrs Roopra indicated that it was always open for
there to be an application to change the Respondent’s
parole conditions to
allow him to live in Penrith. The clear position to the Tribunal was that
ultimately Mrs Roopra would be moving
into the home in the near future and the
Respondent would be remaining at his parent’s home.
in her evidence Mrs Roopra stated that she considered before she and her husband
could reside together again that the Respondent
had a number of his own issues
to work through. Following this they could proceed with the marriage counselling
they had commenced.
Mrs Roopra stated that there had been a couple of
relationship counselling sessions but these had been ‘put on hold’
to allow the Respondent to focus on these proceedings. Financial restrictions
were also a consideration, the Respondent not having
continuous work since his
release from prison.
Roopra provided an account of the Respondent’s involvement in family and
community life since his release from custody in
early January 2013. While there
had been very limited contact with her family the Respondent enjoyed the support
and company of his
own family, and a number of family friends and former
colleagues. The references provide some details of this. In response to
from the Tribunal Mrs Roopra stated that she had not taken any
holidays from work and spent about three hours a day travelling to
work. Mrs Roopra also reported that the Respondent frequently spent time at the
Temple on a Sunday but was actively involved
with her in family activities on
Roopra confirmed that she and family members had continued to visit the
Respondent whilst he was in custody. She reinforced her
earlier evidence that
these visits were ‘enjoyable and relaxed’. What was not clear from
Mrs Roopra’s statement
was the fact that there was only one occasion when
she had a one-on-one visit with her husband which resulted from a suggestion
to the Respondent during a group session in the CORE
examination in chief Mrs Roopra gave the following evidence
(T96.14-20):
Q. How would you describe the present state of your relationship with
A. Yep, I think it's quite good. It's positive and yeah it's enjoyable;
it's definitely different from him being out, rather than
him being in custody,
so, you know, that was a difficult time but, yeah, things are looking good and
they're improving. We have
lots of quality family time together with the four
of us, and also, you know, just personally between the two of us, so yes, it's
looking good, yes.
Roopra accepted during cross-examination that there had been difficulties in the
marriage since before 2005. She also gave evidence
regarding the nature of their
intimate relationship which the Tribunal will not recount in this document for
Tribunal does however consider it appropriate to record
that Mrs Roopra stated in cross-examination that the Respondent had informed
that prior to his arrest he had visited sex workers at massage parlours
(T122-123). The Tribunal notes that this does not accord
Respondent’s answer in the ‘pre-program’ survey completed
prior to his participation in the CORE Program.
Details of this survey are
addressed later in this document.
her statement Mrs Roopra reports that she had observed that the Respondent had
‘quite calm and relaxed’
since his release from custody
and that she had not observed any issues with
‘depression or
(paragraphs 16 and 17).
cross-examination Mrs Roopra stated that there had been arguments between them
since the Respondent was released from custody
although she would not accept
that they had been serious arguments – rather they had been about serious
issues (T114). Mrs
Roopra stated that she thought that they were likely to be
discussing financial matters in the period 5 to 20 March 2013. Mrs Roopra
the following evidence (T114.31 – 115.4):
Q. During that period of time in March, did it get to a point where you
said to your husband "Our marriage is over"?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did it get to a point where he said to you "Our marriage is
A. Yes, probably, perhaps. I think Chaitan seems to be a bit more
erratic in his thoughts that I would be so
Q. What did he say?
A. He has said, possibly, you know, "Don't worry about it, it's finished,
we'll just go separate ways", but it's something I've heard
a few times before
and look I honestly don't take it too seriously. Yeah.
Q. You don't take it too seriously when your husband says to you "Don't
worry, its finished, let's go our separate ways"?
A. No, to be honest, because well Chaitan is dealing with a lot of stress
at the moment, he is dealing with a lot of trauma and has
been for quite some
time. It unfortunately, or fortunately it's his nature and maybe its perhaps
the nature of our relationship
but to be honest its you know, it has had its
ups and downs all the way through, even after his release from custody. But I
genuinely say that you know, that a prominent feeling is that its positive
and its improving.
in her evidence, when asked about an entry made in the parole officer’s
records made on 20 March 2013 indicating the Respondent
had told his parole
officer that the marriage had ended (see transcript of entry reproduced below)
Mrs Roopra gave evidence that
the Respondent had told her
that the marriage had ended. This position must be set against
evidence of other comments made by the Respondent. Mrs Roopra’s
in this regard was as follows (T125.38-45):
Q. And he has told you a few times that the marriage is over?
A. Yes. He's also told me quite a few more times that you know we'll
work on things and we'll be together, and that he's trying.
And I believe that
Q. How many times has he told you that the marriage is over since he
has been released from gaol in January this year?
A. Possibly once or twice.
Roopra also gave the following evidence (T123.27-124.40):
Q. Is it correct to say, Mrs Roopra, that you wish to tell this Tribunal
that your marriage is going as well as it can be?
A. Yes, I believe it is.
Q. That's what you would like this Tribunal to accept, is that
A. Well, it is going well I can't say that it is ideal it's a long
process that we are both undertaking. I also realise that
Chaitan has some more
issues to work on within himself, but I'm happy with the state of the
relationship and I just look forward
a future together.
Q. He has said to you, a couple of times since January of this year
"Don't worry; it's finished; let's go our separate ways?"
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. You have laughed it off?
A. Well, I wouldn't say that I've "laughed it off" but Chaitan does tend
to say things and off the cuff, and erratically, and he
does well, up until
now and I believe he will continue to do always come back some sense and
reality, after discussing things.
So he he has made you know considerable
improvements in communicating and dealing with issues, but I can't say that it's
a perfect scenario as yet.
Q. Have you ever thought that if he said to you, "Don't worry; it's
finished; let's go our separate ways?" that that's what he actually
A. I have considered that, yes. But knowing him knowing my husband, I
know I know what he's like I know how he reacts, and
I do also hear the
other side when he does apologise and when he does say, "No, that's not the
case; that's not what I want."
Q. As at 20 March this year, your marriage had ended, hadn't it?
A. Possibly briefly.
Q. What do you mean by "possibly briefly"?
A. Well, I know that Chaitan gets upset and the way he deals with things
is is to you know take drastic measures in some instances,
but I also know
that yeah that he comes back too. You know once he's thought about things
and considered you know his
options he does come back and I feel that is a
genuine feeling he does find these things difficult. He finds a lot of things
difficult to deal with.
Q. What had actually happened in your marriage that make you say that
your marriage had ended "possibly briefly" as at 20 March this
A. I think that was Chaitan's statement. I have never said to him that
the marriage has ended. So from my side, it hadn't ended.
If one person breaks
an agreement I suppose it is ended for him that was very brief period.
Q. It happened between you and him just before he said that
A. I think it was the stresses of dealing with the finances, and this
coming Tribunal.
Q. He had said to you the marriage is over, is that right?
A. Correct.
Q. Those were the words he used, "The marriage is over"?
A. I can't recall specifically but, generally, yes.
Q. What else did he say to you about the marriage at that time?
A. That's possibly all because our communication would have stopped for
that time, and then it would have resumed.
Q. How long after did that resume?
A. A couple of days perhaps.
in her evidence she states that the relationship is
‘progressing well,
we have a few major hurdles such as HCCC and housing issues’
paragraph 32). The Tribunal notes that it appears, at least for the immediate
future, that the housing issue has been settled
by Mrs Roopra’s purchase
of a home and the terms of the Respondent’s parole requiring him to reside
in his parent’s
(T125.6-21):
Q. You're saying your relationship is progressing well, even though
Chaitan has said to you, on a number of different times, since
released from goal that the marriage is over?
A. Yes, he has said that a few times, yes, but he has also attended
counselling with me, and we have also had many discussions
unfortunately it's
the nature of our relationship.
Q. You understand why Chaitan being in a marriage is important for his
risk of future offending, is that correct to say?
A. I think he has to deal with these issues himself. You know, having
gone to counselling myself in the period that he was in custody
they have made
me realise that he has issues to deal with himself before he can deal with
relationship issues. So I think it would
be beneficial to him, yes, to be
married. He does want that, and I offer that as support, and I genuinely offer
that for myself.
But I know that he has issues to deal with himself, and then
he will also deal with the issues that we have in our marriage.
in answer to a question from the Tribunal Mrs Roopra gave the following evidence
(T133.39-140.14):
Q. If you could summarise for us the main reasons why that counselling
hasn't continued?
A. I think Chaitan is finding it difficult at times and he has asked for
it to be on hold at this point. I think he has genuinely
been quite stressed
with these proceedings, so he did make his intention clear to me that, you know,
he would like to stop for some
period of time until after this is finished. So,
you know, I have agreed to that. I think that the intention is definitely there
and we will continue it. He finds it important, he knows it's important, and he
even in the view sessions that we have had I can
see a big improvement from
previous counselling sessions where he was quite closed off and reserved. So,
you know, he's working
through it. It's not quite there yet, but definitely big
improvements.
Q. From something you said earlier, do I understand it that you think
that there would be some benefit in him having some individual
counselling and
resolving his issues so that the relationship counselling can progress more
satisfactorily?
A. Yes. I believe so. So he did attend that intensive course while he
was in custody and, you know, there were quite a few outcomes
Obviously he's in a very different scenario now and has to make quite a few
adjustments, so I think that a few sessions
or however long it takes, really
would benefit him as well. So I think he is being referred to a psychologist
shortly. These
things obviously take some time with parole and, you know, what
he can and can't do, but yes, it is his intention and I think that
beneficial.
paragraph 18 of her statement Mrs Roopra indicates that she observed the
Respondent had managed stress well and was
'working through his daily
. The evidence before the Tribunal supports the assertion that
the Respondent was working to a routine. However, there is evidence
Respondent is not entirely managing stress. The ‘blow ups’ Mrs
Roopra gave evidence about under cross-examination
stand as a clear example of
Roopra referred to the Tribunal’s observation (in paragraph 90 of
Roopra (No 1)
) regarding the stressors in the Respondent’s life.
Mrs Roopra stated that the previous
‘triggers for his episodes’
were financial commitments and
‘having to discuss issues’
and observes that the Respondent is now able to discuss
issues better’.
Respondent was observed by Mrs Roopra to be calmer due to meditation, painting
and music and was able to communicate better than
before he went to gaol. She
further stated that she considered this to be an ongoing process. In her oral
evidence Mrs Roopra elaborated
by stating that the Respondent still had issues
to work through for himself before they could work on their relationship. Mrs
also gave evidence that she considered that the relationship between her
family and the Respondent could be addressed after she and
the Respondent had
sorted out their relationship (T131).
a very positive note Mrs Roopra reported that the Respondent was regularly
attending a gym and staying very active as well as managing
his medical
conditions. She considered that the sessions with the psychologist whilst he was
in custody were of benefit, later adding
that she considers they have enabled
him to be more able to discuss his thoughts now. It was her understanding that
he would soon
be attending counselling/psychology sessions organised by the
parole service. Mrs Roopra concluded that her husband was now physically
medically well. The two relationship counselling sessions they had attended were
beneficial, focussing on decision making and
financial matters. In her written
statement Mrs Roopra states that time and a lack of funds had been an obstacle
‘finding suitable counselling’
however in oral evidence it
became apparent that the desire of the Respondent to focus on this Tribunal
process also played a role
in the counselling not continuing.
Roopra observed that the Respondent’s spiritual development had continued
since his release from gaol (see paragraph 43)
and that he finds great peace
from his personal meditation (see paragraph 44).
Roopra also states that she considers she is adjusting well to having the
Respondent back. It is also her evidence that their
financial decisions were
dependent upon the Respondent finding work and the outcome of this Tribunal. In
her oral evidence Mrs Roopra
explained the significant financial decision she
had made a few weeks earlier to purchase a home in her name only using the best
part of the monies in the joint savings account as being on expert advice that
this was a better alternative to renting as well as
providing flexibility as to
whether the property could be sold at some future point so that another home
could be purchased in which
the Respondent may reside with her or be rented out
so that a suitable property could be rented for that same
Roopra states at paragraph 30 that she intends to stay married to the Respondent
and will continue to support him. She continues
in paragraph 31 to state that
her feelings towards him are
‘warm and hopeful’.
Although her
availability was limited by her work commitments the time they spent together
‘fun and family orientated’
. In her oral evidence Mrs
Roopra also provided details of the time they had managed to spend alone
together including for movies,
coffee or dinner.
Roopra accepted under cross-examination that the Respondent committed quite
serious sexual offences against a number of women
and had apparently lost a
large sum of their joint superannuation funds (by share trading) without her
knowledge (T111-112). Mrs
Roopra was under the impression that the joint
superannuation funds were sitting in an account or a fund or the like (T147).
Roopra gave the following evidence (T115.12-115.39):
Q. Is it correct to say that you will never again be able to trust your
A. I can't say that, no. I do trust him.
Q. You trust him?
Q. You have no doubt about what he might do in the future?
A. We definitely everybody would have some level of doubt but I think
that you know, the measures that we put in place and his
own, you know, self
evaluation has definitely gone a long way into helping, you know, the trust
factor, from myself, his family,
the community.
Q. He's hidden what he did from you in the past?
A. Correct, yes, and we
Q. You know he can hide things from you in the future as well?
A. Yes. True, so we will all be quite a bit more vigilant and look, we
know what he's gone through, he had to go through that self
reflection himself
and he has, you know, a lot of things have come to light since these charges
were first laid. We have looked
at a lot of the factors that are involved in
you know, we are all dealing with that, no more so than he, he is dealing with
Q. You will all be quite a bit more vigilant because you know that
there's a chance that he might do something in the future?
A. I doubt that he would ever do anything quite like, you know, the
events that have already taken place, you know, I can so far
as anybody can be
sure that that would not happen. But you know, there are still stresses in his
life that, you know, we're all
assisting with.
Roopra gave evidence that it was her understanding that the letter from the
family accountant addressed to Centrelink dated 9
January 2013 was produced for
the purpose of assisting the Respondent to secure some form of social security
benefits as he was without
income and is still on a low level of income.
re-examination Mrs Roopra stated that she was only asked to produce information
regarding the share trading losses on the first
day of the phase two of the
Inquiry (subsequent to having arranged for such documentation to be available to
the District Court during
the criminal proceedings). On the second day of the
phase two Inquiry Mrs Roopra stated that after making a couple of telephone
‘back and forth’ with the accountant she was able to provide a
document dated 8 February 2011 which she stated had been
emailed through to her.
Although this letter was addressed ‘To whom it may concern’, was not
signed, and was not on letterhead
the Tribunal was informed that this was the
document that was placed before the District Court. This document became exhibit
(see around T142).
the Tribunal raised with counsel for the Respondent that this particular
document did not record any loss described as a share
trading loss, Mrs Roopra
indicated she had found a similar document dated 3 February 2011 in her computer
in the ‘drafts’
and this was produced and became exhibit R19. Mrs
Roopra stated she thought this was also a document produced by the accountant.
This ‘draft’ document notes a $200,000 loss from the Private
Superannuation Fund which does not appear to be listed in
exhibit R19.
T145 Mrs Roopra gave the following evidence regarding these
Q. What's your basis for understanding what losses, if any, was
A. It was another thing that Chaitan was doing secretly, I wasn't aware
of that at the time, it was only once he was taken into custody
that he did
mention these accounts and once Chaitan's brother, who is an accountant, and
myself did check and we did see substantial
losses on those accounts.
Q. When you say you saw substantial losses, what were you looking at that
caused you to think that?
A. The bank statements.
Q. The what statements?
A. The bank statements.
Q. They were bank statements in relation to an account held by
A. I look Chaitan had access to them, I think they were a super fund,
it was a joint super fund but I wasn't well I wasn't aware
of that at the
Q. A joint super fund for whose benefit?
A. For Chaitan and myself.
Q. Yes. Have you undertaken any steps to try and retrieve any account
statements in relation to those bank accounts or the superannuation
A. Look I did have a quick look yesterday but given our situation in
that, you know, our possessions have been in storage for two
and a half years, I
could not find them at this point in time. I don't have much with me
Roopra’s evidence was that with time more information could have been
obtained about these losses.
Evidence of the Respondent
Respondent provided a statement dated 22 April 2013 (exhibit R2). Although the
Respondent makes reference to the Reasons for Decision
Roopra (No 1)
at paragraph 2 he gave the following oral evidence on 23 May 2013
(T12.46-13.12):
Q. You've read it very carefully; is that right?
A. I've read it.
Q. You've read it very carefully?
A. I wouldn't say carefully. I would say I've read it.
Q. This is about you, this judgment, isn't it?
Q. You want to know what the Tribunal has found in relation to your
conduct, don't you?
A. Yes, but again, carefully: how would define carefully?
Q. The question I asked was have you read it carefully. What's your
A. I've read it.
Q. It is correct to say that you have put a lot of effort into preparing
for these proceedings; is that right?
A. As much as I could. I've done what I could.
Q. It is a very important matter for you that you keep your registration
as a dentist; is that correct?
A. It is an important matter.
Respondent accurately records his wife’s address and reports she had
purchased a home in Penrith. The Respondent emphatically
states that he does not
wish to reside in Penrith as this was the location in which he committed the
offences, as well as being where
the victims and former patients live. Despite
the separate living arrangements the Respondent recorded in his statement that
not consider their marriage as having ended. The Respondent was
cross-examined and asked questions by the Tribunal about the entries
made by his
parole officer regarding statements made by the Respondent during his reporting
sessions that the marriage had ended
(and other statements consistent with this
position). The Tribunal makes observations regarding this issue later in this
Respondent set out some of his parole conditions in paragraph 9 of his
statement. The Respondent provided the Tribunal with a
full set of his parole
conditions after the Tribunal adjourned at the end of the Inquiry (T162). The
evidence supports the Respondent’s
evidence that he has not received any
adverse reports/notifications while on parole nor has he breached his parole
conditions.
Respondent provided an account of the work he had undertaken since his release
from prison and reports that he enjoyed the work,
that he got on well with the
other employees and his supervisors although he found some of the work to be
physically challenging.
Respondent stated that his finances were ‘tight’ (paragraph 18 of
his statement) but that he had received assistance
from Centrelink, from his
employment and his parents and other family members were also willing to assist.
In his oral evidence the
Respondent stated on a number of occasions that his
focus had shifted away from financial matters and he now appreciated that there
were other far more important considerations in life. In answer to questions
from the Tribunal the Respondent stated that he had
no income and so he was
given an ‘emergency payment’ by Centrelink shortly after his release
from incarceration. For
the purpose of gaining the Newstart Allowance the
Respondent required the letter from the accountant indicating he was not
any income from the trust and was separated from his wife (T157). The
Respondent gave the following evidence (T157.20-33):
CHAIRPERSON: Whether or not you were separated from your wife, was that a
factor that Centrelink wanted to know about?
RESPONDENT: I'm not certain of that. I think there was a part in it I
recall there were four parts: living separately; separated;
divorced, and I
think one more and I remember thinking that the form was "unique" because it had
"living separately" and "separated"
and I ticked "living separately" box. I can
recall that because when I went home and told my mum and dad about that I said,
a what a wonderful form they seem to have been through every
possibility of family breakup, or you know or not, and they
have come up
with this form". So I remember specifically filling the form as "living
separately" and
[accountant]
I would have said to him, "Yes, we are
living separately". However, he has written "has separated". I believe that it
be "living separated".
Respondent was asked by the Tribunal about his current attitude towards the loss
of money (T146.46-147.22):
CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell me something more about the financial the
financial picture and in particular the importance of the loss
of the roughly
$200,000. Can you tell me how that figures into your life at the
RESPONDENT: Yes. I've changed my philosophy on money, I think was a
not greedy but I was certainly very money orientated and asset
bound if you like
and certainly now I look at it, having been incarcerated, that what do you
essentially need as a human being.
What do you really require where there is
not much that you really require. Do you require a lot of money? No. But
I was definitely driven and motivated through financial means and I
wanted to at that time, like you know I suffered a great depression
GFC crisis because, you know I think and this was brought up in the Core
Program that I had that issue well why me, why
did this happen to me. Almost a
self entitlement issue and we dealt with that in the Core Program with Meagan
and she helped me
through that and definitely I look at it now as be sufficient,
have what you need but not excessive. At the time it flawed me, yes.
CHAIRPERSON: Do you have access to the records from the super funds that
you were using for the purpose of the share trading or whatever
you were doing
RESPONDENT: The accountant is still working on that unfortunately, he
hasn't because its yes, the accountant hasn't hasn't
provided that no.
Hasn't provided it.
Respondent provides details of his current medical conditions and the manner in
which he is managing them (paragraphs 21 and 22).
The Respondent also stated he
was receiving care from various health practitioners and elaborated on this in
answer to questions
from the Tribunal. The Respondent consulted a new general
practitioner (rather than his brother-in-law) about three weeks prior to
phase two Inquiry. The Respondent is hopeful that the psychologist that the
Parole Service will arrange for him to undertake
some cognitive behavioural
Respondent recorded in his statement (paragraph 24) that he was sleeping well as
a result of the use of a CPAP machine and noted
his reduced anxiety and stress,
his improved circumstances (having been released from custody) and his improved
physical and mental
health. He reports attending a gymnasium regularly and
working daily. The Respondent has also commenced taking art classes and enjoys
listening to music and playing his guitar.
Respondent reported that he and his wife had attended two marriage counselling
sessions in the two months after his release from
custody (i.e. the last session
was in February 2013) and when finances permitted he would like to continue with
these sessions. In
his oral evidence the Respondent indicated that another
factor in these sessions not continuing was that he needed to focus on
preparation
for this Tribunal’s Inquiry.
Respondent reported that he was talking daily to his wife which may be on some
occasions by way of text messaging.
he was in custody the Respondent reports that he enjoyed the support of his wife
and family as he had visitors each week-end.
It was difficult to maintain
telephone contact with his wife as she was working and he did not have access to
a telephone after 3pm.
Since his release he states he has continued to work on
his relationship with his wife and appreciates he may have to do this for
rest of his life.
Respondent stated if he was ever permitted to practice dentistry that he hoped
and expected that his wife would be the practice
in custody the Respondent participated in the CORE Moderate MSPC program. At
this point the Tribunal notes that a psychologist
involved in this program
provided a comprehensive report which formed exhibit R13. The Respondent stated
he gained insight into the
nature of his offences during this course (see
paragraph 42 of his statement). The course ended with a presentation to family
in a ‘Support Network Meeting’. In his oral evidence the
Respondent told the Tribunal that his brother and two sisters
attending this
presentation and his wife could not attend as she had just commenced a new job
making it difficult to take time off.
The Respondent gave the following evidence
when asked about the Support Network Meeting (T159.41-160.38):
CHAIRPERSON: I'm just wondering, which family members were present during
that presentation?
RESPONDENT: Well, now I should tell you a little bit about the support
network meeting, prior to discussing that. The support network
offered to few people not everybody in the program is even offered it. I was
one of the few who was offered that because
I had a solid history of support,
and that support was ongoing; was committed and was an energetic type of
support, it was proactive
and as you see before you today, my family members are
here and yesterday my family members were here as well, so I have had the
of support that people only wish for, given my circumstances. So that's the
first thing.
The other matter is that in the Core Program, out of the eight members who
inmates who were in that Core Program, I was the only one
who had a support
network meeting. To my knowledge no other member was offered that. Meagan
would look through the records and
see who attended the visits, visitations, who
attended, who wrote letters and so forth and based on that I was offered a
network meeting. It is no small deal to be even offered that. So I was
very happy to present what I had learnt in the Core Program
to family members.
Those members who were there that's what you asked. The third part of that is
that my brother,
was there, my sister
here today,
my sister who is here today were there and they
were the members who were there of the family and I specifically recall I had
Dharini to come to the support network meeting. She had just started a
job, she had just started I think about two weeks prior to
that, maybe even less
and it was very difficult for her to take the time off to come to that
So even from that time she, you know, despite our trials and tribulations
or perhaps because of them, as I said previously, she has
stuck by me and for
that I am very, very lucky and I am very I'm indebted to her for that and I
despite the questions that have
been fielded, I want to get to the Tribunal that
we're still together and we will continue to be still together although we need
guidance for that and support. So the only the only I would like to also
mention that it has been suggested that the marriage
guidance has stopped. Yes,
it has been stopped because I didn't want to take too much on my plate, at that
stage I didn't even know
if I'd be able to appear here with solicitors, I didn't
know that, and as you know, Madam Chair, there was a strong possibility that
could have been here alone and facing Mr Fernandez on my own, that's not a very,
very happy thing to do as you have seen he can
be I wish he was on my side
but you know, it is I try and be as honest as I can and as frank as I can
before you here today and
say to you that although our marriage has difficulties
and problems, its perhaps despite them, because of them and we are two stubborn
people, to an extent, and we will see this through, I am certain of
program attended by the Respondent was the ‘Season for Growth’ which
focussed on his welfare and spiritual guidance.
He attended weekly religious
services with the religious sister who ran this program. The service was also
taken by a priest.
Tribunal notes there were details set out in
Roopra (No 1)
offered by Rev. Dr Peter Powell. In paragraph 45 of his statement the Respondent
sets out his understanding that the
CORE Program he undertook whilst
incarcerated is a more intense and higher level program. The Respondent’s
evidence was that
both the psychologist from the CORE Program and Dr Lennings
were of the opinion that the Rev. Dr Peter Powell course would be of
no value to him.
his release from custody he has resumed attending services of his own faith with
members of his family or on his own. The lessons
taught include morality,
spirituality, guidance of the soul, community spirit, a sense of belonging,
humility and gratitude. He also
undertakes the provision of service while as
part of his attendance. He has found these activities to have played an
important role
in his re-integration into the community, that it has been a
positive process and has been an important contributing factor to him
from the symptoms of depression. The Respondent reports that since his release
from custody he has not experienced any
anger or depressive episodes.
51 of the Respondent’s statement reads:
I consider that my emotional state is stable.
Respondent attributes this to various strategies including talking to family
members (including his wife), to his Parole Officer,
to the Job Placement
Officer, to the relationship counsellor and to Dr Lennings in addition to his
involvement with his religious
Respondent describes the close family relationships he enjoys in his current
residence and the activities the members of the household
and extended family
attend to together.
Respondent addresses the comments made by the Tribunal in paragraphs 199 to 214
Roopra (No 1)
which addressed the Board Inquiry held in March 2009 at
paragraphs 60 to 67 of his statement.
Respondent described being
‘depressed, terrified and in a completely
foreign environment’
at that time. Further he felt that his personal
judgment was poor and he therefore relied heavily on the professional legal
he was given. He accepts that he knew at the time that he was guilty of
certain criminal offences charged but assessed his ‘guilt’
‘innocence’ with respect to the
‘full suite of charges that
had been pressed’.
paragraphs 63, 64 and 65 the Respondent continues:
63. My present view is that the submissions were made in a sincere and
honest way because there were charges of which I was clearly
not guilty. It was
not my intent to mislead the Board. That said, I understand with hindsight that
my guilt in relation to some of
the criminal charges was relevant to the
Board’s determination; and that the general statement of
“innocence” likely
cause the Board to infer that I contended that I
was innocent of all charges. If so, I accept that the Board would have been
by the general statement of “innocence” on my behalf. I
sincerely apologise to this Tribunal and the Board for that fact.
However, I do
not recall turning my mind at the time to the fact that my guilt in relation to
some (only) of the criminal charges
was relevant to the Board’s
determination, or that the Board might be misled by the general statement of
“innocence”
on my behalf. And I confirm that I certainly did not
intend to mislead the Board as to my innocence. I accept that my failure to
appreciate that my conduct might have misled the Board reflected poor personal
judgment at the time.
64. I have been able to reassess my position and clearly see that the
Board deserved and should have been provided more information
on questions of
65. I realise now that a commitment to innocence reflects a position on
the whole rather than the particulars, and the Board quite
rightly made its
decisions based on that. At the time, I did not exercise such a clear insight
into these matters and I apologise
for doing so.
cross-examination the Respondent stated that his conduct before the Dental Board
of NSW was a simple reflection of his mental
state rather than an attempt to
keep his registration at all costs.
paragraph 66 of his statement the Respondent stated that he had realised with
hindsight that the Tribunal’s concern regarding
this matter was
‘fair and reasonable’.
Further, with the benefit of
discussions with Dr Lennings, subsequent to giving evidence during the first
phase of this Inquiry,
the Respondent has come to the understanding that his
conduct was ‘externally driven’ - that is to say as a result of
shame and embarrassment and concern for his family that he felt at the time as
well as the fear about his future and his
‘clouded emotional and
psychological state’.
Respondent states that he is completely remorseful towards his victims and their
families and is seeking a
‘redemptive path’
(paragraph 70).
Further, he feels that the impact upon his victims is immeasurable. The
Respondent mentions his discussions regarding
Justice Unit. It is the Respondent’s evidence that this has not progressed
substantially due to
his parole conditions.
Respondent indicates his desire to return to dentistry as it is an important
part of his identity and as he feels he owes the
profession and the community a
debt because of his misconduct that needs to be repaid. He also feels he owes it
to his family to
reduce some of the financial stress he has placed upon them as
a result of the criminal and disciplinary proceedings.
Respondent ends his statement with the following (at paragraph
I would be completely respectful of any conditions which might be imposed
upon the resumption of practice. I am confident that the
support of Dharini, my
family, and my community, would assist me to comply with any conditions.
answer to a question from the Tribunal the Respondent acknowledged that he had
indicated to his parole officer on 22 November 2012
that he would be residing
with his parents upon release from custody. He had relied upon the guidance and
advice of the psychologist
who ran the CORE Program in making this statement.
The Respondent gave evidence that by making this indication he would be
his chances of parole being granted and of not having to live in a
‘half-way’ house.
T149 the Respondent gave the following evidence:
CHAIRPERSON: At this stage had you had any discussions with your wife
released on parole.
What was the nature of those discussions?
RESPONDENT: The nature was an open and frank discussion, it was well
firstly I've got to get parole, that's the, you know, the
incarceration, it says, well you don't automatically receive parole and even if
you do get an automatic parole then the
address can be problematic so you can
end up in a halfway house called a COSPs centre, Community of Offender Services
these matters where are you going to live makes a huge impact on
where if you do end up in getting parole of not. Even though
January to be released, that release is subject to certain conditions and one of
them was no doubt the address. In fact
that's probably the main one, for
example I can't live opposite a school, things like that.
So there are guidelines for which parole have to follow to do their job
and Meagan when we when I asked her in the program several
discussed where to live and you know, how what was the best way for me to
approach my application for parole, she said
this is the way to go about it, ask
your parents, seek permission to do so. Do it that way and when Dharini visited
I discussed
that with her and said look, this is the main thing. And I mean
sure, she is my wife, she was obviously a little bit well I'd like
you to come
to live with me, I mean there's no doubt to that so despite our problems, or
even perhaps because of our problems we
still want to, you know, there's an
element of we want to make this thing work. There is definitely that element to
it and its perhaps
despite everything and because of everything, there's an
element of determination to this.
So we want to make it work to prove to ourselves that there is redemption,
that there is salvation, that there is journey and a path
and that's really
where the emphasis is for me. I find that the question of where to live was
more directed by circumstances during
my incarceration and from what I learnt in
the Core Program, I can't say how important the Core Program was for me.
Respondent stated that he had read all of the references provided to the
Tribunal during phase one but had not read all of the
references that had been
provided to the Tribunal on his behalf for ‘phase two’ and added
(T158.18-159.14):
RESPONDENT: I read the ones provided for the first hearing. The second I
would have I wrote emails saying saying I have know
this person for X amount
of time and I continue to support him and I know that he is out of incarceration
and I rang them saying,
"Look, would you would you agree to this or not, or
would you amend it it is up to you how you take it from there". That's how
that's actually came up and I think a lot of them sounded the same. So they
still gave me support; they still provided me the support,
and I just I
remember writing the email to the ones that were email I remember giving
them a draft and saying to them, "If
you agree with this draft, then sign. If
you don't agree with it, amend it". A lot of them did sign it as it was, and
some of them
amended it.
CHAIRPERSON: So if I can take you in the folder, your document there, to
number 11 for instance, you can see there that that one
appears to come from Dr
Keray, your brother in law and do I take it that this was a draft where he did
not amend the draft to take
out the word "occupation" and to insert his
occupation?
RESPONDENT: Correct, that's right. This is a draft that I sent I sent
the draft out, and a lot of them requested that I do that,
because they said,
"Look, I don't simply have the time to go through the entire thing, but I do
provide you support", I think that's
the essence of it.
CHAIRPERSON: So that if there was an observation on the part of the
Tribunal that paras 1 to 6 of most of these are the same.
RESPONDENT: It's because they were drafts, yes.
CHAIRPERSON: That there was also a typographical error in the paragraph
dealing with taking medications and the CPAP machine where
it says, "Taking
medication rather than
that typographical error is repeated in many of them that would be because you
had forwarded a draft.
RESPONDENT: Correct. That's entirely my doing, unfortunately, that I
made that typographical error. That is also why, Madam Chair,
the folders were
were sent to you in not the best form as we might say so I did that myself.
So that was a time where I was
as you may recall I didn't have a defence. I
was running around trying to get references and get some support, and people
did give me the support and but they just said to me, "Look, would you
mind you draft the letter; I'll sign it; I'm happy to
do; I know your
situation" so I personally went out drove out to their places and talked to
them, or met with them, and so forth.
So it was not a it was not although it
looks mechanically and it has the effect of being a little bit wonky I the
in essence is true, and the support in essence is genuine.
Evidence of Dr Lennings
Tribunal heard evidence from Dr Christopher Lennings, Clinical Psychologist, who
assessed Mr Roopra at the request of the Respondent’s
representatives. A number of documents were produced under summons by Dr
Lennings (admitted as Volume 2 of the HCCC material)
and included a personality
assessment inventory dated 5 November 2010, an undated STATIC99R Coding form
recording a score of 1/0;
undated handwritten notes from interview with the
Respondent; copy of a seven (7) page report by Dr Lennings dated 5 November 2011
regarding the Respondent and addressed to McLachlan Thorpe Partners; copy of a
12 page report by Dr Lennings dated 6 November 2010
regarding the Respondent and
addressed to Carters Law Firm; a copy of a thirteen (13) page report by Dr
Lennings dated 10 November
2010 regarding the Respondent and addressed to
Carters Law Firm; a copy of a nine (9) page report by Dr Lennings dated 23 March
regarding the Respondent and addressed to McLachlan Thorpe Partners; and a
copy of a Personality Assessment Inventory dated ‘11/10/10’
10 November 2010) regarding the Respondent.
his report of 23 March 2013, Dr Lennings outlines the Respondent’s current
situation as reported by Mr Roopra in a 1 hour
interview conducted on 21 March
2013. The report documents that the Respondent and his wife are currently
living separately and
that he and his wife have been attending relationship
counselling, although it is temporarily ‘on hold’ so that the
can concentrate on the ‘Tribunal process’. In addition
the report indicates that the Respondent is currently employed
in a casual
position in a furniture warehouse, which allows him time to enjoy other
interests. Dr Lennings records that the Respondent
has abandoned plans to study
accountancy and has become interested in painting and information technology
with plans to combine the
two. The Respondent indicated his long term plans
were to get back into dentistry. With regard to the Respondent’s health,
the report states that he is managing his diabetes well and has had no problems
with his health since release.
Lennings records that ‘
Mr Roopra defines his mental health as
he is maintained on an anti-depressant but
does not report symptoms of depression currently and did not appear depressed in
’. Further Dr Lennings states ‘
his manner in
interview was quite different from the two previous times I interviewed him.
The bombast and intellectualisation notable
on those occasions was missing, he
presented as considerably more direct and realistic in conversations. To that
end he seemed less
defensive than previously and when we talked about that, it
seems his time in CORE program was well spent and made a difference to
Lastly Dr Lennings’ summary of the current situation notes
that the Respondent advises that he ‘
occasionally drinks alcohol but at
a moderate level
’ and drinks only one cup of coffee a
remainder of the report deals with Dr Lennings’ comments regarding the
seven (7) specific ‘terms of reference’
provided by the
Respondent’s legal representatives. Dr Lennings states that, in relation
to Mr Roopra’s emotional and
psychological condition, the Respondent is
currently not depressed’
‘there is no
indication that his mental health is an issue for risk of re offence or problems
in resuming his professional
life. History is more of an issue
report advises that the psychological factors that brought about the
Respondent’s mood disturbance and the offence
are currently absent and Dr
Lennings states ‘
I do not view his mood is likely to deteriorate to a
point that re-offence risk is raised if the current pattern is
maintained’
. Further, Dr Lennings reports that ‘
good emotional control, apparent insight gained and continuing low risk, there
is no specific reason attributable to the
risk assessment or his mental health,
that indicates Mr Roopra could not successfully re-commence
regard to the question of the impact of incarceration and the risks of
re-offending, Dr Lennings’ report states that the
length of time that a
person is incarcerated is important and that periods of less than five (5) years
are seen as
‘less noxious’
than longer periods. The report
further states that while ‘
Mr Roopra’s initial adjustment to
prison was quite tumultuous, involving an attempted suicide, he appears to have
settled and
through a chance opportunity to make up some numbers in the (CORE)
group when others dropped out, he used it (the CORE program) well’
‘gained important insights and psychological benefit from
In his oral evidence Dr Lennings stated that ‘
not appear that he had been affected by the negative outcomes that are possible
for being in jail.
’ (T73. 40, 23 May 2013).
Lennings advises that ‘
there is no change in Mr Roopra’s risk
estimate for re-offending. It was already at a low risk level
report goes on to explain that ‘
low risk is as low as it can
’ and that ‘
once an offence is committed a situation cannot
arise where a person is regarded as having no risk. The critical issue in
interpreting
low risk is the assessment of what scenarios or dynamic risk
factors may occur such that the risk is elevated?’.
report notes that ‘
’ has occurred around the
Respondent’s mood control and that he is in the process of working on the
relationship issues,
leaving the only dynamic risk factor to have increased
being employment instability. The risk is in Dr Lennings’ view not
in any appreciable way and is now assessed as low. Dr Lennings went on to say
that the scenario, referred to in his previous
evidence to the Tribunal, where
the Respondent experiences ‘
persistent low mood, in the context of
relationship troubles, and a crash in self esteem probably associated with
increased alcohol
, remains but is now regarded as less
part of cross examination questions, Dr Lennings confirmed that some form of
mood state monitoring and a requirement to ‘
check-in with somebody
from mental health assessment’
on a six monthly basis over a period of
five years would need to be put in place while there is no evident problem with
the Respondent’s
mental state. He also referred to the need for some
relationship work to take place at some point. (T77. 12, 16, 28; T78.1, 23 May
Lennings indicates that the treatment Mr Roopra has received since his last
and no further
offence-specific treatment beyond ‘
the maintenance work he will receive
from Corrections’
is recommended. The report notes that the
Respondent is under the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service and that
he has been allocated a psychologist through Community Corrections,
although he remains on a waiting list for that to happen’
remaining on the (Child Protection) Register for 15 years.
response to a question regarding courses of treatment as a condition of
re-commencing practice, Dr Lennings identified two treatment
issues being the
Respondent’s psychological state, particularly the prospect of the return
of depression, and relationship
issues. The report goes on to state that
relationship issues will be the most difficult aspect of Mr
Roopra’s life to manage for the next little while. Relationships
the context in which both sexual and intimacy needs are met. Resolution of the
difficulties in his relationship will form
the core of his treatment needs for
the immediate future’
the issue of insight into the conduct and consequences for the victims of the
offences, Dr Lennings states that ‘
there does appear to me to have been
a genuine understanding of what he put his victims through. ... However, the
report of (
the Corrective Services CORE program psychologist
) goes some
way towards clarifying for me the reality of his comments to me
Tribunal notes that at page 5 of the Treatment Report, dated 31 January 2013,
compiled by the Corrective Services NSW
psychologist with the Sex and Violent
Offender Therapeutic Programs paragraph 20 states that ‘
acknowledged the potential harm he had caused to the victims of his sexual
offending, including secondary victims. Mr Roopra
recognised that he had
apologised to one of the victims of his sexual offending, but did not believe
his apology was sincere at the
time. Early in treatment, Mr Roopra expressed
interest in participating in the Restorative Justice process to provide a more
apology and for his own “karmic” journey.’
CORE program treatment report also sets out in paragraphs 21 and 22 the
Respondent’s acknowledgement of the ‘internal
and external
events’ that were factors leading to his decision to commit the sexual
his report Dr Lennings states that he was asked to comment on whether the
Respondent’s failure to identify that the (Dental)
Board hearing in 2009
would have been interested to know if he was guilty of some or any of the
charges reflected the ‘
more pervasive qualities of the
Respondent’s character’
‘a particular confluence of
circumstances at the time’.
Dr Lennings states that it is a difficult
question to answer and offers comments to the effect that ‘
behaviour was deceptive it might be understood as externally driven as opposed
to some malign character flaw’.
He also indicates that he is not in
a position to comment on legal tactics and that he believes that the
Respondent’s conduct
does not raise his risk or suggest
a character flaw such that a risk assessment needs to be revised’
Evidence regarding the Respondent’s financial position
letter dated 9 January 2013 from the Respondent’s accountant was included
in documents produced under summons from Corrective
Services. This letter was
addressed to Centrelink and recorded that the Respondent was not able to access
any funds from the ‘Roopra
Family Trust’ and had been separated from
his wife since February 2011.
Respondent also gave evidence that at the current time his accountant had not
resolved the final accounts for over two years.
He stated that his wife had
attended the accountant’s office on the evening of the first day of this
phase of the Inquiry to
obtain documents to produce in response to the
outstanding matter of his exact financial position (T171-172). The Respondent
not account for the discrepancy between the two documents regarding the
$200,000 share trading loss. The Tribunal notes at this point
that Mrs Roopra
gave evidence that she had spoken to the accountant by telephone and that he had
located the document in his emails.
Roopra also gave evidence regarding two pages of figures setting out financial
details. She explained that one was a draft document
that had been forwarded by
the Accountant and the other was a document retrieved by the accountant from his
emails and she understood
this was the final document put before the District
Court. Further details are set out in this document in the section dealing with
Mrs Roopra’s evidence.
The documents produced under summons
folders of documents were provided to the Tribunal by the HCCC. These documents
were produced under summonses issued to: Corrective
Services NSW (two volumes
being produced), Justice Health, and the Probation and Parole Service.
these documents was a report dated 30 January 2013 written by the Psychologist
in charge of the CORE Moderate Program –
being one of the Sex and Violent
Offender Therapeutic Programs offered by Corrective Services NSW within the
prison system. This
document also formed exhibit R13.
Report (exhibit R13) records that the Respondent undertook the CORE Program
between 18 June 2012 and 6 January 2013 (being the
day he was released from
prison). It also records that this is a course for men in custody who have
sexually abused adults and/or
children. It is designed for individuals who have
low-moderate to moderate risk/needs. The introduction to the Report includes the
While in treatment, participants are assisted to develop the skills,
attitudes, values and resources identified as necessary to lead
a fulfilling and
offence free life. This is primarily achieved through cognitive behavioural
therapy with other approaches (i.e.
motivational interviewing and solution
focussed therapy) also drawn upon to ensure a comprehensive approach to
Report noted that the Respondent had pleaded guilty to four counts of Aggravated
Indecent Assault where the victim was under 16
years and five counts of
Aggravated Indecent Assault where the victim was under the authority of the
offender for offences committed
between September 2008 and February 2009. The
report also notes the details of the offences as per the undated Summary of
(referred to in
Roopra (No1)).
report indicates that during the time that the Respondent spent in prison for
the purpose of serving his sentence (rather than
on remand when he experienced
considerable adjustment difficulties), the Respondent adapted well to the
custodial environment. The
Respondent did not receive any institutional
misconducts or negative reports from his wing. The Report records (as do the
produce by Corrective Services) that the Respondent was considered to
be a good worker, that he got along with the other offenders,
and was respectful
towards staff.
was cautioned not to change any CSI procedures or make up his own documents on
17 December 2012 (see reference to this in exhibit
volume 1 – HCCC
documents and paragraph 14 of exhibit R13 – the CORE Program Treatment
Report). The Respondent was also
given ‘warnings’ on two occasions
(June and July 2012). The June warning related to the state of his cell and the
stores held. The July warning related to the Respondent sitting on the
toilet in his cell at ‘letgo’ without warning
the Prison Officer,
not apologising and not appearing to care about the offence caused.
in prison the Respondent was enrolled in a distance education course (Bachelor
of Business) and an Information Technology and
Visual Arts and Crafts
Certificate. He managed this study and achieved good marks in addition to
maintaining his prison employment.
Report records that the Respondent participated in the program in a positive
manner, integrated well into the therapeutic community,
formed healthy
relationships with other community members and provided group support. The
Report continues:
He contributed to group discussions, appeared motivated to identifying
problematic areas in his life and implemented newly learnt
skills. Mr Roopra
recognised the value and relevance of treatment processes (i.e., journaling,
check-ins), in that he independently
maintained these tasks; and demonstrated an
understanding of treatment concepts. Mr Roopra was open to feedback and provided
challenging,
but appropriate feedback to others. He used examples of his own
unhelpful behaviour and insights he had gained in treatment to support
other group members.
Report then details two aspects of the Respondent’s progress as a result
of the course –
Understanding of Offending Behaviour
Pathways to Offending
the heading
Understanding of Offending Behaviour
the Report records that
the Respondent provided an account of his sexual offences which was consistent
with the court documents and
indicated that he had specifically targeted the
‘who he perceived to be vulnerable’
and created an
interview process so he could access and assess the victims. The Respondent
further acknowledged that he had used strategies
such as isolating the victims
from others to reduce the likelihood of getting caught and giving the victims
money to gain victim
compliance. Initially the Respondent hypothesised that he
may have engaged in this conduct as an exercise in self-harm (i.e. harming
self by harming others) but as the treatment progressed he considered factors in
his life at the time of the offences more in
terms of the
Pathways to
part of the course (see below).
author of the Report observed that the Respondent was able to demonstrate
appropriate empathy and perspective-taking skills. He
was further observed to be
able to continue to support other group members
‘despite some
interpersonal differences’.
The Respondent was observed to demonstrate
appropriate empathy for his victims and acknowledged the potential harm he had
his victims (and his secondary victims). The Respondent reported that
he had apologised to one of his victims but believed that the
apology was not
sincere at the time. He expressed interest in participating in Restorative
Justice process so that he could provide
a more genuine apology and continue his
own ‘karmic’ journey.
Pathways to Offending
heading the Report records that the Respondent
demonstrated insight into the factors
‘that contributed to his decision
to commit the sexual offences’
. These factors
his fragile
his socializing
with friends who placed significant value on material possessions and wealth as
measures of worth and respect which
contributed to his inflated sense of self
and sense of entitlement
his self-worth
being challenged by his financial loss during the ‘Global Financial
his feelings of
being ‘powerless’ and ‘overwhelmed’ in his marital
relationship
his reported
lack of intimacy, increased arguments and withdrawal of sex from his wife to
‘push her away’.
Respondent attempted to alleviate his discomfort and potential for further
distress by avoiding his emotional response. He engaged
in a range of avoidant
coping strategies (dismissed others, isolated himself, intellectualised
problems) and use sex as a manner
Respondent reported that he viewed
pornography with
‘interest in “teen” focussed pornography’
frequently closer to the offending. The report continued (at paragraph
His sense of entitlement allowed him to blame others for problems; and,
triggered beliefs that his wants were most important and that
he deserved more.
Coupled with his view of sex as a means to gain a sense of control. Mr Roopra
created opportunities to offend by
identifying who he perceived to be vulnerable
and less rejecting victims and isolated victims so that he could not be
detected. He
developed employment contracts that he perceived exonerated his
culpability; and, used financial incentives and his position to overcome
resistance.
Report records that as a result of the work undertaken in the course the
Respondent identified the following factors resulted
in his committing a sexual
a perceived loss
of control in his life – over finances, relationship, health
challenges to
his relationship – lack of intimacy, not resolving conflict, poor
poor coping
– avoidance, compartmentalizing, intellectualizing problems
entitlement – belief that he was better than others or his wants were more
unhealthy views
women, sexual arousal to vulnerable
young women
opportunities to sexually offend.
the program a risk assessment process occurred. The tool used for this
assessment was the Static-99R. The author states that
although there is
currently no objective means for establishing a comparison sample for NSW
offenders there is no reason to believe
that the outcomes would be substantially
different. The Respondent scored in the low risk category indicating he falls
into the rate
of recidivism of between 3% and 7% over five years and 7% and 13%
over ten years.
Report goes on to detail ‘Dynamic’ risk factors. These are described
in the Report as enduring characteristics that
may be associated with the
likelihood of re-offending. These factors are divided into two temporal groups
of either stable or acute
characteristics. In this area the Report identifies
those factors relevant to the Respondent. The first area reported on is intimacy
deficiency. The Tribunal has refrained from setting out the details from the
report and the associated notes from the summonsed material.
The Tribunal merely
observes that the depiction of the marital situation does not accord in many
respects with that outlined in the
statements provided by the Respondent and his
wife for the purpose of these proceedings.
Report records that the Respondent identified intimacy deficits as one of his
‘salient risk factors’
. The author of the Report indicates
that the Respondent was committed to engaging in relationship counselling with
his wife and adds
the rider that the Respondent should be mindful during this
process not to seek verification of his perception of the relationship
the therapist. The author recommends that the Respondent should focus on
‘increasing communication, equality, and problems solving in the
relationship’.
Report noted that there was no indication that the Respondent was otherwise
socially isolated or that he could be selfish and
dismissive of others (this
comment being made with respect to the Respondent’s statement that one
factor he attributed to his
offending conduct was his sense of entitlement).
Respondent was observed to have formed meaningful relationships with the other
participants in the CORE moderate program and this
is reported as being a
‘positive treatment gain’
respect to sexual self-regulation the Report states that characteristics related
to sexual deviance have been found to be the
strongest predictors of sexual
recidivism.
Respondent’s attitude about sex being a means
to gain power and
is noted in the Report (paragraph 43). The Report records
that the Respondent discussed using sex as a coping strategy. The author
that the Respondent’s increased use of ‘teen’ related
pornography sites possibly acted to normalise his sexual
interest in the similar
aged females that he offended against. At the time of the course the Respondent
reported low libido and displayed
no evidence of sexual pre-occupation. He was
also realistic about managing his sexual wants in the future, hoping that these
be met through an intimate relationship with his wife. If he experienced
difficulties in this regard he was encouraged to advise
his Parole Officer or
his COS Psychologist and seek a referral to the Forensic Psychology Services
area covered by the Report was the Respondent’s ability to generally
self-regulate (e.g. so as to avoid impulsive acts,
to follow through with stated
intentions and to avoid high risk situations). The Report records that while the
Respondent did not
have a significant history of poor self-regulation he did
discuss his feelings of being overwhelmed by negative life events. The
noted that when the Respondent spoke of these events he engaged in avoidant
coping style
‘in which he intellectualised or compartmentalised the
problem in an attempt to avoid uncomfortable emotions he experienced’
and overall was likely to avoid emotion rather than display uncontrolled
outburst of emotions (paragraph 47).
the Respondent was observed to mainly adopt a pragmatic approach to
problem-solving he had some difficulty with cognitive problem-solving
related to emotional issues (such as problem solving within his
the program the Respondent was observed to increase his emotional
awareness/recognition of others and developed strategies
to assist him to
effectively manage his emotions. The author was of the view that the Respondent
would benefit from continuing to
implement these strategies. The Report also
notes that the Respondent does not have a history of impulsive
the heading ‘Significant Social Influences’ the author notes that
the nature of the offender’s social network
is one of the well-established
predictors of criminal behaviour. In the Respondent’s situation this was
not considered to be
an area of risk as he generally had a supportive and
pro-social family network. The Report in particular referred to the involvement
of his brother and sisters in the Support Network Meeting when the Respondent
had the opportunity to inform them of the gains he
had made through the
treatment program and they had the opportunity to identify some of the
problematic conduct he had engaged in
at the time of his offending. The author
considered that his brother and sisters would be able to assist the Respondent
to identify
when he was engaging in problematic behaviour in the
Report records the Respondent informing the author of discord between his wife
and some of his family members. The Report records
that the Respondent’s
wife visited him in prison on separate allocated days to his family members.
Further upsets between them
were noted (see paragraph 51). As a result the
Respondent may have felt ‘
caught in the middle’
author cautioned that the relevant people needed to be
‘encouraged to
work collaboratively in assisting Mr Roopra to manage his risk of reoffending
and work towards his goal of establishing
a healthy and fulfilling
from his family support the Report noted that the Respondent’s previous
friendships had
‘lacked emotional closeness and promoted a
materialistic, power-based lifestyle’
. These relationships had not
been maintained whilst in custody.
Report noted that the Respondent had cooperated with supervision (for example
bail conditions, directions whilst in gaol) and
therefore this was not
considered to be a risk area.
following indicators that the Respondent may be engaging in /having difficulty
managing the various risk factors are identified
in the report.
Difficulties
within relationships may be marked by dismissive behaviors, he is likely to
focus on the wrongdoing of others rather
than acknowledging his contribution, he
may use the withdrawal of sex from his wife or partner as a way of exerting
control in the
relationship.
Respondent’s sense of entitlement
‘is triggered’
present as selfish and inconsiderate of others. This may result in him putting
‘others down’
, increase his use of sarcasm or being
passive-aggressive. The Respondent may also act without little thought rather
than problem
solving first. There was also the risk that the Respondent may
become overly focused on material possessions (being indicative of
his sense of
entitlement).
Deterioration in
motivation which could be evidence by his not attending the gym, getting out of
his routine or postponing plans or
responsibilities. Internally he may have
feelings of being overwhelmed, depressed or perceive himself to be out of
His living space
may become cluttered with unnecessary belongings, his personal hygiene and
appearance may deteriorate, and his medical
symptoms may exacerbate.
The Respondent
may isolate himself, become too serious or make excuses not to attend social
The Respondent
may also generalize or intellectualise problems to avoid how he is feeling about
Difficulties
with sexual self-regulation may be marked by increased use of pornography or
making sexualised comments regarding women.
Report details the self-management plans that the Respondent formulated for
himself while undertaking this program. These plans
are designed to lead to a
healthy offence-free life with the addition of a range of interventions to
assist him to cope with risk
factors should they arise. The author opined that
the Respondent would benefit from regular review of his self-managed plans to
they are realistic and consistent with his life in the community.
Report also noted that the Respondent acknowledged that his relationship with
his wife could be a risk factor and work was required
prior to them living
together in the future.
Report also noted that the Respondent had ongoing issues with his registration
as a dentist. The Respondent had indicated that
until he was able to work again
as a dentist that he was interested in exploring employment in the arts,
including undertaking an
Arts degree or course.
way of a conclusion the Report considered all of the risk factors and stated
that there was nothing to indicate departure from
the low risk rating given by
the STATIC-99R. This could be increased if he had difficulty managing certain
risk factors (in particular
intimacy deficits). Further the Report noted that
the Respondent participated positively in the program and had gained insight
his offending behaviour and his more general problematic attitudes and
behaviours.
therapeutic recommendations made by the author was for the Respondent to be
referred to the COS Psychologist who will provide
him with an opportunity to
consolidate the gains made during the program and will provide him support in
adjusting back into the
community. If the Respondent experiences problems with
risks (specifically sexual self-regulation) a referral to the FPS should be
by his Parole Officer or Community Offender Services Psychologist. It was
further recommended that the Respondent address the
outstanding problems in his
marriage by way of an organisation such as Relationships Australia or a private
practitioner with the
relevant expertise.
final recommendation made in the report is that the Respondent has no
unsupervised contact with any persons under the age of 18
years (with specific
exceptions extended to family members).
the Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal on 23 May 2013 he stated that
he had undertaken the CORE Program between June
and December 2012; He attended
the program two days a week for two and a half hours a day. He gave evidence
that he derived many
benefits from the course, although he considered insight
was the main benefit he derived (T10).
Respondent reported that he was completely remorseful and regretful about the
conduct for which he was convicted. The Respondent
gave the following evidence
at T11.6-37:
Q. What is your present attitude to the victims of your crimes?
A. Very sorry about what I did and very hurt by I feel very sorry for
Q. How have you adapted to your release from custody?
A. I've done the best I could. I've received a lot of very good support
from family and friends and colleagues and I think it really
is one day at a
time and slowly making very good progress.
Q. How would you describe your present emotional and mental
A. I'm stable now and I'm very stable, yes.
Q. To what extent are you experiencing at the moment any episodes of
depression or anger?
Q. What is the present state of your relationship with your wife?
A. We're still communicating and continuing to work on things and we
continue to do so and I describe them as good relations.
Q. Do you still regard yourself as married or do you regard yourself as
separated from your wife?
A. I regard myself married with my wife, however we do live
separately.
Q. Why is it that you choose to live separately?
A. We did that because of parole reasons. I can't live when I was in
the Core Program I asked
, the psych, if I should go back to
Penrith and she said, "No, it's not a good idea for you to go back to Penrith."
So the main reason
was it was easier for me to get released for parole if I
didn't live in Penrith.
Q. Why did you understand it was not desirable for you to live in
A. Because that's where the offences took place.
the time of the phase two Inquiry the Respondent was working full time driving a
truck for a charity organisation.
Respondent gave the following evidence at T12.22-36:
Q. What is your personal view about the likelihood that you will
A. I will never reoffend again.
Q. What are the reasons for your confidence in that view?
A. I'm a different person to what I was then.
Q. In what respects would you describe those differences?
A. I think I've had time to reflect upon my actions, I've had time to
analyse and work through many issues and the Core Program has
given me a lot of
tools for which to cope with things, to help me manage self
management plans and support. So I look at it as
just a bad time in my life and
I have moved on.
Q. Why do you wish to continue to practice in dentistry?
A. I enjoy dentistry. I always found it a rewarding career and I still
think I have a contribution to make.
cross-examination the Respondent was asked whether he had read the
Tribunal’s judgment carefully. The Respondent replied
and then gave the following evidence
(T13.1-30):
Q. You've read it very carefully?
A. I wouldn't say carefully. I would say I've read it.
Q. This is about you, this judgment, isn't it?
Q. You want to know what the Tribunal has found in relation to your
conduct, don't you?
A. Yes, but again, carefully: how would define carefully?
Q. The question I asked was have you read it carefully. What's your
A. I've read it.
Q. It is correct to say that you have put a lot of effort into preparing
for these proceedings; is that right?
A. As much as I could. I've done what I could.
Q. It is a very important matter for you that you keep your registration
as a dentist; is that correct?
A. It is an important matter.
Q. Is there anything more important for you at the moment than keeping
your registration as a dentist?
A. I think health is very important as well. I think there are matters
that are health, spirituality
TRIBUNAL: I can't hear the witness, I'm sorry.
WITNESS: Sorry. I think health, spirituality, one's sense of being,
equipoise, these sort of things are also very important.
to being taken to any specific entries in the Case Notes kept by the Parole
Service the Respondent was asked the following questions
Q. You understand that you need to be honest with your parole officers,
A. I am honest and things do change so you know what I may say from one
week I may have to clarify that the following week so there
are circumstances in
which I may say one thing one week and then the following week because
circumstances change or things happen
in life and things change so it's not
it's a fluid, it's a fluid situation. I think the only thing that's constant
that the time keeps going and that we meet on a regular
Q. When you give information to your parole officers you do so honestly,
is that correct?
A. At that time, yes, that is relevant to that time.
Q. Because you know it's important to be honest with your parole officer
officers, don't you?
A. Yes. Yes, at that time as I said things do change so I clarify it. I
may have said something right at the beginning of the parole
period which has
subsequently changed due to circumstances.
Q. What are you thinking of there?
A. I'm not thinking of anything in particular but I am thinking that you
may say to me, well you've said something and things have
changed so I think it
you know, life's life goes on and life changes so it's not a matter for me to
be as definitive in saying
a yes or no answer to me.
Respondent agreed under cross-examination that he had carefully prepared his
statement which he signed on 22 April 2013. He further
agreed that he had been
honest in his statement, that he appreciated it was important that he was honest
in the statement and did
not conceal anything from the Tribunal. While preparing
his statement he did not talk to his wife about the contents of the statement
he had been instructed not to do so. He had also not spoken to her about his
evidence. The Respondent then gave the following
(T17.20-40):
Q. Did you tell your wife about what you were putting in your
A. We discussed life in general. I did not say I'm going to put this
into my statement but we discussed life in general and we're
communicating.
Q. Did you tell your wife about the kind of details that you would be
putting in your statement?
A. No, but we discussed life in general as I said.
Q. Your understanding of discussing life in general is that those details
A. Possibly.
Q. Definitely, wasn't it?
A. I would say not definitely.
Q. When you discussed details of
A. I said possibly.
Q. life in general you understood that those details would find their
way into your wife's statement, is that correct?
A. Possibly.
Respondent gave evidence that he had a copy of the report of Dr Lennings dated
23 March 2013 although he could not recall exactly
when he received this
document or whether he showed this document to his wife or whether she asked to
see a copy of the report.
Respondent was also asked during cross-examination about the purchase of a house
by his wife. The Respondent stated he thought
that she had exchanged on the
property about two weeks ago and would settle at the end of May. He stated that
his wife had been
talking about purchasing a home for about the last six months
as one of the ‘options on the table’. The Respondent stated
the time they were having the discussions he was not aware that she was buying
it in her own name with money out of their
combined savings. The following
evidence was given by the Respondent regarding this issue
(T20.40-22.24):
Q. So what Dharini has done is take money out of your combined savings;
is that right?
A. I would say that she has made a decision and that decision has been
based on factors such as our children and what she believes
is the best outcome
given the circumstances, sir.
Q. The question I asked you was Dharini has taken money out of your
combined savings; is that correct?
A. Well if you're talking about a transfer to purchase an asset; is that
what you are saying?
Q. You know full well what the question is. The question is Dharini has
taken money out of your combined savings?
A. I wouldn't say "taken," sir. I think taken is a strong word.
Q. You have combined savings with Dharini?
A. I would not say taken. I'd say I have combined savings with her but
when you say the word "taken" taken to me is you know,
you're saying that she
took the money. I don't think that's what occurred, sir.
Q. As at the start of January this year how much money was in your
combined savings?
A. I don't know.
Q. How much did Dharini buy the house for?
A. I think it was around 300,000.
Q. Where did Dharini get the money to buy the house?
A. From the bank account.
Q. Whose bank account?
A. From a combined bank account.
Q. How much was taken out of that bank account?
A. Again, I'm not sure, sir.
Q. Did she also take out a mortgage for this house?
A. I think the it's a line of credit one. It's one of those ones where
you take a mortgage with the line of credit. However,
you'd have to ask her
because I'm not sure of the details.
Q. Has she not talked to you about the details of her buying this
A. We have talked about it but not the detail of this is the loan and
this is the type of loan, no.
Q. Those are very important details, aren't they?
A. To some people, yes.
Q. Well to you that's an important detail, isn't it?
A. No, it's not.
Q. You wife purchasing a house for $300,000, that's an important step,
A. It is but the details of it are not. You asked me about do I know I
would not know what percentage the loan is at. I would
not know of the details
of which bank account it is. I do not know the very details of it, but the
general nature of the transaction
is sufficient for me and I trust her to do the
right thing. So if you're asking me about nitty gritty details, no, I don't
those all that important. I think the general nature of her transaction is
one which is of benefit to the family and that is a good
Q. The amount of money to buy a property is an essential detail; isn't
A. To some people. Not to me.
Q. You're saying it's not essential for you to know how much gets taken
for Dharini to buy this property?
A. No, I don't think it is for me.
Q. How much money is in your combined bank account today?
A. I don't know. I don't know, to be honest with you. Again, I said to
you I think that one of the things that when I was incarcerated
I looked at
money, money is one of those things that I look at very differently and you're
asking me questions either almost my philosophy
on money has changed. I take a
much more spiritual path in life and that's why I enjoy working what I do with
the Salvation Army
as well, which I we take donations from people. It's a
spiritual type of work. Mr Fernandez, when you're saying to me would I
every cent and dollar and sit there and be worrying about whether it was 304,000
and $304,500.01 I'm afraid I have to say to
you my philosophy on money has
changed. I'm taking much I take a much more, you know, spiritual on things.
So you're asking me
a question I have to say no.
Respondent also provided a non-responsive answer to the cross-examination
question regarding whether the amount of money that
the Respondent has access to
determines how he lives (see T23).
T25 the Respondent stated that
‘parole is not an easy thing to
, however, the records of the Case Notes from the Parole Service
record that the Respondent was informed on 13 December 2011 that
parole would be
‘automatic’ (see page 24 of 54 of the Case Note Report – HCCC
exhibit volume 1).
was difficult cross-examination of the Respondent regarding the reason he was
residing in a particular place. There is no need
for the Tribunal to reproduce
this exchange and identify the Respondent’s current residence but notes
the non-responsive nature
of the Respondent’s evidence (see around T
25-27). Later in his cross-examination the Respondent stated that it had been
wife’s decision to purchase a house in her own name in a suburb he was
unlikely to be allowed to reside in whilst on parole
Respondent was then asked the following questions following on from paragraph 71
of his statement (T27.37-28.27):
Q. When did you get the feeling that the offences had a debilitating
affect on the victims and their families, when did that happen?
A. I think doing The Core Program was very instructive to me because when
a psychologist
went through victim empathy, that was one of the
modules that we did, I got a strong feeling that a stronger feeling I should
then previously, and that again I'd like to say that it's a process, not a
date at which I can set and give you sir. It is a continual
process but a large
part of that statement I would have to attribute to doing The Core Program. The
Core Program was an intensive
program and it involved ..... involved me having
a hard look at myself, a hard look at what had I done, and its affect on the
and their families. And hence that statement, I would say, worked
would be attributed to that.
Q. Did you realise before starting The Core Program that your offences
had a debilitating effect on the victims and their families?
Q. When did that happen?
A. Again I cannot tell you complete a significant date. I would say
that I had a greater insight and an awareness after I had
done The Core
Q. What about on the date you pleaded guilty in the District Court to
these offences, was that date where you felt that these offences
debilitating effect on the victims and their families?
A. Yes. Yes it would be.
Q. Was there any time earlier than that that you can remember feeling
that these offences have a debilitating affect on the victims?
A. I think if I go further back in time the one of the things that if
I look at, say, the period when March 2009, when I first
appeared at the
Tribunal hearings I was in a confused state of mind. And I don't think that I
had a true sense of victim empathy.
Towards time that I pleaded guilty I
certainly had a clearer view in that progressed with time.
Q. You're saying as at the 29 March 2009 you didn't have a true sense of
victim empathy, is that right?
A. I would I would agree with that. I think The Core Program helped me
to a great extent there.
T 28-29 the Respondent agreed that he did not have empathy for his victims as at
March 2009 despite the fact that he had spent
some time in gaol after being
charged with various offences relating to these three victims and despite having
told his wife that
he was sorry. The Respondent stated that at that time he was
sorry for what he was putting his wife and family through and sorry
for himself.
Respondent clarified that his statement in paragraph 70 regarding seeking a
‘redemptive path’
meant that he had committed a sin, he
carried guilt and remorse for his victims, and he was seeking redemption and
Respondent ultimately accepted in cross-examination that he had not followed
through with the referral to Welfare to engage with
the Restorative Justice
Unit. He also accepted that he had not been told by his Parole Officer that he
was not allowed to contact
the Restorative Justice Unit and had only spoken to
two people about this matter. However, later in answer to questions from the
Tribunal the Respondent indicated that he had in fact contacted Welfare in March
of 2012 (T153).
Respondent was taken to the comments made by the Tribunal in
Roopra (No 1)
at paragraph 238 and 337 and then asked the following questions regarding
the matter of his desire to apologise to the victims, his
remorse and his
contrition as follows (T34.6-38 & 35.36-37.9):
Q. Mr Roopra, it is correct to say that you want this Tribunal to find
that you are doing everything you can to say sorry to the
victims, is that
A. Yes, I think I have done my utmost.
Q. The question was you want this Tribunal to come to a finding that
you've done everything you can to apologise to the victims?
A. Well, I cannot, I cannot, I can't say what the Tribunal will say or
even what my wishes are. I can only say what I have done
and put that to the
Tribunal and I believe I have done my outmost.
Q. You want this Tribunal to find that you are sorry for committing these
offences don't you?
A. I am sorry. What the Tribunal makes of that apology is what they,
what they make
Q. You want this
A. but I am sorry.
Q. You want this Tribunal to find that you are sorry for committing the
offences don't you?
A. Again, I am sorry. I'm very sorry, there is no, there is no day that
I do not find myself thinking and finding myself remorseful
Q. Paragraphs
A. But as to what, you know, the Tribunal does with that, that's not my
Q. You've read the judgment of the Tribunal haven't you, you've said that
A. Yes, yes.
Q. You know at paragraph 238 the Tribunal extracted some evidence that
you gave in relation to apologising to the victims, do you
recall that?
A. Where's the paragraph, I'm not sure where that is?
Q. Could you turn to paragraph 238 of the judgment? Can you see that
what's extracted there is a portion of the judgments relating
to answers you
gave about apologising to the victims, can you see that?
Q. Can you turn to paragraph 337 of the judgment?
Q. If you look at the first sentence and read that just to yourself
Q. Can you see that the Tribunal has made an observation about the level
of your genuine insight, can you see that?
A. Sure, yeah.
Q. If you turn to your statement now to paragraph 69 can you see that you
have in fact referred to those two paragraphs of the judgment?
Q. It is correct to say that you want to demonstrate to this Tribunal how
sorry you are to the victims, is that correct?
A. I want to demonstrate not only to this Tribunal, to the victims
themselves.
Q. Let's just deal with this Tribunal. It is correct to say that you
want to demonstrate to this Tribunal how sorry you are to the
Q. And demonstrating how sorry you are to the victims, to this Tribunal,
will help you in retaining your licence to practice as a
dentist, is that
A. I'm not sure, I don't know if the Dental Tribunal would look at that,
how they would look at it. I can only demonstrate my own
feelings and my own
Q. But that's how you look at it isn't it, by demonstrating how sorry you
are that it's going to help you
A. I don't necessarily, I don't necessarily think so.
Q. Excuse me, can you just listen to the question. That's your attitude;
that's what you think, it's by demonstrating how sorry
you are will help you to
retain your licence to practise as a dentist. That's your view, isn't
A. Can you repeat that again, because I think we're talking my sense of
being sorry is a true sense of being sorry.
Q. By saying
A. By saying sorry, I'm saying sorry not only to the victims but to the
entirety of the universe. That's my sense of being sorry.
And you're saying
that I want to somehow manipulate the Tribunal into a decision. I don't think
so. I don't agree with that.
Q. Part of your wanting to demonstrate sorrow for these offences is to
A. That's an interpretation; I don't agree totally with that.
Q. That's your view, though, isn't it?
A. No, it's not my view.
Q. You don't agree totally with it?
A. No, I don't.
Q. Do you agree with any of it?
A. As a matter of fact I wouldn't be able to put a percentage on it,
but I'd say that my sense of being sorrow from what I understand
in the Court
program and what I've learnt is to demonstrate being remorseful and to be sorry
to the victims in a universal sense,
not for a utilitarian value to it. I don't
see it as that. I don't see it as a means to an end. I see it as a pure and
I don't see it purely, as you put it in front of this Tribunal.
I mean, when I
first came here, I apologised to Prof Wing and Prof Lester who are my
colleagues, my dental colleagues, and that
is part of that journey as
Respondent was asked about an entry made in his Case Notes on 4 January 2012. It
is difficult to summarise the manner in which
the Respondent addressed the
cross-examination questions without reproducing his evidence. The Respondent
gave the following evidence
(T38.47-42.1):
Q. Can you see at the top of that page there's a note of 4 January 2012;
can you see that?
A. 4 January 2012.
Q. Can you see that?
Q. That's about two weeks after you gave evidence at this Tribunal; do
you recall that?
Q. That is a report written by a person by the name of
can you see that?
Q. You knew someone while you were in custody at the parole unit called
Q. I want you to read to yourself, just quietly, what's contained in that
note of 4 January 2012.
A. Yes. Yes.
Q. You did speak to
on 4 January 2012, didn't
Q. You had interviews with her at that time?
Q. That was at a section of the gaol called the electronic section; is
that right?
A. I'm not sure what it's called. Yes, yes, that's right.
Q. It was about a referral, you sought a referral from her?
A. That's right, yeah.
Q. You told
that you'd been going through the dental
Q. You told her that you were a dentist.
Q. You told her that due to your offences, you were at risk of losing
your licence.
Q. You told
that you needed to show what actions you
were taking to make amends to the victims; correct?
A. Yes, correct.
Q. You told
that you needed to show what actions you
were taking to address your behaviour; is that right?
A. As of that date.
Q. So the answer to the question is yes; is that right?
A. Yes, as of that date.
Q. You told
A. This is prior to the Core Program as well.
Q. I'm talking about 4 January 2012. You understand that, don't
A. That's right.
Q. You told
on that date that you wanted to know what
was the best way to contact the victims to say sorry; is that right?
asked you about why it was you wanted to contact the
victims to say sorry; is that right? Is that right?
Q. She spoke to you about whether you had valid reasons to contact the
victims, didn't she?
Q. She spoke to you about whether your efforts were genuine in contacting
the victims, didn't she?
Q. She spoke to you about whether your efforts about remorse were
genuine, didn't she?
Q. You told
that contacting the victims was as much
A. Yes. At that time.
Q. So two weeks after you gave evidence in this Tribunal, you were
A. If I was allowed to.
Q. No, you said you wanted to contact them?
A. If I was allowed to; that's why I contacted
Q. You asked
what was the best way to contact the
victims; correct?
A. I asked her what was the formal way to do so, yes.
Q. You told
that there might have been spiritual healing
in you contacting the victims; correct?
Q. You told
that there might have been karmic response
in this, in you contacting the victims?
A. Yeah, karmic as in karma, K A R, by the way.
Q. You also told
that doing so was just as much about
you wanting to retain your licence as a dentist.
A. At that stage; I had just been
Q. Correct?
A. I had just been to the Tribunal hearing, and I thought that was a
valid reason as well. I do feel, though
Q. So the answer to the question is you told
doing so, it was just about it was just as much about you wanting to retain
your licence as a dentist; correct?
A. At that stage, and
Q. So the answer to the question is yes; is that right?
A. The answer to the question I wouldn't give as a blanket yet, but I
would say that, again, at that stage, that was my answer to
Q. The answer to the question I asked you is yes, isn't it?
A. Well, I would say no to your question because you're asking again
polarised questions to what are fundamentally multi factorial
Q. It is a fact that you told
A. Well, it's a
Q. It is a fact that you told
your efforts in contacting
the victims was just as much about you wanting to retain your licence as a
A. Among other
Q. That is a fact, isn't it?
A. Among other factors, sir.
Q. That is a fact, isn't it?
A. Among other factors.
Q. That is a fact, isn't it?
A. It is a fact.
Q. You did tell that to
didn't you?
A. I did so, yes, among other factors.
Respondent stated that he had included significant details regarding his current
attitude towards the offences as he would like
the Tribunal to take this into
account but this was not the only reason he had done so as he also saw saying
sorry as part of his
Respondent was taken to the part of his statement dealing with his conduct
before the Dental Board in 2009. The statement notes
the contents of paragraph
Roopra (No 1)
and the Respondent gave the following evidence
(T44.24-29):
I accept that I knew in my mind at the time that I had been guilty of
certain criminal offences charged, however at the time I was
assessing my guilt
or innocence by reference to the full suite of charges that had been pressed
against me. There were charges laid
against me that I knew I was not guilty of,
allegations of fact made which I disputed and I maintained my innocence of the
of charges up to the time of committal in November 2011, yes, that's
the Respondent added that looking back he was maintaining his innocence on the
basis of the legal advice he had received but
accepted that he was the person
ultimately responsible for this position. The Respondent’s evidence
continued (T45.13-46.22):
Q. Have a look at paragraph 63 of your statement?
Q. You say there that you, "Understand with hindsight that ..(fault in
record).. 12.31.35 in relation to some of the criminal charges,
was relevant to
the Board's determination", do you see that?
Q. You accept that a general statement of innocence was likely to cause
the Board to think that you were innocent of all of the charges,
A. Yes, I yes, totally agree with that. Yes.
Q. You, at the end of that paragraph say that, "Your failure to
appreciate your conduct possibly misleading the Board reflected poor
A. Judgment.
Q. At the time?
A. Correct.
Q. Your personal judgment at the time was that you were going to do
anything you could to keep practising as a dentist?
A. My poor personal judgment, sir, at the time was just a reflection of
my mental state.
Q. And your poor personal judgment was you were going to do anything you
Q. To keep practising as a dentist?
A. That I think is an inference. I think my poor personal judgment at
the time was simply that, poor personal judgment.
Q. Are you saying that you weren't in a proper condition to
A. No, I wasn't in a proper condition.
Q. You weren't in a proper condition?
A. I can't recall. I can recall being confused and in a desperate state
of mind. I can recall that but I cannot recall deliberately
coming to the Board
to Dr John Wilkinson
(as stated)
and members of the Board that I
fronted to, and deliberately misleading, lying, manipulating or trying to
finesse them in any such
way. That is not that was never my intention,
Q. Why did you put a document before the Dental Board that said you were
innocent of the charges?
A. Again I think there were a number of factors there. One of them was I
was not in a good state of mind. I wasn't in a state of
mind. I relied again I
go back to the statement, that I relied heavily on the advice I received from Mr
Thorpe and others who I
Respondent stated that by this time in 2009 he had reduced the number of
patients he was treating each day and was limiting his
practice to procedures
with which he felt more comfortable. He was undertaking a lot of government
subsidised work which did not
involve complex crown bridge or implant work on
the basis that he realised he was
further cross-examination regarding his conduct before the Dental Board the
Respondent gave the following evidence (T47.3-49.10):
Q. You knew when you went before the Dental Board on 29 March 2009 that
if you admitted to them that you had indecently assaulted
three young women,
that they would not let you practice as a dentist? You knew that, didn't
A. Again, I did not specifically recall thinking that way. I
specifically recall feeling confused and asking people for advice.
Did I go in
and mislead people, Mr Fernandez? I did not. I looked John Wilkinson
in the eye and I said, "Look, this is the situation", and I laid it
out on the table as far as I could. And I'm doing that today
Q. But you didn't tell him that you'd indecently assaulted three young
women, did you?
A. I acted on the advice that the solicitors gave me and at that time I
cannot recall thinking exactly what you just said.
Q. You must have known if you told the Dental Board on 29 March 2009 that
if you admitted to indecently assaulted three young women
they would not let you
practice as a dentist. You must have known that?
A. I cannot recall thinking that way because there were a number of
factors again in play that that were there and I cannot recall
thinking that.
Q. Why did you think you were there at the Dental Board?
A. Well, I think I think the Dental Board, I was there to try and
explain situations. I was there to explain and I'm here today
again doing the
same thing. I'm here to to again seek some sort of clarification and move on
with my life and be able to practice
again. So I think that was why I was I
was at the Dental Board there.
Q. By the time you went to the Dental Board you had already been arrested
for a number of charges?
Q. You'd spent time in gaol?
Q. For those charges?
A. Correct.
Q. You'd been released on bail for those charges, correct?
Q. You understood that the Dental Board was interested in protecting the
life or physical or mental health of any person, you understood
Q. You understood that the Dental Board was interested in the safety of
the community, didn't you?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. You understood that, didn't you?
A. I did, sir.
Q. So you understood that if you were to admit to indecently assaulting
three young women the Dental Board would not allow you to
A. I would say that that would be a consideration in hindsight but at
that particular time I cannot say I recalled that exact path
of thinking. I
don't think I thought that exact time of thinking. Although it seems very
obvious to think that now, I sought advice
and acted upon that advice. But
that's what I did, so and I apologise now. It seems bleeding obviously
bleedingly obvious that
perhaps I should have taken a different course.
Q. Who was responsible for what was said and
A. I was ultimately
Q. at the Dental Board? Who was responsible?
A. I was it is my responsibility. I acted on advice but it's
ultimately my responsibility and I am here again to apologise to
Board for that. I could have acted differently and I should have acted
differently and looking back I don't think I was
in a mental state where I could
make a clear decision. I don't think I was in that sort of state to make a
clear and independent
decision, sir and I say that quite frankly. I'm here
again and I'm in a much clearer position now, looking back in hindsight, I
see that. That's bleedingly obvious.
Q. While you were not in a state where you could make better mental
decisions, you were still treating patients. Is that your evidence?
Q. Again, I limited my practice because I realised something was wrong
and I did simple procedures. Cleanings and simple fillings.
I did not take on
the complex part of dentistry.
Q. A simple filling involves using a drill, doesn't it?
Q. Drilling someone's teeth, is that right?
A. Yes sir.
Q. Potentially giving someone an anaesthetic? Is that right?
A. Yes sir.
Q. That's serious, isn't it?
A. It is serious. It's not as serious as other avenues of dentistry
which are implants which I have done in the past which are much
more serious.
So on a level on a spectrum, complex dentistry and simple dentistry, there's a
spectrum. Again, to polarise it
into one or the other, is just a simple matter.
It's again, a multi factorial sort of process.
Q. You need to be careful when you're using a drill in someone's mouth,
A. Yes. Absolutely.
Q. You need to be careful when you're giving someone anaesthetic, don't
A. Absolutely. There is no doubt to that.
Respondent agreed under cross-examination that some of the risk factors
identified by both Dr Lennings and the CORE program were
issues around his
relationship with his wife (need for intimacy etc). The Respondent agreed that
he relied heavily on the support
of his wife, that there had been problems in
the relationship for many years and that the offences were committed at a time
the relationship
was not good. The Respondent stated that there were continuing
problems in the marriage but they were still together, there were
‘separation papers’ and had not filed ‘divorce papers’
(T50). The Respondent also agreed that the Tribunal
was entitled to know details
indicates that some of
the evidence regarding the Respondent’s marriage,
although relevant is not recounted in this document for privacy reasons.
respect to paragraph 29 of his statement the Respondent clarified that when he
said that he and his wife spoke ‘daily’
that this may mean that they
communicate by text message on some days.
evidence was given by the Respondent regarding the nature of his relationship
with his wife (see around T60-62). The Respondent
agreed under cross-examination
that he informed his Parole Officer on 20 March 2013 that his marriage had
ended. The Respondent also
accepted under cross-examination that on the next day
when he saw Dr Lennings for the purpose of the provision to the Tribunal of
up-dated report that he did not tell Dr Lennings that the marriage had ended.
The Respondent gave the following evidence at T63.31-64.42:
Q. You didn't tell Dr Lennings on 21 March this year that your marriage
had come to an end, correct?
Q. Your marriage had come to an end by 20 March, is that the
A. Well, I had said that, but you know it chances so from one day
to the next it changed, so
Q. The reason that you told Mr Battaglia on 20 March that it had now
ended was because your opinion was the marriage was over, correct?
A. On that day, and it changed the next day, so I have no problem with
that because that is, unfortunately, the nature of our relationship
change within a day, and I have no issue with that, but it has been a difficult
and rocky road, and we are still together
so between one day to the next that
road, and we are still together so between one day to the next that
Q. Between 5 March and 20 March something had happened which led you to
believe that your relationship was over, correct?
A. Well, we just weren't really getting as well as we could have and
things have been up and down like there's no doubt to that
I don't disagree
Q. But more than that it got to the stage where you believed the marriage
A. I believed it but it didn't happen.
Q. You told Mr Battaglia
A. There's no separation form or anything like that so I may have said
that but the actualization of it coming to paperwork is
totally different, so
what I say to my parole officer sometimes is letting off steam. So and that
is a good thing for me because
I am discussing things with him. So he may have
made this made this comment and wrote this in the file, but you will see in
following week that I will have said something else.
Q. I object. I object. That's not responsive to the answer?
A. Well, again I will answer the question as best I can, sir. And it
requires some clarification at times.
Q. Your evidence earlier today was that Marco asked you questions and you
answered his questions as honesty as you could do you
recall giving that
A. Absolutely, absolutely, without a doubt.
Q. You were honest when you told Mr Battaglia on 20 March this year that
your marriage was over, correct?
A. I said that but I did not say it as it's finished; it's ended, and
we're going to go and get a divorce. That's different again,
so you know
Q. What you said was, it had ended with wife, that's what you said,
A. I said that but I did not mean it to be a divorce. It didn't lead to
the consequence of marital divorce papers, so
Q. You said that you were accepting of the fact that your marriage had
ended, correct?
A. Yes, well it well there's always that possibility that it could
gotten further, but on that day I may have been letting off
steam so that's
all it was.
Q. It wasn't a "possibility" as at the
A. It may it was me letting off steam.
Q. I object. I object. Mr Roopra
being given directions regarding waiting until the question had been asked
before providing an answer and answering the question
that had been asked the
cross-examination of the Respondent continued. He gave evidence that the
marriage was over as of that one
day (being 20 March 2013 - T65.21), that this
one off comment on that particular date’
(T66.7), and
that the marriage was not over the following day when he was reviewed by Dr
Lennings (T65.41-66.1)
Respondent was taken to other entries in the Case Notes and to his statement and
then asked the following question (T69.28 –
Q. It is correct to say that nowhere in your statement have you indicated
to this Tribunal that at one point in time your marriage
was over; that's
correct, isn't it?
A. I've never believed it to be over.
Q. You told
[Parole Officer]
it was over, didn't you?
A. On one particular occasion.
Q. Are you saying on 20 March that was the one and only day that you
believed your marriage was over?
A. I have had other moments, but on that one particular day I said that
Q. Are you saying
A. I don't think it as you know, moments occur and I may have said that
in that moment and let off some steam. I don't see it
as being the way it is
because it's certainly not the say it is. She is here today and we're
continuing.
Q. Is your evidence that during your interview with Mr Battaglia on 20
March that's the only time you thought your relationship was
A. There may have been other times. I may have said something to that
effect and he may have written it down as such. That is fair
enough and I don't
think that is going against the evidence that I've given here. I think it it
has been a rocky road and at times
I have disclosed information to the parole
Q. You've had marriage problems for years; correct?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. As at 20 March you believed your marriage was over; correct?
A. On that particular day I said something to that effect, yes, and I've
certainly thought that on other occasions.
Q. What happened between 5 March and 20 March to make you believe your
marriage was over?
A. I can't recall, to be honest with you.
Respondent then gave the following evidence (T70.44-71.10
&71.29-72.22):
Q. You deliberately chose not to put in your statement that you believed
on 20 March that your marriage was over; correct?
A. Yes, because there have been other times that I believed it to be over
and I didn't put those in either. This is of a general
sentiment. The general
sentiment is that we are still together. There have been moments and I've said
to friends and various family
members "I think it's over" and that was one of
those moments that I said that to the parole officer.
Q. You chose not to put that in your statement to this Tribunal, didn't
A. I didn't think because again the general feelings are that it's not
Q. Your earlier evidence was that you've been together for the whole of
the time since you were released from gaol; do you recall
giving that
A. Yes, and I believe that to be correct.
Q. It cannot be correct that you've been together for the whole of the
time since you've been released from gaol if on 20 March you
believed your
marriage was over; that is correct, isn't it?
Q. You decided what would be in your statement to this Tribunal and what
would not be in your statement?
Q. You made a deliberate decision that you would not put anything in your
statement about your belief that your marriage was over;
A. Because I don't think it's over.
Q. You made a deliberate decision not to put anything in your statement
Q. The reason you didn't put anything in your statement about your belief
of your marriage being over is because you understand your
marriage is very
important in terms of these Tribunal proceedings; correct?
Q. You gave evidence earlier, just before lunch, when I asked you about
your marriage as follows:
"The Tribunal needs to know all about my marriage, given the nature of my
offending it is very important."
Do you recall giving that answer?
Q. This Tribunal does need to know all about your marriage, doesn't
Q. You didn't tell the Tribunal that your marriage was over on 20 March,
A. Because it wasn't.
Q. You deliberately concealed from this Tribunal the fact that your
marriage was over as of 20 March, didn't you?
A. No, I don't believe I did because it's not over.
Other evidence
Respondent provided two documents to the Tribunal on the second day of the phase
two Inquiry. These documents were addressed ‘TO
WHOM IT MAY
CONCERN’. The document described as a draft became exhibit R19 and is
dated 3 February 2011. This was a document
the Tribunal understands was
retrieved from Mrs Roopra’s email records. This document recorded a
$200,000 share trading loss
from the Private Superannuation Fund as being
sustained between September and December 2008. The Tribunal notes that the
gave evidence during phase one (T68) that the loss was closer to
$230,000. The second document dated 8 February 2011 was provided
by the family
accountant and it became exhibit R18. This document does not appear to record
the share trading loss. The balance of
the recorded information is essentially
the same - it notes that the family home was sold in December 2010 to meet legal
three investment properties were sold at ‘fire sale’
rates in July 2009 resulting in a $82,000 loss, that one dental
practice was
sold at a breakeven point and the other dental practice was awaiting sale. It
further noted that there was a drop in
net income in 2010, a loss of potential
income and a loss of goodwill.
Tribunal was provided with two folders of documents produced under summons by
the Corrective Services Department. In the first
folder (exhibit 1) there were
the Case Notes made by the Respondent’s Parole Officers. The Respondent
did not require the authors
of these notes to be called for cross-examination.
The following entries are contained in these notes.
18 January 2012 WELFARE: Offender enquired re Restorative Justice process.
The unit is currently unattended until the end of January.
Offender advised to
make a referral to Welfare mid February.
18 February 2012 Text: ......
>He reported no changes to his address, contact details or
circumstances. Apart from work his main priorities remain his application
re-registration with the dental board and rebuilding his relationship with his
wife. The latter taking up a lot of the discussion
during the iv.
*have arranged to attend catholic care for counselling and have arranged
an appointment on 19/02/13 at 6.30pm
*from his comments appears to be some issues that will be referred to
counselling. Namely how best to use their accumulated funds
to best suit their
needs at present
*there still appears to be some tension between his partner and his other
family members
*also discussed his openness to the dissolution of marriage, he stated
that he was open to that but that his focus is on reconciliation
and he stated
that was also the focus of his partner’s. (Also refer to T60)
20 March 2013 RELATIONSHIP: he indicated that it has now ended with his
wife, he is accepting of the fact, as it is the actualisation
02 April 2013 TEXT: He has attended counselling for relationship issues
with Relationship Australia/Catholic Care. Whilst he and his
ex wife have
separated they are reported to have an amicable relationship ...
03 April 2013 ....he saw his wife for lunch on Monday .... Encounter was
positive ... It would appear that this encounter raised some
questions about the
future of the relationship and it would appear that the uncertainty is on part
(sic). He believed that she may
still be open to the prospect of an ongoing
relationship.
notes also record that the two counselling sessions that the Respondent and his
wife attended were on 26 January 2013 and 23 February
2013. From the balance of
the evidence before the Tribunal there have been no other counselling sessions
for either the Respondent
as an individual or for them as a couple.
summonsed documents also contained a letter from the Respondent’s
accountant addressed to THE MANAGER CENTRELINK and dated
9 January 2013. This
letter certified that the Respondent had been his client for the past five
years, that he had operated a dental
clinic under a trust, that the clinic and
the trust ceased operating in December 2010 and that since that time the
Respondent was
unemployed and had no source of income. The letter further
certifies that the Respondent and his wife have
‘been separated since
February 2011’.
Tribunal does not explore in detail in this Reasons document the contents of the
records provided by Corrective Services or the
records made by the psychologist
responsible for the CORE Program as it may cause undue distress. The Tribunal
indicates that these
records are consistent with the views formed by the
Tribunal from other evidence and its own observation of the Respondent regarding
various aspects of the Respondent’s conduct and character.
Character References
Dr Firoz Vellani
Vellani, a medical practitioner, provided a character reference for the
Respondent in November 2010, which he updated on 26 October
2011. In his first
reference, Dr Vellani stated that he had known the Respondent for approximately
28 years, having first met at
Sydney Grammar School. Dr Vellani stated that he
knows family is a central part of the Respondent’s life and that he knows
him to be a
‘perceptive, intelligent, softly spoken and good-natured
individual.’
2010 reference also stated that the Respondent’s friends and family were
shocked and unable to believe that he had been
charged with these offences,
‘the type of behaviour with which he was charged was completely
out of character.’
his second reference, Dr Vellani stated that he understood from the
Respondent’s family that the Respondent was maintaining
attitude whilst in prison and that he had taken steps towards his recovery by
undergoing counselling and psychological
treatment. He stated that
‘it appeared he is coming to terms with his previous shortcomings, and
in doing so, the Respondent is reducing the likelihood
of ever reoffending
He stated that he did
‘not believe there would be
any benefit to the community to prevent him from practising
further reference dated 22 February 2013 was provided by Dr Firoz Vellani.
this final reference Dr Vellani noted that:
this reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 8 November 2010 and was in relation to
a Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Vellani also stated that he stood by his earlier comments and added that the
Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville which seemed to
have had a positive impact on his life;
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents;
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, and choosing not be idle, following his undertaking
to the HCCC (sic) not to work in
any dental field;
remorseful but positive and continued to take steps to recovery through
counselling and psychological treatment; and should
be given every consideration
to return to his profession.
Dr Alexander Erdstein
Erdstein, a medical practitioner, provided a character reference for the
Respondent in November 2010, which he updated on 24 October
2011 for the purpose
of the first phase of the Inquiry. In his original reference, Dr Erdstein
stated that he had known the Respondent
for approximately 28 years, having first
met at Sydney Grammar School. Dr Erdstein stated the Respondent is
‘loyal and good-hearted.’
He stated that the Respondent has
‘much remorse and regret with respect to the victims’
and that he realised he had made an
‘error in judgement which has
caused much emotional suffering’
for the victims.
his original reference Dr Erdstein also stated that the Respondent had several
medical conditions and, as a respiratory and sleep
disorder physician, he
believed these conditions, left untreated as with the Respondent,
affect daytime functioning to a significant degree’
the Respondent’s
way of his updated reference dated 24 October 2011, Dr Erdstein stated that the
Respondent’s rehabilitation suggested that
the Respondent
still make a substantial contribution to the dental health of his
community,’
and that he felt that the Respondent would not
a further reference dated 25 February 2013 provided to the Tribunal during phase
two of the Inquiry Dr Erdstein stated that:
the reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 25 February 2013 (sic) and was in
relation to a Notice of Complaint issued
by the Health Care Commission on 28
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Erdstein indicated that he stood by his earlier comments and added that the
Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked
on his life;
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents in Blacktown, and was attending the
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field;
was using his
CPAP machine, was now a different man, and that he fully supported his return to
his profession; and
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non-parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay.
Dr Claro Villon
the purpose of the ‘phase one’ Inquiry Dr Villon provided a
character reference on behalf of the Respondent on 5 January
2011 and a further,
updated, reference on 26 October 2011, in which he reiterated the contents of
his earlier reference, and provided
further support. In his earlier reference,
Dr Villon stated that he had known the Respondent since they were undergraduate
and that the Respondent was
‘trustworthy, straightforward and
and that he
‘lives for his work’
reference Dr Villon stated that the Respondent had suffered
‘besmirched the good name of his family and compromised the future of
his further reference, Dr Villon stated that the Respondent was rehabilitating
himself and would
‘make the required changes to his
. Dr Villon indicated that the Respondent was regaining his
spirituality and had the continued support of his family.
the second phase of the Inquiry the Tribunal received a further reference from
Dr Claro Villon, a dentist. This character reference
was dated 24 February 2013.
his final reference Dr Villon noted that:
his reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 29 March 2009 and was in relation to a
Notice of Complaint issued by the Health
Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Villon stated he stood by his earlier comments and added that the
Respondent:
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents in Blacktown, and was attending the
happily of being reunited with his family and being a father to his boys
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field;
different man, and his return to his profession was fully supported;
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program and had talked about the positive
impact it had made on his life; and
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non-parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay.
Mrs Gurmel Sidhu
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mrs
Sidhu on 23 October 2011, in which she reiterated the
contents of her previous
reference provided in January 2011. In her earlier reference, Mrs Sidhu
confirmed that she had known the
Respondent for approximately 35 years, and was
good friends with the Respondent’s parents.
Sidhu stated that the Respondent had
‘acknowledged and accepted
responsibility for his behaviour’
‘remorseful and
understood’
what he had done. Mrs Sidhu stated that the
Respondent’s actions have had
‘a massive detrimental effect on
his mental health’
the second reference, Mrs Sidhu mentioned that the Respondent was being
rehabilitated,
‘has fully cooperated with the authorities...and has
been a model prisoner.’
Mrs Sidhu stated that the Respondent has
‘a strong empathy for others’
and she was
‘confident’
that the Respondent
‘would not reoffend
due to his positive attitude towards accepting
liability.’
a character reference provided during phase two Mrs Sidhu is identified as being
a retired Senior Assistant Superintendent of Dept.
Corrective Services. This
reference is dated 22 February 2013. She noted in her reference that:
this reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 28 March 2009 and was in relation to a
Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of her
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Sidhu indicated that she stood by her earlier comments and added that the
Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked
on his life;
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents in Blacktown, and was attending the
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field; and
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay.
Sidhu repeated an earlier comment that the loss of the Respondent’s
services to the non English-speaking community was duly
felt, and that she
supported the Respondent’s submission to continue practising as a
Dr Harminder Sian
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent for the
purpose of the first phase of the Inquiry from Dr Sian
on 24 October 2011, in
which he reiterated the contents of his previous reference provided in March
2009 (presumably for the criminal
proceedings). In the earlier reference, Dr
Sian confirmed that he had known the Respondent as a friend and colleague for 20
and had initially been impressed by his
‘great intellect and
good nature.’
Dr Sian, a registered dentist, stated that the
Respondent was a
‘model citizen’
of the Sikh and dental
communities.
his 2011 reference, Dr Sian reiterated his earlier reference and stated that the
Respondent had
‘come to terms’
with his situation and had
‘taken steps to re-evaluate his outlook on life’
confirmed that the Respondent had much support in the Sikh community and did
‘not believe it would be necessary for protection of the public, or
otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Sian, provided a further character reference for the Respondent on 21 February
2013. In this reference Dr Sian noted that:
this reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 29 March 2009 and was in relation to a
Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Sian stated that he stood by his earlier comments and added that the
Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked
on his life;
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents in Blacktown, and was attending the
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field;
was regularly
taking “hi” (sic) medications, was using his CPAP machine, was now a
different man, and that he fully supported
his return to his profession;
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non-parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay.
Dr Sangeeta Vellani
written character reference dated 31 October 2011 was provided on behalf of the
Respondent by Dr Vellani, a registered dentist,
for the purpose of phase one of
the Inquiry. Dr Vellani reiterated the contents of a previous reference she had
provided in March
2009 (presumably for the criminal proceedings). In the
earlier reference, Dr Vellani stated that she had known the Respondent since
1985 when they both attended Sydney University, and that the Respondent had been
‘like a brother’
to her. Dr Vellani stated that she was
‘very shocked’
to hear about the situation and felt it was
‘completely out of character’
for the Respondent to have
behaved in this way.
her 2011 reference, Dr Vellani not only reiterated her earlier reference but
added that the Respondent had the continued support
from his family and friends
‘taking appropriate steps to address his failings and his
depression by undergoing counselling and psychological treatment’.
‘not believe it would be necessary for protection of the
public, or otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
practising again.’
final reference was provided by Dr Vellani dated 22 February 2013. In this
reference Dr Vellani noted that:
this reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 27 March 2009 and was in relation to a
Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of her
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Vellani stated that she stood by her earlier comments and added that the
Respondent;
had substantial
family support, and was living with his parents;
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville, which had a
positive impact on his life;
was compliant
with counselling and psychological treatment; and
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, showing his wish to contribute to the
Vellani requested the Tribunal to afford the Respondent an opportunity to
practice in some capacity in the community’s interest.
Dr Jasvinder Kheray
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr
Kheray dated 3 November 2011. The Tribunal notes that
Dr Kheray also gave oral
evidence before the Tribunal. In his oral evidence Dr Kheray stated he was the
Respondent’s brother-in-law
– a matter not disclosed in the written
character reference. Dr Kheray explained in his oral evidence that this fact was
‘not mentioned’ in his reference. He was unsure as to whether
this fact came to the attention of the District Court as
he did not give
evidence (T145). Dr Kheray also indicated in his oral evidence that he had
little information regarding the criminal
convictions of the
Respondent.
the 2011 written character reference Dr Kheray stated
understand and have full knowledge of the nature of the charges in Dr
Roopra’s case’
. In his reference, Dr Kheray stated that he had
been the Respondent’s family physician for approximately ten years, and
he had visited the Respondent in custody. Dr Kheray stated that the
Respondent is endeavouring to better himself by undertaking
business courses and
counselling, and spiritual reflection sessions. Dr Kheray stated that the
Respondent has
‘expressed his desire to apologise to the
‘accepts the responsibility of his
He stated that he believed the Respondent could
‘still provide a good dental service to the community’
‘it is unlikely that the Respondent will reoffend as he has
had time to reflect deeply about his behaviour and has very strong
At no point in this reference does Dr Kheray indicate he is
the Respondent’s brother-in-law. It was only during the proceedings
the Tribunal came to understand Dr Kheray was also the Respondent’s
brother-in-law.
J Kheray provided a further character reference for the Respondent on 28
February 2013. Once again in this reference Dr Kheray
does not indicate he is
the Respondent’s brother-in-law. This reference gave his occupation as
“of (occupation)”
(sic) and stated that:
this reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 30 March 2011 and was in relation to a
Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Kheray’s final reference stated that he stood by his earlier comments and
added that the Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents in Blacktown, and was attending the
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field;
was regularly
taking “hi” (sic) medications, was using his CPAP machine, was now a
different man, and that his return
to his professional life was fully supported;
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non-parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay.
Mr Jasbir Singh Thind
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Thind
dated 4 November 2011 for phase one of the Inquiry.
In his reference, Mr Thind
stated that he had known the Respondent for 30 years in the Sikh Association,
and later in his capacity
as the General Secretary of the Sikh Association of
Sydney. Mr Thind stated that the Respondent is a
‘sincere and astute
professional’
‘highly valued.’
that loss of the Respondent’s services is
particularly to the non-English speaking patients and that
the community supports the Respondent for the
‘continuation of his
career and practice.’
further character reference was provided by Mr Thind dated 14 February 2012. Mr
Thind noted that:
the Respondent
had been known to his organisation for 30 years, and that this reference was in
addition to two earlier references
of 29 March 2011 and 4 November 2011;
the reference
was in relation to a Notice of Complaint issued by the Health Care Commission on
28 June 2011; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Thind stood by his earlier comments and added that the Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC during his
incarceration;
had substantial
family support, was living with his parents in Blacktown, and was attending the
Temple; and
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, and it was noteworthy that he was prepared to work
hard at a job.
Thind repeated an earlier comment that the loss of the Respondent’s
services to the non English-speaking community was duly
felt, and he supported
the Respondent’s submission to continue practising as a
Mr Gurcharn Singh Sidhu
Sidhu provided a written reference on behalf of the Respondent in March 2009
(presumably for the criminal proceedings) which he
updated in October 2011 for
the phase one Inquiry. In his initial reference, Mr Sidhu stated that he had
known the Respondent since
1975. Mr Sidhu stated he had held many prominent
positions in the Sikh Association of Sydney, and that the Respondent and his
were instrumental in helping lay the foundations of that Sikh community.
Mr Sidhu stated that the Respondent’s many
‘testimony’
that the Respondent
follows the principle of
‘honest work and truthful living’
instilled in him by his parents.
his second reference, Mr Sidhu stated that he has had recent contact with the
Respondent’s family and
‘it appears the whole family is pleased
with his progress’
. He further states that
‘it appears the
Respondent has understood his trigger points that lead to his previous
dysfunctional behaviour and he seems
highly unlikely to
re-offend.’
the reference dated 22 February 2013 provided for the purpose of the phase two
Inquiry Mr Sidhu, a retired principal Research Scientist
from CSIRO, noted
the reference
was made further to a previous reference of 28 March 2009 and was in relation
to a Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked
this final reference Mr Sidhu stated that he stood by his earlier comments and
added that the Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked to
him about the positive impact it
had made on his life;
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay;
had experienced
immediate and extended family support and understanding;
was living with
his parents in Blacktown and was attending the Temple; and
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field.
Sidhu further noted that the loss of the Respondent’s professional
services to the non English-speaking Indian and Sikh community
had been a burden
to it, and urged the Tribunal to allow the Respondent to practise again as the
chance of his re-offending was negligible.
Mr Rudy Concina
the purpose of the first phase of the Inquiry Mr Concina provided a character
reference for the Respondent on 4 February 2011
and a further, updated,
reference on 31 October 2011. In his original reference, Mr Concina stated that
he had known the Respondent
for over 15 years, having met through the dental
industry, and has also been a friend of the Respondent and attended many family
gatherings with him.
Concina stated that the Respondent possessed positive personal characteristics,
such as being
‘a fair leader in a team network’
‘reserved and quiet in nature’
‘very respectful
to his peers’
. He stated that the Respondent is
‘remorseful’
‘hopes for forgiveness’
for his actions. Mr Concina expressed his fear for the Respondent’s state
of mind, stating that the Respondent was
‘clearly in a depressed state
‘lost confidence’
his second reference, Mr Concina added that he has visited the Respondent
occasionally since his incarceration and found him
‘calm and in good
. He stated that the Respondent is now
reflective about his life and has gained an understanding of his prior depressed
He stated that many of the Respondent’s patients have
asked about his wellbeing and
‘miss his practice not
operating.’
He stated that the
‘community would surely
benefit from the Respondent being able to practice as a Dentist in the
further character reference was provided for the Respondent by Mr Concina, a
dental prosthetist dated 24 February 2013 for the purpose
of the phase two
Inquiry. Mr Concina noted that:
this reference
was by way of an update to a reference of 4 February 2011 and was in relation to
a Notice of Complaint issued by the
Health Care Commission on 28 June 2011;
it would be used
by the Tribunal in considering the Respondent’s fitness to practise
dentistry; and
a copy of his
previous reference was annexed and marked “A” (which it was
Concina indicated he stood by his earlier comments and added that the
Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked
on his life;
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field;
had met with him
since his release, was regularly taking “hi” (sic) medications, was
using his CPAP machine, was now a
different man, and that he fully supported his
had a very calm,
compassionate and highly motivated, positive attitude; and
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay.
Dr Dri Thamby
Dri Thamby, an oral maxillo-facial surgeon, provided a reference for the
Respondent dated 26 February, 2013. He supported the
Respondent’s
application for registration with the Dental Council (sic), although he was not
‘the incidents’
that took place.
Thamby noted that the Respondent had always been a family oriented, responsible
and loyal person and had two children to support.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions which were supplemented by oral
submissions. The transcript reflects the oral submissions
made, although some
reference is made to those submissions below. The HCCC also provided, at the
request of the Tribunal, submissions
regarding the consequences for the
Respondent of the fact that his name will be on the Child Protection Register
until 13 January
2028. All of the submissions of the HCCC form Annexure B
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent also provided a written outline of submissions which were
supplemented by oral submissions. The transcript reflects
the oral submissions
made, although some reference is also made to those submissions below. The
Respondent similarly provided, at
the request of the Tribunal, submissions
regarding the consequences for the Respondent of the fact that his name will be
on the Child
Protection Register until 13 January 2028. All of the
Respondent’s submissions form Annexure C hereto.
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent had handed up a document headed
‘Proposed Orders/Conditions’ at the end of
phase one. These are
included in Annexure C hereto.
Tribunal’s consideration of the Evidence and
Submissions
Tribunal has considered the entirety of the submissions made by both parties.
Tribunal accepts the submissions of both parties as to relevant legal
principles. With respect to the submission regarding the
discretion’ of the Tribunal (see Respondent’s submission at
paragraph 13) the Tribunal is of the view
that this is very much a secondary
consideration to the protective role of the Tribunal. If conditions on
registration are contemplated
by a tribunal then they should be designed to
remediate the deficits identified. It is not however a factor which is to be
against public safety. Similarly, the financial interests or
convenience of access issue of keeping a practitioner working within
community cannot be balanced against public safety. While it is true that there
is a large investment made by society in the
education of health professionals
this is not a factor that compels a tribunal to allow individuals who are not
suitable to remain
in practice.
there is no doubt room for the recognition of the public interest in redemption
(see paragraph 15 of the Respondent’s
submissions) the Tribunal prefers
the view expressed in
Ex parte Tziniolis
Re The Medical Practitioners
67SR (NSW) 448
Health Care Complaints Commission v
41 NSWLR 448
(see reproduced in the annexed
submissions).
fact that the conduct of the Respondent was facilitated by the Respondent being
a dentist was commented upon by Judge Blackmore
DCJ. His Honour commented in the
Remarks of Sentence at page 14 after considering the fact that none of the
victims were patients
but two were young girls and the third
Having said that it must be borne in mind that the offender used his
position as a dentist, a person who the complainants would naturally
a person of good character to employ each of the complainants.
the Judge noted that the Respondent deliberately procured the victims for the
purpose of assaulting them, he had specifically
advertised for them and as soon
as he had access to them he started to mistreat them. At T24.6 His Honour
‘They weren’t people who’d been working in his
office for five or six months and one day he decided through some
attraction, to
put his hand down their top’.
The judge clarified a submission made by
the Crown to the effect that the Respondent
‘used people’s
understanding of a good character, good standing in the community as a dentist,
to lure somebody to work
(phase one exhibit 47, page
is no doubt that the conduct occurred in the course of the Respondent’s
practice of dentistry and this places the matter
into a more serious category
than, for example, similar conduct occurring totally within a practitioners
‘private life’.
In this regard the Tribunal notes the comments of
the Medical Tribunal in
and endorses the view that conduct
committed in the course of practice must be weighed more heavily.
Tribunal notes (and accepts) the Respondent’s submission that the conduct
was abhorrent and reprehensible and that further
disciplinary sanction is
Respondent lists a number of factors which the Tribunal would consider as
indicating a period of suspension rather than deregistration
was appropriate. On
the evidence before the Tribunal it is able to accept that the Respondent was a
person of good repute prior to
the offences but cannot be satisfied that it is
conduct that is antithetical to his general character or a result of some
mental disturbance that is now resolved. The Tribunal comments below
that it is not satisfied that there is true insight into his
conduct and
therefore a finding of genuine remorse for his victims rather than his own
predicament is not possible at this time despite
indications that this is
evolving. The Tribunal accepts that the Respondent has embraced rehabilitation
but also finds that there
are many issues still to be resolved before the risk
factors identified by Dr Lennings and the CORE Program are dissolved or
the offences did not violate patient-dentist relationships they were certainly
committed in his practice as a dentist. While
it does not strike at the
fundamental role of a dentist it does violate the trust placed in dentists by
the community (see paragraph
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales v Da Rocha
[2013] NSWCA 151).
The Tribunal accepts that the
Respondent is in the fortunate position of retaining significant levels of
support from many family
members and some friends. The Tribunal observes that
there is still considerable work in the area of his marital relationship, a
matter considered significant by both Dr Lennings and the CORE Program
(particularly with respect to meeting the intimacy needs of
the Respondent). As
indicated previously the Tribunal has no reason to doubt the clinical competence
of the Respondent. While there
may be concerns regarding the workload undertaken
by the Respondent this appears to be a matter he has appreciated. This is not
a factor that in and of itself could allow the Tribunal to be
comfortably satisfied that the appropriate order to make involved suspending
Respondent then allowing him to return to practice with conditions. For the
reasons set out below the Tribunal does not accept
that it is able to fulfil its
protective jurisdiction by allowing the Respondent to remain suspended from the
Register at this time.
paragraph 6 of the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent there is a list
of factors put forward to the Tribunal to illustrate
the improvement in the
Respondent’s position since phase one. The Tribunal is unable to accept
that there is a significant
difference in the position of the Respondent by
virtue of the fact that he is no longer incarcerated. While the fact that the
is out of gaol results in the potential to perform work as a dentist
there is, in the Tribunal’s view, the same stigma throughout
the time that
a person is serving a term of imprisonment (whether by way of incarceration or
on parole).
is also little weight that can be placed by the Tribunal on the fact that the
Respondent does not appear to have suffered from
the potential detrimental
effects of incarceration. While this certainly does not place him in a worse
position, it does not place
him in a better position.
Respondent’s submissions also point to stability and rehabilitation. It is
difficult for this Tribunal to take a definitive
position in this regard given
the extremely short time that has elapsed since the Respondent’s release
from custody and his
constant supervision since that time. Once again there is
every sign that the Respondent is benefiting from this supervision just
from the support of family and friends but an appropriate assessment of
stability and rehabilitation is not possible at
the Tribunal has formed the view that the Respondent was not nearly as honest or
frank as he could have been with the Board
during the Dental Board of New South
Wales Inquiry this is not a matter that is determinative of the findings made
herein. The Tribunal
has taken into consideration the submission that the
Respondent had the benefit of legal advice during the Board Inquiry. Further,
there are other factors that result in the weight of such a finding not being
the determinative factor. The Tribunal re-iterates
the comments made in
Roopra (No 1)
regarding the obligations of health practitioners appearing
before regulatory bodies
Tribunal also considers that during phase two the Respondent continued not to be
as full and frank with the Tribunal as he could
and should have been. By way of
a general observation regarding the Respondent’s answers to direct
questions throughout the
proceedings the Tribunal notes that many of his answers
were non-responsive to the question, rambling, sometimes contradictory with
combative overtone on occasions. He claimed often not to recall pertinent facts
and complained that questions, where an answer
of ‘yes’ or a
‘no’ would have sufficed, were ‘too polarized’. On a
number of occasions when the
Respondent did make a definitive answer, he placed
the responsibility for an important decision onto another party.
particular his response to questions about his joint bank account with his wife,
and the significant withdrawals made for the purchase
of her house, would
indicate he was without any interest in money which does not sit comfortably
with the balance of the evidence.
The Tribunal notes his approach for financial
support from Centrelink, his attempts to find paid employment, and his presently
wish to contribute financially to the well-being of his family. It also
does not sit well in the context of his well-documented
overall effect of the Respondent’s behaviour before the Tribunal leads it
to conclude that it cannot find the Respondent
has appreciation of his
disclosure obligations to a tribunal (or other regulatory body), an obligation
incumbent upon all registered
members of a health profession.
short, the Tribunal comments that the behaviour of the Respondent as a witness
in the proceedings left members of the Tribunal
with the sense that he had
fashioned his answers to obtain the outcome he desired. The result of this
approach to providing information
was that inconsistencies became apparent
between evidence from the Respondent on different occasions and from different
Respondent’s failure to acknowledge and address major health issues over a
number of years is a substantial concern to the
Tribunal. While these seem to
have been addressed during his incarceration the Tribunal notes that at least
some of these conditions
had the potential to compromise the safe delivery of
health care services to his patients at the time he was still practising. All
health practitioners have an obligation to manage their own health issues to
ensure there is no impact upon the quality of care they
provide. While the
Tribunal accepts that by its very nature depression may create a reluctance to
seek treatment the Tribunal notes
that the Respondent only raised the issue of
his depression late in the piece with his general practitioner and in the
apparent context
of the Respondent’s self-diagnosis. Dr Kheray confirmed
this position and prescribed medication accordingly. Dr Kheray again
when the Respondent requested an increase in the level of the medication.
the issue of health risks the Tribunal notes that the Respondent was aware of
his low tolerance to alcohol but chose to ignore
this risk. Further, he reported
that he engaged in activities such as trading shares on the US stock market
between midnight and
3 am and drank large amounts of coffee. The
Respondent’s significant sleep issues which were likely to impact upon his
to practise as a dentist were not addressed by the Respondent. The
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated he acknowledged that
the stress of the
legal proceedings was having an impact on his practice and therefore he had put
limits in place.
Respondent’s evidence during phase two was that these things were all
behind him and he was adhering to the regimen of health
care that had been
imposed upon him whilst incarcerated. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has
only been on parole for less
than five months and that he has had considerable
monitoring by family and the Parole Service.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent had only recently found a new general
practitioner (rather than his brother-in-law) and was
yet to consult with a
psychologist. While there are definite signs that the Respondent is taking
better care of his health the Tribunal
has reservations regarding whether these
are permanent lifestyle changes and whether, when once again placed in stressful
situations,
the Respondent will revert to unhealthy excesses and psychological
disturbance. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent is taking
anti-depressant
medication although Dr Lennings is of the view that he is currently showing no
symptoms of depression.
Respondent’s submissions address the factors to be considered subsequent
to a finding of misconduct in determining whether
the practitioner should be
followed by a consequential finding as to ‘good character’. The
factors addressed in the submission
are derived from the decision of the Court
of Appeal in the matter of
McBride v Walton
[1994] NSWCA 199
paragraphs 61 and 62. These factors are:
(a) whether the misconduct
can be satisfactorily explained as an error of judgment rather than a defect of
(b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct
practise medicine;
(c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and hence
atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner's normal
qualities of
(d) the motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct;
(e) the underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
misconduct; and
(f) whether the practitioner's conduct post the proven episode of misconduct
demonstrates that public and professional confidence
may be reposed in him to
uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required of a medical
practitioner.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct cannot be satisfactorily explained as
an error of judgment. This was planned conduct
on the part of the Respondent
repeated on a number of occasions over a significant period of time. It is the
Tribunal’s view
that the conduct demonstrates defects in the
Respondent’s character.
Respondent’s submissions address this factor by acknowledging the
aggravating features of the conduct, which are all accepted
by the Tribunal. The
fact that there was no sign of physical harm to the victims does not accord with
the fact that the Respondent
hit one of the victims on the buttocks and grabbed
her breast (see the record of the Respondent’s account of his conduct
25 June 2012 in Exhibit 4 of the HCCC documents produced under summons
from Corrective Services) nor does it sit well with the emotional
harm that must
have flowed from the conduct. The Tribunal notes the characterisation of the
conduct on the ‘criminal’
scale by the trial judge and his
acceptance of the role of the Respondent’s depression. The intrinsic
seriousness of the Respondent’s
conduct is increased by its nexus to the
practice of dentistry for the purpose of this Inquiry.
Tribunal is unable to accept the Respondent’s submission that this was an
isolated episode. There were a number of offences
committed over a five month
period. The Respondent’s evidence was that these offences were preceded by
increased access to
pornography, in particular ‘teen’ pornography.
the Tribunal has not addressed every aspect of the Respondent’s
submissions on this point it has considered all of the
submissions. There is
however one particular point that the Tribunal will comment upon. At paragraph
61(c) to (e) the Respondent’s
submissions indicate that the Tribunal
should view the Respondent’s general moods as having improved since his
release from
custody, that he is in an emotionally stable state and accept his
statement that he has not encountered any depressive or anger episodes.
submissions further indicate that this can be corroborated by Mrs Roopra. The
Tribunal is unable to accept this submission. There
is evidence before the
Tribunal that as recently as March this year the Respondent was not in an
emotionally stable state and on
at least one occasion informed his wife that the
marriage was over. Mrs Roopra gave evidence that it was one of his several
and that she did not take it seriously at the time as the usual
pattern would be for him to calm down and retract his statement.
This had been
the pattern prior to his incarceration. The Respondent obviously was of a
mindset firm enough to inform his Parole
Officer that he considered that the
marriage was over as is recorded in the notes for 20 March 2013 (see above).
Both the Respondent
and Mrs Roopra gave evidence that there was no particular
‘fight’ or issue at around this time in March 2013 that may
expected to have precipitated such a reaction from the Respondent.
was the further evidence of Mrs Roopra that she considered that the Respondent
had a number of issues to work out for himself
prior to them being able to
co-habit. While these are two examples, the Tribunal is of the view that overall
the Respondent cannot
be seen as currently being emotionally stable. Overall the
conduct is not seen by the Tribunal as isolated or
uncharacteristic.
respect to the fourth factor set out in
(motivation) the Tribunal
has significant concerns regarding the utterly selfish and totally inappropriate
motivation of the Respondent.
The evidence of Dr Lennings and from the CORE
Program report indicate that there was a desire for power and control on the
the Respondent and that he deliberately targeted vulnerable females (two
teenagers and one young woman). This was an escalation from
his use of the
services provided at a massage parlour and the Tribunal heard evidence that it
was a result of the cost and inconvenience
of using the services of sex workers
that resulting in his offending. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent reported
2012 in the CORE Program Pre-group written interview that he had
never paid for sex due to
‘HIV fears and employment’.
Tribunal notes the evidence of the Respondent regarding his activities at
massage parlours prior to the time of his offending.
The Tribunal further notes
Mrs Roopra gave evidence in phase one that the Respondent had told her he had
visited massage parlours
for sexual purposes.
respect to the fifth factor set out in
(underlying qualities of
character by prior misconduct) the Tribunal does not put any weight on the early
conviction of the Respondent
for Larceny as a Servant (largely due to the nature
of the conviction, the length of time since the offence was committed and there
being no details of the nature of the conduct before the Tribunal). The
Respondent was able to provide the Tribunal with a large
number of references
attesting to, what the Tribunal considers to be the Respondent’s
reputation. The substance of this large
amount of evidence attests to the
Respondent being a person with a good reputation within the community.
Reputation is different
to character. The relevant legislative provisions also
use fitness or suitability of a person to hold registration in a regulated
profession. These are also different to reputation and character. The Tribunal
adds a note of caution to this position on the basis
that with the exception of
Dr Kheray none of the referees from either phase one or phase two were called to
give evidence.
Tribunal notes with respect to the references provided in phase one that all
five of the referees in the category of professional
associates were students
with the Respondent during his undergraduate days, one being on exchange from
Manchester University. Each
of these referees expressed a similar view regarding
the Respondent and thought that he had been a good and keen student
(approximately
20 years ago).
of the referees in phase two expressed the view that the Respondent had been
diligently occupying himself whilst in prison and
was unlikely to re-offend.
They all expressed the wish that the Respondent be permitted to return to
practise as a dentist.
appears that the depression mentioned in the evidence (including the references)
was diagnosed retrospectively and substantially
based upon reports of the
Respondent regarding his situation. The Respondent identifies depression as a
significant cause of his
conduct and this is reiterated in the opinions of the
all of the referees who provided an additional reference for the purpose of
phase two of the Inquiry noted that the Respondent:
had participated
in the CORE Moderate Sex Offenders Program at MSPC Matraville and had talked to
him about the positive impact it
had made on his life;
had pleaded
guilty to 9 counts of aggravated indecent assault, with a full sentence of 3
years and a months, with a non-parole period
of 1 year and 6 months, and that he
was now released from MSPC Long Bay;
had experienced
immediate and extended family support and understanding;
was living with
his parents in Blacktown and was attending the Temple; and
was working as a
pick packer at Aldi’s, following his undertaking to the HCCC (sic) not to
work in any dental field.
is nothing in these references which takes them out of the category of
commenting substantially on reputation rather than going
to character.
Tribunal’s concerns regarding the underlying qualities of the
Respondent’s character are not advanced by the evidence
that he utilised
joint superannuation funds to engage in share trading without the knowledge or
consent of his wife.
final factor set out in
(post conduct) is also problematic. The
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s submission that the numerous
references enable
the Tribunal to repose trust in the Respondent to maintain the
high standards expected of a registered health practitioner.
Tribunal has considered the evidence of Mrs Roopra both with respect to this
factor and to the matter generally. There are inconsistencies
in the evidence of
Mrs Roopra that may be attributed to a good deal of ‘wishful
thinking’ on her part with respect to
the welfare of her husband, the
desired outcome of this matter and the future of her marriage to the Respondent.
There is no doubt
that there is a significant level of commitment on the part of
Mrs Roopra to her husband and the marriage. Marital difficulties have
since 2005 and they remain married. The inconsistencies noted by the Tribunal
primarily relate to the evidence given in her
statement regarding her
observations of the Respondent’s demeanour and statements concerning the
state of their marriage which
contrasts with the oral evidence.
Tribunal notes that the HCCC also make submissions regarding these factors (see
paragraphs 10 to 24). The Tribunal accepts the
submissions made therein.
paragraph 82 of the Respondent’s submissions there is a reference to the
safety of the Respondent’s patients. The role
of this Tribunal is broader
– it extends to protecting the public, maintaining standards within the
profession, maintaining
the reputation of the profession, the trust that can be
reposed by members of the public (not just an individual’s patients)
members of a profession as well as to act as a specific deterrent for the
individual and for the profession at large.
paragraph 91 the Respondent includes a submission regarding the general
deterrence dimension of the role of the Tribunal and indicates
Respondent’s breach was not a breach of professional standards. While the
Tribunal accepts that the Code of Conduct
in place at the relevant time may not
have had a specific provision relating to sexually assaulting staff members, the
the Respondent was a criminal offence committed in relation to his
practice as a dentist and as such must be seen as a breach of
professional
standards. Not all conduct (or misconduct) can be ‘codified’ and the
broader basis of all professional standards
is observance of the law.
the Respondent’s submissions accept that the protection of the reputation
of the profession is a feature of this matter
that may on the face of it require
an order of deregistration the submissions detail reasons as to why this is not
necessary in the
circumstances. The Tribunal does not find any of the
submissions persuasive for the reasons that are detailed elsewhere in this
The conduct of the Respondent is of such a serious nature that the
reputation of the profession can only be maintained by removing
his name from
the Register.
HCCC made submission regarding the lack of genuine contrition on the part of the
Respondent (see paragraphs 25 to 29 of its submission
– part of Annexure B
hereto). The Tribunal indicates that there is nothing in the evidence in phase
two which has changed the
findings of the Tribunal (in
Roopra (No 1)
regarding the Respondent’s contrition as set out in paragraph 225 of
the HCCC Submission.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC regarding deterrence being of
particular importance in this matter (see paragraphs
30 to 34 of the HCCC
Submissions in Annexure B hereto).
Tribunal notes it has set out its views regarding the credibility of the
Respondent. The Tribunal also notes the HCCC made submissions
regarding this
matter at paragraphs 35 to 37 of its Submissions. The Tribunal accepts those
submissions.
HCCC made submissions regarding the Respondent’s concealment of important
information from the Tribunal at paragraphs 38
to 44 of its Submissions. The
Tribunal accepts this position and notes that elsewhere in this document the
Tribunal has set out details
of other instances of the Respondent failing to
provide relevant information in circumstances where it would have been
appropriate
for him to do so. Not only is there the Dental Board of New South
Wales Inquiry situation and the failure to inform his wife of the
use of their
joint superannuation funds but there is also the evidence the Tribunal has of
inconsistencies between the Respondent’s
evidence as to his prior use of
sex workers and the statement recorded in the pre-registration survey for the
CORE Program as to
not having paid a sex worker.
the Tribunal notes the submissions made in reply on behalf of the Respondent to
the effect that the Respondent had not made
an attempt to ‘gild the
lily’ with respect to the state of his marriage it is the view of the
Tribunal that he certainly
has not willingly provided an accurate picture of the
state of his marriage.
HCCC made submission as to the appropriate protective orders to be made in this
matter in paragraphs 45 to 48 of its Submission.
The Tribunal accepts these
submissions and in particular is concerned by the lack of a cohesive and
comprehensive treatment plan
that addresses his risk of reoffending in a dental
practice (see paragraph 48(e) of the HCCC Submission).
Findings regarding Complaint Two and Orders
Tribunal notes that the Particulars of all of the Complaints are established by
the Certificates of Conviction contained in the
evidence. The Tribunal notes
that the Respondent did not contest Complaints One, Three and Four. The Tribunal
has already found to
its reasonable satisfaction that the evidence supported
findings with respect to Complaints One, Three and Four in that the Respondent
has been convicted of nine criminal offences, that the conduct was improper and
unethical conduct relating to the practice of dentistry.
Tribunal found that the conduct described in the Particulars is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation of the
Respondent’s registration. The Tribunal therefore found professional
misconduct of a very serious nature.
indicated in the Reasons for Decision
HCCC v Roopra (No 1)
it was clear
from the outset that the true contest between the parties was as to whether the
conduct rendered the Respondent to currently
be not a suitable person to hold
registration (Complaint Two).
Tribunal recounts what it stated in
HCCC v Roopra (No 1)
that the phrase
‘suitable person’ is not defined in the National Law. However some
assistance as to its meaning is provided
by section 55(1) of the
which gives the grounds upon which the National Board may decide that an
individual is not a ‘suitable person’ to hold
a general registration
in a health profession. This is an appropriate consideration in the view of the
Tribunal as when it comes
to consideration of criminal conduct it would not be
appropriate for a different standard to be applied to a person making an
application
for registration as opposed to a person already holding
registration. Those grounds include: s 55(1)(b) –
‘having regard
to the individual’s criminal history to the extent that is relevant to the
individual’s practice
of the profession, the individual is not, in the
Board’s opinion, an appropriate person to practice the profession or it is
not in the public interest for the individual to practice the
profession’
and s 55(1)(h) –
‘in the Board’s
opinion, the individual is for any other reason not a fit and proper person for
general registration in
the profession.’
clearly the criminal conduct of the Respondent is not only of a very serious
nature, it also relates to his practice as a dentist
as it provided him with a
level of trust and a facade of legitimacy. The HCCC have firmly established the
conduct related to the
practice or purported practice of dentistry. Even if it
had not occurred within this setting, the Tribunal is of the view that a
criminal record of this nature would prove to be a very significant barrier to
registration.
Consideration
of the fact that the Respondent is still serving a term of imprisonment is also
relevant to this determination. The
Tribunal also notes that the criminal
conduct of the Respondent cannot be characterised as ‘one off’ or
term ‘fit and proper person’ has been considered in protective
and a wide view of the
matter should be taken (see, for example,
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279).
is also the view of the Tribunal that considerations such as the maintenance of
the reputation of the profession and the trust
that is reposed in the profession
by the public are also matters relevant to the determination of the question of
suitability of
an individual for registration.
the factors described by Basten JA in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
related to the question of character, it
is the view of this Tribunal that such factors have relevance to the wider
question of whether
a person is suitable to hold registration.
Tribunal adopts the view of the Physiotherapy Tribunal of New South Wales in
to [71] as to factors that provide
assistance to the determination of suitability. At paragraph 71 the Tribunal in
that matter stated:
This Tribunal is of the view that professional integrity, personal
integrity, insight into the reason why the conduct attracted the
criticism of the Tribunal, insight into the steps required to remediate any
personal or professional deficits identified by
the offensive conduct, steps
taken towards such remediation, the Respondent’s otherwise good character,
the nature of the Respondent’s
prior professional practise including any
prior misconduct are some of the matters to be explored and appropriately
weighed by the
Tribunal in determining suitability at the current time.
indicated in
Roopra (No 1)
the Tribunal was of the view that the
Respondent was not a suitable person to hold registration as a dentist at the
time he committed
the offences. The Tribunal has had the benefit of a
significant amount of material regarding the Respondent’s attendance
a Board Inquiry in March 2009, including additional evidence from the
Respondent in phase two. The Tribunal is still of the view
that the Respondent
was not a suitable person to hold registration at that time. It is of
significant concern that the Respondent’s
evidence still does not allow
the Tribunal to form any other view than that the Respondent’s actions
were a result of his being
willing to do whatever it took to retain his
registration. Just as the Respondent indicated he may not have read all of the
that was placed before the Dental Board Inquiry he similarly did not
read all of the material placed before the Tribunal during phase
particular the financial records). He had also not carefully read the Tribunals
Reasons for Decision in
Roopra (No1).
The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent gave evidence that he may not have even been in a mental state where
he was capable of understanding
the material before the Dental Board. The
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent gave evidence that he was not in a fit
attend to the search for his financial records at the end of the first
day of the phase two Inquiry and left this to his wife.
phase two the Tribunal was provided with a small amount of additional evidence
regarding the particular stresses faced by the
Respondent during the relevant
period. While the Tribunal accepts the indication made by his legal
representatives that this was
an area overlooked during preparation of the
matter (understandable given the time frame resulting from their recent
re-engagement
in representation) the Respondent had a period of several months
to gather this information since his release from custody. There
is nothing, for
example, that supports the purported financial losses. The Tribunal has nothing
to displace a finding that the stresses
and difficulties faced by the Respondent
fell within the normal range of the vicissitudes of daily life, and therefore
the Tribunal
does not place much weight on these factors explaining the
extraordinary conduct of the Respondent.
Tribunal cannot be certain about the exact state of the Respondent’s
finances or his financial losses during the Global
Financial Crisis. This is due
to the inability of the Respondent to provide these details to the Tribunal.
While the Respondent may
have suffered losses as a result of ‘share
trading’ this cannot be seen as an excuse for his offending conduct. It is
also of concern that this activity was undertaken using funds jointly held by
the Respondent and his wife without the consent or
knowledge of his wife. Mrs
Roopra appears to have taken control of finances by purchasing a home in her own
name from the bulk of
their joint savings. While these are matters between the
two of them, the use of the funds without his wife’s knowledge is
to the question of the Respondent’s character.
Representations
were made by both the Respondent and Mrs Roopra regarding the state of their
relationship. The evidence, as it ultimately
came before this Tribunal, does not
support the initial representations made by either of them in their written
statements. While
the Tribunal has been able to determine the matter of
appropriate orders without having to consider conditions on registration, it
should be noted that the Tribunal is of the view that a tribunal should be
satisfied as to a respondent’s ability to comply
with any conditions on
registration in their own right without regard to the actions of others no
matter what relationship they may
have to a respondent. While there would be a
significant degree of comfort provided by a respondent having a reliable support
(family, friends, staff, mentors, supervisor, health care providers
and the like) a tribunal is also required to consider whether
the respondent
themselves has the ability to comply with conditions imposed.
Tribunal expressed the view in
Roopra (No 1)
that it observed that there
is still a lack of genuine insight on the part of the Respondent into the
consequences of his actions
for the victims of the offences. While the
Respondent has certainly made inroads in this area as a result of the
intervention of
the CORE program and Dr Lennings the Tribunal is still left with
the view that the Respondent’s insight and remorse is very
much centred on
his own position and the consequences he has suffered as a result of his
Considerations relevant to Orders
is of concern to the Tribunal that when the Respondent gave evidence before the
Tribunal he spoke of the regrets he had with respect
to the conduct but did not
place emphasis on any regret for the effect the conduct had had on the victims,
his patients or his other
staff members.
regrets expressed by the Respondent were largely cast in a superficial manner
with greater emphasis placed upon the impact upon
his own life.
cognisant of the Respondent’s position with respect to facing a number of
charges that did not ultimately proceed, the
Tribunal has formed the view that
the Respondent was not as completely frank as he could have been with the Board
Inquiry. The Board
is a body with which any registered dentist must be honest
and direct. The Respondent cannot totally hide behind the guise of having
under legal advice given the lack of frankness that is now otherwise evident.
example of a lack of full and frank disclosure is the referencing in the
Respondent’s CV to having contributed to the
profession by way of
‘committees’. The Respondent was unable to provide details of this
activity to the Tribunal during
his oral evidence in phase one and nothing was
provided to the Tribunal in this regard during phase two.
is also of concern to the Tribunal that the Respondent’s position appears
to be that he is was and is still prepared to make
misrepresentations if it
assists him to remain registered. The Respondent acknowledged that he knowingly
misled the Board and relied
on the advice of his legal advisers as an
explanation.
was a lack of a ‘ring of truth’ about the Respondent’s
evidence regarding the reason why he was carrying dentistry
text books with him
when he attended the interview with Dr Lennings. This adds to the lack of the
‘ring of truth’ in
the evidence given by the Respondent to the Board
and to this Tribunal as set out above.
Tribunal cannot be confident that the Respondent will not re-offend and
therefore pose a risk to the public. The evidence of Dr
Lennings and the CORE
Report would support this risk being quite low, but not negligible. The Tribunal
has to assess this risk not
in the general community setting but in the setting
of the privilege of holding registration as a health practitioner. In this
it is not just the offences but the context in which they occurred that
is also considered by the Tribunal. The Tribunal notes a
submission made on
behalf of the Respondent in his criminal trial to the effect that he was just an
‘employer’ (see exhibit
47 page 25 line 5) but this Tribunal is
charged with maintenance of standards within the profession and looks to the
context of professional
practice as a registered health practitioner to
appropriately characterise the conduct.
the evidence of the Respondent to the effect that there may always be a risk
that he will re-offend is, at one level, evidence
against his interest and
indicative of insight, it is a matter that concerns the Tribunal. The Respondent
does not preface this statement
with advice regarding the implications of his
conduct on the victims nor follow this statement with a set of
conditions/standards
he considers he must adhere to ensure the conduct does not
occur again in the future. The Tribunal also has concerns about the lack
evidence regarding the checks that will be put in place to ensure he will not
re-offend. In reaching the view regarding the likelihood
of the Respondent
re-offending the Tribunal also notes the scant recognition of the impact of his
conduct on both the profession
and the community’s perception of the
profession. This is indicative of a lack of genuine insight and the factors
motivate, facilitate or prevent future re-offending.
statement by the Respondent (see paragraph 34 of R1) that his capacity to comply
with conditions on his registration in ‘large
part’ was due to the
support of his wife, does not give the Tribunal much comfort as to the
protection of the public. The Tribunal
now has the benefit of some independent
reports of the Respondent’s expressions of the difficulties he faces in
his relationship
with his wife. While the Tribunal heard evidence from Mrs
Roopra as to her dedication to her husband, it is difficult to place significant
reliance on this when the Tribunal has heard the evidence that she does not
consider that they can resume residing together until
after he has resolved his
own issues. It is difficult for the Tribunal to place reliance on matters which
rely upon a continuing
relationship with Mrs Roopra given the inability of the
Respondent to establish the stability of the marriage at this point in time.
Tribunal notes that Dr Lennings identified the relationship as a key factor.
Further, the purchase of a home in a suburb the
Respondent is unlikely to be
allowed to reside in for the duration of his parole is not a promising omen. In
any case this Tribunal
has no ability to bind Mrs Roopra in any respect.
Further, it is implicit in the trust that is reposed in health practitioners
they have the intrinsic personal qualities to maintain professional and
proper conduct without reliance on an outside factor such
as the influence of a
Tribunal is particularly concerned about the targeted and pre-meditated nature
of the Respondent’s conduct towards the three
young women involved, his
persistent and forceful coercion of them and his attempts to cover up his
conduct (by way of example the
Tribunal points to the ‘contract’ and
subterfuge of the carrying of files out of the practice so as to minimise the
of other staff). Quite clearly these are aspects of the conduct that
were explored in detail during the CORE Program.
Tribunal’s primary consideration is the protection of the public.
Maintenance of standards within the profession and of
the trust that can be
reposed in members of the profession by the public, and the deterrence of others
from similar conduct are also
significant considerations. The only appropriate
order to make in this matter is one that ensures the Respondent does not return
to the Register until he has served his terms of incarceration and then had an
opportunity to live in the community and demonstrate
that he has remediated the
defects in his character identified by his conduct.
Tribunal is of the view that serving a term of imprisonment for offences of the
nature committed by the Respondent in the circumstances
of this matter precludes
him from holding Registration. The broad range of support enjoyed by the
Respondent demonstrated by the
references enables the Tribunal to fix a
relatively short period of time from the point he completes his term of
imprisonment to
allow him to attempt to demonstrate to another tribunal his then
suitability for registration. The Tribunal also has the evidence
Respondent regarding how he intends to conduct himself in the future. The
Tribunal is of the view that a further period of
two years will need to elapse
before the Respondent could be in a position to attempt to demonstrate to any
future tribunal that
he is once again a suitable person to hold registration.
Tribunal is further of the view that the Respondent should not be providing any
health service until such time as he regains registration
as a health
practitioner. The Tribunal is satisfied the Respondent poses a substantial risk
to the health of members of the public
at this time. The Tribunal therefore
proposes to make a Prohibition Order with respect to all health
Tribunal would also have concerns if the Respondent engaged in work involving
the managing of a dental or other health service
practice. While this may not
fall within the scope of a Prohibition Order it may be a factor examined by a
tribunal considering the
Respondent’s application for re-registration in
the future.
Tribunal makes specific mention of the Prohibition Order with respect to the
provision of ‘health education services’.
This is made in light of
the evidence of both Dr Lennings and the CORE Program regarding the increased
risk of the Respondent re-offending
when he is placed in a position of power.
The Tribunal specifically prohibits the Respondent from working in a position
is instructing students in any health related matter, in particular the
teaching of dental assistants, dental students, dental nurses,
hygienists, dental therapists or dental technicians and/or dental prosthetists.
Tribunal also notes that it was submitted on behalf of the Respondent during the
sentencing proceedings that the court should
take into account loss of his
profession (see exhibit 47, page 25 – line 47). Later in the sentencing
proceedings it was confirmed
on behalf of the Respondent that he would not be
able to work until he was restored to the register (see page 26 line 40). The
was also asked to consider the hardship he had experienced within his
particular community (page 26 line 13) although this Tribunal
has evidence of
considerable support and acceptance within this community.
Tribunal is of the view that the appropriate Order to make in the event of
finding any one of Complaint 1, 2 or 4 established
would be cancellation of
registration followed by a period of exclusion from re-application and a
Tribunal also issues a reprimand to the Respondent. The nature of the misconduct
is such that it has brought the reputation of
the profession into disrepute and
it is reprehensible. The Tribunal is of the view that this is not an appropriate
matter for the
National Board to exercise the discretion granted to it by virtue
of section 226(3) of the National Law.
does not appear to be any contest between the parties that costs should be
awarded in favour of the HCCC.
Noting that the Respondent is currently suspended from the Register (having
been suspended on 11 October 2010), the Tribunal orders
(the Respondent is
referred to hereafter as the Practitioner):
Practitioner’s registration is cancelled forthwith.
Practitioner is not entitled to apply for review of the Order cancelling his
registration until 6 January 2017.
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed. If the
parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted for
an application to apply to
have the matter re-listed before the Tribunal to determine
Practitioner is prohibited from providing any health service as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
until he gains
registration as a health professional, at which time the relevant registration
authority should consider the further
continuation of the Prohibition Order
and/or conditions on registration.
Practitioner is hereby formally and severely reprimanded in terms of annexure D
HCCC v Roopra (No 2)
[2013] NSWDT 3.
Publication
of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Dental Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
Dental Council of New South Wales.
Dated: 21 June 2013
___________________
___________________
George Wing AM
___________________
Keith Lester
___________________
Sandra Everett
Annexure A - Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B - Submissions of the HCCC re Phase Two and Consequences for the
Respondent of being on the Child Protection Register
Annexure C - Submissions of the Respondent re Phase Two and Consequences for
the Respondent of being on the Child Protection Register
and proposed
Annexure D - Reprimand
HCCC v ROOPRA
INDEX TO DOCUMENTS
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS
Volume 1 – Documents Produced under summons from Corrective Services
Volume 2 – Documents Produced under summons from Dr Lennings OAM
Volume 3 – Documents Produced under summons from Justice Health
Volume 4 – Documents Produced under summons from Corrective Services
INDEX TO RESPONDENT’S DOCUMENTS
Lay Witness Statements
Statement of Mrs Dharini Roopra dated 19 April 2013
Statement of Dr Chaitan Roopra dated 22 April 2013
Psychiatric Material
Medico-legal report of Dr Lennings dated 23 March 2013
Character References (filed by respondent previously)
Dr Alexander Andrew Erdstein
Dr Claro Villon
Dr Harminder Sian
Mr Rudy Concina
Dr Gurcharan Singh Sidhu
Mrs Gurmel Sidhu
Undertaking, signed by Chaitan Roopra
Dr Jasvinder Kheray
Mr Marco Battaglia, parole supervisor
CORE report by [CORE Psychologist]
Mr Jasbir Singh Thind
Dr Firoz Vellani
Dr Sangeeta Vellani
Dr Sri Thamby
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN – financial statement dated 8 February
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN – financial statement dated 3 February
SUBMISSIONS
FURTHER SUBMISSIONS
BY THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
A. INTRODUCTION
Health Care Complaints Commission v Roopra (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT 5 at
[323] the Dental Tribunal found:
The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in the Particulars is
of such a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of
the Respondent’s registration. The Tribunal therefore finds professional
misconduct of a very serious nature.
2. The Commission seeks cancellation of the respondent’s
registration.
B. THE POWER TO CANCEL REGISTRATION
3. Section 149C of the
National Health Law
(1) A Tribunal may suspend a registered health practitioner’s
registration for a specified period or cancel the registered health
practitioner’s registration if the Tribunal is satisfied-
(a) the practitioner is not competent to practise the practitioner’s
profession;
(b) the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct; or
(c) the practitioner has been convicted of or made the subject of a criminal
finding for an offence, either in or outside this jurisdiction,
circumstances of the offence render the practitioner unfit in the public
interest to practise the practitioner’s profession;
(d) the practitioner is not a suitable person for registration in
practitioner’s profession.
authorities concerning what must be established before an order for removal can
be made, were collected in the Commission’s
first submissions dated 9
March 2012 (CFS) at [32] – [37] and [65] –
Commission withdraws the submissions made at CFS [38] – [40] in asking the
Tribunal to apply the judgment in
Stanoevski v The Council of the Law Society
of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
– [53]. The Commission does
not now submit that in order for a person’s registration to be cancelled
it must be established
that a person is unfit to practice as a
for the indefinite future. The Commission does not now
submit that in order for a person’s registration to be cancelled it must
be established that suspension for a period of time is not appropriate in the
circumstances of the case.
power to cancel registration arises from s. 149C of the
National Health
. The Tribunal can cancel the respondent’s registration if it finds
any one of the matters in s. 149C of the
National Health Law
the Tribunal found the respondent guilty of professional misconduct (Complaint
Four), the Tribunal could cancel the respondent’s
registration. If the
Tribunal found the respondent had been convicted of or made the subject of a
criminal finding for
an offence, and the circumstances of the
offence rendered the practitioner unfit in the public interest to practise the
practitioner’s
profession (Complaint One), the Tribunal could cancel the
respondent’s registration. If the Tribunal found that the respondent
not a suitable person for registration as a dentist (Complaint Two), the
Tribunal could cancel the respondent’s registration.
Commission submits that Complaint Two has been established, for the reasons that
are set out below. However, even if Complaint
Two was not established, that does
it would not lead to a finding that the respondent is a suitable person for
registration as a
dentist. The Tribunal can still cancel the respondent’s
registration because of its findings in relation to the other
Complaints.
8. The Tribunal has found the respondent guilty of Complaints One, Three
Four. The Tribunal stated at [326] that:
Quite clearly the criminal conduct of the Respondent is not only of a very
serious nature, it also relates to his practice as a dentist
as it provided him
with a level of trust and a facade of legitimacy. The HCCC have firmly
established the conduct related to the
practice or purported practice of
dentistry. Even if it had not occurred within this setting, the Tribunal is
of the view that a criminal record of this nature would
prove to be a
significant barrier to registration.
Tribunal’s findings in relation to Complaints One, Three and Four are
alone sufficient to justify the cancellation of the
respondent’s
registration. The Tribunal has found the respondent guilty of professional
misconduct of a very serious nature
(at [323]). This is in itself sufficient for
the Tribunal to cancel the respondent’s registration.
C. THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ABOUT WHETHER THE RESPONDENT IS NOT A
SUITABLE PERSON TO HOLD REGISTRATION AS A DENTIST
[325] the Tribunal sets out the appropriate law to be taken into consideration
in a determination of the suitability of a practitioner
to hold registration.
The Tribunal referred to s. 55(1) of the
National Health Law ,
establishes the grounds upon which the Board may determine the suitability of a
practitioner in the health profession.
11. Section 55(1)(b) of the
National Health Law
Having regard to the individual’s criminal history to the extent that
is relevant to the individual’s practice of the
profession, the individual
is not, in the Board’s opinion, an appropriate person to practice the
profession or it is not in
the public interest for the individual to practice
the profession.
12. Section 55(1)(h) of the
National Health Law
In the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other reason not a
fit and proper person for general registration in the profession.
144(e) of the
National Health Law
states that a complaint may be made
that the practitioner is otherwise not a suitable person to hold registration in
the practitioner’s
profession.
expression “not a suitable person” in s. 144(e) of the
should be given its natural and ordinary meaning, bearing in mind
the context within which it appears in the
National Health Law
the definition of “suitable person” in s. 55(1)(b) of the
National Health Law).
15. The relevant factors to take into account should not be restrictively
prescribed.
There is no such limitation in the
National Health Law
itself. The
factors will depend upon the facts of each case.
Tribunal has found that the respondent was not a suitable person to hold
registration when he committed the offences (at [332]):
The Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent was not a suitable person to
hold registration as a dentist at the time he committed
Tribunal has found that the respondent was not a suitable person to hold
registration when he appeared before the Dental Board
on 29 March 2009. The
Tribunal found (at [332]):
The Tribunal has had the benefit of a significant amount of material
regarding the Respondent’s attendance before a Board Inquiry
2009. The Tribunal has formed the view that the Respondent was not a suitable
person to hold registration at that time. It is of significant
concern that the
Respondent’s evidence is that, in essence, he was willing to do whatever
it took to retain his registration,
that he may not have read all of the
material that was placed before the Board Inquiry and that he may not have even
been in a mental
state where he was capable of understanding that
material. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent returned to practising
out on bail. If the Respondent was as impaired as his evidence indicates then
it is of concern to this Tribunal that he may have been
working when he was
unfit to do so.
Tribunal has found that the respondent was not a suitable person to hold
registration when he gave evidence before the Tribunal
on 19 December 2011. The
Tribunal found (at [335]):
The Tribunal notes the care taken by the Board Inquiry to explain to the
Respondent the role of the Board Inquiry being to protect
the public safety and
not to determine his guilt or otherwise to the charges he was facing. While
there is no doubt certain tensions
bear upon a practitioner placed in the
situation where the practitioner must simultaneously answer to both the
regulatory authority
as well as the criminal justice system over the same
conduct, the obligations placed upon registered health practitioners to
provide a frank account of their conduct cannot be overridden.
The Respondent
chose to place evidence and submissions before the Board Inquiry professing his
innocence when he knew that it was,
at least in part, untrue. If the
Respondent was not prepared to indicate which part of the charges he admitted
to and which he did not then the only proper course
for the Respondent to have
taken at that point was to offer no comment with respect to matter. Even if the
Tribunal is wrong on this
point, the Tribunal has formed the view that the
Respondent was not, at the time he gave evidence before the Tribunal, a suitable
person to hold registration.
Tribunal has made a number of findings that are relevant to a determination of
whether the respondent is currently a proper person
to hold registration as a
at the time of the hearing, the Tribunal did not have sufficient evidence to
support a finding that the respondent faced
particular stresses at the relevant
period (at [333]). The respondent has had the opportunity to provide this
the respondent has still not taken any steps to remediate the deficits manifest
in the conduct, and the respondent did not
have any insight into how he may go
The Tribunal notes that at the time he appeared before the Board Inquiry the
full extent of the Respondent’s conduct was not
able to be considered by
the Inquiry, that the Respondent had not taken any steps to remediate the
deficits manifest in the conduct,
nor did the Respondent have any insight into
how he may go about such remediation.
the respondent has still not embraced, and is still not appreciative of, the
protective role of the Tribunal and other regulatory
bodies, such as the Dental
Board. The Tribunal found (at [339]):
It is of concern that the Respondent placed significant reliance on the
advice provided to him at the Board Inquiry and the Council
Inquiry as a reason
for allowing material regarding his denial of the charges to be put on his
behalf that was, at the very least,
not entirely frank. There is nothing that
the Tribunal has heard that would allow it to be comfortably satisfied that the
has now embraced and is appropriately appreciative of the protective
role of this Tribunal and the other regulatory bodies exercise
(such as the
Board and Council).
Health Care Complaints Commission v Pierce
[2010] NSWMNT 23 at [62] the
Tribunal identified a range of factors that may be relevant to an assessment of
good character. These
are now examined in light of the respondent’s
(a) Whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment rather than a defect of character.
The Tribunal has found that the respondent’s criminal conduct cannot be
characterised as one off or isolated in nature (at [327]).
(b) The intrinsic serious of the misconduct in terms of fitness to practise
The Tribunal found that the respondent’s conduct is of such a
sufficiently serious nature so as to justify suspension or cancellation
respondent’s registration (at [323]).
The Tribunal also found (at [326]) that the respondent’s conduct is of
a very serious nature and relates to his practice as
a dentist, as it provided
him with a level of trust and a facade of legitimacy.
(c) Whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and hence
atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner’s
normal qualities of
The Tribunal has found that the respondent’s criminal conduct cannot be
characterised as one off or isolated (at [327]).
(d) The motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct.
The respondent sought out each victim for his own sexual pleasure, whatever
the other issues he was having in his life at the time.
The respondent enjoyed
the conduct and he was aware of what he was doing (T 59).
The Tribunal has sought evidence from the respondent in relation to the
circumstances in which he claims he found himself. The Tribunal
The Tribunal has not been provided with evidence other than statements of
family members, which support the evidence of the Respondent
that he faced
particular stresses at the relevant period. There is nothing, for example, that
supports the losses claimed by the
Respondent to have been made as a
of his activities on the stock market or the high workload he claims to have
had at this time or that this was distinct from his work
pattern at other times.
If these matters fall within the normal range of the vicissitudes of daily life
it would be difficult for
the Tribunal to place much weight on these factors
explaining the extraordinary conduct of the Respondent.
(e) The underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
(f) Whether the practitioner’s conduct pursuant to the proven episode
of misconduct, demonstrates that public and professional
confidence may be
reposed in them to uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude
required of a dentist.
These two matters can be dealt with together.
The Tribunal has found that the respondent chose to place evidence before the
Dental Board professing his innocence, when he knew
that it was at least in
part, untrue (at [335]). This evidence goes directly to the respondent’s
The Tribunal has also found that the respondent has not taken any steps to
remediate the deficits manifest in the conduct, nor did
the Respondent have any
insight into how he may go about such remediation (at [336]).
Further, the Tribunal observed a continued lack of genuine insight into the
consequences of his actions for the victims of the offences
respondent’s attempt to explain his admissions seriously damage his
credibility. The Tribunal can take this into account
in assessing his character:
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 450 per Mahoney
D. THE RESPONDENT LACKS GENUINE CONTRITION
Tribunal has made the following findings regarding the respondent’s
contrition:
(a) The respondent continues to show a lack of genuine insight into the
consequences of his actions for the victims of the offences
(b) The respondent has not yet apologised to his victims, nor provided an
explanation as to his lack of contact with Parole Service
(c) The respondent continues to vacillate on certain issues, such as his
focus on the consequences of actions on himself and his family,
rather than his
focus on the consequences on his victims (at [338]).
respondent should not breach the conditions of his parole by contacting the
victims. However, the fact that during the whole of
his time in custody, and up
to now, that the respondent has never contacted Restorative Justice to discuss
in general terms about
making of an apology to his victims (T 31) demonstrates
how superficial the respondent’s assertions of contrition
of the respondent’s actual motivation for contacting the victims is
supported by a Department of Corrective Services
Case Note Report
4) made by [omitted] on 4 January 2012. This took place
after the respondent had given evidence before this Tribunal on 19 December
2011. [omitted] noted the following:
Interview with inmate at Electronics - A3: re: REFERRAL
- Chaitan stated he had been going through Dental Tribunal (is a Dentist and
due to his offences - Agg. Indec. Assault x 3) is at
risk of loosing (sic) his
licence - he needs to show what actions he’s taking to make
amends to the victims / address his behaviour etc. Therefore, inmate wanted
to know what was the best way to contact victims to say
sorry. Challenged
Chaitan on the validity / genuine efforts of his remorse etc - and he
this is just as much of his wanting to retain his dentist licence as it is
28. The respondent accepts that he had this conversation with [omitted] (T
respondent continues to show a lack of genuine insight into his actions and the
consequences of his actions on the victims of
the offences.
E. DETERRENCE IS PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT IN THIS MATTER
30. The Tribunal will have regard to the importance of deterrence in this
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 471 Giles JA
[T]he object of protection of the public also includes deterring the legal
practitioner in question from repeating the misconduct,
and deterring others who
might be tempted to fall short of the high standards required of them. And the
public, and professional
colleagues who practise in the public interest, must be
able to repose confidence in legal practitioners, so an element of deterrence
an assurance to the public that serious lapses in the conduct of legal
practitioners will not be passed over or lightly put aside,
but will be
appropriately dealt with.
principles are directly applicable to dentists and other health
practitioners.
were three victims of the respondent’s conduct. Each victim was a
vulnerable young woman. The respondent’s conduct
took place over five
months, and only stopped when complaint was made to police
respondent has served a period of 1 year 3 months in prison for nine serious
sexual offences. He is now serving the balance of
his sentence of imprisonment
on parole, and will be on parole until 6 January 2015. He is subject to the
child sex offender register.
has substantial weight in this matter, and is one of the matters weighing in
favour of cancellation.
F. THE RESPONDENT WAS NOT A CREDIBLE WITNESS
respondent’s credibility may be taken into account in seeking to determine
what he is apt to do in the future:
Bannister v Walton
NSWLR 600 at 723 –729.
respondent was not a credible witness, for the following reasons: (a) He was
The respondent avoided many of the questions asked of him,
and did not give straight answers to many of the questions he was asked.
qualified most of the answers he gave, such as saying he was honest with his
parole officer at the time (T 14 – 15) and
said that “life goes on
and life changes so it’s not a matter for me to be as definitive in saying
a yes or no answer
(b) His gave nonsensical answers, based on what he thought what the Tribunal
wanted to hear. For example, at T 21 he gave these answers:
Q. The amount of money to buy a property is an essential detail; isn’t
it? A. To some people. Not to me.
Q. You're saying it’s not essential for you to know how much gets taken
Doreenie to buy this property? A. No, I don't think it is for me.
These answers have to be compared with the respondent’s assertion that
he lost $230,000.00 in eight months of share trading,
and that this triggered a
lot of the negativity that lead to his offending behaviour (T 96, 19
December 2011).
(c) He was argumentative, and sought to qualify his answers about matters of
fact that could not be argued against.
One notable example was at T 40 – 41, when the respondent was cross
examined about the conversation with [omitted] on 4 January
Q. You asked [omitted] what was the best way to contact the victims;
A. I asked her what was the formal way to do so, yes.
Q. You told [omitted] that there might have been spiritual healing in you
Q. You told [omitted] that there might have been karmic response in this, in
you contacting the victims?
A. Yeah, karmic as in karma, K-A-R, by the way.
Q. You also told [omitted] that doing so was just as much about you wanting
to retain your licence as a dentist.
A. At that stage; I had just been--
Q. Correct?
A. I had just been to the Tribunal hearing, and I thought that was a valid
reason as well. I do feel, though--
Q. So the answer to the question is you told [omitted] that in doing so, it
was just about - it was just as much about you wanting
to retain your licence as
a dentist; correct?
A. At that stage, and--
Q. So the answer to the question is yes; is that right?
A. The answer to the question I wouldn’t give as a blanket yet (sic
– should be ‘yes’), but I would say that,
again, at that
stage, that was my answer to that.
Q. The answer to the question I asked you is yes, isn’t it?
A. Well, I would say no to your question because you’re asking again
polarised questions to what are fundamentally multi factorial
(d) He respondent still does not accept his conduct before the Dental
The respondent continues to justify his conduct when he appeared before the
Dental Board on 29 March 2009. The respondent does not
accept that he knowingly
misrepresented his situation. The Tribunal has found that he was not a suitable
person to hold registration
at the time he appeared before the Dental Board (at
The relevant evidence was as follows (T 47 – 48, 23 May
Q. You knew when you went before the Dental Board on 29 March 2009 that if
you admitted to them that you had indecently assaulted
three young
women, that they would not let you practice as a dentist? You knew that,
didn’t you?
A. Again, I did not specifically recall thinking that way. I specifically
recall feeling confused and asking people for advice. Did
I go in and mislead
people, Mr Fernandez? I did not. I looked John Wilkinson in the eye and I said,
“Look, this is the situation”,
and I laid it out on the table as far
as I could. And I’m doing that today as well.
Q. But you didn’t tell him that you’d indecently assaulted three
young women, did you?
A. I acted on the advice that the solicitors gave me and at that time I
cannot recall thinking exactly what you just said.
Q. You must have known if you told the Dental Board on 29 March 2009 that if
you admitted to indecently assaulted three young women
they would not let you
practice as a dentist. You must have known that?
A. I cannot recall thinking that way because there were a number of factors
again in play that - that were there and I cannot recall
exactly thinking
Q. Why did you think you were there at the Dental Board?
A. Well, I think - I think the Dental Board, I was there to try and explain
situations. I was there to explain and I’m here
today again doing the same
thing. I’m here to - to again seek some sort of clarification and move on
with my life and be able
to practice again. So I think that was why I was - I
was at the Dental Board there.
Q. By the time you went to the Dental Board you had already been arrested for
a number of charges?
Q. You’d spent time in gaol? A. Yes.
Q. For those charges? A. Correct.
Q. You’d been released on bail for those charges, correct? A.
Q. You understood that the Dental Board was interested in protecting the life
or physical or mental health of any person, you understood
Q. You understood that the Dental Board was interested in the safety of the
community, didn’t you?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. You understood that, didn’t you? A. I did, sir.
Q. So you understood that if you were to admit to indecently assaulting three
young women the Dental Board would not allow you to
practice, correct?
A. I would say that that would be a consideration in hindsight but at that
particular time I cannot say I recalled that exact path
of thinking. I
don’t think thought that exact time of thinking. Although it seems very
obvious to think that now, I sought
advice and acted upon that advice. But
that's what I did, so – and I apologise now. It seems bleeding obviously -
obvious that perhaps I should have taken a different
respondent’s lack of credibility is a significant matter to be taken into
account in determining both whether the respondent
is not a suitable person for
registration as a dentist, as well as determining what he is apt to do in the
future. The most significant
aspect of the respondent’s credibility is his
deliberate concealment from the tribunal of the state of his marriage. This is
discussed separately.
G. THE RESPONDENT HAS DELIBERATELY CONCEALED IMPORTANT INFORMATION FROM
THIS TRIBUNAL
38. As at 20 March 2013 the respondent considered that his marriage had
He has deliberately concealed that fact from the Tribunal. Instead he has
presented a picture of his marriage to the Tribunal that
39. The respondent was asked about his marriage and stated (T
Q. That means your marriage has continued for the whole of the time since
you’ve been released from gaol?
A. Yes. Yes it has. I haven’t put any things to otherwise.
There’s no separation papers or - no, nothing like that. She’s
very supportive. And I’m very lucky. Very lucky that she has been very
supportive.
40. On 20 March 2013 the respondent’s supervising Parole Officer,
Battaglia, noted in the Case Reports (Volume 1) that the
respondent:
Indicated that it has now ended with his wife, he is accepting of the fact,
as it is the actualisation of what he expected. He has
accepted the status, they
remain amicable and he has contact with the children.
the respondent’s attempts to explain this statement (such as that he was
blowing off steam, and that he had not prepared
any separation papers) the
Tribunal can find that in fact his marriage had ended by that date
(a) He told his Parole officer that.
(b) He told his Parole officer he accepted that fact.
(c) He told his parole officer that the end of the marriage was the
actualisation
(not possibility) of what he had expected.
(d) In each of the ways in (b) and (c) the respondent was indicating that
this was not some passing thought that the respondent had.
(e) At the next interview with Mr Battaglia, on 27 March 2013, the
respondent:
[C]ommented that the relationship with his wife remains amicable, she has now
brought herself a house and that he has regular contact
This is a clear indication that the marriage had not recommended at that
(f) The respondent’s marriage has been in trouble for many years,
going back to 2005.
(g) By July 2012 the respondent’s wife had told him that she was still
with him only because they had two sons together (respondent’s
2012, Volume 4).
(h) By July 2012 the respondent’s wife had told him that their sons
were her priority.
(i) As at the time of his release the respondent was considering using sex
workers to fulfil his sexual needs – which would
not be the case of the
respondent’s marriage was as he has described.
(j) The respondent’s wife lives in a separate house to him. (k) The
respondent’s wife lives an independent life to him.
(l) The respondent’s wife bought a house in her own name, with the
respondent not mentioned possession any legal documents
in relationship to that
(m)The respondent’s wife bought a house in Penrith, knowing that the
respondent would not be permitted to live in Penrith as
part of the conditions
of his being released to parole.
respondent is aware why his marriage is an important consideration for the
Tribunal. He said (T 52):
Q. They were details that you thought this Tribunal needed to know about your
A. I think this Tribunal deserves to know all about my life.
Q. And it deserves to know all about your marriage, doesn’t it?
A. Yes it does. Yes. I think that's important. Given the nature of my
offending, yes, I think it’s very important.
respondent has knowingly concealed the true state of his marriage from the
Tribunal. Irrespective of whether the marriage has
recommenced, the respondent
deliberately chose not to include any details in his statement about the
marriage having ended by March
respondent’s lack of honesty with the Tribunal clearly indicates that he
is not a suitable person to hold registration as
H. THE PROTECTION OF THE HEALTH AND SAFETY OF THE PUBLIC REQUIRES THAT THE
RESPONDENT’S REGISTRATION IS CANCELLED
45. Section 3A of the
National Health Law
3A Objective and guiding principle [NSW]
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the
health and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration.
ultimate role of the Tribunal is to protect the public. In particular, the
public is to be assured that:
(a) It will be protected from the risk of the practitioner in question
repeating the misconduct.
(b) The decision will have a deterrent effect on others that might be tempted
to fall short of the high standards required of them.
(c) The decision will have the effect of encouraging the maintenance of high
standards in the medical profession.
(d) The decision will have the effect of maintaining public confidence in the
profession.
(e) The decision will not unnecessarily deprive the public of the services of
the practitioner.
general principles are derived from a number of cases, including:
, NSW Court of Appeal, Unreported, 13 November 1990;
, NSW Court of Appeal, Unreported,
19 December 1991;
Law Society of New South Wales v Bannister
Council of Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR
Law Society of
New South Wales v Walsh
, NSW Court of Appeal, Unreported, 15
protection of the health and safety of the public requires that the
respondent’s registration is cancelled because:
(a) The respondent committed the offences in his professional capacity as a
The Commission set out 37 ways in which the respondent’s criminal
conduct was related to his practice as a dentist (CFS [42]).
The Tribunal found
that the Commission firmly established the conduct related to the practice or
purported practice of dentistry
(at [326]).
(b) The respondent used his position as a dentist to commit the
Being a dentist provided the respondent with a level of trust and a facade of
legitimacy (at [326]).
(c) The respondent’s future risk is directly related to his practice as
Dr Lennings gave evidence (T 173 – 174, 5 March 2012) as
Q. If you were to hypothesize a risk scenario? A. Yes.
Q. In which offences could take place or against victims who offences might
take place by Dr Roopra, what is it you would have in
mind, doctor?
A. I think the most - normally you go on the modus operandi, what did he do
last time. That is the most likely thing he is going to
repeat, so in this case
it would be taking in a young staff member for the purpose of training or
something else like that and attempting
to groom that person into meeting his
sexual needs. That would be probably the most likely risk scenario. Another risk
scenario would
be him developing again some kind of professional relationship
with a vulnerable young person, probably through teaching if he
got into teaching or something else like that. Although that is not part of
his modus operandi to date, one imagines a similarity
in that what he has to do
is firstly encourage a dependence between a person and himself and then take
advantage of that dependence
so there is a grooming stage involved, a capacity
to make use of some form of institutional authority and then, if he is
experiencing
the destabilizing factors, there is always a potential to act
out on those, providing he doesn't have insight into his behaviour on those
kinds of things.
(d) The respondent’s conditions on parole and his being placed on the
child sex offender register are no assurance of him not
reoffending. One of his
victims, Kylie Murphy, was 23 years old. The respondent can freely and easily
find young looking and vulnerable
women over the age of 18 years old if he
(e) The respondent has not presented an appropriate treatment plan that
addresses his risk of reoffending in a dental practice.
[The psychologist]made therapeutic recommendations for the respondent. The
respondent has not presented a treatment plan beyond being
supervised by his
Parole officer and seeing a psychologist from the Parole Service. Dr
Lennings’ opinion is that these two
organisations would not be doing very
much for the respondent.
Further, the respondent has not presented evidence of the supervision he
would have in practice. The respondent has not given any
evidence of the working
conditions that he would propose to ensure that there is no further risk, such
as working in a group practice.
Given his convictions and his restrictions as a
person on the child sex offenders register, it is uncertain whether he would
be accepted into a group practice.
49. The power of the Tribunal to award costs is set out in Clause 13 of
National Health Law
. The clause relevantly
(1) A Tribunal may order the complainant (if any), the registered health
practitioner or student concerned, or any other person entitled
(whether as of right or because leave to appear has been granted) at an inquiry
or appeal before the Tribunal to pay costs
to another person as decided by the
50. The following principles apply in relation to orders for costs in
(a) The nature of an order for costs applies equally to civil litigation,
summary proceedings and disciplinary proceedings. This does
not mean that the
discretionary considerations relevant to those proceedings are identical.
However, the subject of the discretion,
that is, an order for costs, has the
same nature, and that guides the exercise of the discretion:
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
at 78 - 79.
(b) A successful party to litigation has a reasonable expectation of being
awarded costs against the unsuccessful party:
Oshlack v Richmond River
(1998) 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
NSW Medical Board v
[2009] NSWMT 8 at [42].
(c) Fairness dictates that the unsuccessful party typically bears the
liability for costs:
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1993] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
HCA 11 at [134];
NSW Medical Board v Dinakar
[2009] NSWMT 8 at
(d) The principle in (b) applies unless it is demonstrated that some other
order is appropriate:
Currabubula Holdings Pty Ltd v State Bank of NSW
[2002] NSWSC 232.
(e) The usual rationale of making a costs order is that it is just and
reasonable that the successful party should be reimbursed for
costs incurred, in
the absence of grounds connected with the charge or the conduct of
the proceedings which make it unjust or unreasonable that there should be
such reimbursement:
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
at 80, 84, and
(f) The test of whether an order for costs should be made against
an unsuccessful complainant is not whether he or she has done anything to
warrant punishment. It is whether, in the circumstances,
the respondent should
be compensated:
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
(g) It is for the losing party to establish a basis for any departure from
the usual rule:
Waterman v Gerling Australia Insurance Co Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2005] NSWSC 1111
NSW v Stanley
[2007] NSWCA 330
(h) A tribunal ought not exercise its discretion against the successful party
arbitrarily or capriciously, or on no grounds at all:
Oshlack v Richmond
River Council
(1998) 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
(i) The discretion to award costs must be exercised judicially, and
according to rules of reason and justice, not according to private
benevolence, or sympathy:
Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
(j) Generally the presumption will only be displaced where there has been
some sort of disentitling conduct on the part of the successful
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
(1998) 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
NSW Medical Board v Dinakar
[2009] NSWMT 8 at [44].
(k) Examples of disentitling conduct by a successful party include the
failure to explain the conduct before laying charges, and the
unreasonable
prolonging of proceedings:
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
. Disentitling conduct does not necessarily
need to amount to misconduct, and may simply be any conduct “calculated to
unnecessary expense”:
Lollis v Loulatzis (No 2)
35 at [29];
Keddie v Foxall
[1955] VicLawRp 58
[1955] VLR 320
(l) In the absence of disentitling conduct by the successful party, the
Tribunal will exercise its discretion by compensating the
successful party
through an order for costs:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Howe
[2010] NSWMT 12;
NSW Medical Board v Dinakar
[2009] NSWMT 8 at
Commission has been almost entirely successful in establishing each complaint.
The Commission has established professional misconduct
of a very serious nature.
The Commission has not engaged in any disentitling conduct in its prosecution of
the matter.
52. The Commission should be awarded costs.
J. ORDERS SOUGHT
53. The Commission seeks:
(a) Cancellation of the respondent’s registration for a period of three
to five years.
(b) A prohibition order. (c) Costs.
Commission respectfully submits that, in the circumstances of this case, an
order that the respondent be reprimanded and be placed
on conditions would not
assure the health and safety of the public.
CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
CHAITAN ROOPRA
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE RESPONDENT OF BEING ON THE
CHILD PROTECTION REGISTER
A. INTRODUCTION
Tribunal has sought the assistance of the parties about what the practical
consequences will be for the respondent of being placed
on the Child Protection
Register if he is to be permitted to practise as a dentist.
B. OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE
CHILD PROTECTION (OFFENDERS REGISTRATION) ACT
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
sets out the
obligations of a person who has been placed on the Child Protection Register.
Such a person is a “registrable person”
The respondent will
have ongoing reporting obligations to the Commissioner of Police. He will have
to, for example, advise of changes
to his personal information
changes to where he lives
, of his travel arrangements
), and change of name
to any future practice by the respondent as a dentist,
of the Act requires:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the “relevant personal
information” to be reported by a registrable person consists
following information:
(f) if the person is employed:
(i) the nature of the person’s employment, and
(ii) the name of the person’s employer (if any), and
(iii) the address of each of the premises at which the person is generally
employed or, if the person is not generally employed at
any particular premises,
the name of each of the localities in which the person is generally
(m) details of any carriage service (within the meaning of the
Telecommunications Act 1997
of the Commonwealth) used, or intended to be used,
by the person,
(p) details of any email addresses, internet user names, instant messaging
user names, chat room user names or any other user name
or identity used, or
intended to be used, by the person through the internet or other electronic
communication service,
respondent is subject to the Child Protection Register for 15 years: s. 14A. He
will be required to report his relevant personal
information to police for that
period of time. His obligations will end on 13 January 2028.
COMMISSION FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE ACT 1998
Commission for Children and Young People Act 1998
(NSW) (CCYPA) provides
additional regulation of people on the Child Protection Register.
of the CCYPA states:
(1) A prohibited person must not:
(a) apply for, or otherwise attempt to obtain, child-related employment,
(b) undertake child-related employment, or
(c) remain in child-related employment.
person is a “prohibited person”
CCYPA) if the person is:
(a) a person convicted of a serious sex offence, the murder of a child or a
child-related personal violence offence, whether before
or after the
commencement of this subsection, or
(b) a person who is a registrable person within the meaning of the
Protection (Offenders Registration) Act
respondent is therefore a prohibited person.
CCYPA creates a statutory presumption that a prohibited person poses a risk to
the safety of children:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
(2007) 70 NSWLR 323
per Basten JA.
33(1) CCYPA defines “child-related employment” as:
(a) mean[ing] any employment of the following kind that primarily involves
direct contact with children where that contact is not
directly supervised by a
person having the capacity to direct the person in the course of the employment:
(xiv) employment involving the direct provision of child health services.
respondent will be prohibited from applying for, undertaking, or remaining in
child-related employment: s. 33C CCYPA. This will
restrict the scope of the
respondent’s ability to practice as a dentist.
respondent can, pursuant to ss. 33H and 33I make applications that the Act does
not apply to him. Section. 33J(1) states that
an order can be made under such an
application only if the Commission for Children and Young People is satisfied
that the prohibited
person does not pose a risk to the safety of children.
Section 33J(3) sets out a number of matters that must be considered in this
determination, including the seriousness of the offences relating to the
prohibited person, the age of the person at the time those
offences were
committed, the age of each victim of the offences at the time they were
committed, and whether the person knew, or
could reasonably have known, that the
victim was a child.
D. PRINCIPLES RELATING TO HEALTH PRACTITIONERS PLACED ON THE CHILD
PROTECTION REGISTER
Health Care Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
(2007) 70 NSWLR 323
of Appeal set out principles in relation to medical practitioners and the Child
Protection Register. Dr Wingate was convicted
of the possession of child
pornography. As a result of the convictions, Dr Wingate was placed on the Child
Protection Register and
at first instance, the Medical Tribunal ordered that he
was not to treat a person under the age of 18 years of age without a chaperone.
appeal, Basten JA considered the appropriateness of orders in the context of the
CCYPA. Basten JA held that the legislative scheme
imposed by the CCYPA was
relevant to the order made by the Medical Tribunal. Basten JA stated (at [73]):
Although the Tribunal was not required to determine whether the statutory
scheme prohibited the practitioner from supplying health
services to patients
under 18 years of age, it should have treated the legislative scheme as part of
the legal background against
which the exercise of its discretion in making
orders was to be considered. It should have considered whether it was satisfied
provision of services to young patients “posed no risk” to them
and, if not so satisfied, there should have been a reasoned
justification for
not imposing a condition which had the same effect as the statutory prohibition,
if it operated.
JA stated (at [72]):
Although not all forms of employment which may involve or affect children are
covered by the definition of “child-related employment”
that very many forms of work which involve the provision of personal services to
children, whether in an institutional
setting or otherwise, are covered.
Accordingly, there is presumed to be a relationship between conduct constituting
an offence of
a relevant kind and the provision of professional services in
health, education, transport, child protection, recreation and “other
support services”.
wide definition of “child-related employment” was applied (at [72]).
[P]resumed to be a relationship between conduct constituting an offence of a
relevant kind and the provision of professional services
in health, education,
transport, child protection, recreation and ‘other support
Care Complaints Commission v Dr Alex Simring
[2010] NSWMT 7 also deals with
the consequences of being placed on the Child Protection Register. Dr Simring
possessed child pornography.
The NSW Medical Board had regard to the
respondent’s continued medical practice in the context of this criminal
Medical Tribunal examined the definition of “child-related
employment” in the context of medical practice. Dr Simring’s
inclusion on the Child Protection Register led to a finding that he was
prohibited from engaging in child–related employment
(at [9]). As a
result, it was ordered that Dr Simring must not attend, treat or perform
procedures on patients under 18 years of
Importantly,
in considering the respondent’s future practice and the conditions he
proposes to practice under, it was held in
It is not an answer to assert that the respondent’s particular type of
practice is one in which his professional contact with
children will be rare.
The qualities necessary to good professional practice obtain whatever the
particular nature of the practice.
respondent’s placement on the Child Protection Register and the operation
of the CCYPA directly affect the respondent’s
ability to practice as a
dentist, should this Tribunal permit him to do so.
HCCC V ROOPRA
Submissions of the Respondent
24 May 2013
Table of Contents
Introduction
Roopra does not contest Complaints 1, 3, 4, but contests Complaint 2.
Roopra unconditionally concedes that his criminal conduct was abhorrent and
reprehensible, and that it is appropriate for the Tribunal
to impose further
disciplinary sanctions.
is respectfully submitted that the appropriate sanction is the imposition of a
further suspension, and the subjection of future
registration to certain
conditions of practice.
way of summary, the following considerations support suspension rather than
deregistration:
(a) prior to
the offences, Dr Roopra was a person of impeccable character and standing;
(b) the conduct
was utterly aberrant and antithetical to his general character, and was
associated with temporary mental disturbance
involving depression and loss of
mood control;
(c) the mental
disturbance has since resolved;
(d) Dr Roopra
displays profound and genuine remorse for his actions;
(e) Dr Roopra
has embraced rehabilitation;
(f) there is no
appreciable risk of re-offence;
offences did not relate to the violation of the dentist-patient
relationship;
(h) notwithstanding
the shameful nature of the offence, Dr Roopra retains the strong support of
family, friends, patients, and professional
colleagues;
(i) Dr Roopra
provides a valuable professional service to his local community;
Tribunal can adequately fulfil the purpose of disciplinary action by means of
suspension.
these submissions, the text in “mark-up” mode constitutes additions
to the submissions prepared on behalf of Dr Roopra
for the Phase 1 hearing. The
additional submissions address the fresh evidence that has been filed, and the
matters raised in the
Tribunal’s Phase 1 judgment.
Roopra is in a significantly better position to defend complaint 2 now, compared
to time of the first hearing, for the following
released from custody on parole on 6 January 2013, and therefore is not
presently afflicted by the stigma of incarceration;
(b) At the time
of the last hearing, Dr Lennings had identified the potential prejudicial effect
of incarceration (and these risks
were elaborated in paragraph 16 of his second
report). While Dr Roopra remained in custody (and faced the prospect of further
incarceration),
the Tribunal could reasonably have felt concern about whether
the effect of incarceration could compromise his future capacity to
However, Dr Lennings confirmed in oral evidence that (since his release) Dr
Roopra displays no adverse effect from his
time in custody, and (on the
contrary) appears to have utilised the custodial period for self-improvement.
Dr Lennings concludes:
“given the good emotional control, apparent
insight gained, and the continuing low risk, there is no specific reason
attributable
to the risk assessment, or his mental health, that indicates Dr
Roopra could not successfully re-commence practice”: [14];
Roopra’s marriage has been identified as significant for his stability and
rehabilitation. At the last hearing, the
Tribunal could reasonably have formed
the view that the marriage might not survive the adaptation period following Dr
future release from custody. Although Dr Roopra’s marriage
still confronts difficulties and issues that need to be addressed,
release from custody Dr Roopra and his wife remain very committed to the
marriage. The fact that the marriage has remarkably
survived the duration of
and transition from incarceration, combined with their frank acknowledgement of
the challenges they still
confront and their commitment to address those
challenges, bodes well for their marriage in the future.
Tribunal’s judgment, a number of matters were identified which caused the
Tribunal particular concern about Dr Roopra’s
fitness for practice. It is
submitted that these matters have been substantially addressed by the evidence
in the second phase of
the hearing, and the course of events since the last
(e) Firstly,
the Tribunal expressed concern that the conduct of Dr Roopra at the March 2009
board hearing was not frank, and that
“there is nothing that the Tribunal
has heard that would allow it to be comfortably satisfied that the Respondent
has now embraced
and is appropriately appreciative of the protective role of
this Tribunal and other regulatory bodies”: [339]. This issue
substantially addressed in Dr Roopra’s evidence in the second phase (which
has been the subject of vigorous challenge
under cross-examination). For the
reasons set out in paragraph
below, it is submitted that the
Tribunal can now be comfortably satisfied that Dr Roopra has insight into the
unsatisfactory nature
of his conduct before Board, and a proper appreciation of
the protective role of the various regulatory bodies in the profession.
(f) Secondly,
the Tribunal found that “at the time the Respondent gave evidence before
the Tribunal the Tribunal observed that
there is still a lack of genuine insight
into the consequences of his actions for the victims of the offences”:
[337]. Since
the first phase hearing, Dr Roopra has attended an intensive
“custody based therapy program” for sexual offenders, called
“CORE Moderate”. The course lasted approximately 7 months, during
which period Dr Roopra attended treatment 2-3 days
per week, for several hours.
Part of the program related to “Understanding of Offending
Behaviour”, which “provides
an account of an individual’s
acceptance of responsibility for past offending behaviour”: Donaldson,
CORE report
”), [15]. The evidence demonstrates that
this course has been profoundly beneficial for Dr Roopra developing further
into gravity and consequences of his actions. For the reasons set out
in paragraphs
below, it is submitted that the
Tribunal can now be comfortably satisfied that Dr Roopra possesses appropriate
insight into the consequences
of his actions for the victims of his
its judgment, the Tribunal states that “it formed the view that that the
Respondent was not, at the time he gave evidence
before the Tribunal [at the
phase 1 hearing], a suitable person to hold registration”: [335].
Notwithstanding that finding,
it is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal can
now be comfortably satisfied that Dr Roopra is a suitable person to hold
registration,
by reason of the matters set out in paragraph
above (and the matters otherwise set out
in these submissions).
Legal principles
Purpose of jurisdiction: protective, not punitive
disciplinary jurisdiction is “entirely protective and notwithstanding that
its exercise may involve a great deprivation
to the person disciplined, there is
no element of punishment
relevant function of the Tribunal (as of this Court) is to protect the public
from medical practitioners whose continued
practice may cause harm to the
Consequently,
it is not the role of a disciplinary tribunal to “emulate the
censoriousness of the criminal courts when what
they are dealing with
essentially is criminal conduct”. In
Re Dr Abraham
Stephanopoulos
the disciplinary
panel conducted disciplinary hearing in relation to a medical practitioner
convicted of child pornography charges.
“[163] It is tempting for a panel of a regulatory body
to emulate the censoriousness of the criminal courts when what they are
with essentially is criminal conduct. This is especially so when the conduct
falls into the categories of being abhorrent
and perverted as was the offending
by Dr Stephanopoulos. However, for panels to approach their task in this way is
to misconceive
their function and to lapse into impermissible and retributive
judgmentalism.
[164] It is the responsibility of a panel to reflect in a sophisticated and
balanced way about considerations that are relevant to
regulatory bodies, as
against those that are within the purview of the criminal courts. Part of that
responsibility includes applying
community expectations and values, as best it
can. A panel must endeavour to achieve the difficult balance between on the one
protecting the community and upholding the standards and reputation of a
profession and, on the other hand, enabling the community,
where appropriate, to
draw upon the potential contributions of a practitioner who in the past has made
serious errors of judgment.
Inevitably this involves characterisation of the
behaviour, evaluation of what has caused it, and assessment of the likelihood of
its being repeated.
[165] It is not the function of a panel to be punitive, but it is its task to
mete out robust determinations where necessary - on
occasions to draw lines in
the sand in relation to when a practitioner’s conduct is such that he or
she has forfeited the right
to enjoy the benefits and privileges of
registration. A component of this declaratory role for panels is to articulate
which in one context or another cannot be transgressed without the
most serious of consequences. This is an aspect of protecting
the community, and
the profession. Such statements must be backed up by actions by panels to do
that which is necessary to deter
other practitioners who might contemplate
behaving in a similarly unacceptable way.”
Dimensions of protection of public interest
are a number of dimensions to the protection of the public served disciplinary
Protecting patients of practitioner concerned
there is protection of patients or potential patients of the practitioner
concerned. “The purpose of any order made
upon a finding that a complaint
has been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of the public at
large, but more particularly
patients or potential patients of the practitioner
concerned”.
Protection of general reputation of profession
there is protection of the general standing and reputation of the profession.
“One particular concern in....cases
of moral turpitude is that the public
reputation of the profession may suffer and public confidence in it may be
prejudiced.”
Consequently, it is recognised that the public interests which may properly
be protected by disciplinary sanctions “include,
indirectly, the standing
of the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence in the high
standards of medical
practitioners”.
Consequently,
a legitimate purpose of disciplinary sanction is to provide “an assurance
to the public that serious lapses in
the conduct of ... practitioners will not
be passed over or lightly put aside, but will be appropriately dealt
is sometimes said that disciplinary rules are “protective of the
profession.....However, the only claim of the profession
to protection is as the
discharge of its functions advances the public
maintenance of public confidence in the profession is an important purpose of
disciplinary action,
this can be achieved in a number of ways, not
all of which dictate his removal from the
“there is also an element of deterrence or, to put it more positively,
encouragement to other practitioners to recognise
the importance of complying
with professional standards and the risks of failing to do
Consequently,
“In the relevant sense, the protection of the public is... not confined to
the protection of the public against
further default by the solicitor in
question. It extends also to the protection of the public against similar
defaults by other solicitors
and has, in this sense, the purpose of publicly
marking the seriousness of what the instant solicitor has done”.
fact that the misconduct did not occur in a clinical setting, detracts
significantly from the need for deterrent
Extrapolation from other professions
similar principles are applied in the disciplinary jurisdictions of different
professions, care must be taken with respect
to the slavish extrapolation of
principles from different professions. This reflects that different
considerations may be relevant
to the protection of the public in relation to
different professions.
respect to law, “There are four interrelated interests involved. Clients
must feel secure in confiding their secrets
and entrusting their most personal
affairs to lawyers. Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on
the word and the
behaviour of their colleagues. The judiciary must have
confidence in those who appear before the courts. The public must have
in the legal profession by reason of the central role the profession
plays in the administration of justice. Many aspects of the
administration of
justice depend on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public in the
performance of professional obligations by
professional
respect to medicine, it has been held that: “The degree of trust which
patients necessarily give to their doctors
may vary according to the condition
which takes the patient to the doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace
medical matters,
the trust a patient places in a doctor is considerable. In some
cases, of which the present seems to be an example, the patient’s
cannot help but be almost absolute. The doctor’s power in regard to the
patient in such cases is also very great. I do
not mean power in the abstract
way but as a matter of fact; the extent of the power will vary according to the
temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of the relationship in which they are temporarily placed,
a position to do whatever the doctor wants with the body of the patient. This is
one of the reasons why doctors are subject
to correspondingly great obligations
and are expected to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the
public interest”.
Countervailing considerations
the overarching purpose of the jurisdiction is protection of the public
interest, it is recognised that a number of countervailing
consideration which
are material to the exercise of remedial discretion.
“the public's interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in utilising, to the full, the skills
of talented people who have
undergone years of rigorous training but who, having misconducted themselves,
have had to be removed
for a time from positions of responsibility and
there has been in the authorities a recognition in the public interest of
redemption, which weighs in favour of leniency
in circumstances of contrition
and rehabilitation.
“Because the jurisdiction is for the
protection of the public, regard also may be had, to the public's interests in
the restoration
to the Roll of such persons as have demonstrated, including by
their work, activities and life, a fitness to be restored. For cultural
historical reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the
shared morality of our society. In part, this
is because of the teachings of
religious leaders who have profoundly influenced our community's perception of
justice and fairness,
reflected from earliest times in the courts: see, eg,
St Matthew's Gospel
, 3, 19. In part, it derives
from the self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation
of those who lapse and
to hold out to them the hope that, by diligent and
honourable efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be
to the good opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society.
The public's interest also includes the economic interest which
is involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having
misconducted themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and
it is recognised that the protective purpose should be fulfilled without
unnecessarily causing punitive effects on the practitioner.
that disciplinary orders are commonly characterised as “protective”
does not deny that they have punitive
effects.....In particular circumstances,
it may be important to recognise that disciplinary orders other than fines also
have punitive
effects and to take those effects into account in ensuring that
the necessary protective purpose is achieved without unnecessarily
degree of punishment exceeding that thought appropriate by the criminal
“in considering whether the facts alleged have been proved, the Court
takes into account the gravity of the matters
alleged and the very serious
consequence which disbarment has upon a person subject to such an
“Fit and proper person”
an order for deregistration is sought, “the ultimate issue is whether the
practitioner is shown not to be a fit and proper
person” to remain on the
professional register.
burden of establishing that the practitioner is not a “fit and proper
person” rests on the
complainant.
With matters
asserted in mitigation the onus rests on the
practitioner.
standard of proof is “comfortable satisfaction” on the balance of
probabilities, to indicate a level of satisfaction
that takes into account the
serious consequence of an affirmative
making an assessment of “fit and proper person” it is necessary to
examine "the whole position",
and “every fact which can throw any light” on the
This requires
“consideration of the detailed subjective and objective circumstances of
offending behaviour”.
turn on a “close consideration of their own
is determined at the time of the disciplinary hearing, not the time of the
all cases of professional misconduct justify or require a conclusion that the
name of a practitioner should be removed
fame and character" or “good character” are frequently used
touchstones for the “test of his ethical fitness
profession”
(sufficient
for establishing a practitioner is a “fit and proper person”).
the classic statement of the content of “good character”, it was
stated: “The judgment as to character must
be arrived at by giving due
weight to all features... “Good character” is not a summation of
acts alone, but relates
rather to the quality of a person. The quality is to be
judged by acts and motives, that is to say, behaviour and mental and emotional
situations accompanying that behaviour. However, character cannot always be
estimated by one act or one class of act. As much about
a person as is known
will form the evidence from which the inference of good character or not of good
character is drawn”.
respect to the dimensions of character relevant to the inquiry:
(a) The defects most significant to the status of “fit and proper
person” are those relating to character traits reasonable
necessary for
the practice of the
profession;
(b) However, relevant defects of character are not strictly confined to those
directly associated with practice within the profession.
Tribunals are
“entitled to enquire into what may be described as personal misconduct, as
distinct from professional misconduct,
in determining ... whether or not the
applicant is a man of good character, whilst recognising that there may be some
kinds of conduct
deserving of disapproval which have little or no bearing on the
question whether ... an applicant for registration as a medical practitioner
a person of good
character”.
(c) Nevertheless, in an assessment of fitness for practice, “ there is a
real distinction between professional misconduct,
and purely personal misconduct
on the part of a professional, although there are cases in which the distinction
may be difficult
“[T]he whole approach of a court to a case of personal misconduct must
surely be very different from its approach to a case
of professional misconduct.
Generally speaking, the latter have a much more direct bearing on the question
of a man’s fitness
to practice than the
are occasionally different statutory formulations for describing the touchstone
for entitlement to registration, but they are
generally construed
consistently.
Dealing with particular allegations of misconduct
respect to making an assessment of whether a practitioner is a “fit and
proper person” or of “good character”,
in light of particular
aspects of proven misconduct, the following guidelines have often been
determine whether a finding of proven misconduct should be followed by a
consequential order that the practitioner is not
of good character in the
context of fitness to practice medicine, one must consider:
(a) whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment rather than a defect of character;
(b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness to practise
(c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and hence
atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner's normal
qualities of
character; [With respect to this factor “an episode may well involve a
sequence of events and not a single event.
To describe an episode as
“isolated” does not mean that it has to be one or a small number of
events (although that might
be satisfied in the present case), nor does it say
anything specific about the time period. It is merely a way of asking whether
particular conduct should be seen as correctly revealing an underlying defect of
character, or as aberrant behaviour. Similarly,
the third factor sought no more
than to judge the particular aspects of misconduct against the background of the
practitioner’s
life and practice, so as to put the misconduct in
(d) the motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct;
(e) the underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
conduct; and
(f) whether the practitioner's conduct post the proven episode of misconduct
demonstrates that public and professional confidence
may be reposed in him to
uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required of a medical
practitioner.”
understood”, that statement “provides guidance by way of a checklist
of considerations, which may be of
varying relevance depending on the
circumstances of the case and which may not be comprehensive. It is not to be
treated as if expressed
guidelines effectively require:
consideration of the particular proven misconduct;
(b) a broader
inquiry of all other evidence and considerations relevant to the assessment of
mandated inquiry beyond the limited particulars of the offending conduct
reflects 2 guiding principles:
(a) Firstly,
the recognition that that particular episodes of misconduct need not necessarily
define broader “inherent qualities”
of character even at the time of
the misconduct.
“a single act, or connected series of acts, even if pertinent to medical
practice, may not amount to showing that
a registered practitioner is “not
of good character”.
(b) Secondly,
the recognition that fact that character can be reformed. “A man may be
guilty of grave wrongdoing and may subequently
become a man of good
character”.
inquiry critically involves consideration of the likelihood of re-offence. The
following factors have been identified in the
authorities as being relevant to
the assessment of that likelihood
Insight into the nature and gravity of the misconduct is a very important
consideration.
“practitioner’s expressed intention not to re-offend is relevant to
mitigation, [but] will have little weight unless
accompanied by an understanding
of the wrongfulness of the conduct which was the subject of the disciplinary
Contrition.
In cases such as this where the protection of the community is the
paramount interest, contrition, if accepted as honest, may indicate
occasion for protection
“The fact that the opponent pleaded guilty to the charge will usually
be counted in her favour”,
reflecting insight into the wrongfulness of the conduct;
taken to promote rehabilitation and prevent recurrence
Rehabilitation
“Clear and convincing evidence of rehabilitation” has been described
important”.
relevant to the inquiry is evidence of support from:
(a) family.
This reflects the significance of supportive environment for
rehabilitation;
(b) professional
peers. The “court very much values the views of the opponent’s
: This reflects
that “some of the referees are, because of longer acquaintance..., in a
position to
judge...character”;
the attitude of peers is indicative of how fellow professionals would regard the
continued registration of the practitioner.
light of the assessment of character, an overall assessment then needs to be
made as to what disciplinary sanction is required
to fulfil the purpose of
protecting the public interest, in relation to the various dimensions of public
interest referred to in
Criminal misconduct
principles have been developed in relation to assessing misconduct which
constitutes a crime. “The impact of criminal
convictions on practitioners
in the context of an assessment as to their character will vary
fact that the opponent has a conviction for a serious offence is not necessarily
sufficient reason for an order striking
that person off the
“Convictions
for quite serious offences do not necessarily mean that a professional
practitioner is deprived of the quality
of good character required as a
condition of fitness to
the fact of conviction and imprisonment is, however, far from irrelevant and may
be regarded as carrying a degree
of disgrace
, Kitto J went
so far as to say: “A conviction may of its own force carry such a stigma
that judges and members of the profession
may be expected to find it too much
for their self-respect to share with the person convicted the kind and degree of
association
which membership of the Bar entails.” However, his statement
that the stigma of conviction may be sufficient must necessarily
be read in the
context of his earlier statement that the “bar is no ordinary
profession” (298), and that a barrister
is “by virtue of a long
tradition, in a relationship of intimate collaboration with the judges, as well
as with his fellow-members
of the Bar, in the high task of endeavouring to make
successful the service of the law to the community. That is a delicate
relationship,
and it carries exceptional privileges and exceptional obligations.
If a barrister is found to be, for any reason, an unsuitable person
to share in
the enjoyment of those privileges and in the effective discharge of those
responsibilities, he is not a fit and proper
person to remain at the Bar”
are numerous examples of cases in which professionals have not been
deregistered, despite convictions for crimes.
Prothonotary
v Del Castillo
[2001] NSWCA 75
, [57] (knife fight, acquitted of murder)
Ha v Pharmacy Board of Victoria
[2002] VSC 322 (A
pharmacist indecently
assaulted two young female interviewees applying for a pharmacy assistant
position, pretending to examine them
for needle marks. The Board suspended him
from practice for three months and reprimanded him, as well as imposing
conditions on his
return and ordering that he pay costs. On appeal Gillard J
held that suspension was not appropriate and imposed a fine instead);
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [37]
Prothonotory
of the Supreme Court of NSW v P
[2003] NSWCA 320 (Solicitor
convicted and
imprisoned for importation of cocaine. Not stuck off)
Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR
, at [33] (indecent assault of defendant’s children, including removing
clothes and once touching the vagina. The High Court
overturned the
deregistration of the practitioner. The Court held that “the nature of
the trust, and the circumstances of
the breach, were so remote from anything to
do with professional practice that the characterisation of the appellant's
personal misconduct
as professional misconduct was erroneous”: [34]. The
Court held further that: “the Court of Appeal in the present
case appears
to have given insufficient weight to the isolated nature of the 1997
offences, and the powerful subjective case made
on behalf of the
appellant”: [37])
Board of Queensland v Fitzgerald
(Queensland Health Practitioners Tribunal,
27/04/06) (A general surgeon had pleaded guilty to three offences of accessing,
downloading
and copying child pornography from the internet, for which he was
convicted and fined $2000. The practitioner agreed to stringent
restrictions on
his right to practise, and to undergo treatment. The Tribunal rejected the
complainant’s contention that a
three month suspension should be imposed,
after having said: “There is no doubt that the offences for which the
was convicted were serious offences; they are offences which are
difficult to detect or stop; they involve the exploitation of children
serious ways and constitute seriously disgraceful behaviour....General
[deterrence] in this type of offence is important
in sentencing in the criminal
courts, however, in this jurisdiction the considerations are somewhat different.
This jurisdiction
is protective rather than punitive and the Act requires the
Tribunal to consider the protection of the public, the maintenance of
for the profession, and the maintenance of public confidence with the
profession. So the question is really will the public
confidence in the
profession be maintained without a suspension and will three months’
suspension deter other from committing
like offences?”); referred to
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [40]
Board of Queensland v Cullen
[2006] QHPT 004 (dentist convicted for charge
of attempting to unlawfully procure a child under 16 to commit an indecent act.
Tribunal found the dentist was unlikely to re-offend. Tribunal suspended
registration for 2 years, and thereafter imposed conditions);
referred to in
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [33]
[2007] NSWMT 2 (Medical practitioner convicted of offences relating to
possession of child pornography, fined, and placed on 3 year
good behaviour
bond. In disciplinary proceedings, the practitioner was not struck off, but
conditions were placed on his registration);
affirmed on appeal in
Care Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
Abraham Stephanopoulos
[2006] MPBV 12 (medical practitioner convicted and
jailed on child pornography charges. The Tribunal found: “These are very
serious adverse findings. The conduct of Dr Stephanopoulos is abhorrent from the
perspective of contemporary community values. Although
he did not pay for the
images that he collected and although he procured them from free sites on the
Internet, by his addiction to
such material between March and June 2003 he
provided encouragement to the producers and purveyors of illegal material that
the innocence of children. As a consumer of their product, he has taken
his place in the chain of their criminality.” Nevertheless,
the Tribunal
only suspended registration, and thereafter subjected it to conditions); noted
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [33])
[2007] NSWNMT 5 (Nurse
convicted of offences relating to the
possession of pornography. No further sanctions imposed)
[2010] NSWCHT 2
[2011] NSWSC 960 (Chiropractor
convicted of exposing
himself in a public place. Not struck off)
(NSWMT, 29/4/2010) (Medical practitioner convicted of possessing
child pornography. Tribunal accepts that there was “minimal
of commission of “hands on” offence. The Tribunal held that
“the conduct of the respondent in accessing
and possessing child
pornography, while done in private life, by reason of its serious and
reprehensible nature demonstrates an absence
of qualities compatible with
professional practice”: [75]. “The conduct was of a very serious
order. There could be
little argument in the Tribunal’s view that the
respondent was not a person of good character. The issue to be resolved is
whether he has reformed himself to the extent that he could properly regarded
[sic] as a person of good character to have reposed
in him the trust and
confidence associated with the practice of medicine”: [110]. The
Tribunal so found, stating that “the
reformation of character is
continuing and al the evidence demonstrates that the respondent has embraced
therapy and is demonstrating
an understanding of the nature and effect of his
offending...{: [110]. The practitioner was not struck off. Registration
to conditions, prohibiting treatment of persons under 18, except in
special circumstances)
noted above, there are a number of cases in which professionals have not been
deregistered despite convictions for possession of
child pornography. This is
notwithstanding the emphatic judicial recognition of the gravity of such
offences. For example, it has
Panel is of the view that Mr Provan’s conduct in this matter, when
objectively viewed, is of a high level of immorality,
outrageousness and
disgracefulness. Because it involves criminal offending in respect of children,
it is particularly serious....The
possession of child pornography involves
facilitation and encouragement for the corruption and violation of children. The
preparedness
of persons such as Mr Provan to purchase child pornography creates
a market which encourages the further exploitation and abuse of
innocence. The offence created by
is intended,
among other things, to deter prospective purchasers and collectors of child
pornography in the hope that adverse economic
consequences will ensue for those
who produce it....As the Ontario Court of Appeal put it in R v Stroempl
105 CCC (3d) 187:
‘The possession of child pornography is a very important
contributing element in the general problem [of] child pornography.
real sense, possessors ... instigate the production and distribution of child
pornography – and the production of
child pornography, in turn, frequently
involves child abuse in one form or another. The trial judge was right in his
observation
that if the courts, through the imposition of appropriate sanctions,
stifle the activities of the prospective purchasers and collectors
pornography, this may go some distance to smother the market for child
pornography altogether.”
Remedial options
Deregistration
order for the involuntary removal of the name of a practitioner from the Roll of
solicitors is made only because the probability
is that the solicitor is
permanently unfit to practise. Unless the court is persuaded that the
probability exists, the proper order
to make will usually be one of suspension
or fine instead of
the expression “permanently unfit to practice” has recently been
held to capture “a shade of meaning of
being likely to be unfit to
practice for the indefinite future”, rather than meaning that “in no
circumstances whatsoever
would the solicitor be fit to
even by reference to that less rigorous “shade of meaning”, if
“the Tribunal or Appeal Panel is of the view
that a person is presently
unfit to practice, but after a particular period of time will be once again fit
to practice, then suspension
for that period of time is the appropriate
order.....Removal from the roll is appropriate only when a legal practitioner is
to practice, and suspension for a particular period is not
appropriate”.
proper use of suspension is...for those cases in which a legal practitioner has
fallen below the high standards to be expected
of such a practitioner, but not
in such a way as to indicate that he lacks the qualities of character and
trustworthiness which are
the necessary attributes of a person entrusted with
the responsibilities of a legal
practitioner.".
an order of suspension (rather than deregistration) to be made the Tribunal
would have to be satisfied that at the end of the
period of suspension the
practitioner would be a fit and proper person to resume medical
Conditions:
“Conditions
are not necessarily imposed because of a finding that there is, in their
absence, a probability, or even an unacceptable
risk, of inappropriate
behaviour. They are often imposed as a means of securing and maintaining public
confidence in the profession
when the slightest doubt
“chaperone” condition, pursuant to which practice is subject to the
condition that a third person is required to be
in attendance during patient
consultations, “does not necessarily bespeak that there is otherwise an
unacceptable risk in allowing
the practitioner to continue to practise”.
It may be appropriate to impose such a condition when:
(a) there is
even a “remote” possibility of recidivism;
(b) for the
“maintenance of confidence of the public, both in the particular doctor
and in the profession
generally”.
Consideration of the Facts
Application of guidelines for assessing “good character”
out below is a consideration of the guidelines for the assessment of “good
character”, referred to in paragraph
(a) whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment rather than a defect of character;
(b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness to practise
Roopra concedes that there are a number of aggravating aspects of the offending
conduct, which underscore the unquestionable seriousness
misconduct.
(a) there were
incidents involving 3 victims over the span of 5 months;
(b) the young
age of one of the victims;
(c) the fact
that the offences were planned, rather than spontaneous;
(d) the fact
that Dr Roopra was in a position of trust with the victims, by reason of being
in the position of an employer, and the
offences involved an abuse of that
(e) the fact
that Dr Roopra sought to employ the victims in his capacity as a dentist, whom
the victims would naturally accept was
a person of good character
objective aspects of the offending conduct which mitigated its gravity of the
offending conduct, relative to the relevant
category of offence
(a) Although
the victims suffered harm in the form of hurt and upset (which was significant
and can not be minimised), there was no
significant physical
the trial judge found that there subjective circumstances which mitigated the
gravity of the crime. As to this:
(a) The trial
judge found that “he had no difficulty accepting that the offender was
significantly depressed at the time of
the offending”, and that “his
behaviour was related to his mood disturbance”: Applicant Bundle, Tab 48,
(b) The trial
judge accepted that the “offender’s depression significantly
weakened his moral construct” at the
time of the offences: Applicant
Bundle, Tab 48, page 17;
(c) The nature
and significance of Dr Doopra’s mental state is addressed further
sentencing judge assessed the offences as “ranging from somewhere just
below the middle range of objective seriousness towards
the bottom of the range
of such seriousness”, in respect of the offences in question.
there are a number of objective aspects of the offending conduct which mitigated
the gravity of the offending conduct “qua
fitness to practise
medicine”. As to this
(a) None of the
victims were patients of Dr Roopra, and there was no violation of any
dentist-patient relationship;
(b) None of the
offending conduct took place on the practice premises;
offences were indirectly linked to his professional practice, because he
procured the services of the victims in his capacity
as a dentist.
Nevertheless, the absence of any connection between the offences and the
dentist-patient relationship, renders the
offending conduct substantially remote
from the practice of dentistry.
(c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and hence
atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner's normal
qualities of
way of summary, the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode, atypical
of the Dr Roopra’s normal qualities of character.
the offences occurred over a 5 month period, within the context of a 19 year
the offending conduct was utterly antithetical to the upstanding qualities of
character of Dr Roopra evidenced by the significant
body of character evidence.
This is addressed further below.
the experts are agreed that the prospects of re-offending are very low:
(a) Dr Lennings
concludes that the “appreciable risk of offending again is....negligible.
Risk can be moderated by dynamic
factors. In Dr Roopra’s case the
strength of marital relationship, his developing self awareness, the absence of
mood disturbance,
and compliance with his treatment for health needs help to
moderate any risk that might be otherwise indicated by the simple fact
offence”: Respondent, 41, [17]; 55, [43]-[44]. Dr Lennings is a person
of immense practical and academic experience
and expertise in the field of
sexual offending generally: see curriculum vitae at Respondent’s Bundle,
Tab 8, 44Aff. The
depth of that expertise, and the objective rigour of his
analysis, were manifest in his oral evidence;
Baird, who prepared the pre-sentence report, concluded that Mr Roopra was in the
“low risk category relative to other
male sexual offenders”:
Respondent, 35
Refresher evidence
(c) Evidence since Dr Roopra’s release from custody confirms that the
prospects of re-offence remains low;
(d) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings states:
is no change in Mr Roopra's risk estimate for re-offending. It was already at
the low risk level”: [20].
(ii) However,
he confirms that the “dynamic risk” has in fact lowered since the
last hearing, concluding: “On the
whole the change in dynamic risk
factors has been towards lowering risk, such that in 2010 I estimated his risk
based on dynamic
risk factors as moderate, but I would now assess it as
low”: [21].
(iii) Further,
he states: “In my evidence to the Tribunal I suggested a scenario in
which Dr Roopra's risk may become elevated
would be one where once again he was
experience persistent low mood, in the context of relationship troubles, and a
crash in self
esteem probably associated with increased alcohol use. This
scenario remains the case, but seems less likely than when I initially
Roopra. In addition, the requirement to maintain”: [22]
(e) In his oral evidence, Dr Lennings stated that:
(i) the level
of Dr Roopra’s risk of reoffcence was “as low as he can
confirmed that he could not say that there was “no further risk”,
but also stated that there was a risk of future
offence even in the general
population of persons who had not previously committed a sexual offence. Merely
“being male is
a risk factor”;
(iii) He stated
that there was “
no discernible or appreciable risk of
”, in view of the “absence of significant dynamic risk
respect to the predicted rates of recidivism for persons with the same score as
Dr Roopra on the STATIC-99R test, it was
noted in the CORE report that
recidivism was between 3% and 7% over 5 years, and 7% to 13% over 10 years.
However, Dr Lennings noted
that recidivism for the purpose of that statistic is
not necessarily limited to actual sexual offences. Rather, the most common
re-offence (at least in some studies) was “administrative” offences
relating to breach of reporting conditions. Further,
those statistics
don’t take account of the dynamic risk factors which mitigate risk in Dr
Roopra’s case;
(v) When it was
suggested that to Dr Lennings that placing Dr Roopra back in a practice setting
might be a “trigger” for
relapse, Dr Lennings said “it is hard
to imagine”. On the assumption that there is supervision at the practice,
he considered
that re-offence was “simply unbelievable”. Dr
Lennings would be “pretty perplexed” as to why Dr Roopra would
inclined to re-offend. Further, in view of the “external
restraints” which he presumes would be in operation in the
practice, to
re-offend Dr Roopra would need to be “considerably more deviant than he
appeared to me or anyone else who assessed
(f) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]states that Mr Roopra’s total
score on the Static-099R (which is a test of “static
risk”) “places Mr Roopra in the low risk category relative to other
male sexual offenders”: [31]. Her
assessment of the “dynamic
risk” factors were consistent with a low assessment of the materiality of
dynamic risk factors
in Dr Roopra’s circumstances:
the evidence supports the finding that the offending conduct was associated with
an acute temporary mood disturbance and
depression, contributed to by a
temporary alignment of life circumstances.
(a) Dr Lemming
concludes that “it seems he experienced a major depressive episode
associated with some hypomanic behaviour”:
Respondent, page 53.5. He
noted that “he seems to have begun to swing between depressed moods
accompanied by self-loathing
and anger on the one hand, and mild hypomanic
states on the other”: Respondent, page 56, [48]. “From a
psychological
perspective the current offences can be understood as a form of
self-soothing behaviour in which he attempted to make himself feel
an...exercise of power over others for sexual gratification”: Respondent,
page 56, [49]
(b) Dr Lennings
observed that “depressions can reduce inhibitions against offending as it
lowers the ability of the person to
consider the effect of their behaviour on
others (reduce empathy); impair judgment; and cause distortion in their sense
is pleasurable or rewarding”: Respondent, 41, [18]. Dr Lennings
states that the underlying mood disturbance of Dr Roopra
“generated the
loss of cognitive flexibility and self-approval that he now seems to
command”: Respondent, 56, [49]
diagnosis is corroborated by evidence of Dr Roopra’s behaviour during the
relevant period, from Dr Roopra and his wife.
His wife states that “at
the time of the offences, Chaitan was in a state of depression. He was
displaying mood swings and
was unstable. He was non-communicative. Our
relationship thus suffered”: Respondent, 12, [4];
(d) Dr Lenning
described the antecdents to the mental disturbance as including the following
(i) series of
medical shocks which hit his family in 2004-6, including his wife’s
breast cancer and his mother’s sickness,
which caused emotional distress:
Respondent, 46.8; see also TS.10.32
(ii) increased
domestic and child care responsibilities associated with his wife’s
medical condition, which was emotionally
draining: Respondent, 47.1;
financial losses, from speculative share trading: Respondent, 47, [7];
(iv) maintaining
secrecy in relation to the losses: Respondent, 40, [12]
(v) problems
with practice management, because his wife withdrew as practice manager because
of her sickness: Respondent, page 49,
(vi) marriage
difficulties from 2006-8, leading to his contemplation of separation:
Respondent, page 51
(vii) various
serious medical conditions, which he was not properly medicating: se further
Respondent, 12, [3];
(viii) inability
to be “honest with himself”: Respondent, 40, [12];
(ix) there was
produced a “series of stressors that cumulatively overwhelmed him”:
Respondent, 40, [12]
(e) By way of
elaboration on nature and impact of the medical conditions:
(i) Dr Roopra
was suffering from diabetes. This was diagnosed in diagnosed in March 2005:
TS.126.5. There is a 2 to 3–fold
increase of depression in persons with
diabetes: 126.9. The failure to take a diabetic medication can lead to
“mood swings”,
impairment of “cognitive function”,
(including “emotionally”), and disruption of sleep: 127.4
(ii) Dr Roopra
suffered from hypertension. This was diagnosed in March 2005: 127.8. The
failure of a patient with hypertension
to take appropriate medication can lead
to the person being “always tired and you can be moody and cranky”:
(iii) Dr Roopra
suffered from severe apnoea: Bundle 3, page 10, TS12.39, 93.14, 94.9. This
relates to a condition which frustrates
a patient obtaining adequate quality
sleep: 129.3. It can lead to a person being “tired throughout the
day” and “you
can’t concentrate and you always feel
sleepy”: 129.4.
(iv) Dr Roopra
suffered from severe back pain: Bundle 3, 10
depression”: Bundle 3, 10
(vi) Dr Kheary
said that the “collective impact” of obesity, hypertension, severe
lower back problems, severe sleep apnoea,
diabetes and depression “would
affect a person’s performance during the daytime, mood swings and
concentration”
(vii) Dr Roopra
had been failing to take medication consistently: TS.10.25,
trial judge noted, the “the manner in which this highly intelligent man
was acting at the time supports a conclusion
he was significantly disturbed.
The ‘contract’ that he had the complainants sign in each case were
frankly bizarre”:
Applicant Bundle, Tab 48, page 17
the evidence supports the finding that the mood disturbance has
terminated.
(a) Dr Lenning
concludes that Dr Roopra is “not currently depressed” and the
“mood disturbance now seems largely
resolved”: Respondent, page 56,
diagnosis is corroborated by evidence of Dr Roopra’s behaviour during the
relevant period, from Dr Roopra and his wife
and others. Mrs Roopra states that
she has observed “drastic improvements in Ghaitan’s physical and
mental health”:
Respondent, 13, [7]. Dr Kheray says that Dr Roopra was
“much calmer” with his anti-depression medication: 130.4.
Refresher evidence
(c) Since his release from custody, the general mood improvement has been
maintained and enhanced.
(d) Dr Roopra considers his emotional state “stable”. He says he
has encountered no “depressive” or “anger”
(e) This was corroborated by Dharini.
(f) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings:
(i) notes that
“Mr Roopra is currently not depressed”: [12]
(ii) far from
his period of custody having exacerbated any emotional or psychological
difficulties, Dr Lennings observes that: “His
time in gaol appears to
have given him perspective (his phrase) and although he has substantial
emotional, professional identity
and financial pressures weighing on him, he
presents as reasonably euthymic but not inflated, grandiose or hypomanic”:
(iii) states:
“In my original report I considered that a risk for Mr Roopra was mood
disturbance, and that the offence was related
to pervasive low mood, episodes of
grandiosity allowing him to suspend a moral conscience, and poor self esteem.
These psychological
factors are currently absent. He does appear to have
developed insight into his need to control his alcohol and coffee intake, the
pressure he puts himself under, his need for balance and perspective in his
life, and seems to have gained some insight and improvement
in communication
mood as likely to deteriorate to
a point that a re-offence risk is raised if the
current pattern is maintained”: [13]
concludes that: “There is no current indication that his mental health is
an issue for risk of re offence or problems
in resuming his professional
life”: [12]
(g) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]stated:
Roopra made significant improvements to emotional regulation whilst
participating in treatment. Mr Roopra appeared to
increase his emotional
awareness, emotional recognition in others, and strategies to assist him
effectively manage his emotions”:
aid in solving emotionally-related problems, Mr Roopra brought issues to group,
and requested feedback and suggestions
from others. He was able to put these
strategies into place and bring outcomes back to the group. Mr Roopra would
benefit from continuing
to implement strategies he identified in self-management
plans to assist him manage his emotions (e.g., journaling, awareness and
understanding of emotion) in the future”:
the evidence supports the finding that the life circumstances which combined to
generate the depression and mood disturbance
have been addressed in Dr
Roopra’s life, and Dr Roopra has strategies in place to prevent the
triggering of further such episodes.
(a) He is now
on antidepressants, which Dr Lenning observes facilitates control over moods:
Respondent, page 46.5
medication for various medical conditions is in check: Lennings, Respondent,
page 40, [11]6.5
relationship with his wife is vastly improved, and she notes that “these
events have brought us closer together”:
Respondent, 12, [4]. His wife
states that: “Today Chaitan is very open and communicative towards
me”: Respondent,
(d) Dr Roopra
was able to articulate to Dr Lennings an insight into the “red
flags” which increased the risks of emotional
“episodes”:
drinking, gambling on the share market, secrecy about loss, taking on too much
work, failure to communicate:
Respondent, page 40, [12]. Dr Roopra was able to
explain strategies for avoiding the red flags: ibid
(e) Dr Lennings
concludes that “He appears to understand the link between engaging in
behaviours that reduce the risk of depression
and the potential for recidivism
thereby. He appears to have worked out how to avoid the isolation and self
justificatory (but irrational)
self-talk of depression by engaging in open
communication”: Respondent, 41, [18].
(f) By way of
further stress management techniques, he now practices meditation “and has
returned to his once spiritual self”:
Respondent, 13,
Refresher evidence
(g) Following his release from custody, Dr Roopra is managing his various
medical conditions with medication: Roopra, [22]
(h) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]stated:
Roopra was motivated to implement changes in his life”: [19]
Roopra made significant improvements to emotional regulation whilst
participating in treatment. Mr Roopra appeared
to increase his emotional
awareness, emotional recognition in others, and strategies to assist him
effectively manage his emotions”:
proactively manage the risk factors identified and to assist him in achieving an
offence-free and more positive future
life, Mr Roopra developed a number of
self-management plans. In summary, the plans outlined a variety of future good
life goals including:
to have a healthy sex life, to use effective and healthy
coping strategies, establish and maintain healthy relationships, to consider
others and to have a healthy lifestyle. To work towards these goals, Mr Roopra
identified strategies such as: open communication
with partner and family;
maintain and review journal (i.e., monitor thought processes and identify
unhelpful thoughts); be responsible
for self (personal integrity); establish and
respect boundaries; establish a routine; perspective take; get involved in
activities; set realistic goals; and re-evaluate goals and plans
regularly”: [58].
addition to the above-mentioned goals to lead a healthy offence-free life, Mr
Roopra identified a range of interventions
to assist him cope with his risk
factors should they arise in the future. These included strategies such as:
identify unhelpful thoughts
and challenge them; consequential thinking;
perspective-take seek help or advice from professional and personal supports;
situations and go to a safe place (i.e., safe for Mr Roopra
community)”: [59]
(i) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings states:
(i) as noted in
above, that Dr
Roopra “does appear to have developed insight into his need to control his
alcohol and coffee intake, the pressure
he puts himself under, his need for
balance and perspective in his life, and seems to have gained some insight and
improvement in
communication about his mood and behaviour”: [13]
(ii) concludes:
“given the good emotional control, apparent insight gained, and the
continuing low risk, there is no specific
reason attributable to the risk
assessment, or his mental health, that indicates Dr Roopra could not
successfully re-commence practice”:
(iii) However,
as Dr Lennings notes in his Further Report, there are (unsurprisingly)
“significant issues yet to be resolved”:
Dr Roopra has manifested insight into the nature, gravity and cause of the
offending conduct, and his responsibility for
it. This is recognised by the
experts to be profoundly important to the prospects of re-offending. As to
Roopra informed Dr Lenning that “he accepts that there was some planning
in the offences and he accepts he was sexually
aggressive”: Respondent,
47, [8]. Dr Roopra informed Craig Baird (who prepared the pre-sentence report)
that “he acknowledged
abusing his position of authority and abusing
vulnerable people in order to feel power and control”: Applicant, 34
(b) Dr Lennings
states that he appears “to demonstrate both acceptance of responsibility
for his behaviour, and genuine remorse”:
Respondent, page 46;
(c) The insight
into the appalling and inexcusable nature of the conduct was frequently
demonstrated in the course of Dr Roopra’s
evidence in this hearing: eg,
Refresher evidence
(d) The additional evidence filed since the last hearing reinforces the insight
Dr Roopra has developed into the nature of his offending
(e) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]stated that:
Roopra generally accepted responsibility for his behaviour whilst participating
in CORE Moderate”: [19];
regards to victim empathy, Mr Roopra demonstrated appropriate empathy towards
victims of sexual offending..... Mr Roopra
acknowledged the potential. harm he
had caused to the victims of his sexual offending, including secondary
victims”: [19].
Roopra demonstrated insight into the factors that contributed to his decision to
commit the sexual offences”:
[21]. She concluded: “As a result of
this work, Mr Roopra identified that at the time of offending the following
resulted in a sexual offence: a perceived loss of control in his life
(i.e., over finances, relationship, health); challenges in
his relationship
(i.e., lack of intimacy, not resolving conflict, poor boundaries); poor coping
(e.g., avoidance, compartmentalising/intellectualising
problems); a sense of
entitlement (i.e., belief that he was better than others, or his wants were more
important); unhealthy views
power/control, sexualising young women, sexual arousal to vulnerable young
and creating opportunities to sexually offend”: [23]
(iv) In her
email letter dated 8 January 2013 to Dr Roopra’s parole officer (Marco
Battaglia), [The psychologist]said of Dr
Roopra’s participation in the
program that: “Mr Roopra participated well, and appeared to gain insight
into not only
his offending conduct but problematic attitudes and behaviours in
his life (eg, avoidant coping style, relationship difficulties,
entitlement, unhealthy attitudes towards sex): Volume 1
(f) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings:
that: “Dr Roopra is recorded as having understood arid gained appropriate
empathy for his victims through the CORE
program”. Referring to Dr
Roopra’s attempts to seek restorative justice, Dr Lennings states:
“What seemed clear
in his seeking restorative justice was that Dr Roopra
was trying to find some genuine way to explain his actions and provide an
opportunity
for a genuine apology to them, and if it were possible, some way to
unburden the distress they felt”: [29]
(ii) concludes
that: “there does appear to me to have been a genuine understanding of
what he put his victims through.....the
report of [The psychologist]goes someway
towards clarifying for me the reality of his comments to me”: [31].
Dr Roopra has manifested profound and genuine remorse and contrition. Dr
Lennings observes that “remorse is considered
a strong indicator of
rehabilitation potential by many”: Respondent, 42. Further, it evidences
a reasonable set of moral
standards, consistent with the qualities of good
character. The remorse is evidenced and corroborated by the following
(a) The trial
judge noted that he “saw what I would assess as genuine remorse. I do not
believe this was feigned. He honestly
confronted his offending and was
prepared to accept the harm he caused. This bodes well for a full
rehabilitation”: Applicant
Bundle, Tab 48, page 20;
(b) Dr Lennings
observes that “Dr Roopra does appear to demonstrate genuine remorse and
this has been a consistent observation
over time”: Respondent, 42, [19];
(c) His wife
states that “Chaitan has show great remorse and regret over his actions.
He is deeply affected by the impact it
has had on the victims and their
families”: Respondent, 11, [2];
(d) See further
transcript of sentencing hearing: Applicant Bundle, 243;
(e) The remorse
was repeatedly manifest in the course of this hearing: eg, T78.28
expression of genuine remorse and contrition is corroborated by a great many of
Dr Roopra’s referees: Erdstein (friend),
75, 72; Concina (professional
colleague), 83, 82; Sidhu (family friend), 102, 101; Lee (personal friend and
dentist), 103; George
(employee), 87; Cass (employee), 90; King (patient and
Church minister), 92, [6]; Rowles (patient),
Refresher evidence
(g) In his further statement, Dr Roopra states: “I am completely
remorseful towards victims and their families and I am seeking
a redemptive
path.....I feel that the offences have had a debilitating effect on victims and
their families.....I am utterly remorseful
victims, which I feel is unmeasurable”: [70]-[72].
(h) In his oral evidence he affirmed that his level of empathy “progressed
with time”. He did not think that he had
victim empathy in March 2009.
It was “a process” from then, “but a large part” of his
progress towards empathy
was attributable to the CORE program: it was
“intensive” and you “had to take a hard look” at your
and actions. Now he feels “totally remorseful”, and
“total sorrow” for his victims.
(i) It was put to him that his expression of sorrow and remorse are merely to
assist his cause before this Tribunal, and retain his
licence. He firmly
rejected that proposition, and said something to the effect of: “I
sorry. What they make of it is up to them”. He was not saying sorry
as a “means to an end”.
Dr Roopra has manifested a strong commitment to rehabilitation, which weighs
against the likelihood of re-offending.
(a) Dr Lennings
observes that Dr Roopra “reports a strong orientation to furthering his
recovery through offence specific treatment”:
Respondent, 43; see also
46.5, 38, [6];
(b) He and his
wife attended family counselling: Respondent, 12, [8];
enrolled in sex offender treatment programs: Respondent, 42, [20]; see further
his evidence in this hearing at T.64-66
(d) He would be
prepared to attend any educational courses, training, medical treatments, as a
condition of registration: Respondent,
5, [37]; 13, [8]-[10];
(e) His stated
commitment to rehabilitation is corroborated by a great many of Dr
Roopra’s referees: eg, Dr Erdstein (friend),
72; Concina (professional
colleague), 82; George (employee), 87; King (patient and Church minister), 92;
Sidhu (family friend), 101;
Badve (friend and dentist), 114; Kheray (family
physician), 128; Bharaj (friend), 156, [5]; Improved moods and state of mind
sentencing; Concina (professional colleague), 82; Sidhu (family friend),
Refresher evidence
(f) Since the last hearing, Dr Roopra has undertaken further rehabilitation
programs, which have been effective in facilitating greater
insight into the
gravity and consequences of his misconduct, and generally enhancing the
stability of his emotional and mental states.
(g) While in custody between 18 June 2012 and 6 January 2013, Dr Roopra
participated in the “Sex and Violent Offender Therapeutic
CORE Moderate
”), conducted by Meagan [OMITTED],
psychologist, from Corrective Services NSW
(h) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]stated “Overall, Mr Roopra's
participation in the CORE Moderate program was positive.
He contributed to group
discussions, appeared motivated to identify problematic areas in his life and
implemented newly learnt skills.
Mr Roopra recognised the value and relevance of
treatment processes (i.e., journaling, check-ins)....Mr Roopra was open to
and provided challenging, but appropriate feedback to others. He used
examples of his own unhelpful behaviour and insights he had
gained in treatment
to support change in other group members”: [16]
(i) Dr Roopra says of his participation that: “During the program I
gained insight into the nature of the offences I committed
and particularly in
the thorough and rigorous examination of the offence pathway. I often think
future of those who have been affected by my
actions”: [42].
(j) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings:
Roopra’s participation in the CORE program, states: “Mr Roopra
attended the CORE program most days of the week,
for several hours per day over
approximately a six-month period. It is an intensive program....He clearly
engaged well with the program,
demonstrated the usual difficulties in engaging
in such programs as declaring himself, revealing his deepest thoughts and
and talking openly about his offences. However, he seems to have done
well, was viewed by [The psychologist]as graduating from the
program and having
benefited from it”” ]24]
(ii) having
expressed surprise that Dr Roopra was able to secure a place in the CORE
program, he observes that: “This serendipitous
event appears to have been
important as he used it well, and gained important insights and psychological
benefit from it”:
Other programs
Season for Growth
: Dr Roopra also attended while in custody
“the ‘Season for Growth’ program with Sister Theresa who
welfare and spiritual guidance. That was an eight week program
which ran over about 12 weeks, which involved accommodating change,
improvement
and coping”: [45];
Marriage Counselling
: Dr Roopra and his wife have attended some
marriage counselling since his release, and are keen to restart further
counselling when
finances allow: [27]. Dharini says of the counselling:
“We are attending marriage counselling at present. It has proved
beneficial so far although it is a lengthy process. Time and lack of funds have
proved to be an obstacle in finding suitable counselling.
Also the availability
of the counselling sessions has proved difficult. We have so far completed two
sessions. The focus of those
has been in relation to decision making, and
financial issues. I believe they have been extremely valuable and successful so
I am committed to continuing the process, and I believe that Chaitan is
also”: [38];
. Dr Roopra states: “I have not undertaken Rev Peter
Powell’s course (which is referred to in Paragraph 91 of the judgment)
I completed the CORE program instead. I understand from my discussions with
experts, including Dr Lennings, that the CORE program
is a more intensive and
higher level program that Dr Powell’s course, and that there would be
limited or no benefit in me doing
both”: [45]. This is confirmed by Dr
Lennings in his further report: [24]
(n) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings states:
(i) In light of
the rigour and the value of the CORE program, Dr Lennings concludes:
“Thus much of the thoughts I had about
offence-specific treatment no
longer apply. Mr Roopra remains under the supervision of both Probation and
Parole and the CGU, and
he tells me he has been allocated a psychologist through
Community Corrections, although to date he remains on a waiting list for
happen. He remains on the Register for 15 years and will be subject to
supervision and reporting conditions for that length
of time. I see no need for
proposing any additional offence specific treatment or supervision, other than
the maintenance work he
will be receiving from Corrections”: [24].
Roopra were to recommence practice, Dr Lennings states: “There remain two
other treatment issues to consider (given
my response to Question 4). The first
is review of his psychological state, particularly the prospect of a return of
depression.
I have already indicated he does not need treatment for this at the
moment over and above what has already occurred, but medication/psychiatric
review will be useful as a prophylactic should there be some return of low mood.
I believe that mandating he attend for six monthly
reviews of his mood over a
five-year period would form a reasonable and useful control condition”:
(o) Dr Lennings gave the following consistent oral evidence:
(i) to require
further treatment raises the issue of “overservicing”;
(ii) there is
no evidence of the need for further treatment: “you don’t treat a
problem in absentia”;
(iii) Dr Roopra
had already had “significant treatment”, and there was not much
prospect of further “significant
treatment gain”;
(iv) however,
there remained a need for “monitoring”. As to the frequency, he
said “if no major issues”,
perhaps monthly, bi-monthly, or 3
despite the gravity and shamefulness of his offending conduct, Dr Roopra still
retains the enthusiastic and unconditional
support from his family, the local
Shikh community, and a significant number of professional colleagues. Support
from important
family and community networks is recognised as being significant
for the prevention of re-offending. It is reasonable to infer that
will likely be inspired to attempt to repay the trust and commitment shown by
them, by leading an exemplary future life.
By way of example:
(a) His wife
states: “I have stood by Chaitan during this difficult time and endeavour
to support him throughout our future”:
Respondent, 11, [2];
(b) His eldest
sister states: “Chaitan has the wholehearted support of his devoted wife,
parents, immediate and wider family
and friends, as we know that this episode
was totally out of character. This experience has made us all the more closer
and we will
do all we can to enable Chaitan to resettle”: Respondent,
(President, Ramagharia Welfare Association) states: “The Roopra family are
well respected within the Sikh community
in Sydney and have been active
participants in welfare activities, fundraising, community programs, language
and scripture teaching.
As President of Ramagharia Welfare Association, I can
sincerely state that we as a community stand by Dr Roopra and Roopra family
we are committed to supporting Dr Roopra in returning to a state of complete
rehabilitation in his interactions at work, socially
and within the
community”: 129
Refresher evidence
(d) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]states:
nature of an offender's social network is one of the most well established
predictors of criminal behaviour (Hanson
& Harris, 2007). Positive
influences include people who are likely to promote pro-social behaviours and
values, encourage self-control
strategies, and provide material (e.g., shelter,
employment) and emotional support”: [50]
(ii) “Significant
social influences are not considered an area of risk for Mr Roopra. He generally
has a supportive and pro-social
family network. His parents, siblings, wife and
children continued to provide emotional support whilst Mr Roopra was in custody
evidenced by regular visits”: [50].
(e) As to his relationship with his wife:
evidence discloses that there are (unsurprisingly) difficulties in the
relationship, but Dr Roopra and his wife are both committed
to the relationship,
and committed to working through the difficulties. It is their intention to
live together as a family with
their children, in the future;
(ii) there is
no proper basis for challenging honesty of the evidence of Dr Roopra and his
wife on this matter
Evidence of Dr Roopra
Counselling
: Dr Roopra notes that he and his wife have attended
marriage counselling, and intend to resume further counselling when finances
available: [27]. “The sessions were positive and have assisted Dharini
and us”: [28].
“Close”, but recognition of need to work on marriage
Although, Dr Roopra frankly acknowledges that: “there is still a great
deal to do in working on our relationship”
([28]), he says “I feel
very close to my wife and we are continuing to work on our relationship. I
believe it is something
I will need to work on for the rest of my life, and I am
prepared to do so”: [33]. He said in oral evidence of his relationship
that “we are closer than before”.
Marriage is not over
Dr Roopra and his wife are not presently living together, Dr Roopra stated:
“Dharini and I do not regard our marriage
as having ended, or as being
separated, despite living in different homes at present. One important reason
for me living in Blacktown
is that I do not want to live in Penrith, where I
committed the offences, and where the victims and my former patients
[8]. Nevertheless, they “talk daily” ([29]);
notes of meeting with his parole officer disclose very frank disclosures by Dr
Roopra in relation to the evolving nature of his
relationship with his wife:
Exhibit 1. The note dated 19 March 2013 at page 52 of 54 records Dr Roopra
stating that his relationship
“has now ended with his wife, he is
accepting of the fact, as it is the actualisation of what he expected. He has
the status, they remain amicable”. Dr Roopra did not dispute
that he made those statements to the parole officer;
this does not support a finding that his marriage is now in fact over, and that
the evidence of Dr and Mrs Roopra to the
contrary is dishonest and false. As Dr
Roopra explained repeatedly and powerfully in oral evidence, their marriage is a
road”. Although he did not recall what triggered his belief
on 19 March 2013 that the marriage had ended, he frankly conceded
have been a number of moments in the last several years when he has thought that
the marriage was over. He also acknowledged
that he might sometimes have said
that the marriage was over as a way of “letting of steam”. In light
of his offences
and incarceration, the experience of relationship difficulties
is hardly surprising. However, his evidence demonstrates that he
and his wife
have stuck it out under great and challenging adversity. So far they have
succeeded. He repeatedly affirmed in oral
evidence that he presently believes
that there marriage is not over, and that his affidavit evidence accurately
encapsulates the
“general feeling” and “general
sentiment” of his perception of the state of the marriage. The Tribunal
find that his evidence on this matter was entirely
fleeting nature of his perception that the relationship was “over”
was corroborated by the fact that in the parole
officer’s note on 3 April
2013, it is recorded that Dr Roopra met his wife earlier in the week, and
“the encounter raised
some questions about the future of the
relationship.....He believed that she still may be open to the prospect of an
ongoing relationship”:
Exhibit 1, 54 of 54
fact that he is not being dishonest to this Tribunal about the state of his
marriage is corroborated by the instructions he apparently
provided Dr Lennings,
in circumstances where he must have known that such instructions would be
presented in a report to the Tribunal.
There is no basis for finding that Dr
Roopra sought to create a misleadingly positive impression of the state of the
In his report, Dr Lennings notes that Dr Roopra “remains
married” (which was obviously true). However, his subsequent
description
reflects Dr Roopra’s instructions as to the serious challenges Dr Roopra
perceived his marriage confronted. Dr
Lennings records in [6] that Dr Roopra
“remains in contact with his wife” (suggesting strained relations),
that Dr Roopra
is “keen to put the relationship back together
again”, and that “there are significant issues yet to be resolved
their relationship”. In his oral evidence, Dr Lennings stated that his
impression from his consultation with Dr Roopra
on 21 March 2013 that the
“relationship was strained” and “extremely strained” -
so much so that he simply
assumed that there was no sexual intimacy. He recalls
Dr Roopra stating that he “feared” the relationship would end
there was nothing in Dr Roopra’s statement which is inconsistent with the
fact that Dr Roopra’s marriage was
a “rocky road”, and that at
earlier times he might have formed the fleeting view or stated that his
relationship was
over. As noted above, he frankly conceded in his statement
that “I realise that there is still a great deal to do in working
relationship” ([28]); he believes working on his relationship “is
something I will need to work on for the rest
of my life”: [32].
suggestion that he deliberately withheld information from the affidavit to
mislead the Tribunal is without foundation.
inference that Dr Roopra was not attempting to mislead the Tribunal is supported
by the fact that (from the start) he was very
candid in his oral evidence about
the problems confronting the marriage. He agreed that there were “still
in the marriage. However, they were “not
Evidence of Dharini
(vi) In her affidavit and oral evidence, Mrs Roopra acknowledged the
“difficult road” for her marriage, but powerfully
described her
support for Dr Roopra and their family, her commitment to the marriage, and her
expectation that the marriage would
continue and strengthen.
I intend to stay married to Chaitan, and I will continue to support him.
31 I believe the marriage will last through this difficult time. My feelings
towards Chaitan are warm and hopeful. I believe it
has been a difficult road
but things will improve and a bright future awaits.
32 The relationship is progressing well, we have a few more major hurdles
such as HCCC and housing issue, but things are going well.
33 I believe our relationship has survived the incarceration period quite
well. Communication between us has improved and this is
a continuing process. I
find that Chaitan is much more able to discuss his thoughts now, which he says
is due to the psychology sessions
he attended while incarcerated.
34 The time we spend together, as a couple or as a family, are fun and
family orientated. There are a lot of adjustments at present
but all are coping
(vii) She provided the following oral evidence:
view of the state of marriage
. She was emphatically clear that she did not
consider that she was separated from her husband. Her commitment to the
marriage was
“high”. She remains open to counselling, and
considered that it had been effective to date. Her clear intention and
expectation is that she and her husband will in due course be living
purchase of the house
: No adverse inference as to the state of the marriage
can be drawn from her recent decision to purchase a house in Penrith in her
name. She had first turned her mind to acquiring a new home soon after her
husband had been incarcerated. She only recently committed
to buying a new
job being made permanent. She had
discussed the purchase with Dr Roopra, and he
agreed. She decided to buy in Penrith (notwithstanding that she understood Dr
parole conditions prevented him residing there) because of her
children’s schooling. The children were comfortable at a local
Penrith, and she did not want to move them at this stage. She felt it was
important that she and the children reside locally
near the school, in view of
the fact that she is working full-time, and will need to rely on the local
community to assist her with
schooling arrangements for the kids. She decided
to purchase the house in her name (with Dr Roopra’s approval) because only
she had the income which would support the mortgage, and she was concerned that
there may be difficulties with the finance application
if Chaitain was also an
applicant (and investigations were undertaken by the lender which disclosed his
recent criminal convictions).
Although purchased in her name, she does not
consider that she owns the house independently of Dr Roopra, and considers it
owned as a marital asset. She would be happy for Dr Roopra to visit,
and expects him to, and has discussed that with Dr Roopra.
She has no long term
commitment to living in Penrith, and will consider future housing options with
her husband
(f) As to his relationship with his broader family:
(i) Dr Roopra
reports that: “I have an excellent relationship with my sons and my
family. I would have meals with members of
my family every night at 6pm....
There is a very strong focus on inclusiveness and togetherness”: [56].
“On weekends
we try to spend time as a family unit, with my sons and
Dharini all present”: [59]
(ii) Dharini
confirms that: “Chaitan is on good terms with all family members. He is
in regular contact with our children via
text and phone calls, and sees them
throughout the week and on weekends”: [40]
(iii) Dharini
also notes: “Chaitan spends time with his immediate family members
enjoying each other’s company. He is
close with his siblings, and his
nieces and nephews value his presence and sense of humour”:
(g) As to his connection with the broader community:
(i) Dr Roopra
is deeply connected with the community of his local temple. He states:
“The temple plays a very important role
in my process of re-integration.
After the weekly service, people stay to talk and connect with other members of
the community...An
example of the level of community and family support from the
temple, is that, from 17 April 2013, my parents are going away for
three weeks.
While they are away, they and members of the church have arranged for me, and my
children included in the invitation,
to have dinner with members of the church
every night for that three week people, with different families”:
perceive that I am accepted at a community level thorough my involvement in the
temple, as I described above and that
I am achieving a process of reintegrating.
I have attended community members’ weddings and have been invited to
process of community integration is confirmed by Dharini: “Chaitan has
been supported well by the communities he
is involved with. His medical and
dental colleagues have arranged dinners to meet with him and he visits many of
his friends. His
Punjabi community are pleased to see his back and attending
their functions. He is welcomed and encouraged by them. Our childrens’
school is also encouraging to promote family living”:
(d) the motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct;
motivation is referred to in paragraph
. The nature of the motivation
reflects poorly on Dr Roopra.
it is of limited significance for the characterisation of the general present
character of Dr Roopra, because the motivation
was the product of a temporary
(and now resolved) mental disturbance.
(e) the underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other conduct;
extensive character evidence submitted on behalf of Dr Roopra establishes the
following general character traits of Dr Roopra.
he was a loving and devoted family man: eg, Respondent, 11, [2].
he is compassionate, kind, friendly, and of gentle demeanour, in his dealings
with family, friends, colleagues, employees
and patients:
Professional colleagues and friends
(a) “Compassionate, kind and gentle”: Dr Vellani (friend), 70
(b) “nicest, most loyal, good-hearted people whom I have ever know”:
Dr Erdstein (friend), 73
(c) “spirit of caring”, Dr Manickam (professional colleague),
(d) “caring dentist”: Villon (friend and dentist)
(e) “courteous, helpful and generous”: Badve (friend and referring
(f) “kind and caring”: Vellani (friend and dentist), 118
(g) “very caring and compassionate person. He is very approachable and is
always willing to lend a helping hand”: Saini
(friend), 141
(h) “I have always known him to be a thorough gentleman”: Sahota
(friend, 145)
(i) “very kind, friendly and spiritual man”: Cass (employee),
(j) “approach to patient care both professional and friendly”: Kaur
(employee), 119
(k) practice environment was “one happy family with nice working
environment”, “always treated his patients with
dignity and
respect”: Rai (employee), 120
(i) “affable”: King (patient and Church minister), 93;
(ii) “professional and his conduct exemplary”. “Nurturing
personality and willing to help others”. Recommended
practice to others:
Maripa-Campora (patient and friend), 122-123
(iii) “good dentist...friendly and helpful”: David (15 year old
female patient)
he is respectful, ethical, and courteous in his dealings
(a) “always
shown respect and courtesy”: Dr Erdstein (friend), 73
(b) “always
been very respectful to his peers”: Concina (professional colleague),
(c) “respectful
demeanour”: Concina (professional colleague), 82
upstanding citizen”: Lee (friend and dentist), 105;
(e) “honesty,
dependability, sincerity, integrity and civility”: Wanigesekera (friend
and dentist), 112
to me as honest man of good moral character”: Bedi (President, Sikh
Association of Sydney), 133;
(g) “displays
integrity and has a gentle nature”: Wasdave (Sikh priest), 135
good upstanding citizen”: Saini (friend), 141
have always known him to be a man of utmost integrity in all my dealings with
him and indeed a very well respected member
of the Sikh community in
Sydney”: Sahota (friend, 145)
believe he is a person of the highest integrity with genuine respect for all
people that he interacts with”: Sian
(friend), 148
person of high moral character and righteous living”: Sidhu (friend,
Chairman, Council of Trustees, Australian
Sikh Association [ret]), 151
is highly ethical and has been willing to help the needy”: Rana (family
friend, surgeon), 154
is reliable, highly respected, polite and understanding. He has a good standing
in our Sikh community”: Bharaj
(friend), 157
he has a strong commitment to (and is significantly involved with) his local
community: eg,
is a very helpful community member who works for the needs of the
community”: Bedi (President, Sikh Association
of Sydney), 133;
has always donated his time and services to the community...He is a valued and
an integral member of the Sikh community....We
support Dr Roopra and his family
whole heartedly for the continuation of his career and practice”: Thind
(General Secretary,
Australian Sikh Association), 134;
(d) see further
Wasdave (Sikh priest), 136; Sian (friend), 148; Sidhu (friend, Chairman, Council
of Trustees, Australian Sikh Association
[ret]), 151; Rana (friend, surgeon),
153 Dr Erdstein (friend), 74; Dr Manickam, 79.1; Sian (friend and dentist), 107,
109; Vellani
(friend and dentist), 118; McGarrity (patient, and local
businessman), 126
he is charitable, often providing free or discounted professional services to
the financially needy: eg,
(family friend), refers to the provision of dental services to senior patients,
who were unable to fully to pay for his
services: 101;
(family friend, surgeon), states “while practising, Dr Roopra helped lots
of people in the community by showing compassion
and accepting whatever they had
the capacity to pay rather than standard fees. His return to practice will help
fill the gap created
when his practice had to close”: 153
he has a significant and growing religious and spiritual commitment:
(dentist and friend), 107; Kheray (family physician), 128; Sian (President,
Ramagharia Welfare Association), 130; Wasdave
(Sikh priest), 136; Singh (Head
Priest, Turrimurra Guruwara), 138; Bharaj (friend), 156; Kheray (elder sister),
Refresher evidence
(b) Since his release from custody, Dr Roopra attends weekly services in a Seikh
temple: Roopra, [47]
short, he was a respectable and principled pillar of his local society.
the backdrop of these strongly corroborated character traits and qualities, the
abusive and exploitative nature of the offending
conduct appears utterly
the circumstances, the reprehensible offending conduct does not reflect or
define Dr Roopra’s pervading qualities of character.
It constitutes an
aberration of character which was merely temporary, and which is now
(f) can public and professional confidence now be reposed in him to uphold and
observe the high standards of moral rectitude required
of a medical
practitioner.
light of the above matters, public and professional confidence can reasonably be
reposed in Dr Roopra, to uphold and observe those
standards of moral rectitude.
Is deregistration required to “protect” the public interest
ff above, it was submitted
that there were a number of dimensions to the protection of the public, served
by disciplinary sanctions.
is respectfully submitted that none of them (considered in isolation or
collectively) warrant the deregistration of Dr Roopra.
Protect patients of Dr Roopra
first dimension of protection related to the protection of patients or potential
patients of Dr Roopra.
purpose does not require deregistration, for the following reasons.
the offending conduct did not relate to improper conduct to patients.
there has never been any complaint (or cause for concern) in relation to the
propriety of Dr Roopra’s dealings with
his patients. As to
(a) Dr Roopra
has practised for 19 years, and estimates that he would have had approximately
60,000 to 70,000 consultations: Respondent,
(b) Although
there have been a number of professional complaints by patients in the past,
they have related exclusively to the quality
of professional services, and none
related to inappropriate conduct towards his patients.
(c) Further,
except for a number presently being negotiated, all complaints were resolved by
Dr Roopra performing the work again to
the patient’s satisfaction, and in
some cases involving a provision of a Medicare refund: Respondent, 3,
Dr Lennings concludes that there appears to be “no appreciable risk of
harm to his patients”, or re-offence:
Respondent, 43.
the reasons set out in paragraph
above corroborate the unlikelihood of
any further offending conduct.
the basis for confidence that Dr Roopra can satisfactorily comply with any
restrictive practice conditions imposed as a condition
of registration, is
reinforced by the fact that he was able successfully to comply with detailed
practice conditions imposed by the
Dental Board and the Court, prior to
sentencing: Respondent, 4, [25]-[28]; see further Dr Manickam (professional
colleague), 76.1;
George (employee), 86; Kaur (employee), 119; Singleton
(patient), 127
General deterrence
second dimension of the protection of the public, is the creation of a deterrent
to other practitioners with respect to the breach
of professional
purpose does not require deregistration, for the following reasons.
the offending conduct did not relate to the breach of professional
the offending conduct was subject to the imposition of serious criminal
punishment. To the extent that any deterrent was
required in relation to the
offending conduct, it has been manifestly provided by the severity of the
Protect reputation of profession
final dimension of the protection of the public is the protection of the general
standing and reputation of the profession.
Roopra concedes that this consideration squarely comes into play, in relation to
the offending conduct.
view of the reprehensible nature of the offending conduct, and the severity of
the sentence, the Tribunal could reasonably be concerned
that the failure to
take action against Dr Roopra might prejudice the public confidence in the
profession.
it is respectfully submitted that the protection of the public reputation of the
profession does not require deregistration,
for the following reasons.
there is no blanket rule that the commission of a serious offence requires the
deregistration of the practitioner: see paragraphs
. There are numerous cases of
professionals maintaining registration, despite the commission of serious
offences: see paragraph
a number of factors militate against the public loss of confidence in the
profession, if Dr Roopra is permitted to maintain
registration:
(a) Awareness
of the circumstances of the case will likely reduce possible public concerns
Subject to Dr Roopra’s
submissions being accepted in this hearing, it is reasonable to infer that the
judgment in these proceedings
will disclose that:
(i) Dr Roopra
was previously a man of outstanding reputation and character,
(ii) that the
conduct in question was utterly contrary to that character,
conduct did not involve the abuse of patients;
(iv) that the
offending conduct was associated with temporary depression and mood disturbance
that has been resolved,
(v) and that
there is no appreciable risk of re-offending, for a variety of reasons.
That judgment will be publicly available, and
is available to inform any potential debate about the propriety of any decision
Dr Roopra to retain registration.
(b) it is reasonable to infer that the public has some appreciation of the value
of redemption: see paragraph
(c) even if Dr Roopra were permitted to retain registration, it would still be
open to the Tribunal to mark its substantial disapproval
for the conduct by
suspension or the imposition of practice conditions.
(d) the Tribunal should reasonably be swayed by the fact that so many friends,
patients and professional colleagues have been willing
to express such
enthusiastic and unconditional support for Dr Roopra’s continued practice.
In relation to Phase 2 of the hearing,
additional (refresher) character
references were received from a number of dentists and other health
professionals: R4, R5, R6,
R7, R15, R16, R17.
in determining whether to deregister Dr Roopra, it is appropriate for the
Tribunal to take into account that Dr Roopra has
the capacity to provide an
extremely valuable professional service in his local community, and that
community will be materially
prejudiced if he is deprived of the opportunity of
practice: see paragraph
to this, the evidence discloses that:
(a) Dr Roopra
“helped lots of people in the community by showing compassion and
accepting whatever they had the capacity to
pay rather than standard
fees.” Rana (family friend, surgeon), 153; see further Sidhu (family
friend),: 101
(b) Dr Roopra
provided skilled and valuable expert referral services in the area, which have
to date not been replaced: 115 Badve
(friend and dentist); Singleton (patient)
dental practice was highly regarded in our Sikh community and is sorely
missed”: Singh (Head Priest, Turrimurra
Guruwara), 138; see also Thind
(General Secretary, Australian Sikh Association), 134, R14; Sidhu (Retired
Senior Assistant Superintendent),
(d) see further
Concina (professional colleague), 82, 83; Cass (employee), 89; King (patient and
Church minister), 93; Rowles (patient),
94, [6]; Sada (patient), 125; McGarrity
(patient, and local businessman), 126; Kheray (family physician), 128;
(e) professional
colleagues who prepared references confirmed Dr Roopra’s skills, and
commitment to the profession;
(f) Further, Dr
Roopra states that his capacity to practice between arrest and sentencing
“confirmed my love and passion for
my vocation. It allowed me to recover
a degree of focus, self-confidence, and self-esteem”: Respondent, 4,
Dealing with specific issues raised in the first judgement
Insight into consequence of his actions
Tribunal noted in its judgment that:
at the time the Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal the Tribunal
observed that there is still a lack of genuine insight
into the consequences of
his actions for the victims of the offence. When asked a cross-examination
question directly as to whether
he had apologised to the victims the Respondent
indicated that he had not done so and provided an explanation relying on his
of contact with the Parole Service..
Tribunal is however troubled by the Respondent’s continued vacillation in
his evidence on certain issues, his focus on the
consequences of his actions on
himself and his family rather than appropriate regard for the victims and the
general lack of candour
the Tribunal found with elements of his evidence as
illustrated by the extracts of his evidence set out above
light of the evidence that has been led in phase 2 of the hearing, it is
respectfully submitted that the Tribunal can now be comfortably
(a) at least
following his participation in the CORE program, the Respondent has a deep and
genuine insight into the consequences
of his actions for the victims of the
offences, and remorse for his conduct;
(b) the fact
that he has not contacted his victims does not detract from the genuineness of
that insight and remorse, or from the
empathy he has developed for his victims.
evidence is as follows:
(a) there was
substantial evidence of remorse and contrition before the Tribunal on the last
occasion: see paragraph
further statement, Dr Roopra states: “I am completely remorseful towards
victims and their families and I am seeking
a redemptive path.....I feel that
the offences have had a debilitating effect on victims and their families.....I
am utterly remorseful
unmeasurable”: [70]-[72]
further statement, Dr Roopra also explains as follows at [73]:
“I refer to paragraph 238 of the judgment. I have
not contacted Restorative Justice and I have not written letters to the victims
I have certainly discussed contacting Restorative Justice during the CORE
program. I felt that if there was anything that I could
say to the victims or
their families, or anything which they wanted to express to me, that I would do
it for their sake. However,
I was told that it is a long process and the victims
don’t often want contact from the offender. I have discussed this both
with Ms Donaldson, during the CORE program whilst in custody, and Dr Lennings,
since my release. I have been conscious that contact
with victims contains
enormous potential risk of further harm to them. My failure to contact
Restorative Justice or write to the
victims was not based on selfish reasons but
more because there is no clear or obvious path to do so, and because I have had
professional
advice that it might potentially do more harm than good. Corrective
Services have also indicated that it may be a breach of my parole
conditions”
(d) In her CORE report, [The psychologist]stated:
(i) Part of the
program related to “Understanding of Offending Behaviour”, which
“provides an account of an individual’s
acceptance of responsibility
for past offending behaviour”: [15].
regards to victim empathy, Mr Roopra demonstrated appropriate empathy towards
victims of sexual offending. This was
observed through his feedback and
questions to other group members, particularly those externalising
responsibility or engaging in
victim blaming. Mr Roopra acknowledged the
potential. harm he had caused to the victims of his sexual offending, including
victims. Mr Roopra recognised that he had apologised to one of the
victims of his sexual offending, but did not believe his apology
was sincere at
the time. Early in treatment, Mr Roopra expressed interest in participating in
the Restorative Justice process to
provide a more genuine apology to the victims
and for his own "karmic" journey. A referral to Restorative Justice was not
during treatment”
(e) In his Further Report, Dr Lennings
“[29] Dr Roopra is recorded as having understood
arid gained appropriate empathy for his victims through the CORE program. He
discussed with me his attempt to seek restorative justice (a means for him to
apologise to the victim and allow them to have their
say) but he was dissuaded
from that by Correctional staff and my understanding of the Restorative Justice
program is that it is not
available for sexual offenders. In any case, there are
as many risks for a victim in undergoing that process, as there may be benefits.
Dr Roopra was able to identify domains of functioning such as relationships,
trust, and emotional management that his victims would
be suffering in. What
seemed clear in his seeking restorative justice was that Dr Roopra was trying to
find some genuine way to explain
his actions and provide an opportunity for a
genuine apology to them, and if it were possible, some way to unburden the
[30] We discussed the Tribunal document and the comments there in about Mr
Roopra's apparent focus on the harm his offending had done
to his family and to
himself as compared to the victims, and Mr Roopra indicated that he had
responded to the tribunal's question
following a discussion with Sister Theresa,
in which she had drummed into him the harm his offending had done to his
extended family
and the wider community and not just the victims. Mr Roopra told
me his answers were a function of that earlier discussion and not
minimise the suffering of his victims”: [30].
[31] There does appear to me to have been a genuine understanding of what he
put his victims through. Such an understanding may have
been less developed in
March, 2012, where he remained sensitive to and responsive to the input from
Sister Theresa, and his anxiety
of [The psychologist]goes someway towards clarifying for me the reality of his
to me. However, Dr Roopra is in a difficult situation where other than
saying he understands, he cannot make any act that would not
be viewed as
potentially damaging to the victims.
Conduct before the Board Inquiry
its decision, the Tribunal held:
Tribunal notes the care taken by the Board Inquiry to explain to the Respondent
the role of the Board Inquiry being to protect
the public safety and not to
determine his guilt or otherwise to the charges he was facing. While there is no
doubt certain tensions
bear upon a practitioner placed in the situation where
the practitioner must simultaneously answer to both the regulatory authority
well as the criminal justice system over the same conduct, the obligations
placed upon registered health practitioners to provide
a frank account of their
conduct cannot be overridden. The Respondent chose to place evidence and
submissions before the Board Inquiry
professing his innocence when he knew that
it was, at least in part, untrue. If the Respondent was not prepared to indicate
part of the charges he admitted to and which he did not then the only
proper course for the Respondent to have taken at that point
was to offer no
comment with respect to matter. Even if the Tribunal is wrong on this point, the
Tribunal has formed the view that
the Respondent was not, at the time he gave
evidence before the Tribunal, a suitable person to hold registration.
Tribunal notes that at the time he appeared before the Board Inquiry the full
extent of the Respondent’s conduct was not
able to be considered by the
Inquiry, that the Respondent had not taken any steps to remediate the deficits
manifest in the conduct,
nor did the Respondent have any insight into how he may
go about such remediation.
Tribunal is however troubled by the Respondent’s continued vacillation in
his evidence on certain issues....and the general
lack of candour the Tribunal
found with elements of his evidence as illustrated by the extracts of his
evidence set out above.
is of concern that the Respondent placed significant reliance on the advice
provided to him at the Board Inquiry and the Council
Inquiry as a reason for
allowing material regarding his denial of the charges to be put on his behalf
that was, at the very least,
not entirely frank. There is nothing that the
Tribunal has heard that would allow it to be comfortably satisfied that the
has now embraced and is appropriately appreciative of the protective
role of this Tribunal and the other regulatory bodies exercise
(such as the
Board and Council).
matters raised in that passage of judgment were addressed in detail in further
evidence led in phase 2 of the hearing. In light
of the evidence, it is
respectfully submitted that the Tribunal can now be comfortably satisfied that
the Respondent has “now
embraced and is appropriately appreciative of the
protective role”. By way of summary, the effect of that evidence is as
hindsight, Dr Roopra realises that he exercised poor judgment in the Board
inquiry, and that his conduct was likely to have
misled the Board;
(b) Dr Roopra
extends his apologies to the Tribunal and Board for that fact;
(c) However, he
did not turn his mind to the fact that the Board might have been misled by his
conduct, and did not at the time intend
to mislead the Board (or understand that
he was misleading the Board);
(d) Dr Roopra
takes full responsibility for his conduct before the Board;
(e) Dr Roopra
now fully embraces and appreciates the protective role of the profession’s
regulatory bodies;
(f) Although it
is not submitted on Dr Roopra’s behalf that his conduct before the Board
could be justified or should be excused,
it is submitted that the Tribunal
should find that Dr Roopra’s poor judgment in the Board hearing does not
reflect pervading
general character flaws, but rather the confluence of very
special circumstances which contributed to the poverty of Dr Roopra’s
judgment at that particular time. Those factors include:
(i) the fact
that he was depressed, terrified and confused in light of the charges pressed
against him, and his generally depressed
state at the time;
(ii) the fact
that he lost faith in his own judgment, by reason of the conduct for which he
had been charged;
(iii) the fact
that he was facing a suite of very serious criminal charges, some of which he
strongly contested;
(iv) by reason
of the above matters, he was very substantially reliant at the time on his legal
advisers, and did not turn a considered
and independent mind to his
(v) he had been
advised by his legal advisers to plead innocent to the suite of charges.
Roopra addresses this issue in detail at paragraphs [60] to [67] of second
statement. By way of elaboration of paragraph
, the essence of his evidence was
submissions were made in a sincere and honest way....It was not my intent to
mislead the Board”; [63];
(b) the reasons
why he responded the way he did before the Board were that:
(i) at the time
he was “depressed, terrified, and in a completely foreign
environment”: [61];
(ii) at the
time, he considered that his personal judgment was “poor”, in light
of the conduct the subject of the charges
to which he pleaded guilty:
(iii) by reason
of those matters, he “relied heavily on professional legal advice”,
and he had been “provided with
advice to plead not guilty “to the
suite of charges that had been laid against me”: [61];
(iv) he recalls
then considering that the advice was reasonable, because at the time:
“There were charges laid against me that
I knew I was not guilty of;
allegations of fact made which I disputed; and I maintained my innocence of the
suite of charges up to
the time of committal, in November 2011”:
time, “I do not recall turning my mind at the time to the fact that my
guilt in relation to some (only) of the criminal
charges was relevant to the
Board’s determination, or that the Board might be misled by the general
statement of “innocence”
on my behalf”: [63]
(d) However,
“with hindsight”, Dr Roopra now understands that “my guilt in
relation to some of the criminal charges
was relevant to the Board’s
determination; and that the general statement of “innocence” likely
caused the Board
to infer that I contended that I was innocent of all
charges”: [63]
(e) Although
denying that he intended to lead the Board at the time, he accepts that (if
that is so) “the Board would have
been misled by the general statement of
“innocence” on my behalf”: [63]
(f) Dr Roopra
stated that “I sincerely apologise to this Tribunal and the Board for that
fact”: [63]
(g) Dr Roopra
has re-assessed his conduct, and accepts that:
failure to appreciate that my conduct might have misled the Board reflected poor
personal judgment at the time”:
Board deserved and should have been provided more information on questions of
guilt”: [64];
“Tribunal’s concern about the position I took at the inquiry is fair
and reasonable”: [66].
Roopra was pressed very hard about this evidence in cross-examination, but his
oral evidence was entirely consistent with his affidavit.
(a) Dr Roopra
very clearly accepted that (although he was relying on advice) it was he who was
“ultimately” “making
decisions” about what was said and
not said at the board hearing; and that the decisions were ultimately his
“responsibility”.
(b) However, he
affirmed that in taking the decisions, he was acting on advice; and that
“I don’t think I was in a state
to make clear decisions; and that he
recalls being “confused and in a desperate state of mind”;
(c) He affirmed
that he couldn’t recall “coming to the Board and deliberately
misleading, lying or manipulating”
the Board members. He agreed that
“with hindsight”, it “seems obvious” that if he admitted
indecent assault,
he would not be allowed to continue to practice. However,
“I can’t recall that line of thinking at the time”
Hopes in relation to future practice
Roopra states in his second statement at [81]ff:
hope that I can recommence practicing a dentist as soon as possible. The
practice of dentistry is a very important
part of my identity. I feel I owe the
profession and the community a debt to be repaid because of my misconduct. I
also feel I owe
Dharini and my family an obligation to become a financial
contributor because of the stress I have put them under financially by
legal fees of the criminal proceedings, and these proceedings before the
Tribunal, and the potential of adverse costs orders.
I would embrace a second chance with all my heart.
I wish to make a positive, healthy difference and be allowed to rehabilitate
into the dental community and the community in general.”
Proposed sanction
all the circumstances, Dr Roopra respectfully submits that the appropriate
course is for the Tribunal to mark its strong disapproval
of his conduct by a
combination of suspension for a specified period, and the imposition of
conditions of practice
Proposed Orders / Conditions
The Respondent proposes Orders be made in the following terms:
, that the Respondent’s registration be suspended from 11
October 2010 until 10 October 2013, subject to the conditions below.
Respondent is to attend for monitoring by a clinical psychologist of his choice
and approved by the Dental Council of New South
Wales at his own cost, at a
frequency of once every 2 months or such other period as the psychologist
considers appropriate.
Respondent is to seek approval from the Dental Council of New South Wales of the
acceptability of the clinical psychologist within
2 weeks and to commence
consultations within 2 weeks of receipt by him of the approval by the Dental
Council of New South Wales or
such extended time as may be required by the
treating psychiatrist or clinical psychologist.
Respondent is to authorise the clinical psychologist to inform the Dental
Council of New South Wales of the commencement of treatment,
any subsequent
failure to attend for treatment, any variation in the frequency of attendance
which he or she recommends, and the
termination of treatment.
the event that during the term of the suspension any treating psychologist
recommends that the Respondent be referred to Forensic
Psychology Services Mr
Roopra is to comply with such recommendation within 14 days.
Respondent is to engage in further marriage counselling, at his expense, whether
alone or in company with his wife, as may be
recommended by his treating
psychologist.
Respondent is, during the period of his suspension, to authorise the treating
psychiatrist or clinical psychologist to provide
to the Council within 3 months
and subsequently as directed by the Council, a report by the treating
psychiatrist or clinical psychologist.
Respondent is to attend a face-to-face course on the Ethics of the Dental
Profession at an institution acceptable to the Dental
Council of New South
Wales, at his own cost.
to s149A(1)(c), that the Respondent engage in regular medical consultations with
a general practitioner to review treatment
and management of diabetes, sleep
apnoea and weight management, at least every three months on and from 1 June
2013 until 1 June
the Respondent comply with any and all recommendations issued by Community
Corrections, and/or Probation and Parole for the term
of his supervised parole
to s149A(1)(b), that registration of the Respondent be upon condition that for a
period of 3 years from 10 October 2013,
the Respondent:
(i) May only
practise with an adult dental assistant present, and only at surgeries or
premises approved by the Dental Council of
(ii) Must not
provide dentistry services to patients under the age of 18 years without the
presence of a parent or guardian or adult
family member of that person;
continue the practice previously imposed of maintaining a “Conditions of
Practice Sheet” for every patient
under the age of 18 years (in accordance
with the form annexed and marked “A”); and such records to be
maintained and
available for inspection;
(iv) Must not
employ any person under the age of 18;
(v) Must not
interview any female for employment, otherwise than in the presence of his
practice manager.
to s149A(1)(f), that the Respondent be ordered to appoint Dahrini Roopra (or
other qualified person approved by the Dental
Council of NSW) to act as practice
manager of any practice he conducts for the first 3 years.
to s149A(1)(f), that the Respondent seek and take advice from [a person
recommended by the Tribunal] in relation to management
of the Respondent’s
practice, including specifically, achieving a healthy work life balance.
pursuant to
, the Tribunal orders that if any or all of the above orders
or conditions are breached it will result in the practitioner’s
registration being cancelled, such that all of those orders are critical
compliance orders or conditions pursuant to
HCCC V ROOPRA
Chaitan Singh Roopra as a registered dentist you are hereby severely
reprimanded by this Dental Tribunal in relation to findings of
professional
misconduct of a very serious nature, arising from your actions in 2008, in
carrying out episodes of severe sexual assaults
on three young women in the
setting of your dental practice.
The Tribunal is of the view that you were not a suitable person to hold
registration as a dentist at the time you committed the offences.
Further the
Tribunal is of the view that at this time you are still not a suitable person to
hold registration as a dentist.
The Tribunal has had the benefit of considerable evidence, and is aware in
particular of statements made by yourself and also your
wife, and Dr Christopher
Lennings OAM, specialist clinical psychologist.
The Tribunal found the actions which lead to your conviction, to be
abhorrent. As a registered dentist you were in a position of trust,
expectation of the public is that you would act in accordance with that trust.
You abused that trust not only for your own
sexual gratification but as an
exercise in power over unsuspecting victims. In doing so you breached your
professional obligations
to the profession and thereby brought the profession
into disrepute. The Tribunal formed the opinion that at this stage you do not
have full insight into the gravity of your offences and have made no real
attempt to follow a proper redemptive path, including an
expression to your
victims. Your explanations are neither convincing nor plausible
Dentistry is an honoured profession and registration as a dentist offers
those registered, many privileges, but also an expectation
that a dentist will
act not only honestly and professionally in treatment provided but also in an
absolutely ethical manner. You
have been able to provide testimonials from a
selected group of your colleagues, but members of the profession in general are
concerned by your actions, and would expect that a Tribunal with two of
your peers as members would act appropriately.
The Tribunal is aware that during your incarceration, you undertook the CORE
Programme, which should assist you in your future understanding
behaviour. Although Dr Lennings OAM and the CORE Program psychologist expressed
the view that there is a low risk of your
re-offending, the Tribunal with its
duty of protection is of the opinion that for a person registered as a dentist
there should be
the prospect of a zero level chance of re-offending. Both Dr
Lennings OAM and [the psychologist] were in agreement that there could
triggers to re-offending one of which could be an unstable marriage situation.
In your many statements to the Tribunal both written
and in cross examination
you vacillated with regard to the status of your marriage. There were positive
statements to your parole
officer and others that your marriage had ended. You
attempted to deny this to the Tribunal with spurious explanations.
It is necessary that you avoid both static and dynamic
risk factors to re-offending.
It is fundamental that you do not attempt to place yourself into a position
of power over others
It may be necessary for you to remain under care for perhaps five years, with
ongoing assessment of your psychological and medical
It is important that you take steps to realise a stable marriage
relationship, with use of appropriate marriage counselling and must
continue to
have your situation monitored on a regular basis to avoid the possibility of
re-offending.
New South Wales Bar
Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Clyne v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202; quoted with
approval in
HCCC v Rutner
[2009] NSWDT 2, at [14];
Prakash v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
McBride v Walton
[1994] NSWCA 199
, per Kirby P at
[2006] MPBV 12,quoted with
approval in
[2007] NSWMT 2,a t
Prakash v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Roylance v General
Medical Council (No 2)
[1999] UKPC 16
[2000] 1 AC 311
; noted with approval in
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [30].
Prakash v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
see also Law Society of
South Australia v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
Law Society of NSW
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Law Society of NSW v
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
NSW Bar Association v
(Unreported, NSWCA, 23/8/1988, BC8801576), per Kirby P at
Tribunal, 11 April 1995), page 8; quoted with approval in
HCCC V O'Hagan
[2010] NSWNMT 37
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Law Society of NSW v
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
HCCC v A Nurse
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported), per Priestley JA said;
quoted with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
v LawSociety
of New South Wales
(Court of Appeal, 7 August 1987, unreported);
Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, at 419, 448. Kirby P was in
the minority in each of those decisions, but this statement of principle was not
the subject of criticism
by the majorities in those cases. See also Wingate
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [36]
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
NSW Bar Association
(Unreported, NSWCA, 23/8/1988, BC8801576), per Kirby P at 1; see
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
, at [15]; see also
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
, at 288, 297;
Council of the NSW Bar Association v Hart
[2011] NSWCA 64
Prothnotary v P
[2003] NSW CA 320
[2007] NSWMT 2, at
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [73(4)]; see also Prothnotary v P,
[2003] NSW CA 320
A Solicitor v The
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
[1957] HCA 46
Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR
A Solicitor
v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Prothnotary v P
[2003] NSW CA 320
A Solicitor v
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
[15]; see also
NSW Bar Association v Maddocks
(Unreported, NSWCA,
23/8/1988, BC8801576), per Kirby P at
[1947] HCA 53
Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR(NSW) 448
at 475.9 – 476.1
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Ex parte Tziniolis Re
Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
, per Walsh JA said at 451 and
452; quoted with approval in
McBride v Walton
[1994] NSWCA 199
A Solicitor v
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Fullagar at 290
Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
[2011] NSWSC 960
McBride v Walton
(Unreported, NSWCA, 15/7/94); quoted with authority, in
Re Dr Richard
[2007] NSWMT 2, at [73];
HCCC v Simring
(NSWMT, 29/4/2010);
Health Care Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA
[1957] HCA 46
, per Kitto J at
McBride v Walton
[1994] NSWCA 199
, per Kirby P at
[1947] HCA 53
[2007] NSWMT 2, [86(4)-(5)]
Law Society of New South Wales v. Walsh
(NSWCA, 15 December 1997,
unreported per Beazley JA)
As Samuels JA said in
Childs v Walton
(NSWCA, 13 November 1990,
unreported):
Prothnotary
[2003] NSW CA 320
NSWMT 2, [86(6)], HCCC v McKay
[2007] NSWNMT 5
Prothnotary v P
[2003] NSW CA 320
, at [24]; see also
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
A Solicitor v The
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
[2007] NSWMT 2,
Prothnotary v P
[2003] NSW CA 320
, at [27]; see also
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
, at 415, 448;
[2007] NSWMT 2,
Law Society of
NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
HCCC v Stoker
[2011] NSWSC 960
Prothnotary v P
[2003] NSW CA 320
HCCC v Stoker
[2011] NSWSC 960
Prothnotary v P
[2003] NSW CA 320
[1957] HCA 46
Benedict Anton Provan
[2005] PRBD (Vic) 3, at
The Prothonotary of
the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Ritchard
(NSWCA, 31 July 1987,
unreported); quoted with approval in
New South Wales Bar Association v
[2001] NSWCA 284
, at [26]; see also
Prothnotary v P
NSW Bar Association v Maddocks
(Unreported, NSWCA,
23/8/1988, BC8801576), per
Stanoevski v the
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
Stanoevski v the
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
In Re A Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
at 593 per King CJ.\; quoted with approval in
Barristers'
Board v Darveniza
[2000] QCA 253
Law Society of New
South Wales v Walsh
BC 9706885 a decision of Powell, Beazley JJA and Clarke
AJA of 15 December 1997 at pp
HCCC v Stoker
[2011] NSWSC 960
HCCC v Stoker
[2011] NSWSC 960
, at [25]; see also
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.04 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter