URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/854.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Saleh v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMP 854; (5 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Saleh v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMP
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
REVIEW PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Margaret Gibson
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Christopher Oates
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
DATE OF AMENDMENT:
5 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC); alleged upper and lower
gastrointestinal symptoms from medication taken for musculoskeletal
psychiatric injuries; claimant assessed by original Medical Assessor as having
1% whole person impairment (WPI); re-examination
by audio-visual conference
– Review Panel accepted injury to upper gastrointestinal
tract injury as symptoms arose as a result of medications taken for
accident-related psychiatric condition (diagnosed as gastroesophageal reflux
disorder (GORD)); lower gastrointestinal tract injury
accepted due to no prior
history of symptoms of constipation alternating with diarrhoea (diagnosis of
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS));
impairment assessed under clause 1.247 of the
Motor Accident Permanent Impairment Guidelines, 1 June 2018 and Table 2 of page
American Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment
, Fourth Edition; GORD assessed at 1% WPI; IBS assessed
at 1% WPI; total impairment 2% WPI; MAC revoked; new certificate issued; new
combined certificate issued at 7% WPI.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
REPLACEMENT CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Replacement Certificate issued under
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
The Review Panel:
the certificate issued by Medical Assessor Garvey dated 16 December 2024 and
issues a new certificate as follows.
that the following injuries:
(a) upper gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining weight,
(b) lower gastrointestinal tract – irritable bowel syndrome,
are causally related to the motor accident of 3 June 2016.
above injuries result in a whole person impairment of 2%.
CERTIFICATE
Replacement Certificate issued under
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
The Review Panel combines the following assessments:
Certificate
of Medical Assessor Michael Steiner dated 14 March 2022:
permanent impairment in relation to the following injuries is 0%:
– double vision.
Certificate
of Medical Assessor Richard Haber dated 9 April 2022:
The permanent
impairment in relation to the following injuries is 2%:
Cardiovascular - arrhythmia.
Certificate
of Medical Assessor Neil Berry dated 19 May 2023:
The permanent
impairment in relation to the following injuries is 5%:
cervical spine
– soft tissue injury, and
lumbar spine
– soft tissue injury.
Certificate
of the Medical Review Panel dated 3 November 2025:
The permanent
impairment in relation to the following injuries is 2%:
gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining weight, and
gastrointestinal tract – irritable bowel syndrome.
the Combined Values Chart at page 322 of the
American Medical Association
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
, fourth edition, the
combined permanent impairment is 9% and is NOT greater than
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Saleh (the claimant) was involved in a motor accident on 3 June 2016. She was
the driver of a car that was stationary at a stop
sign when another vehicle from
the opposite direction collided with another vehicle. The two vehicles then
crashed into the driver’s
side of her vehicle with a secondary impact with
the stop sign at the front of her vehicle.
the accident, she suffered from pain in her neck, shoulders, low back and hip.
She also had headaches, dizziness, blurred
vision and diarrhoea.
ambulance transported the claimant to Westmead Hospital where she stayed for
three days.
later developed psychological symptoms which were recorded by her general
practitioner (GP) in a medical certificate as panic
attacks and anxiety. She was
then referred to a psychiatrist who prescribed medication. The claimant says she
had upper gastrointestinal
symptoms of GORD. There were also lower
gastrointestinal symptoms of diarrhoea. Maintenance of weight also became an
issue for her.
claimant made a claim for personal injury benefits with Insurance Australia
Limited t/as NRMA (the insurer), the third-party insurer
of the vehicle that she
says caused the accident.
medical dispute arose about whether the degree of the claimant’s whole
person impairment (WPI) is greater than 10% WPI. Where
there is a dispute about
the degree of a claimant’s WPI, damages for non-economic
cannot be awarded and disputes
must be referred to a Medical Assessor for determination.
16 December 2024, Medical Assessor John Garvey found the claimant’s
gastro-oesophageal reflux and irritable bowel syndrome
to be causally related to
the accident and assessed impairment at 1% WPI.
claimant lodged an application with the Personal Injury Commission (Commission)
seeking a review of Medical Assessor Garvey’s
assessment.
3 March 2025, a delegate of the President (Ms Stephanie Wigan) accepted the
application for review and referred the matter to this
Review Panel (the Panel)
to conduct the Review proceedings.
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT UNDER REVIEW
Assessor Garvey was referred the following injury for assessment:
- oesophagus
– upper gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining
weight, and
- oesophagus
– lower gastrointestinal tract – diarrhea and maintaining
Medical Assessor stated that some of the medication the claimant was taking for
her mental condition can contribute to or exacerbate
gastro-oesophageal reflux
symptoms. These include Lexapro, Abilify, Antenex and Lyrica.
was noted to be in the available range of between 0% and 2% under cl 1.247 of
the Guidelines. The Medical Assessor found
that “in the absence of any
objective clinical evidence on physical examination or on digestive tract
endoscopy and biopsy”,
he considered the claimant’s symptoms to be
at the mid-range at 1% WPI.
Medical Assessor deemed no apportionment was necessary as there was no objective
clinical evidence in the Patient Health Summary
of any pre-existing symptomatic
upper digestive tract impairment before the accident.
treatment effect was allowed as the medication Nexium had not made any
appreciable difference to the claimant’s symptoms.
impairment caused by the motor accident therefore remained at 1%
SUBMISSIONS
claimant’s submissions in her application for further assessment primarily
centre upon a report of gastroenterologist, Dr
David Frommer dated 29 August
2024. The claimant gave
Dr Frommer a history of weight gain from 60kg before
the subject accident of 3 June 2016 to 88kg after the accident. After three
of daily Saxenda injections, the claimant reported losing 15kg, now
weighing 73-74kg. She says this is still an increase of around
13-14kg compared
to her pre-accident weight.
addition, Dr Frommer recorded that the claimant has been suffering over the past
three to four years with reflux and heartburn
every one to two days per week. To
combat this, she relies on Nexium, Gaviscon and or Quick Eze.
claimant also told Dr Frommer that she suffers from nausea regularly after meals
and vomits three to four times a month.
suffers from bloating and feelings of abdominal distension. The bilateral upper
abdominal pain has a 9/10 severity, lasts for
a few hours and assisted only by
vomiting or diarrhoea.
for the past two to three years, the claimant also suffered from bilateral lower
abdominal pain with an 8/10 severity on most
Frommer diagnosed the claimant with:
(a) gastroesophageal reflux disease (GORD) as a result of increased weight;
(b) diarrhoea – possibly from Lexapro;
(c) constipation – possibly from Panadeine Forte or Abilify, and
(d) nausea and vomiting – possibly from Abilify.
Frommer rated impairment as follows:
(a) upper gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining weight
(b) lower gastrointestinal tract – diarrhoea and maintaining weight
(c) total WPI of 8%.
her review submissions, the claimant refers to the history documented by Medical
Assessor Garvey as follows:
“I asked the claimant about her
digestive tract symptoms and she said that when she was consulting a
psychiatrist, he recommended
that she be prescribed Nexium. The claimant said
that she noted abdominal pain, vomiting and nervousness and she would get
and break things, sudden diarrhoea and sudden constipation, stomach
bloating, feeling of heaviness in the stomach, a feeling like
a needle in her
stomach, her mouth became very dry and she became nauseated and she vomited with
food and she had diarrhoea 6 or
7 times a day... During the physical examination
she raised the matter of heartburn which had not been previously mentioned,
she described as a sour acid taste during the morning and during the
daytime which was dependent upon her mood. She also experienced
coughing with
heartburn and got relief from quickies and Gastrogel."
claimant says the history of her gastrointestinal symptoms recorded by Medical
Assessor Garvey does not equate to the 1% WPI assessed.
claimant notes that the Medical Assessor cited the Class 1 example on page
10/241 of the
American Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation
of Permanent Impairment
, Fourth Edition (AMA 4 Guides). This example
described lower gastrointestinal symptoms that were “occasionally
It is submitted that the claimant’s reported symptoms do
not reflect this example.
it is contended that the claimant’s impairment should be assessed under
the colonic and rectal impairment as set out
under Table 3 of page 241 of the
AMA 4 Guides, which provides for an assessment of Class 1 in the range of 0% and
9%. The claimant
says her symptoms are on the more severe side of his
insurer refers to various pre-accident entries (from February 2014 to May 2016)
contained primarily in the Excelsior GP records
which referred to lower
abdominal pain.
insurer also refers to an abdominal ultrasound report dated 13 December 2019
which showed an anterior gallbladder wall polyp of
3mm and increased fat content
in the liver, but no gallstones. The ultrasound was ordered on the background of
high liver enzymes.
is submitted that none of the medications which relate to the claimant’s
alleged accident-related injuries cause elevated
liver enzymes. The insurer says
elevated liver enzymes are brought on by cholesterol-lowering medications (such
as Crestor), if caused
by medications at all.
GORD, the insurer says Nexium (used for heartburn, a core symptom of GORD) was
prescribed on 19 August 2015, before the
insurer further says the claimant’s pre-pregnancy weight was recorded on
22 October 2015 as 77.5kg and on 12 September 2016 (around three months
after the accident), it was recorded as 79.3kg. The insurer
therefore submits
that the history of her weight being 60kg prior to the accident is unlikely to
be accurate. Furthermore, the insurer
says while the claimant’s weight was
recorded in her hospital admission 21-24 April 2019 as 87kg, she was heavily
at the time. Her weight as recorded by her GP was 77kg on 12 December
2019 and on 16 June 2022, her weight was 77.6kg. It is therefore
submitted that
the claimant’s pre-pregnancy weight and her weight over six years
post-accident were within 0.3kg of each other.
insurer also submits that GORD is only mentioned once in the post-accident GP
records on 15 May 2020.
is therefore submitted that the information does not suggest an increase in
weight associated with the subject accident, the claimant’s
current weight
being lower than it was prior to the pregnancy that ended three days
pre-accident, nor that it gave rise to GORD.
diarrhoea, the insurer refers to Dr Frommer’s report dated in August 2024
and his finding that “For the last
2 years she has had mild diarrhoea,
worse over the last 6 months, possibly from Lexapro”. The insurer contends
however that
the claimant’s treating psychiatrist, Dr Benjamin, introduced
Lexapro in May 2017 which does not suggest there is a relationship
between this
medication and the claimant’s development of diarrhoea over the last two
Furthermore,
the insurer says diarrhoea is only mentioned once in the post-accident GP
records, on 9 March 2020.
insurer relies on the report of gastroenterologist, Dr Siddath Sethi, dated 23
May 2024 who opines:
“Ms. Saleh has developed GORD, IBS and
haemorrhoids entirely of her own accord and her MVA and the analgesic
medications that
she was prescribed did not play any causative role whatsoever.
They have occurred regardless. Her obesity has contributed to her
gastrointestinal symptoms.”
insurer submits that there is 0% gastrointestinal WPI related to the
response to the claimant’s review application, the insurer says there are
no errors in the assessment of Medical Assessor
Garvey. The insurer says
impairment is not assessed solely on the claimant’s reported symptoms but
on the objective findings
on examination.
insurer submits that the class 1 example, for which there is 0% WPI (as
reproduced in the claimant’s submissions above),
is clearly in line with
the Medical Assessor’s assessment and reasons, particularly because:
claimant’s symptoms have persisted for several years, with alternating
constipation and diarrhea;
claimant’s stools have not been known to contain abnormal materials;
there were no
abnormalities identified during the examination (auscultation);
the symptoms
have not interfered with the claimant’s usual activities, and
there is no
suggestion in the certificate or elsewhere that the claimant has required any
change to her diet.
Additionally,
the information available to the Medical Assessor does not suggest the
claimant’s weight remains volatile. The
claimant weighed 70.7kg at the
examination, which is very similar to her weight after three months of Saxenda
injections following
the accident (73-74kg) and her weight at Dr Frommer’s
assessment in August 2024 (73kg).
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE
10 March 2025, the Panel issued a direction to the parties requiring indexed and
paginated bundles of the information they relied
upon. Both parties duly
responded with the claimant’s bundle comprising of pages 1-147 and the
insurer’s bundle comprising
of pages 1-2,332.
its preliminary conference on 13 May 2025, the Panel issued a further direction
requiring the following documents:
(a) a list of all prescribed medications with dates from the claimant’s GP
(b) updated records of Excelsior Family Medical Centre to 31 July 2020 (referred
to in item 10 in the report of Dr Siddarth Sethi
dated 23 May 2024 – R14,
page 136 of 2332 of insurer’s bundle);
(c) clinical records of WiseMind Medical Practice as at 25 September 2021
(referred to in item 12 in the report of Dr Siddarth Sethi
dated 23 May 2024
– R14, page 136 of 2,332 of insurer’s bundle);
(d) GP records of Dr Hatzidis (referred to in the Interface ADL Assessment
report dated 11 July 2024 completed by Ms Dawn Piebenga
– Appendix 2, page
258 of 2,332 of insurer’s bundle), and
(e) any gastroenterologist referrals and reports of colonoscopies or
endoscopies.
parties responded to the directions with the insurer uploading a joint bundle
indexed and paginated with pages 1-920 comprising
(a) list of prescribed medications served 27 June 2025;
(b) updated records of Excelsior Family Medical as at 31 July 2020;
(c) clinical records of WiseMind Medical Practice as at September 2021, and
(d) referral to Dr Alina Stoita, gastroenterologist, dated 12 June 2025.
documentation before the Panel is voluminous. While the Panel has read the
documentation, it will not refer to or summarise every
document contained in the
bundles. As detailed in the Panel re-examination report, the claimant’s
history and medications was
discussed with her.
notes (various)
– relevant entries detailed in the Panel
re-examination report.
Medico-legal
report of Dr Siddarth Sethi, gastroenterologist, dated 23 May 2024
File review. Diagnosis of GORD, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and haemorrhoids.
Not causally related to the motor accident.
Developed entirely of their own
accord. No direct injury to gastrointestinal tract. CT abdomen reported as
normal. Claimant is obese
with BMI of 32. Obesity worsens GORD as described in
medical literature. Constipation strongly suggestive of IBS, also worsened by
obesity. There is a pre-existing history of abdominal pain and constipation
requiring laxatives.
Medico-legal
report of Dr Donald Frommer (x2), gastroenterologist, dated
– recorded a history of the claimant’s pre-accident weight
being 60kg and afterwards it rose up to 88kg. After three
months of Saxenda
injections, it fell 15kg and is not 73-74kg. For three to four years had reflux
and heartburn (up to 9-10/10) every
one to two days per week. Takes Nexium,
Gaviscon and/or Quickeze. Nausea after meals tow to three times a week and
vomits three to
four times a month. Also bloating and feelings of abdominal
distension. Upper abdominal pains, up to 9/10 in severity, helped by
vomiting or
diarrhoea. Lower abdominal pain, 8/10 severity, most days. Last two years mild
diarrhoea, worse over last six months.
Daily three to four watery bowel actions
which lead to incontinence one to two times per month. Occasional constipation
but no blood
or mucus. May 2020 – diagnosis of Gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GORD).
Assessment under AMA 4 Guides,
, upper GI,
page 239, Table 2, Class 1, Range 0% to 9%. Assessed at 5% WPI. Diarrhoea and
maintaining weight assessed under Colonic
Impairment, page 241, Table 3, Class
1, Range 0% to 9%. Assessed at 3% WPI. Combined WPI = 8%.
PANEL RE-EXAMINATION REPORT
its preliminary conference, the Panel determined that the claimant be
re-examined. The re-examination was conducted by Medical
Assessors Gibson and
Oates via audio-visual link on 1 August 2025.
Panel had previously decided that re-examination could be conducted by means of
video conference, as matters of history had to
be clarified, whereas there were
no abnormal clinical examination findings noted by the original Medical
Assessor, John Garvey, and
there were no issues raised by the parties.
re-examination report is as follows:
Date of Accident: 3 June 2016
Date of Assessment: 1 August 2025
Permanent impairment disputes to be assessed
– lower gastrointestinal tract – diarrhoea and maintaining
– upper gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining
Details of who attended the Assessment
The claimant, Ms Saleh, was assessed via MS Teams video link by Medical
Assessor Oates and Medical Assessor Gibson on behalf of the
Medical Review
Panel. The technology functioned satisfactorily.
An Arabic interpreter (NAATI No. CPN8X144D) was present for the duration of
the assessment.
The interpreter was not required to translate anything at any time.
Pre-accident medical history and relevant personal details
The claimant confirmed a repair of umbilical and inguinal herniae as a child.
There was a history of PCOS (polycystic ovary syndrome) treated with
metformin. This condition improved and medication was stopped
after the birth of
her second child in 2015.
She had had recurrent UTI (urinary tract infection), particularly in
pregnancy, and pyelonephritis.
There was a history of haemorrhoids in May 2016 during pregnancy with her
second child. This was treated with Proctosedyl for itch
and heaviness. There
was no rectal bleeding. She said the haemorrhoids were related to the pregnancy,
as this was a big baby (her
son was 3.8kg born).
She has had four live births in 2013, 1/5/2016, 6/2019 and 9/2022.
She had gestational diabetes mellitus in two of her pregnancies.
She had had lumbar disc prolapses and annular tears in June 2016.
She had had recurrent venous thromboembolism in pregnancy in 2016, 2019 and
2022; and pulmonary embolism during pregnancy in 2016.
The claimant stated there was no past history of any psychiatric problems and
then qualified this by saying she had seen a counsellor,
who checked her mental
health when she had developed the blood clots during her pregnancies.
Prior to the index accident, she worked in early childhood education in
family daycare and would have between four and seven children
at her home,
depending on the ages of the children.
She lived in a house with her husband who is a self-employed electrician, and
children. Before the accident she did all her usual
daily activities, drove a
car and kept the house.
The Medical Assessors then conducted a medication review with the claimant.
Movicol prescribed 1/12/2014 – The claimant could not remember what
this was given for at first (it is for constipation) and
then recalled it may
have been related to her treatment for polycystic ovary syndrome.
Nexium HP7 which is triple therapy for Helicobacter pylori – prescribed
on 7/1/2015. The claimant explained her husband was
diagnosed with this bacteria
and she was told it was contagious and that she should take a 14-day course of
the triple therapy as
well. The file revealed that her breath test for H-pylori
was negative. This bacterium can cause gastric ulceration.
Voltaren and Nexium were prescribed on 19/8/2015 but she could not recall
what condition these were prescribed for. The Panel notes
that Nexium
(esomeprazole) is a PPI (proton pump inhibitor), usually given to counteract or
treat oesophageal reflux symptoms.
Panadeine Forte prescribed on 21/3/2016 was given for lower abdominal pain
associated with a urinary tract infection, and she was
subsequently admitted for
a kidney infection during the pregnancy for her second child, a son born on
Proctosedyl prescribed 23/5/2016 was given for symptomatic haemorrhoids of
After the date of accident on 3/6/2016
, Maxolon, an anti-nausea drug,
was prescribed on 11/7/2016. Movicol for constipation was prescribed on
29/11/2016. Nexium was first
prescribed after the accident on 18/4/2017, and
thereafter prescribed regularly, along with an H2 receptor antagonist Zantac on
22/6/2020 and 14/4/2022.
Ranitidine (Zantac) was prescribed on 29/8/2022 and then Nexium on 31/5/2023
and 3/4/2024, along with Panadeine Forte periodically
and Norgesic, both
analgesic medication, and Celebrex anti-inflammatory medication.
History of the motor accident
The claimant explained she had given birth to her son about one month before
and her son was in a baby capsule in the back seat, along
with her mother who
was travelling as a back seat passenger. The claimant was driving to pick up her
daughter who was three years
old from childcare.
She was driving a seven-seater people mover. She had a seatbelt on. She was
stationary at a “Stop” sign. Two other vehicles
collided and one of
them lost control and crashed into her vehicle. The Stop sign was then dislodged
and also hit her vehicle.
Airbags did not deploy but she later found out that they were faulty. She was
shaken up by the two impacts and felt aching in the
left shoulder. At the time
of the impact, she was turned around to her left side, holding the baby capsule
with her outstretched
A bystander came up and opened the stuck driver’s door for her so she
could get out and tend to her baby and mother.
One ambulance took her son to Sydney Children’s Hospital, Westmead and
a second ambulance took her to Westmead Hospital, where
she was admitted to the
labour ward for three days for observation because she was complaining of lower
abdominal pain and had some
light bleeding per vaginam (vaginal bleeding), which
became heavier over the next days after the accident. A CT scan of the abdomen
done as part of a CT PAN scan (whole-body trauma CT) for trauma was normal.
History of symptoms and treatment following the motor accident
After discharge from hospital, she rested for a few days and returned to her
childcare work a week or two after the accident to try
and get back to a normal
Subsequent progress
She had some continuing neck pain, left shoulder pain, low back and hip pain,
along with headaches and dizziness, blurred vision and
abdominal pain and
She had some further investigations of her musculoskeletal injuries. She was
treated with analgesics and anti-neuropathic pain agent
Lyrica (pregabalin).
She noticed she had become very anxious after the accident and was easily
She had her mother come out from Lebanon and stay with her for a period of
six months after the accident.
She was struggling to continue work with her pain and ended up stopping the
childcare work.
With respect to her mental state, she saw a psychologist for a few months but
this did not help, so then she was referred to a psychiatrist,
Dr Benjamin.
First assessment was on 22/5/2017. She was diagnosed with major depressive
disorder with psychotic features, with a
differential diagnosis including
schizoaffective disorder and schizophrenia. She was prescribed Lexapro,
Risperdal and diazepam.
Her compliance with medication was initially
At review on 29/6/2017, she was complaining of persistent headache and
significant low back pain since having stopped previously prescribed
was needing to use Panadeine frequently throughout the day. Dr Benjamin advised
her to go back onto Lyrica 75mg bd and
stop Panadeine because of the rebound
effect of codeine withdrawal, and to use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
medication for back
pain and headaches.
He stopped her Risperdal, because it was not effective in controlling her
psychotic symptoms, and this was substituted with Solian
200mg at night. She was
to continue Lexapro 20mg and diazepam 2mg at night.
At next review on 14/7/2017, she had started to develop reflux symptoms and
Dr Benjamin added Nexium 20mg, an H2 receptor antagonist,
to her medications.
Her Solian was increased to 200mg twice bd and she was to continue Lexapro and
Diazepam and Lyrica.
At review on 21/9/2017, she complained of breast tenderness and was diagnosed
with hyperprolactinaemia, most likely caused by Solian.
He psychotic symptoms
had been well controlled since she was on Solian, however the side-effect caused
a reduction of Solian dose
and commencement of Abilify 10mg tablets bd and that
she was to withdraw Solian over a one-week period and continue Lexapro and
At review on 17/11/2017, she continued with Abilify 10mg mane, Lexapro 20mg
and diazepam 5mg, both nocte, with good compliance and
stable mood, adequate
sleep and clear thinking. She had no psychotic symptoms such as delusional
thinking or auditory hallucinations,
which had been noted previously. She was
socialising with friends and in-laws, caring for her children and doing some of
the housework.
At review with Dr Benjamin on 19/12/2017, there was complaint of frequent
vomiting and that she may need to have her stomach checked
gastroscopy.
The claimant told the Panel Medical Assessors that she did not proceed with
the gastroscopy, as she was scared to have investigations.
At review on 29/5/2018, she continued on Lexapro 40mg at night, Lyrica 75mg
bd, diazepam 5mg at night, and the dose of Abilify was
increased from 10mg to
15mg and then to 20mg, which she found more effective, but she was unhappy about
her weight gain over the
previous 12 months of 6kg, with weight at that
consultation 79kg.
She was motivated to lose weight but found it hard to engage in physical
activities and considered taking an appetite suppressant
medication. She was
referred to her family doctor to discuss this further.
In mid-2018 she commenced on Saxenda injections to help her lose weight and
at review with the psychiatrist on 10/7/2018, she had
lost 7kg in the last five
weeks, with her weight on that date being 74kg.
At review in September 2018, there was concern about blood pressure drop
causing dizziness and also her husband was concerned about
relapse in symptoms,
including mood swings, explosive temperament and impulsive behaviour, and she
reported feeling depressed after
the death of a relative.
Dr Benjmain felt she may need to stop Saxenda injections, as it may have been
contributing to irritability, and she was advised to
reduce her dose of diazepam
by one-half.
At review in November 2018, it transpired that she had become pregnant, which
was not planned, and she had stopped anti-depressant
and mood stabiliser
medications and become progressively anxious, irritable and depressed, with
insomnia and paranoia.
Dr Benjmain explained psychotropic medications are only to be used during
pregnancy if they are essential for the well-being of the
patient, which
overrides potential side-effects. He prescribed Lovan 20mg, one in the morning,
Abilify 10mg one at night, diazepam
5mg prn on an as needed basis.
The claimant underwent an ultrasound scan of the abdomen on 13/12/2019 as a
result of high liver enzymes being found on routine blood
tests. This showed no
gallstones but there was an anterior gall bladder wall polyp 3 x 3mm. There was
no dilatation of the intra
or extra hepatic bile ducts, and the common bile duct
measured 4mm in maximal diameter. There was no local liver mass seen and the
spleen and kidneys were unremarkable. No further action was taken.
The Panel notes on review of the medical documentation that the first mention
of gastroesophageal reflux disease by the treating GP,
Dr Hatzidis, was not
until 15/5/2020, some four years after the accident, but the claimant explained
that this aspect of her symptoms
had been monitored and treated by her
psychiatrist, Dr Benjmain.
The claimant stated that the Nexium prescribed by Dr Benjamin had helped with
her upper abdominal pain and with her heartburn, but
she had developed
constipation alternating with diarrhoea and also bouts of acid reflux in the
mouth, particularly in the morning
or when she felt stressed. She would take
Mylanta and Gaviscon, which gave short-term benefit to these symptoms.
She said she would get diarrhoea if she were feeling stressed suddenly or
sometimes she would get sudden constipation according to
her mental situation.
She would vomit when she was feeling stressed, with pain in the epigastrium and
tightness and abdominal bloating,
with tenderness around to the back. Her hands
would get cold and sweaty.
She could have two or three days of constipation and then would get sudden
onset diarrhoea with occasional blood per rectum. She would
get the lower
abdominal symptoms about five days a week and the nausea and bloating in the
upper abdomen, and reflux symptoms about
four days a week, and this has been the
pattern over the last two or three years. She has also noticed becoming
intolerant to dairy
products and had not had this previously.
Her GP had previously recommended gastroscopy and colonoscopy, but she was
too afraid to have them done, but now has made an appointment
gastroenterologist for the first time, Dr Stoita, next month.
She still gets frequent UTIs and will have courses of antibiotics.
Current treatment
Her current medications consist of Lexapro 20mg bd, Nexium 20mg mane, which
she takes most days unless she forgets, and she will sometimes
have an extra
dose at night if the reflux is disturbing her sleep. She uses Gaviscon or
Mylanta symptomatically as well.
She repeated the breath test for H pylori but this was again negative. She
has Abilify 10mg daily, Antenex (diazepam) 5mg as required,
and she takes this
three or four days a week if sleep is an issue. She did try Lacteze but it did
not seem to help her dairy intolerance.
She has Panadeine Forte alternating with Antenex for neck pain and low back
pain. The neck pain radiates to the shoulders and both
arms, right greater than
left, and also she takes this for low back pain which radiates to the right hip
and down the right leg to
She has Lyrica 75mg once daily and also uses cranberry juice and Ural sachets
to help alkalinise the urine to try and prevent UTI.
She did try Ozempic for weight loss after her fourth baby for three or four
months. She found that Saxenda made her less hungry and
she wasn’t craving
for food. Panadeine Forte makes her crave food.
She has seen a different GP, Dr Ozman, Auburn, for the last two years, as he
is easier to gain access to than her previous GP, who
became very busy.
She still takes Ozempic every few months, as she still can’t control
her eating impulse, except when there is a bitter taste
in her mouth. Panadeine
Forte makes her crave food.
Current symptoms
In terms of symptoms, she has had occasional faecal incontinence and wears a
pad if she is stressed or anxious. Some staining will
occur if she passes flatus
at times. When she has constipation, she takes pitted dates and dried plums, and
other high fibre preparations.
She sometimes takes Movicol or else herbal
tablets for her constipation.
Her symptoms have been fairly stable over the last two or three years and
they don’t vary with her weight. Her appetite is intact
but increased when
she is anxious. She has not required any change in her diet.
Subsequent accident, injury or condition
She had a subsequent motor vehicle accident in 2019 and 2020, both of which
were minor. In one of these she was again driving the
eight-seater people mover
and was hit from the rear. Her daughter, who was in the back seat, was
She did see her doctor just as a precaution, as she was worried, but she was
reassured and told to take her usual medications. She
did not develop any
ill-effect from this accident.”
RELEVANT PROVISIONS
Permanent impairment
assessment of the degree of permanent impairment is to be made in accordance
with the Motor Accident Permanent Impairment Guidelines
(effective from 1 June
2018) (the Guidelines).
impairment to the digestive system is assessed under the heading
“Digestive system” and commence from page 56.
These Guidelines apply
to motor accidents that occurred between 5 October 1999 and 30 November
Guidelines adopt the AMA 4 Guides. The Guidelines are definitive with regard to
the matters they address but where they are silent
on an issue, the AMA 4 Guides
should be followed.
Causation of injury
is necessary for the Panel to consider whether the accident caused or
contributed to the claimant’s digestive system injury.
provisions regarding causation of injury are contained in cls 1.5 to 1.7 of the
1.6 and 1.7 state:
“1.6 Causation means that a physical,
chemical or biological factor contributed to the occurrence of a medical
To decide that a factor alleged to have caused or contributed to the
occurrence or worsening of a medical condition has, in fact,
done so, it is
necessary to verify both of the following”
alleged factor
could have caused
or contributed to the worsening of the
impairment, which is a medical determination.
alleged factor
or contribute to worsening of the impairment,
which is a non-medical determination
This, therefore, involves a
medical decision and a non-medical informed judgement.
1.7 There is no simple common test of causation that is applicable to all
cases, but the accepted approach involves determining whether
the injury (and
the associated impairment) was caused or materially contributed to by the motor
accident. The motor accident does
not have to be a sole cause as long as it is
a contributing cause, which is more than negligible. Considering the question
this injury (or impairment) have occurred if not for the
accident?’ may be useful in some cases, although this is not a definitive
test and may be inapplicable in circumstances where there are multiple
contributing causes.”
the provisions of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
apply, in particular
DETERMINATIONS
review of the medical assessment is not limited to a review of only that aspect
of the assessment that is alleged to be incorrect
and is to be by way of a new
assessment of all the matters with which the medical assessment is
Panel, comprised of two specialist medical practitioners, is not required to
choose between competing medical opinions and is
required to form its own
Insurance Australia Group Ltd v
Insurance Australia
Ltd v Marsh
evaluation should only consider the impairment as it is at the time of the
assessment.
Panel may confirm the certificate of assessment or revoke that certificate and
issue a new certificate as to the matters
Panel refers to the above re-examination report of Medical Assessors Oates and
Gibson. The Panel reconvened on 18 August 2025
and discussed the re-examination
report findings before collectively making the below
determinations.
Diagnosis and causation
first referred injury is redefined as upper gastrointestinal tract –
oesophagus – GORD (gastroesophageal reflux disorder)
symptoms and
maintaining weight.
Panel considered that the accident was a cause of this injury, as symptoms arose
as a result of medications taken for a psychological
condition treated by a
psychiatrist, which manifested after the accident.
second referred injury is redefined as lower gastrointestinal tract –
diarrhoea and maintaining weight. Irritable bowel
syndrome is the appropriate
medical diagnosis in this instance.
Panel considered that this condition has arisen as a result of the accident
because there was no prior history of symptoms of
constipation alternating with
diarrhoea. The clinical picture was most suggestive of a functional
gastrointestinal disorder affecting
the lower gastrointestinal tract brought
since the motor
vehicle accident.
was a past history of haemorrhoids and constipation associated with pregnancy
but this condition was temporary and resolved
after delivery.
Summary of injuries referred by the parties
following injuries
caused by the motor accident:
gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining weight, and
gastrointestinal tract – irritable bowel
Permanent impairment
Upper gastrointestinal tract – GORD symptoms and maintaining
is assessed with reference to cl 1.247 of the Guidelines which states upper
digestive tract disease caused by the commencement
and ongoing use of
anti-inflammatory medications must be assessed as 0 – 2% WPI Class 1
impairment, according to Table 2 of
page 239, AMA 4 Guides.
this case, the Panel used analogy and found that the upper digestive tract
disease was caused by the commencement and ongoing use
of anti-psychotic
medications rather than anti-inflammatory medication. However, there were no
specific signs or any evidence on
investigations of a specific disease process
causing the symptoms to manifest.
Panel agreed that 1% whole person impairment is appropriate in the
circumstances, because the symptoms, although frequent, are
not constantly
present and are controlled by the use of appropriate H2 receptor antagonist or
PPI medication. There has been no change
of diet required and her weight is
maintained.
Lower gastrointestinal tract – irritable bowel
Panel referred to cl 1.248 of the Guidelines, which states colonic and/or rectal
disease caused by the use of opiate medication
must be assessed as 0 – 2%
WPI Class 1 impairment according to Table 2 of page 239, AMA 4 Guides.
Assessment of constipation
alone results in 0% WPI.
this case, there is constipation alternating with diarrhoea and 1% whole person
impairment was assessed by the Panel.
the symptoms though frequent are not constant, and there has been no requirement
for a change in diet and her weight is maintained,
indicating that the condition
is at the mild end of the range of 0 – 2%.
Panel noted that constipation is being addressed by use of high fibre
supplements by the claimant, and diarrhoea similarly by
symptomatic treatment.
Panel concluded that for the gastrointestinal injuries referred for assessment,
the claimant’s degree of permanent impairment
Panel revokes the certificate of Medical Assessor Garvey dated 16 December 2024
and issues a new certificate in accordance with
the Panel’s above findings
and reasons for assessment.
Panel also issues a combined certificate combining its assessment with the
certificates of Medical Assessors Berry, Medical Accessor
Steiner and Medical
Assessor Haber.
certificates are located at the front page of this
Section 131
Accidents Compensation Act 1999
Accidents Compensation Act 1999
Section 63(3A) of the 1999
[2021] NSWCA
[2021] NSWSC 619.
Clause 1.21 of the
Guidelines.
Section 63(4) of the 1999
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (565 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter