URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/234.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kearney v Amirbeaggi (No 3) [2025] NSWCA 234 (22 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Kearney v Amirbeaggi (No 3)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 234
Hearing Date(s):
20 October 2025
Date of Orders:
22 October 2025
Decision Date:
22 October 2025
(1) Subject to further order of the Court, enforcement of
the costs orders made in the proceedings by Justice Fagan in the Common
Division is stayed until prayers 4, 5 and 6 of the amended notice of motion
filed by the applicant on 25 September 2025 are resolved
(including by their
withdrawal or by dismissal).
(2) If prayers 4, 5 and 6 of
the amended notice of motion filed by the applicant on 25 September 2025 have
not been resolved by
11 December 2025, the respondents have liberty to apply to
the Court of Appeal Registrar for an order lifting the stay in order
(3) Costs of the hearing in respect of orders 2 and 3 of
amended notice of motion filed by the applicant on 25 September 2025 shall
costs in the appeal (including any application for an extension of time to
appeal), if and when instituted.
Catchwords:
APPEALS – Procedure – Application for interim stay –
Enforcement of costs orders – Proposed appointment of
Applicant’s legal incapacity unresolved – Evidence of
applicant’s psychological condition apt to
deteriorate – Balance of
convenience favours applicant
Legislation Cited:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), rr 7.14, 7.15, 7.16,
Cases Cited:
Di Liristi v Matautia Developments Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 163
Amirbeaggi (No 2)
[2025] NSWCA 73
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 455
Michael Hill Jeweller
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Gispac Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 128
Procedural rulings
Brian Kearney (Applicant) (Self-represented)
Farshad Amirbeaggi (First
Respondent)
ACN 111 804 383 Pty Ltd (Formerly Yates Beaggi Lawyers Pty Ltd)
t/as Yates Beaggi Lawyers (Second Respondent)
Representation:
Applicant (Self-represented)
(Respondents)
Solicitors:
YPOL Lawyers (Respondents)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of NSW
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 147
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 260
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 455
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 1223
Date of Decision:
5 March 2025; 7 March 2025; 21 March 2025; 14 May 2025; 17 October
File Number(s):
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
: This matter arises from a professional negligence claim that the
applicant, Mr Brian Kearney, brought against his former solicitor,
Amirbeaggi and an incorporated law firm associated with Mr Amirbeaggi.
matter has a long and troubled procedural history. The procedural history up to
April 2025 was summarised by Kirk JA in
Kearney v Amirbeaggi (No 2)
[2025] NSWCA 73
at paragraphs [6]-[30]. It is unnecessary to repeat that history
here or attempt to summarise it again.
is sufficient to point to important developments since April 2025.
substantive proceedings were listed for hearing before Fagan J on 28 April 2025.
Mr Kearney did not attend that hearing, but notified
the associate to Fagan J
that he was experiencing acute mental distress that had led to an admission at
the Sydney Clinic. His Honour
treated Mr Kearney as having made an application
to vacate the hearing. He received evidence from Dr Grace, who was the
psychiatrist
treating Mr Kearney. Dr Grace was cross-examined. Fagan J
dismissed the application to vacate the hearing. The hearing proceeded
the plaintiff being represented or evidence being received in support of his
case. His Honour proceeded to dismiss Mr Kearney’s
further amended
statement of claim filed 13 October 2020 and entered judgment for the
defendants.
matters were dealt with in orders that were made by Fagan J on 1 May 2025 and
reasons for judgment delivered on 14 May 2025:
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 455.
Honour also made orders for costs in favour of the defendants and gave
directions to allow part of the costs to be dealt with
by way of a gross sum
costs order. The costs in question included costs associated with previous
interlocutory events, as well as
the costs of the trial. The defendants provided
evidence and submissions to facilitate the making of a gross sum costs order. On
17 October 2025, Fagan J handed down judgment in
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWSC 1223
, ordering that the relevant costs be paid in the gross sum of
Amended notice of motion in the Court of Appeal
25 September 2025 Mr Kearney filed in the Court of Appeal an amended notice of
motion. It seeks a number of orders. Relevantly
for present purposes, by prayer
2 Mr Kearney seeks a stay of proceedings in the Common Law Division pending the
final judgments in
“the appeal proceedings”. By prayer 3, he seeks a
stay of enforcement of all costs orders made by Fagan J in the Common
Division pending the conclusion of “the appeal proceedings”. That
would include the gross sum costs order made on
17 October 2025.
prayer 4 Mr Kearney seeks the appointment of Mr Keiran Stoneham as his tutor
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
alternative, by prayer 6 of the amended notice of motion, Mr Kearney seeks an
order that Mr Stoneham be allowed to act as
his next friend and be permitted to
speak on his behalf during court hearings. Prayer 5 seeks an order dispensing
with the default
requirement in r 7.14(2) that a tutor must commence or
carry on proceedings through a solicitor.
Mr Kearney seeks an order for appointment of a tutor it is not essential for
this to occur in order for him to be replaced by
a tutor. As recognised
expressly in r 7.15(1), a person may become the tutor of a person under a legal
incapacity without the need
for any formal instrument of appointment or any
order of a court. This may be achieved by the filing of the notice of consent
certificate referred to in r 7.16. The critical requirement in this respect
is that Mr Kearney must be a person under a legal incapacity.
Mr Kearney has
filed evidence which he contends establishes that he has at relevant times
lacked capacity to act on his own behalf,
and he maintains that this is still
the position as of today. As Mr Kearney pointed out at the hearing on 20 October
2025, this is
not so much a matter of Mr Kearney’s own self-assessment but
rather a position which he advances based on the professional
judgments of
qualified experts, including his treating psychiatrist Dr David Grace and
consulting expert Dr Donald Rowe. I will return
to this issue because it has
important implications for resolving the matter that is before the Court.
prayers 7 and 8 Mr Kearney seeks an order dispensing with the requirement to
file a notice of appeal, and an order that his application
for leave to appeal
and the appeal be heard concurrently.
Procedural orders in
relation to the amended notice of appeal
amended notice of motion has come before the Registrar of the Court of Appeal
for directions on at least two occasions. On 24
September 2025 counsel for the
respondents pointed out that the amended notice of motion was problematic in
circumstances where there
was no appeal on foot challenging the final judgment
of Fagan J (noting that as of 24 September 2025 the gross sum costs order
outstanding). The same point had been raised in correspondence sent by
the solicitors for the respondents to Mr Kearney on 23 September
formal deficiencies with Mr Kearney’s position were correctly identified
by the respondents. Although there were proceedings
on foot in the Court of
Appeal, they had become redundant by September 2025. On 18 February 2025 Mr
Kearney filed in the Court of
Appeal a summons seeking leave to appeal from
certain orders made by Harrison CJ at CL on 13 September 2024 and Fagan J on 17
2025. The orders in question were interlocutory orders relating to the
case management of the substantive proceedings in the Common
Law Division.
2 April 2025 Mr Kearney filed an amended summons seeking leave to appeal. He
withdrew his challenge to the orders made by Harrison
CJ at CL on 13 September
2024, and sought instead to challenge various orders made by Fagan J on 17
February, 19 February, 7 March
and 21 March 2025. Again, these were procedural
orders relating to the case management of the matter in the Common Law
24 September 2025, the amended summons seeking leave to appeal had been rendered
out of date by developments in the substantive
matter in the Common Law
Division. The various procedural orders that were ostensibly under challenge no
longer had operative force.
They had been overtaken by the final hearing and the
resolution of the matter by Fagan J on 1 May 2025 (subject only to the
formulation
of the gross sum costs order). As counsel for the respondents
submitted to the Registrar on 24 September 2025, if Mr Kearney wished
challenge the correctness of the final orders by Fagan J Mr Kearney needed to
take the formal step of filing not only a notice
of appeal but also an
application for an extension of time to appeal from those orders.
24 September 2025 the Registrar made orders for the filing of evidence and the
relevant forms in relation to a tutor assuming responsibility
proceedings, whether by way of appointment or otherwise. On 15 October 2025 the
applicant was granted an extension of time
until 27 October 2025 for filing of
that material. The respondents have yet to determine if they will file evidence
on the question
of Mr Kearney’s capacity and the role of a tutor in
carrying on the appeal proceedings. The respondents have understandably
the position that they will make that determination after they have had an
opportunity to review the material filed by Mr Kearney.
amended notice of motion was listed for further directions on 15 October 2025
before the Registrar. In the course of that directions
hearing Mr Kearney
indicated his desire to press for stay orders pursuant to prayers 2 and 3 of his
amended notice of motion in advance
of the resolution of the balance of the
prayers (including resolution of the issue regarding the proposed tutor). The
Registrar referred
prayers 2 and 3 only of the amended notice of motion for
hearing by a Judge of Appeal, on the express basis that the referral was
confined to the question of whether there ought to be an interim stay imposed
pending resolution of the issue regarding the proposed
tutor. That is the
referral that came before me for hearing on 20 October
Prayer 2 has become redundant
2 has now become redundant. It seeks an order staying the proceedings in the
Common Law Division pending the final judgments
in the appeal proceedings. The
proceedings in the Common Law Division have now come to an end. As explained
above, Fagan J made final
orders in relation to the substantive proceedings in
May 2025. The final outstanding issue concerned the gross sum aspect of the
costs orders. That was resolved in the Common Law Division by the judgment
delivered on 17 October 2025.
Prayer 3 – Interim order
staying enforcement of costs orders against Mr Kearney
follows that the only issue before the Court on 20 October 2025 was prayer 3 of
the amended notice of motion, seeking a stay of
enforcement of all costs orders
made by Fagan J “pending final judgments and conclusion of the appeal
proceedings”. Because
of the terms on which the matter was referred by the
Registrar, the debate was further confined to the question of whether such an
order ought to be made pending the resolution of prayers 4, 5 and 6 of the
amended notice of motion.
respondents opposed the granting of such a stay. The respondents emphasised that
Mr Kearney has still not filed any notice of
appeal seeking to challenge the
final orders made by Fagan J on 1 May 2025. This makes the reference in the
amended notice of motion
to “the appeal proceedings” somewhat
misleading. On 23 May 2025 Mr Kearney filed a notice of intention to appeal from
the judgment of 1 May 2025, but nothing has since been filed to commence an
appeal. This is despite the respondents having raised
the need for the formal
position to be rectified by filing a notice of appeal and an application for an
extension of time to file
a notice of appeal. The respondents submit that in
circumstances where Mr Kearney has not regularised the position in the Court of
Appeal, despite fair warning to do so, his application for a stay is not
properly in aid of any ongoing appeal process and should
be rejected.
the course of the weekend before the hearing Mr Kearney provided to the Court a
25 page document described as a “draft
notice of appeal”. He also
provided a 22 page document described as “draft grounds leave to
appeal”. Mr Kearney
confirmed at the hearing on 20 October 2025 that these
documents set out the grounds on which he would propose to challenge the
made in the Common Law Division that have led to the dismissal of his
claim and the making of adverse costs orders. This includes,
but is not limited
to, the judgment of Fagan J of 1 May 2025.
Kearney indicated that if the absence of a properly filed document is the
decisive impediment to obtaining a stay, he would seek
an adjournment to enable
him to regularise the position by filing a notice of appeal incorporating the
proposed grounds.
Application of principles governing the
granting of a temporary stay
Michael Hill Jeweller (Australia) Pty Ltd v Gispac Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA
Payne JA explained that the principles governing the granting of a
stay pending appeal are analogous to those governing the grant
of interlocutory
relief before trial. A party applying for a stay must show that the appeal
raises serious issues for determination
and that there is a real risk that the
appellant will suffer prejudice or damage if the stay is not granted. If those
matters are
established, it becomes necessary to consider the balance of
convenience and the competing rights of the parties. The absence of
grounds of appeal is likely to be determinative against a stay application: see
Di Liristi v Matautia Developments Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 163
respondents are right to point to the problematic status of the current position
in the Court of Appeal. Mr Kearney is seeking
a temporary stay of adverse costs
orders ostensibly in support of his challenge to the correctness of the
judgments that have given
rise to those orders, but he does not have an appeal
on foot challenging the relevant decisions. Ordinarily that might be considered
fatal to a stay application of this kind. However, the circumstances of the
current case are unusual. Mr Kearney has filed extensive
evidence which
demonstrates that, at the very least, he has been suffering from severe
psychological distress over many months, to
the point of hospitalisation and
attempted suicide. Mr Kearney has expressly raised a question about whether his
condition reaches
the level, and/or has at relevant times in the past reached
the level, that he is and/or has been a person under legal incapacity
Div 4 of the UCPR
There is a related extant issue,
scheduled to be addressed in coming weeks, about whether a tutor can and should
now take carriage
of the appeal and any applications on behalf of Mr Kearney
(including any further stay of enforcement of the costs orders against
these unusual circumstances, for the purposes of dealing with the application
for an interim stay of short duration, it is appropriate
to look past the formal
deficiencies and proceed on the basis that the draft documents that have been
filed by Mr Kearney serve to
identify the grounds of appeal that he seeks to
rely on to challenge the relevant decisions of Fagan J and (to the extent
other judicial officers who made case management decisions leading to
the final hearing and judgments of Fagan J. Given the unusual
combination of
circumstances, it is not appropriate to require, as a prerequisite to treating
the documents in this fashion, that
Mr Kearney file documents to institute an
appeal in these terms. For the same reasons I did not consider it appropriate to
the hearing of the stay application to allow Mr Kearney to convert the
prolix draft appeal documents into a filed notice of appeal.
There is an
unresolved issue about whether Mr Kearney currently has the capacity to act on
his own behalf and there is a real prospect
that it may soon be the
responsibility of a tutor to make decisions as to what form the appeal may take,
if the tutor decides to
formally institute the appeal. It is in the interests of
all parties, and conducive to the proper administration of justice by the
that if a tutor takes responsibility for commencing and maintaining the appeal
the notice of appeal should reflect the informed
consideration of the tutor
is not to overlook the fact that any appeal that is sought to be instituted is
also out of time. Whether instituted by Mr Kearney
or by a tutor, any notice of
appeal will now need to be accompanied by an application for an extension of
time. It is sufficient
for present purposes to find, as I do, that there is a
seriously arguable basis for such an extension of time being granted, having
regard to the same evidence about Mr Kearney’s mental condition that I
have referred to above.
draft grounds of appeal filed by Mr Kearney are voluminous, repetitive and in
some cases unclear. It is sufficient to observe
that Mr Kearney has identified a
seriously arguable issue about the correctness of the decision under appeal as
it relates to Mr
Kearney’s capacity to appear at the hearing. When the
matter came on for final hearing before Fagan J and Mr Kearney failed
he was at the time hospitalised because of apparently acute psychological
distress. That presented a difficult question
for the trial judge to resolve, in
circumstances where the respondents disputed that Mr Kearney lacked mental
capacity to act and
pressed for the hearing to proceed in his absence. This was
also not the first time that Mr Kearney had allegedly become incapacitated
he was required in court to advance his case.
J was not persuaded to accept that Mr Kearney was lacking the capacity to
appear. His Honour inferred that Mr Kearney was not
genuinely affected by
disabling psychiatric symptoms when he presented to Dr Grace in the days prior
to commencement of the hearing:
J[39]. His Honour placed particular weight on
the fact that Mr Kearney had demonstrated through a number of appearances a
to advance his cause with apparent vigour which Fagan J perceived to be
inconsistent with the later claim of incapacity. His Honour
concluded that the
Court’s longitudinal exposure to Mr Kearney’s conduct and state of
mind over a number of hearings
gave the Court a significant advantage over Dr
Grace when it came to assessing whether Mr Kearney’s claimed pathological
prior to the final hearing was genuine: J[46].
is sufficient for the purposes of this stay application to observe that the
evidence before his Honour raised a serious question
mental capacity to participate in the hearing, which in turn gives rise to an
arguable ground of appeal
As the respondents correctly pointed out at the hearing of the stay application,
Mr Kearney will face significant obstacles in overturning the findings of Fagan
J on the factual question in circumstances where
those findings turned in part
on cross-examination of Dr Grace and his Honour’s assessment of the
reliability of Dr Grace’s
evidence in light of the cross-examination.
There are also issues to be confronted by Mr Kearney about what would have
occurred if
the hearing was adjourned, given the indications of Fagan J about
the orders that he would have made if persuaded that Mr Kearney’s
psychiatric indisposition was genuine: J[58]. While these matters are relevant
to the ultimate prospects of Mr Kearney succeeding,
they do not in my view go so
far as to avoid the conclusion that in light of the evidence before Fagan J
there are arguable grounds
of appeal going to the correctness of the conclusion
that Mr Kearney did not lack capacity.
respondents also point out, correctly, that the gross sum costs order related
not only to the final hearing but also to interlocutory
orders at earlier
stages. The respondents submit that to the extent that Mr Kearney seeks to
impugn those interlocutory orders, it
will be necessary for him to demonstrate
error at those anterior points. While this is accurate, I do not consider it
necessary to
determine if there is a seriously arguable issue about the
correctness of each of those interlocutory orders. It is sufficient to
the intended challenge to the orders of 1 May 2025, in circumstances where the
gross sum costs order was at least partly
dependent on the validity of those
next question that arises is whether Mr Kearney has established that there is a
real risk that he will suffer prejudice or damage
if the stay is not granted.
Here it is necessary to say something about the practical effect of the stay
order, given its temporary
nature. On the current timetable, the issue regarding
whether Mr Kearney lacks capacity and the associated appointment or recognition
of a tutor is likely to be heard and resolved by the Court in early November (if
the respondents do not decide to adduce evidence
on the matter) or a matter of
weeks thereafter (if the respondents require time to file evidence). Mr Kearney
is subject to a direction
to file his evidence by 27 October 2025, which is a
date that already reflects an extension requested by Mr Kearney. I have
the present application on the assumption that Mr Kearney will comply
with that court deadline, as he assured me he can. Any delay
in that regard
could be a factor relevant to any later application to lift the stay.
follows that an interim stay order precluding the enforcement of the costs order
would only be in place for a short period of time.
There is no evidence to
suggest that, absent a stay, this process would move at such a pace as to enable
enforcement to be achieved
within that timeframe, so as to visit financial
consequences on Mr Kearney during the period for which the interim stay would
apply. The respondents have not indicated by evidence or otherwise any
specific plans to commence enforcement action. They have merely
indicated that
they wish to be at liberty to start the process of enforcement.
Kearney does not seek to rely on any financial prejudice or damage that he would
suffer in the absence of an interim stay by reason
of having to meet the costs
liabilities. Nor, relatedly, does he say that his ability to prosecute the
appeal would be impaired in
the absence of a stay because of financial impacts
that would affect his ability to pay for the litigation.
Mr Kearney points to evidence that his psychological condition is apt to
deteriorate in a substantial way to the extent that
he has to engage in
litigious procedures. Mr Kearney accepts that any further prosecution of an
appeal will necessarily impose a
psychological burden of this kind, including to
resolve the issue about a tutor. However, he says that any steps to enforce the
orders over the coming weeks will add to the psychological burden in a way
that presents a serious danger to his mental health and
welfare. The evidence
does provide a reasonable basis for making that asserted connection.
circumstances where it seems inevitable that Mr Kearney will have to endure a
psychological burden if he wants to persist with
the litigation, the
exacerbation of his mental ill-health might be considered to be somewhat
marginal. However, it is a real and
identifiable consequence of allowing the
respondents to proceed with action to enforce the costs orders against Mr
Kearney. Although
there was no evidence about specific measures likely to be
taken in the coming weeks by the respondents in this regard, the premise
respondents’ opposition to the interim stay was that they wish to have the
option of starting the process of enforcement.
In the circumstances, there is a
real risk that in the absence of a stay Mr Kearney will suffer prejudice or
damage of the kind he
to the balance of convenience, this is a situation where neither side can point
to substantial prejudice from either the grant
or refusal of the stay. I have
described above the position of Mr Kearney. As for the respondents, they are not
in a position to
show that they will suffer any particular prejudice, beyond a
short delay in starting the process of enforcement. Beyond a short
delay, that
is not said to have any downstream consequences in terms of the respondents
ultimately obtaining the fruits of the costs
orders, if they remain entitled to
them. The respondents cannot point to any evidence that there is a risk of
dissipation of relevant
assets by Mr Kearney, such that there is a pressing need
to commence enforcement of the costs orders immediately to avoid frustration
the respondents’ rights.
the circumstances, this is a situation where the balance of convenience involves
comparing two relatively weak claims of prejudice,
namely a real but
nevertheless marginal psychological impact on Mr Kearney and a short delay in
the respondents being able to commence
the process of enforcement. The balance
of convenience favours Mr Kearney in this regard.
respondents have expressed concern about the prospect of an extended delay in
being able to commence enforcement proceedings.
Informed by the troubled
procedural history of the proceedings in the Common Law Division, the
respondents legitimately point to
a risk that the Court of Appeal proceedings,
if they are maintained, will become similarly protracted. That in turn could
weight to a concern about delay in enforcing extant costs orders.
However, the application before me is confined to an interim stay
matters stand, it is likely to be in place for only a matter of weeks. That
assumes, among other things, that Mr Kearney
proceeds to file the evidence that
is currently due on 27 October 2025 and that there is no other unexpected
impediment to a resolution
of the issues concerning incapacity and
representation of Mr Kearney’s interests through a tutor soon thereafter.
the possibility that the Court is not in a position to resolve those
issues as efficiently as is presently anticipated, I will grant
liberty to apply
to the Court for a lifting of the stay if those issues are not resolved by 11
December 2025. That is not to assume
that it would necessarily be appropriate to
lift the stay in those circumstances. Rather, the order is intended to provide a
for the respondents to seek to reagitate their concerns if that
situation arises. As for the position after the Court has resolved
raised by prayers 4, 5 and 6, if Mr Kearney or his tutor makes an application
for a further stay and the respondents maintain
their opposition on the basis of
concerns about delay in enforcement, the Court will need to assess the impact on
the respondents
in that different context.
orders of the Court will be:
(1) Subject to further order of the Court, enforcement of the costs orders made
in the proceedings by Fagan J in the Common Law Division
is stayed until prayers
4, 5 and 6 of the amended notice of motion filed by the applicant on 25
September 2025 are resolved (including
by their withdrawal or by dismissal).
(2) If prayers 4, 5 and 6 of the amended notice of motion filed by the applicant
on 25 September 2025 have not been resolved by 11
December 2025, the respondents
have liberty to apply to the Court of Appeal Registrar for an order lifting the
stay in order 1.
(3) Costs of the hearing in respect of orders 2 and 3 of amended notice of
motion filed by the applicant on 25 September 2025 shall
be costs in the appeal
(including any application for an extension of time to appeal), if and when
instituted.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter