URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harwood v Barrington-Smith & Barrington-Smith [2002] NSWRT 23 (11 February 2002)
Harwood v Barrington-Smith & Barrington-Smith
[2002] NSWRT 23
(11 February 2002)
File No. 01/33394
RESIDENTIAL TRIBUNAL
: Harwood (Tenant)
: Barrington-Smith and Barrington-Smith
(Landlords)
APPLICATION:
A claim by the tenant for
compensation for breach of the residential tenancy agreement and for return of
APPEARANCES
: The tenant in person at all hearings;
"observer" Ms Kelly at hearings on 3 September and 20 November
: 3 September 2001, 20 November 2001, 17
December 2001 in Walgett.
Legislative Provisions:
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
(hereafter "the Act"), sections 16, 19, 25 and
The landlords committed a number of breaches of the
terms implied into the residential tenancy agreement by the Act. The landlords
were ordered to pay the tenant $2,499.50 compensation. The Rental Bond Board
was ordered to pay the tenant the rental bond.
REASONS FOR DECISION
On 17 December 2001 I made orders in this case as summarised above. The
case had been on foot by that date for four months, and had
been the subject of
a 2 previous hearing, at which Ms Kelly, who I believe to be a real estate
agent, was present with a "watching
brief" on the part of the landlords, but
without instructions to present evidence. For reasons known only to themselves
the landlords
failed to instruct anybody to fully represent them at any of the
hearings, which meant that, if the landlords had a case, it was
In addition, the respondent landlords were made aware of the case
against them both in the course of hearings and by written notices.
has not been disputed that this is an application by the tenant against a
landlord for breach of a residential tenancy agreement,
but for avoidance of
doubt I am satisfied on the basis of the evidence that in or about January 2001
the landlords and the tenant
verbally agreed that the landlord would grant to
the tenant right of occupation of the premises, consisting of a flat, for
per week commencing on 24 January 2001. A bond of $200.00 was paid on
23 January 2001. The agreement included the right to use
a shed located near
the premises. I am satisfied on the basis of the above findings that the
parties were parties to a residential
tenancy agreement, disputes over which are
able to be dealt with by the Residential Tribunal. Section 5 of the Act applies
to the agreement, and the terms implied by the Act into such an
agreement are implied into this agreement.
In the course of the conduct
of the matter I had occasion to refer the behaviour of the landlords to the
Tenancy Commissioner as the
evidence was that the landlords had unlawfully
failed to lodge the rental bond with the Rental Bond Board. The evidence was
the bond, which had been paid to the landlords on 23 January 2001, was not
lodged until 5 July 2001.
The claim against the landlord, as summarised
in a Notice sent to the landlord dated 27 November 2001, was as
"The Particulars of the Claim are:
* Not providing specific power
connection for duration of tenancy 24/1/01 to 6/9/01,
Not making shed available for
Not providing letterbox,
Oven not working,
For failure to carry out further
repairs that caused the tenant to not enjoy amenities of the premises,
An order that the Rental Bond be
paid to the tenant.
This summary reflects the material
dealt with in great detail by myself at the hearing in the presence of Ms Kelly,
the landlords’
observer, on 3 September 2001. In general terms the
summary reflects the claims made by the tenant in and attached to her
application
lodged on 16 August 2001, which material was provided to the
landlords with a Notice sent by the Tribunal on 21 August 2001.
16 of the Act provides that the Tribunal may, on application, make orders to a
landlord or a tenant make orders, including
orders as to compensation, including
compensation for breach of the residential tenancy agreement,
clear that compensation can be ordered for economic and non-economic loss,
including inconvenience and lack of amenity. The
amount of compensation may or
may not have some relation to the amount of rent paid. Section 83 of the Act
provides that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction in respect of a claim by a landlord
or a tenant under a residential tenancy agreement in respect of a rental
I will set out briefly below the evidence of the tenant, based on my
notes and my recollection of the hearing of the matter. As noted
evidence in contradiction or rebuttal of the evidence provided by the tenant was
provided by the landlord, either orally
or in writing, although the landlord was
advised that evidence in writing could be provided to the tribunal, and although
the landlord
must have been aware of the general nature of the case from late
August 2001.
The evidence, in summary, together with my findings in
respect of the evidence, was as follows. I have accepted the tenant’s
evidence as summarised below. I accepted the evidence because it was
consistent, detailed, and in part corroborated by other material
photographs and other documents. There was no evidence to the
The tenant said that landlord was providing power to the
tenant and the next door neighbour through the tenant’s meter for the
period 24 January 2001 to 3 September 2001, without notifying the tenant. The
tenant’s evidence was that when the tenant complained
to the landlords
tenant $20.00 per week, but no such
payments were made.
Residential Tenancies Act
provides as follows.
19 Landlord
to pay council and water rates, land tax etc
It is a term of every
residential tenancy agreement that the landlord shall pay all rates, taxes or
charges payable under any Act
in connection with the residential premises (other
than charges for electricity, gas, excess water and any other prescribed
Residential Tenancies Act
provides as
25 Landlord's responsibility for cleanliness and repairs
(1) It is a term of every residential tenancy agreement that:
landlord shall provide the residential premises in a reasonable state of
cleanliness and fit for habitation by the tenant,
the landlord shall provide and maintain
the residential premises in a reasonable state of repair, having regard to the
age of, rent
payable for and prospective life of the
(2) In this section:
residential premises
includes everything provided with the premises (whether under the residential
tenancy agreement or not) for use
by the tenant
It is clear that it is
not an implied term of a residential tenancy agreement, and a landlord cannot
require payment of, another premises’
electricity charges. There is no
evidence that the tenant ever agreed to pay the charges. Further, as the
Tribunal observed in
the case of
Carver and Bolt
Berghoffer and
(RT96/25138)
, the requirement to ensure that premises are fit
for habitation includes the duty to provide facilities services and amenities
could reasonably expect to enable the tenant to use the premises as a place
of residence, including the obligation, if the tenant
is to pay for electricity,
to provide a discrete electricity service so the tenant can ascertain the amount
of electricity used by
the tenant.
In my view the landlord is in breach
of the term imposed by
, and the tenant is entitled to be compensated.
I fixed the amount of compensation for that 32 week period at a figure of
approximately half of the amount estimated by the landlord as payable
by the other tenant.
The tenant’s evidence was that a shed on the
property was not made available to the tenant despite verbal agreement to the
The evidence was corroborated by photographs of the shed so full of
rubbish that it could not be used by the tenant. Despite repeated
requests the
landlord did not clear the shed. The landlord has breached the agreement; the
tenant has not received what she paid
for. She is entitled to compensation,
which, based on the rental amount of $100.00 per week, and the diminution of the
received by the tenant, I fixed at $320.00.
The tenant’s
evidence was that no letterbox was provided. A letter from Australia Post
tendered by the tenant stated that if
a letterbox was not provided, mail could
not be delivered. The tenant purchased a letterbox at a cost of $49.50, which
have directed the landlords to pay. Again, the landlord was in breach
of the agreement, and in particular of the term implied by
The tenant said that the oven was unusable, in that the door would
not remain shut due to a broken hinge. The landlords were advised
of this 2 or
3 days after the tenant moved in. The tenant is entitled to be compensated for
the inconvenience and lack of amenity
caused by this breach by the landlord of
the term implied by
, and I fixed the amount of compensation at
Other repairs not carried out, resulting in inconvenience, loss
of amenity, and actual health hazards, included the following. For
part, although the landlords were advised of these problems from the
commencement of the tenancy and repeatedly thereafter,
they remained unfixed in
some cases until early August and in other cases were still unfixed when the
tenant left on 6 September
2001. Some of these breaches were more serious than
others. I awarded the tenant $1650 compensation for these breaches, which all
involved a failure to provide and maintain the residential premises in a
reasonable state of repair.
Ceiling lights were not properly
connected in bedrooms 1 and 2, the bathroom, and there was a broken light switch
in bedroom 2. Photographs
showed exposed bare wires. The light in the bathroom
"exploded" on 2 occasions.
Window screens not missing and
damaged in the lounge room making it impossible to open windows in a climate
that is very hot in summer.
Television aerial, light dimmer, and
air conditioner not working in lounge room, together with a broken light dimmer
and electrical
plug in the first bedroom.
A door was missing from bedroom
The window latch was not working in
Broken pane of glass in the shower
window, resulting in a loss of security (itself a breach of
section 25)
and causing considerable inconvenience in a very cold winter. The
edges of the glass were jagged, and sharp pieces of broken glass
would, from
time to time, fall in the shower.
Laundry waste pipe not working
properly. The evidence (including photographic evidence) was that the broken
pipe caused filthy stagnant
water to remain lying in the laundry, and compelled
the tenant to move the washing machine onto the deck. The laundry door would
not shut properly.
Sewage pump (sump pump) not working:
the evidence was that the effect of this was that sewage was lying in the back
yard for days
at a time, causing a health hazard, and making it impossible
(because of the odour) to hang washing on the line during summer
Guttering over back verandah not
connected. This caused water to fall on wooden steps, causing slipperiness and
causing a panel to
swell and fall out of the steps.
tenant’s evidence was that the tenant was entitled to the bond, and that
there was no rent outstanding. I directed the
Rental Bond Board to pay the bond
to the tenant, the amount to be deducted from the amount of compensation ordered
to be paid by
the landlords.
Residential Tribunal
February 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (24.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter