URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Charity v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited [2025] NSWPICMR 15; (8 May 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Charity v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2025] NSWPICMR 15
Ayla Charity
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review;
whether cost of treatment and care provided or to be provided to the claimant is
reasonable for the purposes of
section 3.24(1)
(entitlement to statutory
benefits for treatment and care); attendant care services; whether loss of
income of provider of gratuitous
services recoverable as statutory benefits;
where injured person is a minor;
section 3.25
section 3.26
; merit review;
– the reviewable decision is
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries Act
The reviewable decision is about whether the cost of treatment and care
provided to the claimant is reasonable for the purposes of
s 3.24(1) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act) and is therefore a merit
review matter under Schedule 2(1)(i) of the MAI Act.
reviewable decision is affirmed.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
is a dispute between Ayla Charity (the claimant) and the insurer about whether
certain expenses are reasonable for the purpose
of s 3.24(1)
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act).
claimant was involved in a motor accident on 20 September 2024.
claimant is 14 years of age and suffered serious injuries in the accident,
including traumatic brain injury. As a result, the
claimant has been dependent
on parental care for her day-to-day needs. The claimant’s mother says she
has been required to
forgo employment to care for the claimant and as a
consequence, suffered wage loss.
claimant lodged an application for personal injury benefits.
29 January 2025 the insurer determined no statutory benefits were payable in
respect of the claimant’s mother’s wage
30 January 2025 the claimant requested an internal review of the insurer’s
decision dated 29 January 2025.
12 February 2025 the insurer issued their internal review decision in which the
insurer affirmed their decision of 29 January 2025.
claimant has requested a merit review of the insurer’s internal review
decision dated
12 February 2025 (the
Application).
SUBMISSIONS
claimant’s mother seeks compensation (by way of statutory benefits paid
under s 3.24 of the MAI Act) for the loss of wages
suffered as a result of
taking time off work to care for the claimant and in particular, to accompany
the claimant to medical appointments.
The claimant submits the mother’s
wage loss should be classified under ss 1.4 and 3.24 of the MAI Act as
“treatment and
claimant submits the MAI Act and Motor Accident Guidelines NSW (the Guidelines)
are designed to ensure injured persons, and by
extension their dependants,
receive prompt and comprehensive treatment and care and the MAI Act and
Guidelines are intended to capture
all reasonable and necessary expenditures
that facilitate the injured person’s recovery. The claimant submits the
wage loss is a direct, quantifiable expense incurred in order to
provide necessary care to the claimant for the claimant’s
claimant contends the severity of the claimant’s injuries
“created a situation where the mother’s services,
while rendered in her capacity as a parent, are indispensable and functionally
equivalent to professional attendant care. Therefore, her lost wages represent a
‘reasonable expense’ that is directly
attributable to the cost of
providing essential treatment and care to her injured daughter.”
claimant acknowledges statutory benefits for gratuitous services are excluded
under the MAI Act but contends the claimant’s
circumstances differ
substantially and the MAI Act is silent on matters where the injured claimant is
a minor or has a legal incapacity.
The claimant submits “therefore ... the
[MAI] Act should be interpreted to ensure equal entitlements for all injured
claimant further submits that jurisdictions with similar statutory schemes have
recognised that, in circumstances where a family
member must forgo employment to
provide indispensable care, the resultant economic loss may be recoverable as
part of the overall
treatment and care benefits.
and in the alternative, the claimant submits s 3.26 of the Act provides
statutory benefits for the loss of capacity to provide
gratuitous domestic
services by an injured person and although the traditional application of this
provision excludes payment for
services rendered gratuitously, the underlying
objective is to ensure injured persons receive comprehensive support for the
they would have otherwise incurred in procuring such services. The
claimant submits her care needs are so extensive that they disrupt
provision of domestic services that would have been provided by the parent. It
is submitted that such a loss should be
treated similarly to the costs incurred
when an injured person is unable to perform domestic tasks, thus justifying
reimbursement
for the economic loss suffered by the parent.
claimant submits an expansive reading of s 3.26 supports the statutory objective
of mitigating financial hardship on families
by recognising the informal, but
essential, care provided by parents is a direct consequence of the injury.
insurer submits the claimant’s interpretation of ss 1.4, 3.24 and 3.26 of
the MAI Act is incorrect and points to s 1.4,
which defines ‘attendant
care services’ as meaning “services that aim to provide assistance
to people with everyday
tasks, and includes (for example) personal assistance,
nursing, home maintenance and domestic services”.
insurer notes the State Insurance Regulatory Authority (SIRA) prescribes that
attendant care services are provided by trained
support workers and attendant
care providers, often facilitated by the insurer, to provide various types of
support to an injured
person including personal assistance, nursing, home
assistance and domestic services” and that cl 4.101 of the Guidelines
“An insurer who has identified a claimant requiring treatment,
rehabilitation and attendant care services must facilitate a
referral to an
appropriate treatment provider (including vocational provider, if appropriate)
within 10 days, with the claimant’s
agreement”.
insurer submits the claimant’s mother is not a trained attendant carer or
a support worker that provides attendant care
services. The insurer submits the
definition of ‘treatment and care’ and ‘attendant care
services’ is to
be read as it is and in context, which is supported by
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) which states: “(6) Definitions
to be read in context Definitions that occur in an Act or instrument apply to
the construction
of the Act or instrument except in so far as the context or
subject matter otherwise indicates or requires”.
insurer acknowledges the severity of the claimant’s injuries and the
mother’s loss of time from work but submits the
wage loss does not come
within the definition of ‘treatment and care’ in s 1.4 and as such,
statutory benefits as compensation
for the mother’s wage loss is not
payable under the MAI Act.
insurer also relies on
Ali v AAI Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
NSWPICMR 56
decision) in which the Merit Reviewer highlighted
that under s 3.24(1) of the Act, it must be an expense that is incurred by the
not a parent or dependant and considered the cost of airfares to
provide care for a minor is not a cost of treatment and care but
is an indirect
cost incurred by the grandmother in connection with the treatment and care
provided to a minor.
insurer submits the loss of wages is not an expense incurred by the claimant and
similarly, the mother’s loss of wages is
not a cost of treatment and care
provided directly to the claimant. Rather, it is an indirect loss in connection
with the care she
provided to the claimant. As such, the insurer submits this
claim ought to be prosecuted in the claimant’s mother’s own
the lost income is not a loss or expense incurred by the claimant.
insurer notes s 3.24(c) of the Act accommodates cases of a minor requiring
assistance to travel by providing that “...if
the injured person is under
the age of 18 years or otherwise, requires assistance to travel for treatment
and care, reasonable and
necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred by
a parent or other carer of the injured person in order to accompany the injured
person while treatment and care for which statutory benefits are payable is
being provided”. The insurer has reimbursed the
claimant’s mother
for travel expenses, thus satisfying s 3.24(c).
so far as the claimant submits the loss of wages should be treated similarly to
costs incurred when an injured person is unable
to perform domestic services
thus falling under s 3.26 of the MAI Act, the insurer refers to the criteria in
s 3.26(1) and submits
this criteria is not met and therefore s 3.26 is not
insurer acknowledges the claimant’s mother’s loss of wages is
unfortunate but submits there is no entitlement to statutory
benefits for same,
as s 3.25(1) of the MAI Act prescribes that statutory benefits are not payable
for gratuitous attendant care services.
proceedings are identified as a dispute about the reasonable cost of treatment
and care. Schedule 2(1)(i) provides power to a
Merit Reviewer to determine
“whether the cost of treatment and care provided to the claimant is
reasonable for the purposes
of section 3.24(1)(a)”.
is no express matter listed in Sch 2 of the MAI Act concerning a dispute
confined to whether a particular item or service provided
to an injured person
is “treatment and care”. However, the starting point is cl 3.24.
Relevantly, s 3.24(1)(a) provides
that an injured person is entitled to
statutory benefits for “the reasonable cost of treatment and care”.
from this that if a cost is not a cost “of treatment and
care” it is not a “reasonable cost of treatment and care”
payable under s 3.24(1)(a).
2(1)(i) provides that a dispute about “whether the cost of treatment and
care provided or to be provided to the claimant
is reasonable” is a merit
review matter. Section 3.24(1)(a) is clearly the precursor to/genesis of the
in Sch 2(1)(i) in the same way s 3.24(2) is the
precursor to, or provides the foundation for, the medical assessment
prescribed in Sch 2(2(b).
the merit review jurisdiction in Sch 2(1)(i) is to be narrowly construed so as
to only prescribe jurisdiction over the question
of whether the cost itself is
reasonable it would require the foundation for the jurisdiction that is, s
3.24(1)(a), to be fragmented
into different parts. Disputes about whether a cost
is a cost of treatment and care and therefore a reasonable cost are likely to
arise in many instances. If only the question of whether the cost itself is
reasonable can be determined as a merit review, claimant’s
would need to
lodge multiple applications for example, by potentially lodging a miscellaneous
claims assessment application to determine
whether a service is “treatment
and care”, a merit review application about the cost itself (because that
a merit review matter) and a medical assessment application if there
is also a dispute about whether the service is reasonable and
guiding principle in s 42 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
Act) requires the just, quick and cost effective resolution of the real issues
in the proceedings. In my view, having regard
to the guiding principle, it is
not likely the intention of the MAI Act that the foundation for jurisdiction
contained in s 3.24(1)(a)
should be fragmented into various sub-disputes with
only one fragment of a dispute under s 3.24(1)(a), being the very narrow issue
of whether a cost is reasonable, to be determined as a merit review.
conclusion is also reached when regard is had to the close relationship between
the wording in s 3.24(1)(a) and Sch 2(1)(i).
That is to say, that for the
purpose of resolving a dispute under Sch 2(1)(i) about whether a cost of
treatment and care is reasonable,
I consider it inherent in the wording of the
two provisions that there is power to determine whether something claimed as
and care” is in fact “treatment and care”
within the statutory definition. In my view, this must be so because
3.24(1)(a), being the precursor to jurisdiction under Sch 2(1)(i), entitles the
claimant to the “reasonable cost of treatment
and care” meaning that
if a cost is not a cost of “treatment and care” it follows that it
is not a reasonable cost
of treatment and care.
therefore conclude I have jurisdiction as Merit Reviewer to determine the
dispute concerning whether the mother’s wage loss
is a reasonable cost of
treatment and care and inherent in this, is jurisdiction to determine whether
the cost meets the definition
of “treatment and care” in the MAI
Meaning of treatment and care – ss 1.4 and 3.26
claimant submits the mother’s lost wages are caught by the definition of
“treatment and care” in s 1.4 and are
therefore treatment and care
expenses for the purpose of s 3.24 of the MAI Act.
3.24 provides:
3.24 Entitlement to statutory benefits for
treatment and care;
(1) an injured person is entitled to statutory benefits for the following
expenses (‘treatment and care expenses’) incurred
in connection with
providing treatment and care for the injured person;
(a) the reasonable cost of treatment and care;
(b) reasonable and necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred by the
injured person in order to obtain treatment and care
for which statutory
benefits are payable; and
(c) if the injured person is under the age of 18 years or otherwise requires
assistance to travel for treatment and care, reasonable
and necessary travel and
accommodation expenses incurred by a parent or other carer of the injured person
in order to accompany the
injured person while treatment and care for which
statutory benefits are payable is being provided.
(2) no statutory benefits are payable for the cost of treatment and care to
the extent that the treatment and care concerned was
not reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances or did not relate to the injury resulting from
the motor accident concerned.
(3) the Motor Accident Guidelines may provide
(a) circumstances in which the cost of treatment and care is taken to be
reasonable for the purposes of this section, and
(b) circumstances in which treatment and care is taken to be reasonable and
necessary for the purposes of subsection (2).”
1.4 provides that “treatment and care” means the
“(a) medical treatment (including
pharmaceuticals),
(b) dental treatment,
(c) rehabilitation,
(d) ambulance transportation,
(e) respite care,
(f) attendant care services,
(g) aids and appliances,
(h) prostheses,
(i) education and vocational training,
(j) home and transport modification,
(k) workplace and educational facility modifications,
(l) such other kinds of treatment, care, support or services as may be
prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this definition,
but does not include any treatment, care, support or services of a kind
declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition.”
lost wages are said to arise because the claimant’s mother took time off
work to accompany her daughter to medical appointments.
The only possible basis
on which this might be caught by the definition of “treatment and
care” is as “attendant
care services”.
1.4 defines “attendant care services” to
“services that aim to provide assistance to people with
everyday tasks, and includes (for example) personal assistance, nursing,
maintenance and domestic services.”
I consider assistance with travel in the circumstances of this case falls within
the definition of “attendant care services”,
s 3.24 clearly concerns
“expenses” that is, a cost that has in fact been incurred by the
injured person. An expense is
incurred when a person has paid, or has a
liability to make payment, to a third party for the expense. Whilst the mother
has suffered
wage loss in the sense she has forgone or missed out on income, the
wage loss is not an expense because it is not monies that have
been paid or have
to be paid by or for the claimant. As such, whilst the wage loss relates to
attendant care services within the
meaning in s 1.4, s 3.24 is not triggered
because the wage loss is not a cost (to the claimant) of that treatment and
loss suffered by the claimant’s mother in the form of wage loss might be
compensable in some way in a claim for damages
(for example, damages for
gratuitous domestic assistance). However, the present claim is not a claim for
damages. It is a claim for
statutory benefits under the MAI Act, which restricts
a claimant’s entitlement to recover loss in connection with treatment
care to expenses paid, or payable, by the claimant to a third party such as the
treatment provider. The only expansion on this
in s 3.24 is for the provision of
travel and accommodation expenses incurred by the claimant or their parent or
carer, if the claimant
is a minor or otherwise requires assistance with travel.
Whilst the wage loss is said to have been incurred in connection with travel
obtain treatment and care for the claimant (a minor), the wage loss is not a
travel or accommodation expense incurred by either
the claimant or the mother.
Rather, the wage loss is an indirect, or consequential loss to the mother (not
the claimant), which is
not provisioned for in s 3.24.
even if the wage loss could be considered an “expense” for the
purpose of s 3.24, I agree with the
decision that for the purpose of
s 3.24 (other than a parent or carer’s travel and accommodation costs
under s 3.24(1)(c))
it must be an expense incurred by the claimant and not an
expense incurred by a parent or dependent.
decision concerned an airfare expense for the injured person’s
grandmother to travel to the injured person’s bedside
gratuitous attendant care services. Whilst it was a cost incurred by the
grandmother in order to provide attendant care
services to the injured person,
it was held not to be a cost of treatment and care but an indirect cost of
treatment and care. It
was also an expense incurred by the grandmother, not the
injured person, in connection with the provision of gratuitous attendant
services and s 3.25 excludes payment of expenses incurred in connection with
provision of gratuitous attendant care services.
For these reasons, it was held
decision that the insurer was not required to reimburse the
airfare under the MAI Act.
present case is similar to the circumstances in the
although more removed from the operation of s 3.24 than
concerned an expense paid or payable to a third party (the airfare)
whereas the present case concerns a loss in the sense of something
the mother rather than monies paid or payable to a third party by the mother (or
the claimant). As in the
decision, the present case does not concern
a travel or accommodation expense incurred in order for the claimant to obtain
or care. It concerns an indirect loss suffered by the mother as a
consequence of the provision of gratuitous attendant care services
by the mother
to the claimant during the course of the claimant obtaining treatment.
is clear from a reading of ss 3.24 and 3.25 that s 3.24(1)(b) and (c) only
concern travel and accommodation costs to attend for
treatment and care and that
other expenses in connection with treatment and care are dealt with separately
under s 3.24(1)(a). Section
3.24(1)(a) deals with expenses for attendant care
services but if the attendant care services are provided gratuitously, one must
then turn to s 3.25 which deals specifically with expenses in connection with
gratuitous attendant care services. If the services
are provided gratuitously
then any expenses associated with provision of those services are specifically
excluded under s 3.25.
stated in the
decision at paragraph 62 the “opening words of s
3.24(1) provide an entitlement to benefits for expenses that are incurred in
connection with providing treatment and care to an injured person. However, s
3.24(1) then provides three types of expenses, incurred
and connected to the
provision of that treatment and care...”. In other words, s 3.24 is a
limiting provision, limiting the
recovery of treatment and care expenses to only
the three types set out in s 3.24(1). The first, in s 3.24(1)(a), is limited to
treatment and care and as such, does not extend to
costs incidental to treatment and care. To the extent there is provision for
costs, ss 3.24(1)(b) and (c) limits this to travel and accommodation
costs only.
if the mother’s lost wages could be categorised as an cost of treatment
and care for the purpose of s 3.24 it does not
fall within any of the three
of attendant care services
and as those services were provided gratuitously, the
cost is excluded under s 3.25.
the mother’s services to the claimant may be considered
“functionally equivalent to professional attendant care”,
contended by the claimant, the fact remains that the attendant care is provided
by the mother on a gratuitous basis and as such,
any expenses associated with
that care falls for consideration under s 3.25, which excludes the
Gratuitous attendant care services – s
claimant acknowledges statutory benefits are not payable for gratuitous
attendant care services but says the circumstances of
this case substantially
differ and the MAI Act is silent in the circumstances of a minor. I do not
agree that the MAI Act is silent
in relation to circumstances where gratuitous
services are provided to a minor. The fact the relevant provision does not make
reference to a minor (or any other specific circumstances) does not mean
it is silent on this issue. Instead, absent any ambiguity,
it means the
provision applies to all circumstances of gratuitous attendant care services,
regardless of whether the injured person
is a minor.
3.25 provides:
“3.25 No statutory benefits for gratuitous
attendant care services
(1) No statutory benefits are payable under this Division for
incurred in connection with the provision of gratuitous attendant care services
(2) In this section--
‘gratuitous attendant care services’ means attendant care
services provided to an injured person for which the injured
person has not paid
and is not liable to pay.”
[emphasis added]
claim concerns gratuitous attendant care services within the meaning in s
3.25(2). The claim is for loss of wages suffered by
the mother in order to
provide the services. On the claimant’s case, this is an expense incurred
in connection with providing
the attendant care services. Even if I agreed this
were an “expense”, I consider s 3.25(1) is clear and unambiguous in
its terms and those terms are that statutory benefits are not payable for
expenses incurred in connection with
provision of gratuitous
attendant care services”. That is, regardless of whether the claim
concerns provision of gratuitous
attendant care services to a minor, statutory
benefits are not payable for any expenses in connection with provision of that
claim for lost wages falls squarely within the exclusion in s 3.25(1).
Accordingly, statutory benefits are not payable in respect
of the mother’s
lost wages even if prima facie, the lost wages are an expense of treatment and
care for the purpose of s 3.24,
as s 3.25 goes on to exclude the expense.
do not doubt the mother’s services are indispensable and functionally
equivalent to professional attendant care, but it remains
the fact that the
services are gratuitous, and statutory benefits are not available for provision
of gratuitous attendant care services
including any expenses incurred in
connection with providing those services.
claimant submits jurisdictions with similar statutory schemes have recognised
that, in circumstances where a family member must
forgo employment to provide
indispensable care, the resultant economic loss may be recoverable as part of
the overall treatment and
care benefits. The claimant does not identify any
other jurisdiction or incidence of this in another jurisdiction. There is no
detail in the submission. In any event, this claim falls under the
statutory regime for motor accident claims does differ to some extent from State
to State. For example, the relationship that
must exist for claims for pure
mental harm differs between jurisdictions. In NSW, the claim must fall within
one of the stated relationship
categories in
Civil Liability Act
(the CLA). However, in Victoria
limits the recovery of damages for pure mental harm to persons that
were “in a close relationship with the victim”. The
legislation is therefore more expansive than
of the CLA. In South
Civil Liability Act
limits damages for
pure mental harm to “a parent, spouse, domestic partner or child” of
the injured person and is therefore
more restrictive than NSW and Victoria by
excluding brothers and sisters.
may also be more expansive (or more restrictive) provisions in motor accident
legislation in other jurisdictions regarding costs
of treatment or care.
However, the NSW legislature has adopted a particular position in the MAI Act
and a different, more expansive
interpretation is not available by reason of the
position of other jurisdictions.
the claimant has not identified any specific legislation of another jurisdiction
or a judicially accepted interpretation of
similar legislation in another
expansive, as contended
by the claimant, the legislation presumably would have
adopted different language and indeed, the same language of the other
to which the claimant is referring.
capacity to provide services to others – s 3.26
claimant contends the claim for lost wages of the mother should be treated in a
similar way to a claim for loss of capacity to
provide services to others.
3.26 provides:
“3.26 Statutory benefits for loss of capacity
to provide gratuitous domestic services
(1) An injured person is entitled to statutory benefits under this Division
for the reasonable expenses incurred after the motor accident
in employing a
person to provide domestic services to the claimant's dependants, but only
(a) in the case of any dependants of the claimant of the kind referred to in
paragraph (a) of the definition of
‘dependants’ in this section--the claimant provided the services
to those dependants before the motor accident, and
(b) the claimant's dependants were not (or will not be) capable of performing
the services themselves by reason of their age or physical
or mental incapacity,
(c) there is a reasonable expectation that, but for the claimant's injury,
the claimant would have provided the services to the claimant's
dependants for
at least 6 hours per week and for a period of at least 6 consecutive months,
(d) there will be a need for the services to be provided for those hours per
week and that consecutive period of time and that need
is reasonable in all the
circumstances.
Statutory benefits are not so payable if the
domestic services provided after the motor accident are provided
gratuitously.
(2) If a dependant of the claimant received (or will receive) assisted care
during a 6-month period for periods that were (or will
be) short-term and
occasional and for no more than 4 weeks in total during that 6-month
(a) in determining whether the claimant would have provided gratuitous
domestic services to the dependant during a particular week
for at least 6
hours, the week should be disregarded if the assisted care was (or will be)
provided during that week, and
(b) in determining whether the claimant would have provided gratuitous
domestic services to the dependant during a 6-month period,
any periods during
which the assisted care was (or will be) provided in that 6-month period should
be disregarded.
(3) The claimant (or the legal personal representative of a deceased
claimant) is not entitled to statutory benefits under this section
in respect of
any loss of the claimant's capacity to provide gratuitous domestic services to
any dependant of the claimant if the
dependant has previously recovered damages
in respect of that loss of capacity.
(4) The provision of domestic services to an injured person's dependants as
provided by this section constitutes the provision of
treatment and care for the
injured person for the purposes of this Division.
(5) In this section--
‘assisted care’, in relation to a dependant of a claimant, means
any of the following kinds of care (whether or not the
care is provided
gratuitously)--
(a) any respite care (being care that includes accommodation that is provided
by a person other than the claimant to a dependant who
is aged or frail, or who
suffers from a physical or mental disability, with the primary purpose of giving
the dependant or claimant,
or both, a break from their usual care
arrangements),
(b) if the dependant is a minor (but without limiting paragraph (a))--any
care that is provided to the dependant by a person other
than the claimant
(i) the person is a parent of the dependant (whether derived through
paragraph (a) (i) or (ii) of the definition of
‘dependants’ in this section, adoption or otherwise), and
(ii) the care includes the provision of accommodation to the dependant.
‘dependants’ means--
(a) such of the following persons as are wholly or partly dependent on the
claimant at the time of the motor accident--
(i) a person to whom the claimant is legally married (including a husband or
wife of the claimant),
(ii) a de facto partner of the claimant,
(iii) a child, grandchild, sibling, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, parent or
grandparent of the claimant (whether derived through subparagraph
(i) or (ii),
adoption or otherwise),
(iv) any other person who is a member of the claimant's household, and
(b) any unborn child of the claimant (whether derived through paragraph (a)
(i) or (ii), adoption or otherwise) at the time of the
motor accident and who is
born after that time.
‘gratuitous domestic services’ means services of a domestic
nature for which the person providing the service has not
been paid and is not
entitled to be paid.”
is important to recognise this claim is under a statutory benefits scheme with
legislation that restricts both the type and amount
of statutory benefits
payable. This means that if a loss is not provisioned for in the MAI Act, no
statutory benefits are payable
for that loss. Principles of statutory
interpretation do not permit a claim that is otherwise not permitted by the
legislation to
be treated “similarly” to a claim that is permitted
by the legislation so as to enable payment of statutory benefits.
if the claim for wage loss could somehow be massaged so as to fall for
consideration under s 3.26 the statutory criteria in that
section must be met.
The criteria in s 3.26, however, is not met as follows:
(a) firstly, this is not a situation where the claimant has employed someone to
provide domestic services to the claimant’s
dependents that is, to someone
other than the claimant. The claim by the mother relates to services the mother
has provided to the
claimant, not to others;
(b) secondly, there is no evidence of any expenses incurred by the claimant in
connection with the services provided by the mother.
For the same reasons
outlined above, the wages foregone by the mother are not an
“expense” incurred by the claimant (they
are a loss suffered by the
(c) thirdly, there is no evidence that any of the criteria in s 3.26(1)(a) to
(d) has been met so as to permit payment of statutory
benefits under s 3.26,
(d) fourthly, regardless of whether the criteria in s 3.26(1)(a) to (d) has been
met, statutory benefits are not payable if the services
provided after the motor
accident are provided gratuitously as is the present case.
is nothing in the legislation or the Guidelines that would permit s 3.26 to be
arbitrarily widened in the way contended by the
claimant so as to require
payment of statutory benefits for lost wages of the mother where the criteria in
s 3.26(1) is not met and
the section contains a blanket exclusion for services
provided gratuitously (s 3.25 is also a blanket exclusion for expenses relating
to gratuitous services).
with s 3.25, I do not consider there to be any ambiguity in s 3.26 such that any
wider interpretation is available to accommodate
this claim. Sections 3.25 and
3.26 contain blanket exclusions such that there is no entitlement to statutory
benefits for any expenses
incurred in connection with attendant care services
that are provided gratuitously.
applicant contends for a “non-traditional” application of the MAI
Act so as to permit payment of statutory benefits
for the mother’s lost
wages. However, as observed by the insurer, pursuant to Harrison As J in
Allianz Insurance Australia Limited v Shahmiri
[2022] NSWSC 481
) [at 70] “...one cannot construe an [A]ct to accommodate
a particular circumstance, no matter how unfair that circumstance
I consider the services provided by the claimant’s mother are attendant
care services, statutory benefits are not payable
in respect of the loss of
wages suffered in connection with providing those services because:
(a) the wage loss is neither a cost of treatment and care incurred by the
claimant or a travel or accommodation expense of the claimant
or her mother;
(b) regardless, the loss was incurred in connection with provision of gratuitous
attendant care services and under s 3.25 statutory
benefits are not payable for
expenses incurred in connection with gratuitous attendant care services, and
(c) the criteria in s 3.26 is not met and regardless, the loss claimed was
incurred in connection with provision of gratuitous attendant
care services and
is therefore also excluded under s 3.26.
Accordingly,
the insurer is not liable to pay statutory benefits in respect of the
mother’s lost wages.
these reasons, the reviewable decision is affirmed.
LEGISLATION
AND GUIDELINES
making this decision, I have considered the following:
the Application,
Reply and supporting documentation;
Motor Accident
Guidelines, and
Regulation.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (529 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter