URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V XENIA CIESLAK [2013] NSWNMT 23 (12 July 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 040/2012
CITATION: HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V XENIA
[2013] NSWNMT 23
(12 JULY 2013)
INQUIRY INTO A
Complainant
: Health Care Complaints Commission
: Xenia Cieslak
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM (Chairperson)
Ms Rosie O’Donnell (Nurse Member)
Ms Leeanne Carlin (Nurse Member)
Dr Siew-Foong Liew (Lay Member)
Date and place of hearing:
written submissions from the HCCC dated 31 May 2013
Reasons for Decision
Representation
Complainant: Ms Mathur of Counsel instructed by Ms J Dinihan , Health Care
Complaints Commission
Respondent: No appearance
PROTETIVE ORDERS – Whether findings of the Tribunal of professional
misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct would
have required
cancellation of practitioner’s registration had she been registered at the
date of the substantive hearing –
HELD – Findings of Tribunal in
substantive proceedings required such an order to be noted on the Nursing and
Midwifery Board
of Australia’s records. Whether practitioner should be
precluded from seeking review of orders for a period of three years
in view of expert evidence a period of three years is
appropriate.
Legislation cited
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
Cases cited
Housing Commission of NSW v Tatmar
Pastoral Co.
(1983) NSWLR 378
Lucire v Health Care Complaints
[2011] NSWCA 99
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
(No 2) NSWCA 182
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd.
(1987 )10 NSWLR
Yates Property Corp. Pty. Ltd (in Liquidation) v Darling Harbour
1991 24 NSWLR 156
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
12 July 2013 the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal (“the Tribunal”)
made orders that the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia (“the
Board”) record that, if Ms Xenia Cieslak (“the nurse”) was
currently registered as an Enrolled
Nurse (Div 2) on the register of health
practitioners maintained by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
in conjunction with the Board her name should be removed
from the register.
Tribunal also ordered that a period of not less than three years elapse from the
date of the Tribunal’s order before the
nurse may make application for a
review under s163A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National Law”) to the Tribunal to again be
registered.
Tribunal also ordered that, subject to any application under s163 (1) (a1) of
the National Law, in the event the nurse seeks a
review the Tribunal’s
orders, the appropriate review body is the Tribunal.
Tribunal made an order that the nurse pay the costs of and incidental to the
proceedings of the Health Care Complaints Commission
(“the HCCC”) as
agreed, and failing agreement, granted leave to restore the matter before the
Introduction
On 1 May 2013 the Tribunal published reasons for decision (“the
substantive reasons”) in respect of an Amended Complaint
lodged by the
HCCC dated 20 February 2013. The Tribunal found the five complaints alleged
against the nurse set out in the Amended
Complaint proved.
Tribunal noted that the HCCC sought that the Tribunal make an order cancelling
the registration of the nurse as an Enrolled Nurse
(Div 2) on the register of
heath practitioners maintained by AHPRA in conjunction with the Board, and that
a period of at least three
years elapse from the date of the Tribunal’s
order before the nurse may make an application for review under s163A of
the National Law to the Tribunal to again be registered as a nurse.
noted in paragraph 6 of the Tribunal’s reasons of 1 May 2013, orders were
made permitting the parties to have a further hearing
before the Tribunal and/or
to make submissions to the Tribunal in respect of the protective orders sought
by the HCCC.
nurse, who did not appear at the substantive hearing, did not file any
submissions or take any steps to have the matter re-listed
for a “second
stage” hearing. Submissions dated 31 May 2013 were filed by the HCCC
with the Administrative Officer
of the Tribunal on 6 June 2013. In these
circumstances the Tribunal determined, as foreshadowed at the substantive
hearing, to
proceed with the making of protective orders without a further
hearing. These are the reasons for the protective and other orders
The complaint and conduct of the
proceedings
Complaint, dated 14 August 2012, was filed by the HCCC in the Nursing and
Midwifery Tribunal
Leave was granted by the Tribunal to amend the
complaint document during the course of the hearing. Five separate complaints
are pleaded
in the amended document filed. The Tribunal found, to the requisite
civil standard, that each complaint was proved.
the conclusion of the hearing the Tribunal made orders as set out in paragraph
132 of the substantive reasons. Those orders afforded
the nurse the
opportunity, if she wished to avail herself of it, to attend at a further
hearing in respect of appropriate protective
orders. The orders further
provided if the nurse failed to notify the Tribunal of her desire to appear and
be heard in respect of
the protective orders that the matter would proceed
“on the papers” with the HCCC being afforded an opportunity to file
written submissions in respect of the relevant protective orders. As noted
above, the HCCC filed submissions with the Tribunal on
Submissions received from the HCCC
paragraph 2.1 of her submissions, Ms Mathur, counsel for the HCCC, noted that
the Tribunal had found each of the Complaints One
to Five inclusive in the
Amended Complaint proved.
3.3 of her submissions Ms Mathur succinctly summarised the relevant principles
to be applied when determining an appropriate order
to be made at the conclusion
of disciplinary proceedings. It is appropriate that we reproduce paragraph 3.3
of the submissions as
it is the principles summarised in that paragraph which
the Tribunal will now apply in determining the appropriate protective orders
be made. Paragraph 3.3 is in the following terms:
The principles to
be applied in determining the appropriate order under s 149A of the National Law
are set out in, among others
HCCC v Litchfield
(1977) 41 NSWLR 630,
Gayed v Walton
31/7/1997 NSWCCA unreported,
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699.
They include:
protection of the public is the paramount consideration
maintenance of the high standards of the medical profession
not only the particular practitioner but others who may stray from the
appropriate standards; a reminder to the profession
emphasise the unacceptability of the conduct involved
support of the position that a period of three years elapse before the nurse
should be permitted to seek a review of the Tribunal’s
orders, Ms Mathur
referred to the expert evidence given by Dr Dore (and which we note was accepted
in its entirety by the Tribunal).
Dr Dore opined it is essential that the nurse
obtain psychological treatment because of her severe anxiety disorders. Ms
noted there is no evidence the nurse has received such
referred to the Tribunal’s discussion at paragraphs 72, 74 and 76 of the
substantive reasons, Ms Mathur submitted at
paragraph 3.12 of her submissions as
The Commission submits that in order to protect the public,
in circumstances where there are a number of unpredictable factors regarding
respondent’s ability, commitment and success
she engaged in
treatment, a period of 3 years is the appropriate period of time for
disqualification.
Tribunal accepts that Ms Mathur’s submission is soundly based on the
evidence before the Tribunal and referred to in our
substantive reasons,
particularly at paragraph 76 and paragraph 91.
substantive reasons
Tribunal, in its substantive reasons (paragraph 131), found the nurse:
impairment as defined in s5 of the National Law;
is not competent
to practise pursuant to s139 (a); and
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B(1)(b) by failing to comply with
Tribunal is satisfied in order to protect the public, if the nurse had been
registered at the date of the hearing, it would have
been appropriate to make
orders cancelling her registration as provided in s149C (1). The Tribunal is
further satisfied, on the
facts found before us, that cancellation of the
nurse’s registration is also necessary to maintain the high standards of
profession, and to deter other professionals from engaging in similar
conduct. Further the effect of such an order demonstrates
the unacceptability
of the conduct involved.
Tribunal accepted the evidence of Dr Dore about the need for the nurse to
address her severe anxiety condition by appropriate
professional help. There
was no evidence the nurse has, or is, receiving such professional help save for
her attendance on Dr Kelly
at the clinic attached to the Gosford Hospital.
Further, we accepted evidence of Dr Kelly about the nurse’s present
unpredictable
state. Dr Kelly said because of her history, including her recent
history, that a significant period of time of time would need
the nurse achieved stability before he would consider her
impairment resolved. That evidence, and our acceptance of it, supports
Mathur’s submissions, which we adopt. We are satisfied to protect the
public that, pursuant to s149C (4) (b), it is appropriate
an order should be
made to preclude any review application by the nurse for a period of three
follows from our conclusion it is appropriate for us to make an order in terms
of s149C (4) (c) namely that we require the Board
to record that, if the nurse
had been registered the Tribunal would have cancelled her
registration.
her written submissions Ms Mathur submitted this was an appropriate matter for
the Tribunal to order that the nurse pay the costs
of the HCCC. Ms Mathur noted
that in some recent orders “Medical Tribunals have made orders that one
party pay the other party
costs ‘on the ordinary basis as defined in
Civil Procedure Act 2005
’ ”. Ms Mathur goes on to note
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) (“the
Civil Procedure
defines “costs in relation to the proceedings as meaning
‘costs payable in or in relation to the proceedings, and includes
disbursements, expenses and remuneration’ ”.
Mathur very properly notes the form of any costs order made is a matter for the
Tribunal but goes on to submit that the formulation
(as defined in
Civil Procedure Act
) “may have a greater degree of certainty as to what
properly comprises costs”.
power to award costs under the National Law is found in Schedule 5D Cl. 13 (1).
That provision reposes a discretion in the Tribunal
to award costs in respect of
an inquiry or an appeal.
principles to be applied in determining whether to award costs pursuant to a
statutory power such as found in the National Law
are well established. They
are set out in a number of leading cases and are summarised comprehensively in
the judgment of Kirby
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
. In summary:
normally in
disciplinary proceedings, as in other civil litigation, costs should follow the
event unless the circumstances of the
case require, in the exercise of
discretion, not to do so (see
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77).
position is frequently referred to as “the usual rule” or
“traditional rule” in respect of costs;
an award of
costs is to compensate, in the form of a partial indemnity, the person in whose
favour it is made not to punish the person
ordered to pay costs;
the onus is
normally on the “losing” or unsuccessful party to establish any
departure from the “usual” rule;
the discretion
to depart from the “usual” rule is unfettered, but must be exercised
judicially (see
Oshlack; Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
generally the
presumption the “usual” rule applies will only be displaced where
there has been some sort of disentitling
conduct on the part of the successful
Oshlack; Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
her submissions Ms Mathur submits that the HCCC conducted the proceedings in a
proper fashion, and that the nurse’s financial
circumstances are
irrelevant to our consideration.
Tribunal accepts that the HCCC properly brought these proceedings, and provided
evidence to satisfy the Tribunal that each of
the complaints alleged was proved.
Although the Tribunal was concerned about late service of documents on the
nurse, we do not find
there should be departure from the usual rule. Therefore
we find that the nurse should pay the HCCC’s costs.
turn then to the submission which is directed to the form of order to be made
for costs. The Tribunal notes that
Civil Procedure Act
plain that jurisdiction under that Act is not extended to this Tribunal. That
said, the definition in
Civil Procedure Act
summarises, in
contemporary language, what is generally accepted as falling within the
definition of “party and party”
costs (as distinct from indemnity
costs, solicitor and own client costs, or costs on a trustee basis). As such,
it is likely to
be useful to litigants, particularly unrepresented parties such
as the nurse in these proceedings, to understand what is actually
encompassed in
the costs order. We have therefore worded the costs order in substantially the
same terms suggested by Ms Mathur,
subject only to deleting the reference to
fees (as the Tribunal does not impose filing or setting down fees). We have
additionally
included a provision permitting application to the Tribunal in the
event that agreement as to costs cannot be reached. We do this
as presently
advised the Tribunal does not have the ability to refer a disputed costs bill to
the assessment process applicable in
New South Wales Courts.
Request by the HCCC in its submissions to identify the particulars in
Complaints Five accepted by the Tribunal
the written submissions on protective orders and costs received by the Tribunal
from Ms Mathur she submitted that it would be appropriate
for the Tribunal to
set out which of the 16 particulars alleged in Complaint 5 were established to
the requisite civil standard as
this would be of significant assistance to the
nurse and any future Tribunal or body which may be considering a review or other
application
by the nurse (submissions [7.3]). The submission refers to s 167F
(2) (a) of the National Law.
167F (1) and (2) provides as follows:
(1) As soon as practicable
after making a decision on an inquiry or an appeal (bearing in mind the public
welfare and seriousness
of the matter), a Tribunal must give a written statement
of the decision to--
(a) the complainant; and
(b) the registered health practitioner or student the subject of the inquiry
or appeal; and
(c) the Council for the health profession in which the practitioner or
student is registered.
(2) The statement of a decision must--
(a) set out any findings on material questions of fact; and
(b) refer to any evidence or other material on which the findings were based;
(c) give the reasons for the decision.
our substantive reasons we referred (at paragraph 129) to the decision of Basten
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission (No 2) NSWCA 182
his Honour referred to the pleading of the complaint in the matter in issue in
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99.
In the latter
decision, his Honour, after referring to the filing of the Complaint against the
practitioner which asserted unsatisfactory
professional conduct, said of the
pleading of the relevant Complaint at [42- 43 and at 45]:
followed 16 numbered paragraphs, four of which were entirely general in their
terms and the remainder of which related
to conduct or omissions on particular
occasions, each involving the treatment of the patient. Further, some of the
numbered particulars
contained sub-paragraphs and, within particular
sub-paragraphs, alternative limbs.
This form of pleading has been commented on by the Court on previous
occasions: see
Health Care Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
. It inevitably gives rise to a degree of uncertainty as
to the precise matters relied upon by the complainant and it is impossible
know the parameters of the case to be presented. Furthermore, it is not possible
for the Tribunal to deal with such a complaint
by finding it proven or
otherwise: it can only deal with the case particular by particular. Whether any
particular which is upheld
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct,
individually or in combination with other particulars, and whether any such
constitutes professional misconduct, either individually or in
combination with others, must be carefully identified in the findings
Tribunal. As a result, the findings are likely to be complex, with a further
risk that interested parties will not be able
to identify readily and with
precision what conclusions have been reached by the Tribunal and, where
protective orders are made,
to which breaches of conduct they relate.
............
Failure to formulate the complaint in appropriate terms is not a matter of
pedantry or formalism. Imprecision can readily lead to
false issues, evidence
extending to matters which are not really relied upon and, as already noted,
confusion as to the effect of
the ultimate orders......
convenience, we reproduce Complaint 5 (it is also set out in Annexure A to our
substantive reasons.)
COMPLAINT FIVE
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a nurse within the meaning
of the National Law:
Background for Complaint Five:
The background to Complaints One, Two and Three are repeated.
On 22 January 2009, the practitioner made application to the former NSW Board
for enrolment as a nurse under the
. In the written application
form, the nurse disclosed that she had been convicted of criminal offences in
NSW between 1997 and 2004.
In the written application form, the nurse answered
“No” to the question “Do you have any physical or mental
which may reasonably be thought likely to detrimentally affect your
physical or mental capacity to practise nursing?”
On 13 March 2009, the practitioner wrote a letter to the Registrar of the
former NSW Board, in support of her application, which addressed
the criminal
convictions between 1997 and 2004 and stated that: “These offences
occurred as a result of my drug addiction at
the time”; and “I have
never reoffended since and am drug free.” The practitioner enclosed a
letter dated 18 September
2007 which she had written to Panel members who were
at that time considering her earlier application for an enrolled nurse
traineeship
in which she stated: “,,,I was able to once and for all detach
myself fully from this lifestyle and addiction and follow a
path”; and “ I realize my addiction caused me to break many
laws...” The practitioner’s letters
dated 13 March 2009 and 18
September 2007 were considered by the Conduct Committee of the former NSW Board
on 20 March 2009 which
decided to grant the practitioner’s application for
registration.
On 26 March 2009, the practitioner was admitted to Herbert Street Clinic at
Royal North Shore Hospital (“Herbert Street Clinic”)
detoxification due to recent opioid use and dependence.
On 22 January 2010, the practitioner was admitted to Herbert Street Clinic
for detoxification due to recent opioid use and dependence.
On 30 April 2010, the practitioner was admitted to Herbert Street Clinic for
detoxification due to recent opioid use and dependence.
On 5 May 2010, the practitioner was discharged from Herbert Street Clinic. On
the same date, the practitioner applied to Centrelink
for a Disability Support
Pension due to her opioid and benzodiazepine dependence.
On 8 June 2010, the practitioner presented to Herbert Street Clinic for
outpatient detoxification due to recent opioid use and dependence.
On 2 July 2010, the practitioner again presented to Herbert Street Clinic for
outpatient detoxification due to recent opioid use and
dependence.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FIVE
28 March 2009, the practitioner discharged herself from Herbert Street Clinic,
where she was being treated for detoxification due
to opioid dependence, against
medical advice.
or about 26 March 2009, or after that date, the practitioner failed to notify
the former NSW Board of her relapse into drug use
in March 2009.
25 January 2010, the practitioner discharged herself from Herbert Street Clinic,
where she was being treated for detoxification
due to opioid dependence, against
medical advice.
or about 25 January 2010, or after that date, the practitioner failed to notify
the former NSW Board of her relapse into drug use
in January 2010.
or about 5 May 2010, or after that date:
(a) the practitioner failed
to notify the former NSW Board of her relapse into drug use in May 2010; and
(b) and failed to do so after the Nurse Unit Manager at Herbert Street Clinic
recommended on 5 May 2010 that the practitioner self-notify
her relapse into
drug use to the former NSW Board.
or about 8 June 2010, or after that date, the practitioner failed to notify the
former NSW Board of her relapse into drug use in
early June 2010.
or about 2 July 2010, or after that date, the practitioner failed to notify the
former NSW Board of her relapse into drug use in
late June or early July
8 July 2010, the practitioner stole property from the Coles Myer Group Pty
8 September 2010 the practitioner stole property from the Coles Myer Group Pty
and after 11 August 2010 the practitioner failed, without reasonable excuse, to
attend a medical examination as directed by a Panel
under section 70GA of the
or after 22 July 2010, the practitioner failed to give notice to the National
Board that she had been charged with a criminal offence
punishable by 12 months
imprisonment or more as she was required to do under section 130 of the National
or after 8 September 2010, the practitioner failed to give notice to the
National Board that she had been charged with a criminal
offence punishable by
12 months imprisonment or more as she was required to do under section 130 of
the National Law.
or after 29 September 2010, the practitioner failed to give notice to the
National Board that she had been convicted of criminal
offences as she was
required to do under section 130 of the National Law.
19 July 2012 the nurse stole property from OPSM.
19 July 2012 the nurse stole property from Strand Bags.
19 July 2012 the nurse had goods on her person including eight Loreal Glam Shine
Lip Glosses and two Broadcraft watches which may
reasonably be suspected of
being stolen.
or after 19 July 2012, the nurse failed to give notice to the National Board
that she had been charged with three criminal offences
[sic] as she was required
to do under section 130 of the National Law.
or after 12 September 2012, the nurse failed to give notice to the National
Board that she had been convicted of three criminal
offences as she was required
to do under section 130 of the National
Tribunal takes this opportunity to record that, in our substantive reasons, we
set out the factual background under the heading
“Background” and
distinguished those matters which were not accepted by us as established by
noting where relevant that
facts were alleged. We also recorded, at paragraph
124 of our findings, that the nurse had failed to notify her drug relapses.
paragraph 125 we repeated our earlier findings about the nurse’s failure
to report the criminal charges brought against
her. At 126 we noted the failure
to attend the appointments with Dr Samuels in August and September 2010. At 102
we recorded that
the HCCC had not established to the requisite standard the
particular in respect of the first consultation with Dr Samuels.
Significantly,
at paragraph 129, when dealing with Complaint 5, rather than unnecessarily
repeating our earlier findings in respect
of identical particulars, we noted
that we had “identified above (that is earlier in the reasons) those
particulars set out
or ‘pleaded’ in the complaint
Accordingly
we are satisfied our substantive reasons already satisfy the criteria in s 167
(2) and accord with the general well established
principles in respect of giving
of reasons (see
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd.
1987 10 NSWLR 24
Yates Property Corp. Pty. Ltd. v Darling Harbour Authority
1991 24 NSWLR
Housing Commission of NSW v Tatmar Pastoral Co.
(1983) NSWLR
we consider the substantive reasons address the criteria identified by Basten JA
in respect of particulars. Although we earlier noted we were
satisfied the nurse would be able to readily discern from our reasons
findings adverse to her should she seek in the future to review the orders, as
requested by the HCCC we note the following references
to our substantive
reasons in respect of each and every particular in Complaint 5. We note the
majority of the particulars were
also relied on in respect of the earlier
complaints.
Particular 1 – see substantive reasons at [31]
Particular 2 – see substantive reasons at [35] [124]
Particular 3 see substantive reasons at [33] [124]
Particular 4, 5, 6 and 7 – see substantive reasons at [124]
Particulars 8 and 9 – see substantive reasons at [108]
Particular 10 – see substantive reasons at [102] where we noted this
particular was not established to the requisite civil standard
Particulars 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 see substantive reasons at [106,107, 108
(amended pursuant to the slip rule)
registration of Ms Xenia Cieslak (“the practitioner) as a Nurse-General on
the National Register of Health Practitioners
maintained by the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (“the Register”) is cancelled
under s149C (1)(a) of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National Law”).
period of not less than three years shall elapse before the practitioner may
application under s163A of the National Law for review
of these orders.
to any application under s163(1)(a1) of the National Law the review body for the
purposes of order 3 of these orders shall
be the Tribunal.
practitioner shall pay the costs of and incidental to the proceedings including
disbursements, expenses and remuneration of the
Health Care Complaints
Commission as agreed and failing agreement liberty to either party to relist
before the Tribunal.
The Hon Jennifer Boland
Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (218 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter