URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/303.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Marchant v Bland Shire Council [2013] NSWADT 303 (31 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Marchant v Bland Shire Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 303
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Decision Date:
31 December 2013
General Division
G Walker, Judicial member
Decision under review set aside
Catchwords:
Access application - code of conduct complaint-whether would prejudice
supply of information - personal information
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Government Information (Public
Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Attorney-General's Department v Cockcroft
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR 180
; Australians
for Sustainable Development Inc v Barangaroo Delivery Authority
[2013] NSWADT
; Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Camilleri
[2012] NSWADTAP 19
Director-General, Department of Education and Training v Mullett & anor
[2002] NSWADTAP 13
; Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
; Hurst v Wagga Wagga City Council
[2011] NSWADT 307
Conservation Council of NSW v Department of Trade and Investment
[2012] NSWADT
Principal judgment
Guy Marchant (Applicant)
Bland Shire Council (Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
G Marchant (Applicant in person)
Ray Smith, General Manager, Bland
Shire Council (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
9 October 2013 the applicant Mr Guy Marchant applied to this tribunal under s
100 of the Government Information (Public Access)
Act 2009 (GIPA Act) for a
review of a decision by the respondent Bland Shire Council dated 28 August 2013
to refuse in part access
to certain information in the Council's
possession.
applicant is an employee of the respondent council, which had received a letter
of complaint dated 18 June 2013 making certain
allegations against him. The
council investigated the complaint as a possible breach of its Code of Conduct.
The tribunal has not
been provided with a copy of the code (although a version
of it is reproduced on the council's website), but apparently it lays down
certain standards for the conduct of council employees and procedures for
handling complaints. The council also apparently has a
separate Code of Conduct
Procedures, but the tribunal has not been provided with a copy of it, nor does
it appear on the council's
this case the complaint alleged failure by the applicant to comply with
standards applicable to the removal of asbestos. Following
an investigation, the
council dismissed the complaint.
access application sought the following information: " Full copy of the
complaint letter dated 18 June 2013 in regard to allegation
made against myself
(Guy Marchant), including full details of name and address of the
author/signature of the complaint". As the
information requested included
information that was personal information of another person, the council had
consulted with the writer
of the letter under s 54 of the GIPA Act before
deciding whether or not to provide access to the information. The person
made no objection to the release of the information.
a planning meeting by telephone conducted on 10 December 2013, the parties
requested that the tribunal should proceed to decide
the matter "on the papers",
that is, without conducting a hearing, as contemplated by s 76 of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(ADT Act). They also asked the
tribunal to decide the application on the basis of the material already before
it, as they preferred
not to adduce any further evidence.
Applicable legislation
objects of the GIPA Act as set out in s 3 (1) are to advance the system of
responsible and representative democratic government
by authorizing and
encouraging public release of government information by agencies, giving the
public an enforceable right to access
to government information and providing
that such access is restricted only when there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure.
term "government information" is given a wide meaning by s 4, being defined as
"information contained in a record held by an agency".
"Agency" is also defined
in s 4 and includes "(e) a local authority". That phrase is in turn defined in
clause 1 of schedule 4 to
mean "a council or county council within the meaning
Local Government Act 1993
". Bland Shire Council is such a council and is
therefore an agency to which the legislation applies.
Act establishes a presumption in favour of the disclosure of government
information unless there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure: s
5. Applicants for access to government information have a legally enforceable
right to be provided with access
to it, unless there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure: s 9. The GIPA Act overrides other statutory
provisions that
prohibit disclosure, apart from the "overriding secrecy laws"
set out in schedule 1. In the case of those laws it is conclusively
that there is an overriding public interest against disclosure: ss 11 and
respect to government information not covered by overriding secrecy laws, the
Act establishes a principle that there is a public
interest in favour of
disclosure: s 12 (1). The category of public interest considerations in favour
of disclosure is not limited:
s 12 (2). That subsection then sets out several
examples of public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure.
can be an overriding public interest against disclosure only when the public
interest test in s 13 is satisfied. It provides
that "There is an overriding
public interest against disclosure of the government information for the
purposes of this Act if (and
only if) there are public interest considerations
against disclosure and, on balance, those considerations outweigh the public
considerations in favour of disclosure".
considering whether there is an overriding public interest against disclosure,
the tribunal is to be guided by s 15 which provides,
relevantly for present
purposes, that agencies must exercise their functions so as to promote the
objects of the GIPA Act and must
have regard to any relevant guidelines issued
by the Information Commissioner.
public interest considerations against disclosure are limited to those set out
in the Table to s 14 of the Act. The respondent
relies on the consideration in
clause 1(d), namely that disclosure of the information "could reasonably be
expected" to have the
effect of "prejudic[ing] the supply to an agency of
confidential information that facilitates the effective exercise of that
functions". It also relies on clause 3(a), namely that disclosure
"could reasonably be expected" to have the effect of "reveal[ing]
individual's personal information. In that regard the respondent refers to s 18
(1) of the Privacy and Personal Information Protection
Act 1998 (PIPA Act), but
does not appear to be relying on consideration 3(b), which specifically invokes
the PIPA Act.
proceedings to review a decision made under the GIPA Act to refuse access to
government information in response to an access application,
the burden of
establishing that the decision is justified lies on the agency, in this case the
respondent: s 105.
issue in the present application is thus whether the correct and preferable
decision is to release the redacted information (the
complainant's name and
address) to the applicant.
Consideration
tribunal's function on review under s 63 of the ADT Act is to make the correct
and preferable decision having regard to the material
before it and any
applicable "written or unwritten law" (meaning legislation or common law). It is
well established that in considering
an application for review the tribunal is
not confined to the material that was before the deciding agency, but may have
any relevant material before it at the time of the review: Drake v
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
act adopts a structured approach that requires decision-makers
(i) identify relevant public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure,
(ii) identify relevant public interest considerations against disclosure,
(iii) attribute weight to each consideration for and against disclosure,
(iv) determine whether the balance of the public interest lies in favour of
or against disclosure of the government information (Nature
Conservation Council
of New South Wales v Department of Trade and Investment
[2012] NSWADT 195
public interest test must be applied in accordance with the principles set out
in s 12 and s 15 of the GIPA Act.
evidence this case falls into a small compass. The tribunal has been supplied
with a copy of the decision by Mr Ray Smith, general
manager, dated 28 August
2013 together with associated correspondence, and a confidential schedule of
non-disclosure documents attaching
the complainant's letter of 18 June 2013,
which is itself redacted.
evidence relied on by the applicant consists of his statement of reasons for
seeking a review of the decision, which is attached
to his original application,
together with an aerial photograph of the part of West Wyalong where his
property is located.
his statement of reasons the applicant states that he seeks the identification
of the author of the complaint letter in order to
enable him to undertake the
necessary action to help ensure his family's privacy and security. The
respondent had supplied him with
a copy of the complaint letter but not the name
of the complainant. He further states that as the father of two young boys and a
husband he is very concerned for his family's privacy and security, particularly
as the complainant has both video and photographic
evidence and has indicated
that he had entered the applicant's property to take "samples" of
to his anxieties is his belief that his premises have potentially been under
surveillance for over three years and may still
be. That is a matter of great
concern both for him and for his wife. His children are of an age that they,
too, understand what is
his work with the Bland Shire Council and with the state Fire and Rescue
organization requires him to be away from home,
and on occasions their children
are at home alone while both parents are at work. Since they have received the
complaint, the applicant's
wife is afraid to go into their backyard and they
have limited their boys' time in the backyard. West Wyalong is a small rural
of fewer than 3000 residents, such that most people know one another.
Consequently, he is concerned that the complainant may have
access to their
child on a social, school or other basis in circumstances in which he cannot
protect them.
was noted above, the public interest considerations in favour of disclosure are
set out in s 12, which makes it clear that those
considerations are not limited.
In my view the general public interest in favour of the disclosure of government
information is the
most relevant consideration in favour of disclosing the
redacted information.
public interest considerations against disclosure are limited to those set out
in the s 14 Table. The respondent bears the onus
of justifying the decision to
refuse access to the redacted information, as well as the burden of establishing
that the public interest
considerations against disclosure
considerations against disclosure relied on by the respondent are found in
clause 1(d) and clause 3(a). It must therefore be shown
that disclosure of the
redacted information "could reasonably be expected" to have one or more of the
effects set out in those clauses.
full Federal Court pointed out in Attorney-General's Department v Cockcroft
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR 180
at 190 that the phrase requires --
"a judgment to be made by the decision-maker as to whether it is reasonable,
as distinct from something that is irrational, absurd
or ridiculous, to expect
that those who would otherwise supply information of the prescribed kind to the
agency would decline to
do so if the document in question were disclosed under
the Act. It is undesirable to attempt any paraphrase of these words. In
it is undesirable to consider the operation of the provision in terms
of probabilities or possibilities or the like".
also Nature Conservation Council at [146]; Hurst v Wagga Wagga City Council
[2011] NSWADT 307
, [56]-[57]. Thus the enquiry is not whether the occurrence of
the prescribed effect is likely, possible or probable. It is whether
expectation of the claimed effect is reasonably based: Australians for
Sustainable Development Inc v Barangaroo Delivery Authority
[2013] NSWADT 252
operation of clause 1(d) of the s 14 Table was considered by this tribunal's
appeal panel in Commissioner of Police, New South
Wales Police Force v Camilleri
[2012] NSWADTAP 19
, [27] -- [33]. It adopted the appeal panel's approach in
Director-General, Department of Education and Training v Mullett and anor.
[2002] NSWADTAP 13
, [58], that (the equivalent in the earlier legislation of)
clause1(d) required the tribunal to engage in a relatively abstract analysis.
was to ask whether material of the kind sought to be protected would, if
released, prejudice the supply of similar material to
government in the future,
as a matter of reasonable expectation. That required the tribunal to
characterize the nature of the material
sought to be protected on the present
occasion; to identify the extent to which material of that kind could only
reasonably be obtained
by confidential communication; and the extent to which
guarantees of confidentiality might be necessary. Further, the information
only must be "confidential information", but it must also be information that
facilitates the effective exercise of the agency's
functions (Australians for
Sustainable Development, [64].
question therefore was whether disclosure of the information sought would impair
(damage) the agency's ability to obtain similar
information in the
paragraph was not concerned with the question whether the particular complainant
whose information was disclosed would give similar
information in future, but
whether the agency would be able to obtain such information [ibid]. That
approach was adopted in Australians
for Sustainable Development and has been
endorsed in many subsequent tribunal and appeal panel
this case the information sought to be protected is the name and address of the
complainant who alleged a Code of Conduct breach
by the applicant. The Council's
decision notes at para 4.5 that the Code of Conduct Procedures (part 13) states
that information
investigation of such complaints " is to be treated as confidential and not
publicly disclosed except as may be specifically required or permitted under the
procedures". The decision also declares at para
4.3 the Council's opinion that
releasing the information would impair the effectiveness of future Code of
Conduct investigations
on the basis that it would discourage the candid and
voluntary provision of information by the general public.
respondent identifies circumstances that could constitute a consideration
against disclosure of information in terms of clause
1(d): that disclosure could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the supply to the agency of confidential
information that facilitates
the effective exercise of its
next step is to attribute the appropriate weight to the clause 1(d)
consideration. That is difficult to do as the respondent's
case consists
entirely of assertion or opinion unsupported by any factual material. In
particular, it states that the relevant information
could only be obtained from
the public by offering a guarantee of confidentiality. But it refers, for
example, to no instances in
the experience of the council or other agencies that
would support that assertion.
problem is illustrated by the Hurst case, which also concerned information
relevant to a council code of conduct investigation.
A council officer had given
evidence that the protection of information encouraged the provision of candid
information to the general
manager, and as a matter of practice such information
was kept confidential. The officer did not depose, however, to having any
of code of conduct investigations where confidentiality was not
maintained. Molony JM considered that her evidence did not identify
for a comparison between investigations where confidentiality had been
maintained, and those where it had not. It failed
to disclose a rational or
underlying factual basis for the conclusion that the information could only be
obtained by guaranteeing
confidentiality or how disclosure could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the effective operation of the council. It was held that
clause 1(d) did not outweigh the general public interest in favour of disclosure
(Hurst at [63] -- [71]).
weighing the considerations for and against disclosure, the tribunal is entitled
to take certain personal factors into account
(s 55). In this case they would
include such matters as set out in the applicant's letter, including his family
structure and circumstances,
and the anxieties he and his wife felt over the
presumed long-term surveillance of their property. The tribunal is under no
to inquire into, or verify, such claims: s 55(6).
performing the balancing process required by the public interest test in s 13,
Higgins DP's remarks in Australians for Sustainable
Development at [55] will be
found apposite: "Ultimately, in determining where the balance lies between the
competing interests, this
'is a question of fact and degree, requiring the
weighing of competing matters, and is a task that is not amenable to
mathematical
calculation'".
the reasons set out above, the present case presents a weaker claim under clause
1(d) than Hurst. The respondent, after all, bears
the burden of proof in such
proceedings and is unlikely to be able to discharge it unless it adduces
evidence of facts and circumstances
such as might support its opinion. Even
though the respondent's view is a quite plausible one, this tribunal is not at
draw inferences at large. Further, the respondent's s 54
consultations revealed that the complainant had no objection to disclosure
the information. Even without taking into account the personal factors,
therefore, I find that there is no overriding public interest
against disclosure
and that the general public interest in the disclosure of the government
information outweighs the respondent's
claim to protect the information under
clause 1(d).
other ground on which the respondent relies is that disclosure could reasonably
be expected to reveal an individual's personal
information, within the meaning
of clause 3(a) of the s 14 Table, the information in question being the name of
the complainant.
information is defined in clause 4 of schedule 4 to mean information or an
opinion about an individual, living or dead, whose
identity is apparent or can
reasonably be ascertained from the information or opinion. The clause also sets
out some examples and
certain exemptions, none of which apply in the present
case. "Reveal" is defined in clause 1 of schedule 4 to mean "to disclose
information
that has not already been publicly disclosed (otherwise than by
unlawful disclosure)". The tribunal is required by s 15(b) to have
regard to any
relevant guidelines issued by the Information Commissioner. IPC Guideline 4,
para 1.2, states that a person's name
and address constitute personal
information but notes (para 3.17) that such information can still be released
after application of
the GIPA Act balancing test.
support of its argument under clause 3(a), the respondent refers to privacy
principle 18 under the PIPA Act. That consideration
is really an argument under
clause 3(b), however, and will be dealt with separately below.
factor weighing in favour of disclosure on this count is the general public
interest in favour of disclosure of government information,
as in the case of
the clause 1(d) argument. The fact that disclosure could reasonably be expected
to have the effect of revealing
personal information relating to the complainant
is a consideration against disclosure. Given that in the present case the
shows that the complainant has no objection to disclosure of that
information, it is difficult to attribute significant weight to
consideration. Further, the personal factors that the tribunal may take into
account under s 55(1) are to be given due weight.
In particular, "the
applicant's motives for making the access application" (s 55(1)(b)) include his
desire to protect his privacy
and that of his family from what he regards as
surveillance, and that constitutes a matter tending to favour disclosure. On
I therefore find that there is no overriding public interest against the
disclosure of the information.
respondent's other line of argument amounts to a case under clause 3(b) of the s
14 Table, on the basis that disclosure could
reasonably be expected to
contravene an information protection principle under the PIPA Act, specifically
s 18(1) of that Act.
section provides that a public sector agency that holds personal information
"must not disclose the information to a person (other
than the individual to
whom the information relates) or other body, whether or not such person or body
is a public sector agency",
but that language is immediately followed by a set
of exceptions, of which the first one reads: "(a) the disclosure is directly
to the purpose for which the information was collected, and the agency
disclosing the information has no reason to believe that the
person concerned
would object to the disclosure".
there is no reason to believe that the person concerned would object to
disclosure, there is no evidence or other material before
the tribunal to
suggest that the disclosure would be directly related to the purpose for which
the information was collected. Accordingly
the exception does not apply and the
consideration against disclosure.
again, it is difficult to attribute weight to this consideration as the
respondent has provided no evidence or other material
to support the claim
beyond partially quoting s 18 itself. The s 54 consultations showed that the
complainant in fact had no objection
to disclosure of his or her identity. In
addition, as in the case of the clause 3(a) ground, the personal factors,
specifically the
applicant's motives for making the access application, tend to
favour disclosure.
balance, on weighing the various factors, I conclude that the considerations
against disclosure, whether taken individually or
together, do not outweigh the
general public interest in favour of disclosure of the
information.
decision under review is therefore set aside.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter