URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2022/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Rymer [2022] NSWPICMRP 6; (3 February 2022)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Rymer
[2022] NSWPICMRP 6
Christophe Rymer
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Merit Reviewer Belinda Cassidy
Merit Reviewer Susan
Merit Reviewer Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
3 Februrary 2022
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
interim decision as to jurisdiction; statutory benefits claim; costs of medical
disputes (minor injury and treatment) allowed
on an exceptional basis under
section 8.10(4) of the MAI Act and reasonable and necessary costs assessed;
application by insurer
for review of decision; preliminary point as to
Merit Review Panel has no power
to review decision made in respect of section 8.10(4) of the MAI Act; that
decision was a decision
made by the Commission as constituted by a member and is
not a merit review matter as listed in Schedule 2(1) of the MAI Act; Merit
Review Panel’s jurisdiction is limited to an assessment of whether the
claimant’s costs as permitted by the Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation or
by the Commission (constituted by the member) are reasonable and necessary;
Rymer v Allianz Insurance
[NSWPICMR] 45 and
Allianz Insurance v Rymer
[2021] NSWPIC 534
REVIEW PANEL INTERIM DECISION
INTRODUCTION
1. Christophe Rymer was involved in a motor accident
on 8 December 2018. He was riding his motorcycle in the second lane of Pittwater
Road at Manly and there was a car up ahead in the first lane. Without warning,
that car undertook a U-turn manoeuvre and Mr Rymer
collided with it sustaining
2. Mr Rymer (the claimant) made an application for personal injury
(statutory) benefits on Allianz Australia Insurance Limited, the
third-party
insurer of the car Mr Rymer says caused his accident (the insurer).
3. A dispute has arisen between the claimant and the insurer about the
payment of legal costs in respect of this claim and specifically
relation to a number of medical disputes that have arisen in connection with
that claim. On 7 October 2021,
Mr Plibersek determined that dispute about
4. Allianz lodged an application to review that decision with the Personal
Injury Commission (the Commission). The President’s
delegate determined
that there was reasonable cause to suspect an error in Mr Plibersek’s
and a Review Panel (the
Panel) has been constituted by the President of the Commission to conduct the
Review of Mr Plibersek’s
decision (the Review).
5. Pursuant to rule 128(1) of the Personal Injury Commission Rules, 2021 (the
PIC Rules) the Panel ‘is to conduct and determine
the proceedings in
accordance with procedures determined by the panel’.
6. The Panel met on 11 January 2021 and discussed the matter.
7. The extensive submissions lodged by the parties in the application that
Mr Plibersek and in the application for review before the Panel,
reveal there is a dispute between Mr Rymer and Allianz about:
(a) whether the claimant should be permitted to be paid legal costs beyond the
sums specified in the Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
2017 (the MAI
Regulation) that is costs on the exceptional circumstances basis and, if so
(b) the amount that should be allowed as reasonable and necessary for those
8. The Panel identified a preliminary issue as to the scope of the Merit
Review Panel’s jurisdiction and whether it had the
power to consider both
the above matters. After receiving submissions from both parties, the Panel has
made a decision which limits
the scope of the matters to be determined by it to
the second of those matters only for the reasons that follow.
The Legislative Framework
The power to determine whether exceptional costs
9. Section 8.10(1) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
2017 (the MAI
Act) says that a claimant can recover from the insurer reasonable and necessary
legal costs and other expenses that
are incurred in connection with a claim for
statutory benefits.
10. Section 8.10(3) provides that these legal costs can only be recovered if
payment of them ‘is permitted by the regulation
11. Section 8.10(4) says ‘the Commission can permit payment of legal
costs incurred by a claimant but only if satisfied that
... (b) exceptional
circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs incurred by the
claimant’. Section 24 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act
(the PIC Act) says ‘The Commission has the jurisdiction and functions that
may be conferred or imposed on it by ...’
the MAI Act.
12. The Commission clearly has the jurisdiction and function of determining
whether exceptional circumstances exist, and that the
reasonable and necessary costs are to be paid by the insurer under s 8.10(4) on
the basis that the MAI Regulation
and the sums allowed in it do not apply.
13. Section 31 of the PIC Act provides that ‘The Commission is to be
constituted by one or more Division members ... to which
the function of dealing
with the proceedings is allocated’. Division members are listed in section
8 of the PIC Act and include
principal, senior and general members. Importantly
for the matters before the Panel, merit reviewers are not members of the
Commission.
14. Merit reviewers, along with medical assessors are ‘decision
makers’ under s 7.1(1) of the MAI Act and s 32 of the
PIC Act. Section 34
of the PIC Act says a decision-maker (such as a merit reviewer) has the
functions that are conferred on the decision-maker
by or under the PIC Act and
the MAI Act.
15. The Panel is not aware of any functions relevant to the dispute before it
conferred on merit reviewers by or under the PIC Act.
Neither party has drawn
the Panel’s attention to any provision of the PIC Act conferring any
function relevant to this costs
dispute on merit reviewers.
16. The function conferred on merit reviewers by or under the MAI Act is the
determination of matters defined in s 7.1 as those matters
declared by Schedule
2 of the MAI Act to be merit review matters.
17. Schedule 2(1)(aa) declares the following to be a merit review matter:
“Whether for the purposes of section 8.10 (Recovery of costs and
expenses in relation to claims for statutory benefits) the
costs and expenses
incurred by the claimant are reasonable and necessary.”
The bifurcation of disputes about costs
18. Disputes about costs are often split between decision makers. In matters
that come before the courts, the judicial officer will
make the order in
relation to costs (the entitlement to costs, whether indemnity costs should be
awarded and issues surrounding offers
of compromise and so on) but the
quantification of costs, if disputed, is determined by a separate
19. In a common law claim, the member undertaking the assessment of it has
the jurisdiction and function of assessing both the entitlement
to costs and the
quantum of those costs (see s 7.37 of the MAI Act). These costs include any
medical disputes (and medical reviews)
that arise in connection with that common
20. A miscellaneous claims assessment matter may arise in either a common law
claim or a statutory benefits
. In the course of the
determination of a miscellaneous claims assessment matter, a member of the
Commission has the power to also
determine both the entitlement to costs and the
amount of those costs (see ss 7.37 and 7.42(2) and the decision of Justice
AAI Limited t/as GIO v
21. But what of a dispute about costs in a statutory benefits claim, or costs
in a dispute that arises in a statutory benefits claim
that is not a
miscellaneous claims assessment matter such as a medical assessment matter? Who
has had conferred upon them the function
of determining the entitlement to costs
and who has had conferred upon them the function of assessing or quantifying
those costs?
22. Wright J in the
case emphasised the clear distinction between
the two functions or powers in respect of costs. For example, at [101] he said
‘Section 8.10(3) should be construed as conferring on the DRS [now
the Commission] a discretion to
the recovery and payment of legal
costs in excess of the maximum costs fixed by the regulations, where the
requirements of s 8.10(4)
are met’. He also held at [102] that a claimant
can recover legal costs ‘which exceed the maximum costs fixed by the
regulations where the payment of those costs is
by the DRS [now
the Commission] in the circumstances referred to in s 8.10(4). He then observed
as follows:
“[105] Whether legal costs are “reasonable and necessary”
is a matter that depends on the particular circumstances
of each case. No issue
arose in the present matter concerning the construction or application of the
words “reasonable and
necessary”. As a result, it is not appropriate
to consider that aspect of s 8.10(1) in these reasons. It can be noted
if there is a dispute concerning whether the legal costs sought to be
recovered by a claimant for statutory benefits are “reasonable
necessary”, this is declared by Sch 2 cl 1(aa) of the MAI Act to
be a “merits review matter” for the purposes
of Pt 7 of the Act
and can be determined in accordance with Div 7.4 of Pt 7.”
23. It is the Panel’s view that in a statutory benefits claim, there is
a bifurcation of the determination of costs disputes
between the parties. The
power to permit costs outside the MAI Regulation (under s 8.10(4)) lies with a
member of the Commission
who, absent agreement between the parties, must give
that permission before a merit reviewer can then assess those costs and
what costs are reasonable and necessary and payable by the insurer.
24. If there is no claim for costs on the exceptional basis under s 8.10(4)
then there is no bifurcation because the MAI Regulation
permits certain costs
and any dispute about the quantification of those (regulated) costs would appear
to be dealt with by a merit
reviewer under Schedule 2 clause 1(aa).
What decisions did Mr Plibersek make?
25. Document AD12 in the portal is a sealed copy of
the decision of Mr Plibersek. The document contains a first page headed
Review’ where Mr Plibersek is identified, in the formal parts
of the document as a ‘Merit Reviewer’. Beneath the
formal parts is
the word ‘Certificate’ which was said to be issued under section
7.13(4) of the MAI Act.
26. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Certificate are found under a heading
‘determination’. Over the next eight pages are other
including: background, submissions, relevant statutory provisions and
conclusion.
27. On page 6 of the document are two sub-subheadings as follows:
(a) Reasonable and necessary costs
(b) Do exceptional circumstances exist?
28. The ‘conclusion’ part of the document contains the following
two paragraphs:
“[69] Under sub-section 8.10(4) I am satisfied that that exceptional
circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the
[70] The amount of the Claimant’s reasonable and necessary legal costs
assessed in accordance with the MAI Act and the Regulations
is $30,800,
inclusive of GST for the solicitor’s professional legal costs and $4,455
inclusive of GST for barrister’s
29. The document finishes with a sign off section as follows:
“Ray Plibersek
General Member and Merit Reviewer
Personal Injury Commission”
30. The Panel is aware that Mr Plibersek is both a member of the Commission
and a Merit Reviewer.
31. The front page of the decision in question refers only to the matter
being a merit review matter and identifies the certificate
as having been issued
under s 7.13(4), a section of the Act relevant only to merit review matters.
However, the Merit Review Certificate
document includes within it (in particular
the conclusions at paragraphs 59 and 60) two decisions – a decision to
payment of costs on an exceptional basis under s 8.10(4)(b) and
a decision quantifying those costs by deciding what costs are reasonable
necessary which he has assessed at over $35,000. The document is ‘signed
off’ with Mr Plibersek’s name and
notes his two appointments
(General Member and Merit Reviewer).
32. It is the Panel’s view that this document should be considered as
containing:
(a) the decision of the Commission as constituted by Member Plibersek to whom
has been allocated the function of permitting (or not)
the claimant to recover
legal costs in accordance with s 8.10 of the MAI Act, and
(b) the determination of a Schedule 2(1)(aa) merit review matter by Merit
Reviewer Plibersek in accordance with section 7.13 of the
What decisions can the Panel review?
33. Section 7.15 of the MAI Act:
(a) permits a party to apply to the President to refer a merit review decision
to a review panel of merit reviewers for review,
(b) limits the grounds for a review to where ‘the decision was incorrect
in a material respect’ which must first proceed
through a gatekeeper test
of ‘reasonable cause to suspect’ the decision was incorrect in a
material respect, and
(c) provides that the Panel may confirm the decision in question or set aside
the decision or substitute its own decision.
34. The Panel communicated to the parties, its preliminary view that it only
has power to review a decision made by a merit reviewer
in relation to a merit
review matter. The Panel sought submissions and both the
agree that the Panel only
has power to review Merit Reviewer Plibersek’s decision under Schedule
2(1)(aa) as to whether the
costs and expenses incurred by Mr Rymer are
reasonable and necessary.
35. The Panel has therefore determined that it will only consider the
decision made by Merit Reviewer Plibersek as to the assessment
of the reasonable
and necessary costs and expenses incurred by the claimant. That matter is a
merit review matter and the Panel only
has power to review merit review
36. In terms of Member Plibersek’s decision to permit the payment of
legal costs incurred by the claimant in accordance with
s 8.10(4)(b), the
insurer’s submissions raise, in paragraph two a question as to the
validity of that decision. The insurer
asks whether Member Plibersek has
‘acted outside the scope of the dispute referred to him, which is noted to
have been a merit
review’. The insurer also ‘queries what
the dispute referred for determination was limited to a merit review of legal
37. With respect to the insurer’s legal representatives, whether Mr
Plibersek’s decision under s 8.10(4)(b) is within
the scope of what was
referred to him and whether that decision is valid or invalid is not a matter
which the Panel can determine.
As the parties agree, and the Panel has decided,
the Panel can only review a merit review matter.
38. The Panel will convene a teleconference with the parties to discuss the
assessment of the claimant’s costs. The parties
will be advised of the
arrangements for the teleconference in due course.
Merit Reviewers Belinda Cassidy, Susan McTegg and Katherine Ruschen
v Allianz Insurance
[2021] NSWPICMR 45
(7 October 2021).
Insurance v Rymer
[2021] NSWPIC 534
(14 December 2021).
Before 1 March 2021 and the
establishment of the Commission the reference here was to the Dispute Resolution
Service (DRS).
In New South
Wales overseen by the Supreme Court’s costs assessment
See the list in
Schedule 2(2) of the MAI Act.
[2020] NSWSC 714
claimant’s submissions are identified as document AD16 in the portal and
were received on 2 February
The insurer’s
submissions are identified as document AD15 in the portal and were received on
25 January 2022.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.02 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter