URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1346.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Estate of Gaber Ekladious Awad; The Estate of Ognee Abd Elkodious Mikheil [2025] NSWSC 1346 (17 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
The Estate of Gaber Ekladious Awad; The Estate of Ognee Abd Elkodious
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1346
Hearing Date(s):
31 October & 17 November 2025
Date of Orders:
17 November 2025
Decision Date:
17 November 2025
Proceedings not referred for pro bono assistance but to be relisted before
the Probate List Judge.
Catchwords:
SUCCESSION – Probate and administration – contest between
children of the deceased testator as to which of two competing
wills should be
admitted to probate – the equity in the estate’s principal asset is
being eroded by mortgage interest,
an issue which the parties are not addressing
– two parties apply for pro bono legal assistance under
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
, r 7.36 for the probate contest – whether in the
circumstances pro bono legal assistance should be recommended by the Court
the Court doubts the declared financial position of the parties and the parties
are not focused upon the declining financial
position of the estate.
Legislation Cited:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Succession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
In proceedings The Estate of Gaber Ekladious Awad & The Estate of Ognee
Abd Elkodious Mikheil:
Plaintiff: Nahed Awad
First Defendant: Emad
Second Defendant: Regaie Awad
Third Defendant: Marcel Awad
Representation:
Solicitors:
In both proceedings:
Plaintiff: in person
Defendant: in person
File Number(s):
2025/00312914; 2025/00312915
Publication Restriction:
reasons explain why the Court has declined in the Equity Duty List to refer
litigants to the Bar Association or the Law Society
for pro bono legal
assistance pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
”). The applications are made by two of the parties to
related probate proceedings (proceedings 2025/312914 – Estate of
Awad, and proceedings 2025/312915 – Estate of Ognee Mikheil). The late
Gaber Awad and the late Ognee Mikheil were husband
and wife and were the parents
of the several contestants in these two proceedings. Although both estates are
in contest, the principal
dispute presently before the Court appears to relate
to the estate of the father and reference to that primary estate is made
these reasons.
short, in the circumstances outlined below, the referral of these proceedings
for pro bono legal assistance will not presently
advance their resolution, or
the administration of the estate and is not either in the interests of the
parties or in the public
interest, given the circumstances of this estate and
the need to preserve the limited voluntary resources available from the Bar
Association and the Law Society for pro bono legal assistance.
Awad (“the father”) and Ognee Mikheil (“the mother”) had
four children, who are in order of age from
oldest to youngest, a daughter
Marciel (the third defendant), a daughter Nahed (the plaintiff), a son Emad (the
first defendant)
and a son Ragaie (the second defendant).
proceedings took their current form when Nahed filed a motion to remove caveats
that Emad and Ragiae had lodged against her
applying for probate of any of the
father’s wills. This motion came before the Probate List Judge Lindsay J
in mid-September
this year. Lindsay J has case managed the proceedings since
then. Only the application for pro bono legal assistance came into the
and became a contested sideshow. But first some general background.
parties’ mother, Ognee Mikheil died on 9 July 2022 ostensibly leaving
wills dated respectively 19 December 2017 and 22 August
2005. She appears to
have given her estate to the parties’ father, Gaber Awad, who died on 7
October 2024 ostensibly leaving
wills dated respectively 23 September 2022, 12
April 2019 and 23 August 2005.
propounds the 2022 will of the father which gives the whole of his estate to
her. She says that her mother’s second will
also substantially benefits
her. The deceased’s eldest daughter Marciel, lives in Alexandria in Egypt,
and has appeared in
the proceedings by AVL but without legal representation. She
says that when the deceased was travelling in the Middle East in mid-2019
visit places holy to the Christian Church that he gave to her the will of April
2019 (“the 2019 will”), which he described
to her as his
“final will” and saying to her that he had executed it in Blacktown
2019 will directs that the deceased’s house in Blacktown should be divided
equally among his four children, his two daughters
and his two sons. The 2019
will appears to be partially deficient - it does not contain a complete clause
disposing of the deceased’s
residuary estate - although the facts
available to the Court indicate that there is little in the deceased’s
estate other than
the Blacktown property.
propounding of the father’
will was thwarted by caveats that Emad
has filed alleged that this will is invalid, forged, or fraudulent, or obtained
by undue influence,
presumably exercised by Nahed. Those will be the issues for
trial in any later probate proceedings. Even if Nahed succeeds there
to be claims by the other siblings under
Succession Act
Blacktown property is an unoccupied freestanding dwelling in Blacktown, which is
said by various parties to be worth in the range
$950,000 to $1.3 million. Due
to the distraction of the current probate conflict between the siblings the
estate is incurring substantial
liabilities. The Blacktown property is mortgaged
to Aims Home Loans, with Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd acting as the mortgagee. The
secures two loans apparently taken out by the father and the mother
during their lifetimes – loan 111177 and loan 111410. Some
of the siblings
say that these mortgages were the result of unconscionable dealings in which
late couple were in a position of special
disadvantage. The Court is presently
unable to make any judgment about the merits of this claim.
statements of account for each of these loans from the mortgagee shows an
alarming picture. Both loans are in default. Monthly
default interest is being
capitalised into the loans at an effective interest rate of 11.5%. The cost of
this to the estate can be
readily gauged from the mortgagee’s recent
statements for both loans, which the Court ordered to be produced to assist it
assess what should happen with these pro bono referral applications.
for loan 111177, on 24 July 2024 the outstanding balance due to the mortgagee
was $157,586.49 and on 24 June 2025 was $177,270.61.
Interest was being
capitalised at the beginning of the last financial year at $1,525.24 per month
and at the end of the financial
year at $1702.43 per month.
for loan 111410, on 24 July 2024 the outstanding balance due to the mortgagee
was $112,238.08 and on 24 June 2025 was $125,858.71.
Interest was being
capitalised at the beginning of the last financial year at $1,088.43 per month
and at the end of the financial
year at $1208.70 per month.
parties told Lindsay J in September and the Court at the hearing in the Duty
List that the amount outstanding of the mortgage
was only $20,513.52. Now that
the default notices (the relevant objective evidence) are available that has
turned out to be completely
wrong and has resulted in the Court being misled. As
at 30 June 2025 the amount outstanding on the mortgage in respect of the two
loans was a total of $303,129.32 (being $125,858.71 plus $177,270.61), with
total monthly default interest payments at that time
being capitalised at the
rate of $2,911.13.
default financial position on both these loans can only have worsened in the
four months that have elapsed since June this year.
Interest is probably
accumulating now at well over $3,000 per month on a gross debt of well over
$320,000 and rising. The current
equity in this property will be eroded during
the parties’ current conflict unless something is done to stop default
the conflict in these proceedings is likely to drag on, there is a strong case
for the Blacktown property either to be leased,
or for it to be sold and the
proceeds invested, so that the assets of the estate are preserved and if
possible enhanced while the
conflict continues. This seems to have been
overlooked by these parties in their bitter succession rivalries.
to the choice between leasing or sale of the Blacktown property, as result of
the Court’s directions during the contest in
the Duty List, Nahed has
filed an affidavit which indicates that she has expended funds to prepare the
property for a possible rental
and obtained a current estimated market rent for
the property of $680 per week (or $2720 per month) before deduction of rental
This rental estimate can be disputed but the true figure is unlikely
to be far above this estimate. It can now be seen that without
injection of funds into the estate, leasing the property is not viable with
accumulating default interest exceeding available
rental income by at least $300
per month. Given the nature of the conflicts between these parties and the time
they will take to
resolve, it is clearly in the interest of preserving the
assets in this estate for the Blacktown property to be sold. The only other
realistic alternative is for Nahed, who claims the whole of the Blacktown
property passes to her under the 2022 will, to advance
substantial funds to the
estate to reduce the mortgage so that renting the Blacktown property is viable.
But her affidavit of assets
is not consistent with any capacity to support the
estate in that way. She says that
is evident from Lindsay J’s orders and notations in the Court record that
the level of conflict within this estate has reached
the point that Lindsay J
has been prompted to suggest that the proceedings might be better dealt with and
the estate better managed
by the appointment of an independent administrator,
although Lindsay J has not yet taken that course.
the additional knowledge about this estate that is now available and is recorded
this judgment, the Court has decided to require
the parties to refocus on the
prescient warnings given by Lindsay J and now to require the parties to show
cause why an independent
administrator should not be appointed to administer the
estate. An independent administrator will facilitate objective communication
with Marciel in Egypt, so that she has proper information to protect her legal
interests in the melee of these Australian warring
then leads back to the question of the referral for pro bono assistance which is
being sought by each of Nahed and Emad. Nahed
originally brought her application
in the duty list before Brereton J who granted it but on the basis it was
revocable, if one of
the other parties objected. Emad objected and says that if
Nahed is referred for pro bono legal assistance then he should also be
referred and afforded the same opportunity on the grounds of “parity and
procedural fairness”. He says he will accept
the present situation that
all parties are unrepresented if Nahed is not referred for assistance. Nahed
claims she has only limited
finances, owning an old motor vehicle, some
jewellery and no real estate and that her only income is Centrelink benefits
she pays for her public housing residents with Home NSW. The
financial position of the other siblings is obscure.
Court has had an opportunity to assess each of Nahed and Emad, even in the
limited contact it has had with them both across the
bar table. Each of them
appears to have energy to robustly advance her and his self-interest in the
public environment of the courtroom.
Among the many bitterly fought contests
that the Court sees in its probate jurisdiction, this case is being conducted
with uncommon
aggression on both sides. In this background of unusually
heightened conflict the Court judges cautiously both Nahed’s estimates
her financial positions and claims to entitlement to pro bono assistance,
notwithstanding that they have not been challenged under
cross examination.
pro bono referral scheme established between the Court and the professional
associations of the Bar Association and the Law Society
is not an unlimited resource. The scheme only works because generous members of
the legal profession in this State are prepared
to commit their time without
charge to fill the gap in the wholly inadequate legal aid provided by State and
Federal Governments
to members of the community. If the Court were to refer
litigants who have financial resources to the pro bono scheme that would
undermine the scheme by overburdening it and by deterring lawyers from offering
their services free of charge because the lawyers
cannot be sure that scheme
members are truly deserving. The Court cannot of course infer that Nahed has
substantial assets. But in
the circumstances the Court is not prepared to infer
that she lacks sufficient assets to engage a lawyer to represent her. She has
least a prima facie claim to a one quarter share in an estate, and potentially
more, which estate would appear to have a total
net value of perhaps about
$600,000 to $900,000, if managed acceptably. Given there is so little evidence
of the financial position
of Marciel, Emad, and Regaie, they cannot be referred
for pro bono assistance on any basis of “parity”.
for a self-represented litigant, Nahed appears to be well capable of gathering
evidence, swearing detailed relevant affidavits
and advancing and defending her
rights with a capable appreciation of the relevant legal principles, and
applicable legal rules.
any pro bono assistance to these two parties is unlikely to address the real
issue bearing down upon them, which is the problem
of the diminishing asset of
the estate. Appointing a pro bono barrister to assist one or both of these
parties is unlikely, on its
own to assist the beneficiaries to administer and
preserve estate assets.
is to be done? The Court is not yet prepared to burden the pro bono system of
the Law Society and the Bar Association established
with these two applications.
Court will recommend however that Nahed and Emad be referred to the Bar
Association and the Law Society by the Registrar in Equity
with a copy of these
reasons, to see if a lawyer might act for them, not on a pro bono basis but at
reduced or favourable rates.
This may well be a matter which would be handled by
a junior barrister or solicitor in the early years of practice, who is prepared
to wait for payment of legal fees when the estate is finally administered. These
reasons have set out the basic facts and will be
published which may facilitate
such a limited referral. If the matter is taken up by a lawyer, an early
mediation of the proceedings
may be attractive.
proceedings will be adjourned back to Lindsay J in the Probate List giving the
parties approximately a week to absorb the implications
of these reasons.
Circumstances may change in the future. If the parties were for example to
commit wholeheartedly to mediating these
two proceedings quickly and submitted
to an order under
Civil Procedure Act
for referral to
mediation, the Court might perhaps reconsider a pro bono referral under
r 7.36. But even then, it is difficult to justify pro bono referral
in probate proceedings such as these, where the parties are in
contest over an
identifiable fund.
parties, like many others, should bear in mind that a pro bono referral under
r 7.36 is not the right of every litigant who claims to be
impecunious but a matter in the discretion of the Court, depending upon
circumstances.
Court therefore makes the following orders and directions.
(1) REFER the reasons published today to the Registrar in Equity with request
that she provide a copy of them to the Chief Executive
of the Bar Association
and the President of the Law Society with a copy of these reasons to see if
counsel or solicitor in the early
years of practice might be engaged act for the
applicants, not on a pro bono basis, but nevertheless at favourable rates.
(2) ORDER that the parties to these proceedings show cause, when the matter is
next before the Probate List Judge, why an independent
administrator should not
be appointed to administer this estate.
(3) ORDER that these proceedings be adjourned before the Probate List Judge on
Tuesday, 25 November 2025.
(4) NOTE that no legal costs have been incurred in these applications.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (238 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter