URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2016/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v McGarrity, King and Campbell [2016] NSWNMPSC 3 (29 July 2016)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
SANDRA CHRISTENE
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001253440 (NSW)
ROBERT KING
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001226322 (NSW)
CYRIL CAMPBELL
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001187242 (NSW)
STATEMENT OF DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDER APPLIES
________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v McGarrity, King and Campbell
[2016] NSWNMPSC 3
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
represented by Scott
Maybury instructed by Fabian Flintoff of the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Sandra McGarrity
represented by Linda
Alexander, Solicitor, NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association.
Steven Campbell
represented by Katherine Doust, Solicitor, NSW Nurses
and Midwives’ Association.
Paul (Chairperson)
Karen Sherwood (Nurse Member)
Schalk (Nurse Member)
Robert Kelly (Lay Member)
: 27, 28, 29 and 30 June 2016
29 July 2016
DATE OF ORDERS
: 29 July 2016
(in summary): Sandra McGarrity is
reprimanded. Her registration is subject to a condition for indirect
supervision
(in summary): David King is reprimanded. His registration is
subject to a condition for mentoring
(in summary): Steven Campbell is reprimanded. His registration is
subject to a condition for indirect supervision
CATCHWORDS:
Professional responsibilities, decision-making, policies
and practices.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law)
– s139B(1)(a), s170, clause 7 of
Schedule 5D
Overview of our decision
1. Early in the morning of 16 May 2012 a residential client
of Casurina Grove Aged Care and Disability Facility, had vomited. RN
arranged for him to see the visiting medical officer a few hours later that
morning. Treatment was given and the patient
was observed. On the following
shift he vomited, and the ‘same appeared to have blood/faecal matter in
McGarrity saw the vomit, she decided it was of no concern. RN Campbell returned
for the next shift. When the patient
again vomited he spoke to RN King to
discuss calling an ambulance. RN King expressed a different opinion, and no
ambulance was called.
2. Next morning, just before 7:00am, the patient was
found dead on the floor of his room in a pool of what was described as vomit
faecal matter. He was 55 years old. Whether his death could have been averted
by some particular action taken by any of the
registered nurses is unknown, and
that is not the immediate focus of this inquiry.
3. The task of this
Professional Standards Committee is to determine whether the conduct of Sandra
McGarrity, David King and Stephen
Campbell, all involved in his care in the 24
hours before his death, demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment that
each possessed or the care they each exercised was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a registered nurse of
their levels of training
or experience. In our view the conduct of each, in different aspects, and to
different degrees, was significantly
below the standard to be
4. Aspects of the conduct of each of them amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct, and in the protection of the public we
decided to reprimand each registered nurse and to impose conditions on their
practices as registered nurses.
Direction for suppression of patient’s
5. At the commencement of the hearing, and pursuant to clause 7 of
Schedule 5D of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) (National
Law), the Chairperson directed that the name of the patient not be published.
The patient is referred to in our
Decision as Patient A or the patient. His
name is recorded in an Annexure to the original of this decision, which is not
to be copied
and is to be removed before publication.
The hearing
inquiry proceeded over four days from Monday, 27 June to Thursday, 30 June 2016.
By s170 of the National Law we were able to
conduct the three inquiries at the
7. The Health Care Complaints Commission, the complainant in
each matter, was represented by Scott Maybury, instructed by Fabian Flintoff
solicitor from the Commission. Katherine Doust of the NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association represented Stephen Campbell,
and Ms Linda Alexander
also of the Association represented Sandra McGarrity and David King.
Commission tendered two volumes of tabbed material and a third volume containing
the medical records of the patient. All of
that material was accepted into
evidence without objection. Each of the registered nurses tendered a folder
containing their statement
supported by a number of documents including
curriculum vitae, records of courses and training undertaken, references in
and some additional statements. All were accepted as evidence in the
9. Also in evidence was a document called Accommodation and
Nursing Services Hunter Residences tendered by Ms Alexander on behalf
RN King and RN McGarrity on the question of their responsibilities on their
shifts. A document called Role of Registered Nurses
as OIC was marked for
identification but was not admitted into evidence.
10. Each of the registered
nurses gave evidence. In addition the Committee heard evidence from Ms Dawes and
Ms Pinner, both assistants
in nursing (AIN) who worked on the shift with RN
Campbell. The Committee also heard from Ms Kathie Terrens who was the
Residential
Nurse Manager at Casurina Grove at the time.
11. Dr Schmidt the
visiting medical officer, gave evidence by telephone of her consultation with
Patient A on the morning of 16 May
2012. Roydon Cannon, also a registered
nurse, gave evidence of the handover on the morning of 17 May and then attending
A’s room to discover he was dead. Ms Thuia, another AIN, gave
evidence of her observations during the night. RN Hemley told
recollection of conversations she said she had with Ms Dawes and Ms Pinner and
her subsequent discussion with RN McGarrity.
12. Ms Jamieson also gave
evidence. She was the registered nurse who took the vomit that appeared to have
blood/faecal matter to
show RN McGarrity, and which RN McGarrity later
‘noted to be blood/faecal
Ms Jamieson’s conduct is not the subject of this
13. Ms Deborah Armitage, engaged by the Commission, attended
and gave evidence as an expert, in addition to the reports she had prepared
concerning her assessment of the conduct of each of the registered nurses. Her
attendance at the hearing assisted the Committee
as she was able to express her
opinion of the conduct of each nurse taking into account additional information
provided during the
hearing, in particular by RN Campbell.
14. The Committee
was greatly assisted by the approaches taken by Mr Maybury, Ms Doust and Ms
Alexander during the hearing. From
the many documents and detailed evidence
they were able to distil the important issues, and each made appropriate
concessions.
15. In his written outline of submissions Mr Maybury helpfully
summarised the applicable law: applying the civil standard and considering
Briginshaw; what is to be reasonably expected of a professional such as a
registered nurse; the importance of proper medical records
as an essential
aspect of good patient care; the protective rather than punitive function of
this Committee; the significant trust
placed by patients in health
professionals; and the importance of protecting the public. These principles
were not contested by
Ms Doust or Ms Alexander and are accepted by this
16. Overall there was little dispute about the events at least
with respect to matters that immediately touched on the Complaints
made and as
particularised by the Commission. Our task was to determine if the practice of
the nurses amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Dealing with the
events chronologically, and then considering the particulars of the Complaints
as each event
arises best elucidates our consideration.
Arrangements at
Casuarina Grove and the knowledge of the nurses
17. Casurina Grove is a 100
bed facility which is divided into ten houses each of ten beds. There are three
shifts of registered
nurses. One nurse usually has responsibility for two of
the houses, with the help of the assistants in nursing, the AINs.
Campbell worked Shift A from 7:00am to 3:00pm on 16 May 2012 assisted by AIN
Dawes and AIN Pinner. RN McGarrity worked Shift
B from 3:00pm to 11:00pm but
not as the nurse in charge of two houses. Instead she was what was called a
Registered Nurse Rover
(RN Rover) a role having a supervisory function over all
the ten houses. RN Campbell returned at 11:00pm on 16 May to work Shift
through to 7:00am on the morning of 17 May 2012. RN King was the RN Rover on
19. RN Campbell, RN McGarrity and RN King are each practitioners of
long standing with extensive experience in their areas of
20. Patient A’s medical history was well known to each of
them, particularly his history of bowel problems, and as Patient A
often said,
he had a ‘crook gut’. They each knew he had a limited ability to
communicate and each accepted that it was
important to be careful in providing
him care to make sure that nothing was missed.
21. RN McGarrity, RN King and
RN Campbell each acknowledged that the presence or apparent presence of faecal
matter in vomit is a
medical emergency requiring escalation to a medical
practitioner or an ambulance to hospital.
22. A significant issue in our
inquiry was whether there was any relevant division of responsibility to respond
to that medical emergency
as between the nurses in charge on Shifts B and C and
the Registered Nurse Rovers during those shifts.
23. In our opinion the
failures of each of the registered nurses, in different ways, to treat the
apparent presence of faecal matter
in Patient A’s vomit as a medical
emergency arose from confusion in the roles of the registered nurse and the
Registered Nurse
Rover, and uncertainty about who it was that had the capability
and the responsibility to escalate care.
24. Our concern is that each of
the registered nurses allowed policy and practice to override their professional
obligations as registered
The events on Shift A and RN
Campbell’s role
25. Shortly after commencing Shift A RN Campbell was
told that when AIN Pinner had taken Patient A to be showered and toileted AIN
Dawes had reported what she thought were two small vomits in his bed. One was
on the pillow and other was on the Kylie (a protective
covering of the centre of
the bed). AIN Pinner thought what she saw contained faeces although she also
knew that Patient A was faeces
incontinent and so she was not sure if what she
saw was vomit.
26. After a discussion with AIN Pinner she took the vomit to
RN Campbell on a face washer, but apparently without any particular comment.
Campbell said that what he saw was mucus and undigested food, no suggestion of
faecal matter. After an assessment RN Campbell
arranged for Patient A to be
seen by the medical officer later that morning. He did so because of the two
small vomits but also
because he was concerned about Patient A’s unusual
lethargy, and his lack of appetite.
27. RN Campbell took all of the relevant
records to Dr Schmidt, and stayed with the patient throughout the examination.
had seen the patient before and was familiar with his medical
28. There is some uncertainty about the history RN Campbell
communicated to Dr Schmidt. Patient A had limited verbal ability and
to communicate on his own behalf. It was obviously important that RN Campbell
be particularly careful to ensure that
all potentially relevant information was
conveyed to the Medical Officer. RN Campbell accepted that
responsibility.
29. RN Campbell was sure that he had mentioned the two small
vomits to Dr Schmidt, although he was more concerned about Patient A’s
lethargy and apparent lack of appetite. Dr Schmidt could not recall RN Campbell
mentioning the two small vomits, perhaps because
her main concern was that of
faecal impaction.
30. Dr Schmidt prescribed a ‘rescue dose’ of
Movicol. Dr Schmidt thought she would not have prescribed Movicol if she
concerned about the vomits. Ms Armitage gave evidence that in her experience as
a nurse, small vomits would necessarily not
exclude Movicol, though that was
dependant on the nature of the vomits. Based on his knowledge and experience RN
Campbell thought
Dr Schmidt’s prescription for Movicol was
appropriate.
31. On their return from the visit to Dr Schmidt RN Campbell
arranged for the patient to receive the Movicol and he then observed
the balance of the shift. However RN Campbell did not make records of his
observations and attendances.
The Shift A Complaint against RN
32. The complaint against RN Campbell is, in summary, that
1. failed to make an adequate nursing assessment of Patient
2. failed to adequately communicate information to the medical
3. subsequently failed to monitor Patient A’s condition,
4. failed to record the prescription of Movicol for Patient A in the
mediation chart.
33. The particulars of the complaint were based on the
information and records available to the Commission at the time and as then
assessed by Ms Armitage. In his statement and during the hearing RN Campbell
gave further evidence of what he did by way of his assessment
and monitoring
Patient A during Shift A. When those matters were put to Ms Armitage she agreed
that he had conducted an adequate
assessment of Patient A and had adequately
monitored Patient A’s condition during the shift. We
34. Although not a particular of the Complaint, RN Campbell did not
make entries in the records of his original assessment of Patient
attendance with the medical officer or his later observations throughout the
shift. RN Campbell readily acknowledged his
failure to make proper
35. We are of the view that RN Campbell’s readiness to
acknowledge deficiencies in his conduct even though no allegation was
against him is a demonstration of his understanding of his professional
obligations as a registered nurse. It is a valuable
trait to identify flaws in
your own conduct without them first having being pointed out by others, or there
being a formal complaint.
In doing so RN Campbell demonstrated
36. We are of the view that RN Campbell could have and should have
been more definite in communicating what he thought might have
significance of the vomits. But in his failing to do so we do not consider that
he fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected.
37. RN Campbell
did fail to record the administration of Movicol in Patient A’s medication
chart. Apparently Dr Schmidt had
not recorded the order for Movicol on the
medication chart.
38. Ms Armitage was of the view that it was not for RN
Campbell to record the administration or transcribe the medical order from
Schmidt’s notes. Although he should have asked Dr Schmidt to correct the
record, his failing to do so, was not conduct
significantly below that expected
39. Movicol had been prescribed and was administered as requested.
That RN Campbell did not take steps to have Dr Schmidt properly
medication was an oversight.
40. The deficiencies in RN Campbell’s
conduct during Shift A did not amount to unsatisfactory professional
Were there other vomits on Shift A?
41. Ms Hemley gave evidence
that shortly after the death of Patient A she was talking with AIN Dawes and AIN
Pinner about what had
happened. She said both of them told her that Patient A
had vomited when being showered on that morning and also vomited on the
table at lunch time. She said they had reported both events to RN Campbell and
he had brushed them off. Ms Hemley said she
told that to RN McGarrity but
otherwise did nothing even though two such vomits would have been surprising and
alarming events.
It was not until she was asked, much later, did she put in
writing what had been said to her some considerable time earlier.
McGarrity said that a few days later she informed Ms Terrens what she had been
told by Ms Hemley, and she did so to assist
Ms Terrens finalise her report. Ms
Terrens had finalised that report some days earlier, within four hours of
Patient A’s death
as was required. Ms Terrens said she had hardly spoken
to RN McGarrity about the incident. Ms Terrens gave evidence she was happy
the performance of both AIN Dawes and AIN Pinner, a comment unlikely to be made
if she had been aware that each of them had
seen the vomits but had made no
report. When Ms Terrnes gave her evidence, nothing was put to her about the
report RN McGarrity
apparently had made by to her.
43. There is nothing in
any of the documents or records to support vomits in the shower or on the dining
table. In oral evidence
both AIN Dawes and AIN Pinner, who were said to be
present on both occasions, deny those events ever happened. They denied saying
anything of the sort to Ms Hemley.
44. Following Patient A’s death
there was a coronial inquest and subsequently an investigation by the
Ombudsman’s Office.
Those who gave evidence to the Committee had already
been interviewed and questioned, at different times and in different contexts,
those earlier interviews and answer to questions revealed,
unsurprisingly,
differences and inconsistencies in the various versions,
45. Had there been a
vomit in the shower and had RN Campbell been told it is hard to accept that he
would not have mentioned the event
to Dr Schmidt. And had he done so Dr Schmidt
could be expected to have recorded the event in her notes or remembered it. And
that Dr Schmidt asked RN Campbell to observe Patient A, and RN
Campbell’s evidence is that he did observe Patient A, it is
also hard to
accept that had Patient A vomited onto the dining room table at lunch time that
RN Campbell, along with AIN Pinner and
AIN Dawes would have then acted as if the
event had never happened.
46. Although quite some time was taken up on the
point Ms Alexander submitted that the evidence was only relevant to explaining
McGarrity’s belief about what had happened rather than being evidence
that the vomits in the shower and on the dining room
table had actually
47. The complaint made by the Commission against RN Campbell does
not include as a particular that there were any vomits in the shower
lunchtime. We find that the two vomits as reported by Ms Hemley did not
RN McGarrity’s conduct during Shift B
48. Relevantly,
whilst RN McGarrity may have believed what she heard from Ms Hemley, her belief
can have no impact on her conduct
on 16 May because it was only later that she
had heard the relaying of events from Ms Hemley.
49. RN McGarrity worked
Shift B as the RN Rover commencing at about 3:00pm and finishing at 11:00pm.
Shortly after 10:00pm RN Jamieson
came to RN McGarrity and said that Patient A
had a small vomit. She showed RN McGarrity a face washer with a small amount of
fluid on it. RN Jamieson took the vomit to RN McGarrity because it
appeared to contain blood/faecal matter. RN Jamieson was aware
that Patient A
had seen the medical officer in the morning, had been prescribed Movicol, and
was to be kept under observation. RN
McGarrity was aware of those matters from
her reading of the pertinent records when she commenced her shift.
Jamieson was concerned enough about the vomit to take it to RN McGarrity.
Between the two of them they concluded that the
vomit could not contain the
blood/faecal matter that had initially concerned RN Jamieson but was reflux from
a Milo drink taken some
hours beforehand. They reached that conclusion without
checking whether Patient A had in fact taken any Milo at the 8:00pm supper.
They both appeared to have assumed that he did on the basis that Milo was
normally given at that time. The notes show that during
the day the patient had
been eating and drinking very little, and that fluids needed to be forced.
Neither of them thought to ask
the AIN on duty if Patient A had taken any Milo
51. RN McGarrity was insistent in her evidence that the vomit
“smelled sweet, like Milo”. RN McGarrity gave no evidence
her knowledge or experience that had Milo been taken at 8:00pm and then been
regurgitated by way of reflux at a little
after 10:00pm that the result would be
dark brown in colour, and would have smelled sweet like Milo.
particular of the Complaint against RN McGarrity was that she failed to
recognise Patient A’s deteriorating condition
in light of the information
she had. RN McGarrity agreed that a vomit containing faecal matter was a
medical emergency requiring
immediate escalation of care to a medical officer or
transfer by ambulance to hospital.
53. Additionally RN McGarrity was said to
have made no notation at that time or later about her discussion with RN
Jamieson, nor of
the conclusion that she reached that what appeared to be
blood/faecal matter to RN Jamieson did not contain any faecal matter but
only Milo reflux.
54. In the client progress notes, HCCC-1, Tab 48, RN
Jamieson had recorded:
2200hr client vomited same appeared to have
blood/faecal matter Discussed with RNR, client to be reviewed by MO in
55. In the Unit Report – 24 Hour Cycle document, HCCC-1, Tab 49, RN
Jamieson recorded:
2200 [Patient A] - Vomited small amount same appeared to
have blood/faecal matter in it. RNR notified, client to be reviewed by MO
56. Both of those entries record the discussion with RN McGarrity but
neither makes any mention of the vomit that appeared to contain
blood/faecal
matter now being treated only as Milo.
57. There must have been something
that concerned RN McGarrity as she expressed the opinion to RN Jamieson (and
later recorded by
RN Jamieson) that Patient A should be seen by the medical
officer in the morning. If the event was truly of no concern why was there
necessity to have Patient A see the medical officer in the morning? Both nurses
knew Patient A was to be observed and that any
deterioration was to be reported
to the medical officer. If the vomit of Milo was a sign of deterioration why
delay reporting the
event to the medical officer? If the Milo was not a sign of
deterioration, why was there a need for review by the medical officer
58. It appears there
was a practice within Casurina Grove about contacting the medical officers after
10:00pm. Up until 10:00pm the
telephone numbers for the medical officers were
kept within the records area of each house and were accessible to the staff on
But shortly after the RN Rover came on duty each evening that contact
information and other notes were taken away from the houses
to be held in the RN
Rover office overnight. If anybody, including a registered nurse, wanted to
would first have to contact the RN Rover and ask
for the telephone details.
59. Given that both RN Jamieson and RN McGarrity
had noticed something with respect to Patient A sufficient to warrant Patient A
reviewed by the medical officer in the morning why did not RN Jamieson ask
for the telephone number so she could call the medical
officer then and there.
And why did RN McGarrity not do so herself?
Responsibility for calling a
medical officer or an ambulance
60. Much evidence was given and many
questions were asked about whether it was the responsibility of the registered
nurse or the RN
Rover to call the medical officer or an ambulance. The
registered nurses said the call was the responsibility of the RN Rover.
Rovers said it was the responsibility of the registered nurses. Those
conflicting statements both relied on the same policies
and practices for
justification.
61. It is not the function of this inquiry to review the
policies and practices of Casurina Grove in place at that time. But it would
appear there must be some flaw in those policies and practices if it can be that
registered nurses on a shift believe they are unable
to contact a medical
officer or call an ambulance without the approval of the RN Rover, and at the
same time the RN Rovers think
it is not their responsibility to contact a
medical officer or call an ambulance, but that the responsibility resides only
registered nurses.
RN McGarrity’s completion of her RNR
62. It is the task of the RN Rover to prepare the RN Rover Shift
Report, a report drawn from the completed Unit Report – 24
Hour Cycles
from the houses. RN McGarrity said that the RNR Shift Reports were to be
prepared by way of simple transcription or
copy and paste of the Unit Report
– 24 Hour Cycle reports.
63. The RNR Shift Report prepared by RN
McGarrity for that shift was not a simple transcription or copy and paste of the
Unit Reports.
RN McGarrity’s entry in the RNR Shift Report concerning
Patient A recorded that the small amount of emesis (vomit) at 21:45
‘noted to be blood/faecal stained. For follow up with GP in the
morning’. She used the word ‘noted’
rather in place of
‘appeared’. There were other differences between the Unit Reports
and the RNR Shift Report completed
by RN McGarrity, though not concerning
Patient A. When questioned about the differences RN McGarrity said the RNR
Shift Report did
not just repeat everything in the Unit Reports but did record
the ‘stand outs’. It was open to RN McGarrity to have
reference to Milo, but she did not do so.
64. Whilst it might not have been
RN McGarrity’s responsibility to make an entry in the clinical notes or in
the Unit Report,
it was her responsibility to make a record in her RNR Shift
Report and in this regard she failed. She had participated in a discussion
a colleague that resulted in a decision that no action would be taken other than
to observe the patient with a referral to be
seen by the medical officer in
perhaps 12 hours time. Such a significant conclusion, one that overrode what
otherwise presented
as a medical emergency requiring a call to a medical officer
or an ambulance, clearly warranted the making of a record of the reasons
Was it RN McGarrity’s responsibility to make a
65. RN McGarrity says it was not her responsibility to make the call;
it was for RN Jamieson. There was no discussion between them
that night about
whose responsibility it was. RN McGarrity said her role as RN Rover was not to
make the decisions but to assist
and provide support to the registered nurses.
Even if that is assumed to be an accurate description of the role of the RN
it would still have been incumbent on RN McGarrity as a registered nurse
to make explicit to RN Jamieson that it was for RN Jamieson
to decide whether to
make a call, and that RN McGarrity was doing no more than providing her
66. RN McGarrity agreed that when she was talking to RN Jamieson she
was giving her best opinion of the vomit in light of Patient
A’s medical
history. That being so, it was important that RN McGarrity tell RN Jamieson
that RN McGarrity was not making a
decision but instead leaving that to RN
Jamieson. Given the seriousness of a possible faecal vomit RN McGarrity should
explicit with RN Jamieson. In this regard RN McGarrity failed to take
appropriate action.
67. Having reached the conclusion the vomit was Milo RN
McGarrity gave evidence she would not herself have called an ambulance even
she thought it was within her area of responsibility to do so. That is a
surprising conclusion given her understanding of Patient
A’s medical
history, his visit to the medical officer, the administration of Movicol, the
need for observation, and that a
colleague was informing her of a vomit that
appeared to contain blood/faecal matter. The conclusion that the vomit was only
reflux of Milo was reached too easily and without care.
committee does not accept that the policies and practices of Casurina Grove, or
at least how they were understood by RN McGarrity,
relieved her of her
professional responsibility to give consideration to what was in the best
interests of Patient A.
69. Ms Armitage was of the view that RN
McGarrity’s conduct with regard to her discussion with RN Jamieson and her
decisions fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of her level of training and experience. We
Armitage also expressed the opinion that RN McGarrity’s failure to
adequately document her decision with respect to the
decisions she made about
Patient A was significantly below the standard reasonably expected. We
71. Of concern to us was that during her evidence RN McGarrity
continued to maintain that she did nothing wrong that night, and she
entitled to do what she did in reliance upon her assumption about Milo, and also
that her role as RN Rover meant that she did
not have any responsibility for
Patient A in the situation that was presented to her. Her attitude suggests to
us that RN McGarrity
does not understand the professional obligations that she
has a registered nurse. We are concerned that RN McGarrity showed no insight
into her conduct.
RN Campbell’s return to duty on Shift C
Shift A RN Campbell had been asked to return for Shift C to cover a staff
shortage, and he did so as the registered nurse
in charge of two of the
73. When he arrived and received a handover he says he was told by RN
Jamieson that Patient A would need to go to hospital during
the night and it was
up to him or organise it. Apparently she pointed to clinical notes on top of a
cupboard. When RN Campbell
asked her why Patient A not been transported already
she left without giving an answer. He thought he should call an ambulance but
did not do so. RN Campbell had read the patient notes and was aware of the
vomit that appeared to be blood/faecal matter. Patient
A was sleeping soundly
and RN Jamieson had recorded that she had spoken RN McGarrity, there was no
decision to call an ambulance
and RN McGarrity had decided to wait until the
morning to consult the medical officer. So he took no action other than to
Patient A. Looking back he regrets his decision not to call the
ambulance then and there.
74. RN Jamieson gave a somewhat different version
of events but we accept RN Campbell’s evidence. His statement of what he
says he was told by RN Jamieson is against interest, as is his expression of
regret in not having acted the moment he arrived on
75. Whilst we
believe that RN Campbell could have made a better decision we do not believe his
conduct at the time was significantly
below that expected. He was concerned
the decision
that she and RN McGarrity had made. He went to observe Patient A
and found him asleep and apparently calm. RN Campbell agreed that
a patient may
sleep as much from exhaustion as well as being calm and relaxed. RN Campbell
made a poor decision but not so as to
amount to unsatisfactory professional
76. During the night Patient A’s condition deteriorated. About
1:30am he was seen by RN Campbell wandering through the house
with small vomits
on his pyjama top and signs of faecal incontinence on his pyjama pants. RN
Campbell escorted Patient A back to
his room to calm him and observe him, and
then he called RN King who was in the RN Rover role for that C Shift.
Campbell and RN King discuss whether to call an ambulance
77. RN King
attended a short time later and both of them sat on the bed with Patient A. RN
Campbell told RN King that he wanted to
call an ambulance. When giving
evidence, RN King agreed that RN Campbell had said that he wanted to call an
78. RN Campbell said he had mentioned calling the ambulance by way
of a question to RN King as he believed the decision to call an
ambulance was a
decision for RN King to make.
79. It was RN King’s belief that the
decision was for RN Campbell to make.
80. RN King gave oral evidence that in
response to RN Campbell comment, he had said, “Let’s wait, and
81. RN Campbell said nothing as he was taken aback by RN
King’s response, which he interpreted as a refusal to call an
82. By default neither of them took any action other than to
observe Patient A, calm him down and then leave the room when he appeared
asleep. That position continued throughout the night with neither of them at
any stage calling a medical officer or an ambulance.
83. Neither made any
record of their discussion or the resultant decision to not call an ambulance.
Both could easily have made a
note in the clinical records or
84. RN King acknowledged that there had been a disagreement
between him and RN Campbell about calling an ambulance. The fact of the
disagreement was confirmed by what happened at the handover the following
morning just before 7:00am. RN King said to RN Cannon,
as he came on duty, that
RN Campbell would want to see RN Cannon to talk about a difference of views - by
implication a reference
to the discussion about calling an ambulance.
few moments later RN Campbell tried to speak to RN Cannon about then calling an
ambulance for Patient A. It seems that RN Campbell
believed that once RN King
had not agreed to call an ambulance that he would have to wait until the next
shift to ask RN Cannon to
call an ambulance. RN Campbell took RN Cannon to the
patient’s room. They found him dead on the floor.
86. There was
further evidence about what happened that morning, but the evidence did not deal
in a direct or useful way with the
Complaints before us.
unfortunate that the same confusion as to policies and practice which so
adversely affected the discussion between RN Jamieson
and RN McGarrity, had a
similar impact on the discussions between RN Campbell and RN King. There was a
failure by all of them to
call an ambulance, a decision that they all
acknowledged should have been made in a case of a possible faecal
88. As previously discussed it is our view that policies and practices
cannot be allowed to prevail over the professional obligation
of a registered
nurse to provide care to a patient. For a registered nurse to seek to pass the
decision to the RN Rover, and for
the RN Rover to suggest that the patient is
not within their care, are each an abrogation of professional
responsibility.
Assessment of the conduct of RN Campbell
89. In our view
RN Campbell’s conduct, as particularised in the Complaint, with respect to
the treatment he afforded to Patient
A from about 1:30am on 17 May 2012 through
to the morning fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected, as
his failure to adequately document the care that he did provide and the
basis of those care decisions.
Assessment of the conduct of RN King
our view RN King’s conduct, as particularised in the Complaint, with
respect to the treatment he afforded to Patient
A from about 2:30am on 17 May
2012 through to the morning fell significantly below the standard reasonably
expected, as also did
his failure to adequately document the care that he did
provide and the basis of those care decisions.
91. RN King was reluctant to
accept responsibility for his role during Shift C even though he acknowledged
that vomiting faecal matter
was a medical emergency. His response to questions
was too great. He spoke of having fewer registered nurse responsibilities when
in the role of an RN Rover. He held that view because
when rostered as an RN
Rover he had additional organisational responsibilities and could not be
expected to retain his responsibilities
as a registered nurse as if he were an
RN on shift.
92. Whilst his attitude may have come about in the context of
the policies and practices at Casurina Grove the public rightly expects
registered nurses that they do not allow policies and practices, in and of
themselves, to take precedence over their professional
obligations towards the
patients for whom they have a responsibility.
93. RN King’s conduct
with respect to his conduct on behalf of Patient A when called by RN Campbell
was significantly below
the standard expected. By his conduct and comment he
had the effect of inhibiting RN Campbell from calling an ambulance. He had
same information about Patient A as RN Campbell had.
94. Apparently he
believed it was not his responsibility to call an ambulance but only assist RN
Campbell to do so if RN Campbell
wanted to do so. If that was his belief then
his statement “Let’s wait, and assess” was ill judged and
RN King ought to have escalated care just as much as RN Campbell should
have done so. RN King also failed to make any record in
the progress notes or
elsewhere about the actions he took and the decisions made, as he should have
The importance of records
95. A failure to document events or
decisions is often thought to be of a lesser seriousness than substantive
failures in affording
treatment. Making accurate and complete records of
treatment provided to a patient and the decisions taken is vital. Doing so not
only provides a crucial tool in the future treatment of a patient by others but
the making of notes and the recording of decisions
may also prompt practitioners
to reconsider and re-evaluate what it is that they have done so
96. These proceedings are a case in point. It would have been
preferable if there were a better record of Patient A’s vomits
morning and what was told to the medical officer. When it comes to the
discussion between RN Jamieson and RN McGarrity it
would have been valuable had
they made a record of why it was that what first appeared to be blood/faecal
matter could after consideration
and discussion be considered as no more than
the regurgitation of Milo by reflux. Had they made notes they each may have
that they were expecting the other to make the decision, and each may
have then taken a different path. Similarly the abbreviated
discussion between
RN Campbell and RN King on Patient A’s bed fell away to inaction partly
because neither of them took the
time to make a note of their decision, an
action that may well have prompted at least one of them to make a different, and
RN McGarrity
97. We find that the conduct of
RN McGarrity in failing to recognise Patient A’s deteriorating condition,
the failure to take
appropriate action and the failure to adequately document
the care that she did provide to Patient A was unsatisfactory professional
98. In order to protect and maintain the confidence of the public in
the standards expected of registered nurses we consider it necessary
McGarrity be reprimanded so as to record our disapproval of her conduct in her
interaction with RN Jamieson and her decision-making.
99. We are concerned
that RN McGarrity does not appear to have gained any insight into her conduct.
Even allowing for possible confusion
McGarrity should have appreciated the importance of her position when RN
Jamieson approached
her with the vomit. Without some further professional
development we do not believe RN McGarrity should practise without some
supervision.
RN Campbell
100. We find that the conduct of RN Campbell in
failing to take appropriate action in not escalating the care of Patient A to a
officer or arranging transfer to a hospital, and in failing to
adequately document the care that he did provide was unsatisfactory
professional
101. RN Campbell impressed the committee with his understanding and
assessment of the errors in his conduct. He has reflected on
what he did, and
has learned from his mistakes. He has been prepared to criticise himself where
appropriate and acknowledge his
failings. He has taken significant steps at
further education and now understands where his learning was lacking. He
as a practitioner showing thoughtful insight and deeply concerned
to improvement
so that he could better discharge his professional obligations as a registered
nurse, and now understands where his
professional development was
102. Nevertheless he did allow policies and practices to override
his desire to look after the patient. In order to protect and maintain
confidence of the public in the standards expected of registered nurses we
consider it necessary that RN Campbell be reprimanded
103. Given the position RN Campbell found himself in – caught
between calling or not calling an ambulance - we believe RN Campbell
benefit from some mentoring, and he would then better serve the public.
104. We find that the conduct of RN King in failing to take appropriate
action in not escalating the care of Patient A to a medical
officer or arranging
transfer to a hospital, and in failing to adequately document the care that he
did provide was unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
105. In order to protect
and maintain the confidence of the public in the standards expected of
registered nurses we consider it necessary
that RN King be reprimanded so as to
record our disapproval of his conduct towards RN Campbell in suggesting and a
course of action
without taking responsibility for his decision.
King found the responsibilities of being the RNR onerous. When undertaking that
role he felt he was unable to also discharge
his responsibilities as a
registered nurse. Without some further professional development we do not
believe RN King should practice
without some
supervision.
107. This Statement of Decision is to be given to
the Commission, RN McGarrity, RN King and RN Campbell, and the Nursing and
Council of New South Wales.
Reprimands, directions and
With respect to RN McGarrity:
108. We reprimand RN
109. We direct RN McGarrity may only practise as a registered nurse
under the supervision of a registered nurse (Division 1) who does
not have any
conditions on their practice. Supervision may be remote, that is, where the
supervisor is:
1. on site, but not working in close proximity to RN
McGarrity’s workplace; or
2. off site or working remotely from RN
McGarrity. At all times the supervisor must be accessible to RN McGarrity to
provide advice
either in person or by telephone.
110. RN McGarrity
1. inform all current nursing employers of the conditions immediately
and provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales
employer’s name and contact details;
2. inform all future nursing
employers of the conditions, and provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of
New South Wales with the
name and contact details of each employer, before
commencing work/employment as a registered nurse.
111. RN McGarrity must only
be employed/work as a nurse in circumstances where the employer has agreed to
notify the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales of any breach of the
conditions, and exchange information with the Council related to compliance with
the conditions.
112. Sections 125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law 2009 are to apply should RN McGarrity’s principal
place of practice be anywhere in Australia other than in New South Wales, so
that the appropriate review body in those circumstances
is the Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia.
113. The Nursing and Midwifery Council of New
South Wales is the appropriate review body for the purposes of Division 8 of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW).
With respect to RN
114. We reprimand RN Campbell
115. We order that RN Campbell
must engage in a mentoring relationship in relation to his practice and
concerning his approaches towards
and methods of dealing with any conflicts in
decision making. The mentoring relationship must occur when RN Campbell is
as a nurse, for a minimum cumulative period of six months full time
equivalent, commencing from the date the mentor is approved by
the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales. The mentor must be:
1. a registered
nurse (division 1) who meets the criteria specified in the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales Mentor
Policy; and
2. approved by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales.
116. RN Campbell must:
1. provide,
within three months of the date of this decision, the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales with the name,
résumé of the registered nurse who has agreed to: act as mentor;
and act as specified in the conditions;
and notify the Council of any breach of
the conditions including repeated failure to attend mentoring meetings; and
exchange information
with the Council in relation to the registrant’s
compliance with the conditions.
2. provide to the Council a copy of the
conditions signed by the registrant and by the mentor indicating their awareness
of the conditions
and authorisation.
3. submit within four weeks of the
mentor being approved, a mentoring plan that is developed in consultation with
the mentor which
meets the standards required by the Council’s mentoring
4. submit a mentoring report to the Council every two months for a
period of at least six months, and until the Council advised the
registrant in
writing. The mentoring report to: be co-signed by the approved mentor and meet
the standards required by the Council’s
mentor policy.
117. Sections
125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 are to apply
should the registrant’s principal
place of practice be anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so that the appropriate review body in
those circumstances
is the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales is the appropriate review body
for the purposes of Division 8 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National
With respect to RN King;
119. We reprimand RN King
direct RN King may only practise as a registered nurse under the supervision of
a registered nurse (Division 1) who does not
have any conditions on their
practice. Supervision may be remote, that is, where the supervisor is:
site, but not working in close proximity to RN King’s workplace; or
2. off site or working remotely from RN King. At all times the supervisor
must be accessible to RN King to provide advice either in
person or by
121. RN King must:
1. inform all current nursing employers of
the conditions immediately and provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New
South Wales
with each employer’s name and contact details;
all future nursing employers of the conditions, and provide the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales with the
name and contact details of each
employer, before commencing work/employment as a registered nurse.
King must only be employed/work as a nurse in circumstances where the employer
has agreed to notify the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales of any
breach of the conditions, and exchange information with the Council related to
compliance with
the conditions.
123. Sections 125 to 127 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 are to apply should RN King’s
principal place
of practice be anywhere in Australia other than in New South
Wales, so that the appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing
and Midwifery Board of Australia.
124. The Nursing and Midwifery Council of
New South Wales is the appropriate review body for the purposes of Division 8 of
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW).
Chairperson
Date 29 July 2016
------------------
Client Progress Notes, HCCC-1,
Tab 48, and Unit Report – 24 Hour Cycle, HCCC-1, Tab 49.
RNR Shift Report, HCCC-1, Tab
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (570 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter