URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Franklin v Coal Mines Insurance Ltd & Ors [2024] NSWDDT 11 (16 October 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Franklin v Coal Mines Insurance Ltd & Ors
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 11
Hearing Date(s):
25 June, 8 July, 22 August, 30 August, 9 October 2024
Date of Orders:
16 October 2024
Decision Date:
16 October 2024
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Subject to order (2) grant leave nunc pro tunc to
commence and continue these proceedings against the first defendant Coal Mines
Insurance Ltd in relation to the claims pleaded in the Second Further Amended
Statement of Claim against deregistered
(2) Decline to grant such leave in relation to
the claim pleaded in pars 95-103 of the Second Further Amended Statement of
(3) Reserve the costs of and incidental to the
Amended Notice of Motion filed on 25 June 2024.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – insurance – application for leave to proceed
against insurer of deregistered companies – whether
policy was issued
– whether insurer was insurer on risk – policies issued to
deregistered employers – work performed
within description of business
covered by policy – dual insurance not relevant to entitlement to grant of
DUST DISEASES – occupational diseases – date of
last employment – deeming provisions – business of employers
coal industry
Legislation Cited:
Civil Liability (Third Party Claims Against Insurers) Act 2017
Coal Industry Act 2001
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act 1942
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
Cases Cited:
Avant Insurance Ltd v Burnie
[2021] NSWCA 272
Central West Group
Apprentices Ltd v Coal Mines Insurance Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 348
Mrdajl v Southern
Cross Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd (In Liq)
[2018] NSWSC 161
Kuypers v Ashton
Coal Operations Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1276
Procedural rulings
Luke Verne Franklin (Plaintiff)
Coal Mines Insurance Ltd (First
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (Fourth Defendant)
Representation:
S Tzouganatos (Plaintiff)
L King SC / T Rowles (First
D Andersen solicitor (Fourth
Solicitors:
Slater & Gordon (Plaintiff)
Helmore (First Defendant)
HWL Ebsworth (Fourth Defendant)
File Number(s):
DDT 2023/7576
Introduction
a Second Further Amended Statement of Claim filed by leave in court on 28 August
2024 the plaintiff Mr Franklin seeks damages in
respect of the following
(1) Silicosis.
(2) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
(3) Mixed dust pneumoconiosis (MDP).
(4) Persistent depressive disorder.
Franklin alleges that he contracted these diseases through the negligence of his
employers, and mine operators, while working in
coal mines.
are sought on a final basis, where the injuries are said to be attributable to
exposure to dust in the State of Queensland.
Provisional damages pursuant to
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
(NSW) (the DDT Act) are sought
in relation to the injuries if found to be attributable to exposure to dust in
New South Wales. An
order is also sought for further damages, if additional
injuries develop which are attributable to dust exposure in New South
Second Further Amended Statement of Claim sues nine defendants. Two of those
defendants are insurers and the other seven are companies
which are still in
Franklin also pleads that he was employed by several companies which have since
been deregistered. The allegations made in the
Second Further Amended Statement
of Claim against the deregistered companies are summarised in the following
De-registered employer
Dates of Employment
Place of Work
Short Version of Company Name
Bentham Constructions Pty Ltd
April 1979 – September 1979
Clarence Colliery in Lithgow, NSW
ACN 000 076 086 Pty Ltd (formerly Allied Construction Pty Ltd)
September 1979 – August 1984
Coal mines at Bulli, Bargo, Huntley, Tahmoor and Lithgow, NSW
Allied Construction
ACN 000 076 086 Pty Ltd (formerly Allied Construction Pty Ltd)
January 1989 – January 1991
Coal mines at Bulli, Bargo, Huntley, Tahmoor, Lithgow and Appin, NSW
Allied Construction
W.G.W. Pty Ltd (formerly Colrok Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd)
February 1991 – July 1991
Tahmoor, North Cliff, West Wallsend, Westcliff and Metropolitan Collieries,
ACN 003 553 099 Pty Ltd (formerly known as Shaft and Tunnel Pty Ltd)
1992 – February 1997
Coal mines at Huntley, Westcliffe and Cordeaux, NSW
South Blackwater Coal Mine and Gordonstone Coal Mine, QLD
Sewerage plant in Manly, NSW
Shaft and Tunnel
Allied Meridian Pty Ltd
March 1997 – 30 June 1997
Various coal mines, NSW
Allied Meridian
075 964 519 Pty Ltd (formerly Allied Mining Pty Ltd)
1 July 1997 to June 1999
South Bulli Coal Mine, NSW
Allied Mining
Allied Mine Services Pty Ltd (formerly Allied Mining Services Australia Pty
1 July 1999 – June 2000
South Bulli Coal Mine, NSW
Allied Mine Services
Thin Seam Mining Pty Ltd
April 2003 – October 2003
Russell Vale Mine in Wollongong, NSW
Alterrain Pty Ltd
January 2004 – 2010 and
2011 – 2015
Various coal mines around Wollongong, NSW
ACN 001 546 130 Pty Ltd (formerly Alminco Pty Ltd)
November 2003 – May 2004
Various coal mines around Wollongong, NSW
will refer in this judgment to the deregistered companies set out in the table
above by the short name in the fourth column of the
table. I will refer to those
companies collectively as “the deregistered companies”.
relation to each of the deregistered companies, the Second Further Amended
Statement of Claim pleads that:
(1) Coal Mines Insurance Ltd (CMI) was the employer’s indemnity insurer
for that company in the coal mining industry in New
South Wales.
(2) Pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
WC Act), CMI is liable to indemnify each company for damage caused to Mr
Franklin by negligence of that company.
(3) CMI is sued pursuant to the
Civil Liability (Third Party Claims Against
Insurers) Act 2017
(NSW) (the Third Party Claims Act) in relation to
allegations against that company.
plaintiff requires a grant of leave to sue the insurer of a deregistered
an Amended Notice of Motion filed by leave in court on 25 June 2024 Mr Franklin
seeks orders that he be granted leave to continue
the proceedings against CMI as
the first defendant and the Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (WCNI) as the
fourth defendant. Such
leave is sought pursuant to the Third Party Claims Act.
The Amended Notice of Motion also seeks a costs order against CMI. Counsel
Mr Franklin acknowledged that he could not, and did not, seek a grant of leave
against CMI in relation to any exposure to dust
in the Queensland mines.
opposed the grant of leave.
was represented at the hearing by Mr Andersen, solicitor. An order was made by
consent granting leave to sue WCNI in respect
of the alleged liability of Shaft
and Tunnel, arising from Mr Franklin’s work as a tunneller at the sewerage
treatment plant
The Third Party Claims Act
4 of the Third Party Claims Act provides as follows:
Claimant may recover from insurer in certain
circumstances
(1) If an insured person has an insured liability to a person
), the claimant may, subject to this Act,
recover the amount of the insured liability from the insurer in proceedings
before a court.
(2) The amount of the insured liability is the amount of indemnity (if
any) payable pursuant to the terms of the contract of insurance
in respect of
the insured person’s liability to the claimant.
(3) In proceedings brought by a claimant against an insurer under this
section, the insurer stands in the place of the insured person
proceedings were proceedings to recover damages, compensation or costs from the
insured person. Accordingly (but subject
to this Act), the parties have the same
rights and liabilities, and the court has the same powers, as if the proceedings
were proceedings
brought against the insured person.
(4) This section does not entitle a claimant to recover any amount from a
re-insurer under a contract or arrangement for re-insurance.”
Mrdajl v Southern Cross Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWSC 161
, Justice Walton identified four elements in s 4 as
(1) There is an insurer in existence.
(2) The insurer has issued a policy to the relevant defendant.
(3) The policy covers the risk.
(4) The policy was in place at the time of the risk.
four matters were put in issue by CMI, although by the conclusion of the hearing
some limited admissions were made.
5 of the Third Party Claims Act provides as follows:
5 Leave to proceed
(1) Proceedings may not be brought, or continued, against an insurer under
section 4 except by leave of the court in which the proceedings
are to be, or
have been, commenced.
(2) An application for leave may be made before or after proceedings under
section 4 have been commenced.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), the court may grant or refuse the
claimant’s application for leave.
(4) Leave must be refused if the insurer can establish that it is entitled
to disclaim liability under the contract of insurance
or under any Act or
Avant Insurance Ltd v Burnie
[2021] NSWCA 272
the Court of Appeal
held that an applicant for leave under s 5 of the Third Party Claims Act is
required to establish the following
three elements:
(1) That there is an arguable case against the holder of the insurance
(2) That there is a reasonable possibility that the holder of the insurance
policy will be unable to satisfy any judgment.
(3) That there is an arguable case that the holder of the insurance policy
would, if it found liable to the plaintiff, be entitled
to indemnity under the
policy - to put it another way, that any liability of the holder of the
insurance policy to the plaintiff
is, in the language of s 4 o the Third Party
Claims Act, an “insured liability”.
was no real debate as to whether the plaintiff could establish these matters.
Rather, the dispute was whether CMI was the insurer
on risk for each
deregistered company.
Occupational Diseases and Date of Last
151AB(1)(a) of the WC Act provides as follows:
Special insurance provisions relating to
occupational diseases
(1) If an employer is liable independently of this Act for damages for an
occupational disease contracted by a worker, the following
provisions have
effect for the purposes of any policy of insurance obtained by the
(a) the liability is taken to have arisen when the worker was last
employed by the employer in employment to the nature of which
the disease was
due, subject to paragraph (b),”
151AB(6) of the WC Act defines “occupational disease” to mean a
disease of such a nature as to be contracted by
a gradual process. The
definition includes a dust disease as defined by the
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act 1942
(the 1942 Act).
respiratory diseases for which Mr Franklin sues are “occupational
diseases” within the meaning of s 151AB. Section
151AB(1)(a) requires the
court to make a finding as to the date of last employment of the worker. It is
at this date that liability
is taken to have arisen. It is then necessary to
establish which insurer, if any, was on risk on the last date of
employment.
Coal Industry Insurance Before 2002
there was much evidence, and eventually a certain degree of agreement, about the
dates when CMI policies were in force, what
Mr Franklin must establish for any
liability before 2002 is the existence of an appropriate policy of insurance
which was current
on his last day of work for each of the deregistered
Mr Franklin must establish that the work which he did for each deregistered
company fell within the description of the business
covered by the policy (Tcpt
25/6/24 pp 16/28-17/37 and Tcpt 9/10/24 p 15/11).
have come to the conclusion, for the reasons expressed below, that for each of
the pre-2002 deregistered companies:
(1) The evidence establishes that there was a CMI policy in force on the last
day of each period of employment.
(2) The evidence establishes that Mr Franklin was performing work which fell
within the description of the business covered by the
for Mr Franklin advanced an alternative argument that s 7A of the WC Act (which
is discussed below) is retrospective and thus
there is no need to establish the
two matters listed in the preceding paragraph. Because I have come to the
conclusion that there
were in existence, prior to 2002, CMI policies which cover
the risk, I will not deal with this alternative argument. It may well
decision in a case in the future, if a plaintiff cannot establish the existence
of a CMI policy.
Coal Industry Insurance After 1 January
7A of the WC Act is as follows:
Application of Act in respect of coal industry
7A Application of Act in respect of coal industry
(1) The workers compensation company (within the meaning of the
Industry Act 2001
) is taken to be a licensed insurer that is
a specialised insurer under, and for the purposes of, this Act.
(2) However, the following provisions of this Act do not apply to or in respect
of the workers compensation company-
(a) Division 6 of
(b) sections 156 and 156B,
(c) Divisions 1A, 2-5, 6A and 7 of
(3) For avoidance of doubt-
(a) an employee of an employer in the coal industry is not eligible to make a
claim under Division 6 of
(b) a person who is taken, under Schedule 1 to the
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
, to be a worker employed by
another person is not entitled to make a claim referred to in paragraph (a) if
the other person by whom
the person is taken to be employed is engaged in the
coal industry.
(4) The workers compensation company is taken to be the insurer under this Act
of all employers in the coal industry (whether or
not any such employer
maintains a policy of insurance with that company).
(5) In this section-
employer in the coal industry
has the same meaning as in
Coal Industry Act 2001
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(NSW) (the WIM Act) is as follows:
Application of Act in respect of coal industry
(1) The workers compensation company (within the meaning of
Coal Industry Act 2001
) is taken to be a licensed insurer that
is a specialised insurer under, and for the purposes of, this Act.
(2) However, the following provisions of this Act do not apply to or in
respect of the workers compensation company—
(a) sections 146 and 146A,
of Chapter 5.
(3) For avoidance of doubt—
(a) an employee of an employer in the coal industry is not eligible
to make a claim under
of Chapter 5, and
(b) a person who is taken, under Schedule 1, to be a worker employed
by another person is not entitled to make a claim referred
to in paragraph (a)
if the other person by whom the person is taken to be employed is engaged in the
coal industry.
(4) The workers compensation company is taken to be the insurer under this
Act of all employers in the coal industry (whether or
not any such employer
maintains a policy of insurance with that company).
(5) In this section—
employer in the coal industry
has the same meaning as in
Coal Industry Act 2001
sections were inserted into the legislation by the
Coal Industry Act 2001
(NSW) (the CI Act).
was agreed between the parties that the reference in both sections to the
“workers compensation company” is a reference
Counsel for CMI accepted that for liabilities which arose after 1 January 2002
(when s 7A of the WC Act came into force), CMI
would be the insurer on risk
“if the business of the employers is in the coal industry, policy or no
policy” (Tcpt 25/6/2024
submitted (MFI 3, par 14), and I accept, that:
(1) Since 1948 employers in the coal industry have been obliged to insure their
workers compensation liabilities with CMI.
(2) Section 7A(4) of the WC Act and s 9A(4) of the WIM Act do no more than
recognise and continue the long-standing obligation of
employers in the coal
industry to insure with CMI.
legislative history leading to these conclusions is set out in MFI 3 pp 5-8 and
Central West Group Apprentices Ltd v Coal Mines Insurance Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 348
Central West
Evidence for the Plaintiff
Email dated 5 February 2024 (PX 1)
5 February 2024 the solicitor for CMI set out a list of CMI policies which
applied to some of the deregistered companies. The information
in this email is
the same as the information in Exhibit PX 5, which is discussed
Affidavit of J Wade dated 15 March 2023 (PX 2)
Wade, the solicitor for Mr Franklin, swore an affidavit which establishes the
initial existence, and the deregistration, of the
deregistered companies.
Wade stated that WCNI was the insurer on risk for Shaft and Tunnel as at
February 1997 for tunnelling work.
Affidavit of J Wade dated 18
October 2023 (PX 3)
Wade swore her second affidavit based upon information and belief, from
instructions supplied to her by Mr Franklin. Those instructions
(1) Bentham was a mining engineering business. During the time the plaintiff
was employed by Bentham, the only contract that company
had was to perform work
at the Clarence Colliery in Lithgow. The two Bentham brothers, who were the
owners of the business, worked
with Mr Franklin underground in the coal mine.
The duties of the plaintiff as an underground coal miner included dry bore
and roof support. This was the first time Mr Franklin had worked in a
coal mine, and for that reason he was sent for a medical examination,
a chest x-ray, with the Coal Board.
Allied Construction
(1) Mr Franklin was employed for two periods with Allied Construction. That
company performed shaft sinking and underground mining
construction and provided
development services for the coal mining industry. During the time the plaintiff
worked for Allied Construction,
he only worked in coal mines. During the time
he worked for Allied Construction, Mr Franklin made two claims for workers
compensation.
Both claims were paid by the first defendant CMI. The report in
relation to the first injury, completed by Allied Construction, stated
plaintiff was paid under the Coal Mining Industry (Miners) Award. The report in
relation to the second injury stated that
Mr Franklin was working at Westcliff
Colliery and was paid under the Coal Mining Industry (Miners) Award.
(1) Mr Franklin says that when he worked for Colrok, the bosses were two
brothers being John Rutledge and Paddy Rutledge. They worked
underground with Mr
Franklin and the company did not work outside of the coal mining industry.
Shaft and Tunnel
(1) Mr Franklin says that he was employed as a miner and a mining supervisor
by Shaft and Tunnel. Shaft and Tunnel was a civil works
and engineering company
that worked in both tunnelling and mining. The work the plaintiff did for Shaft
and Tunnel was operating
a road header. He worked at least 90% of his time in
coal mines. He also worked for a period of time in the excavation of the tunnels
for the Manly Sewerage Treatment Plant.
Allied Meridian
(1) Mr Franklin says that Allied Meridian took over the sublease of the coal
lease at the Metropolitan Colliery in Helensburgh, NSW.
Allied Meridian only
worked at the Metropolitan Colliery and the South Bulli Colliery during the time
of the plaintiff’s employment.
Allied Mining
(1) Mr Franklin says that Allied Mining was a flow-on company from Allied
Construction. It was the same people running the company.
Mr Franklin says he
was employed as a coal miner and he worked underground operating a road header
in the Myuna Colliery. He later
moved to the South Bulli Colliery where he ran
the mains development and ancillary work.
Allied Mine Services
(1) Mr Franklin says that Allied Mine Services was a flow-on company from
Allied Mining and Allied Construction. The same people ran
the company. Allied
Mine Services provided services to the underground coal mining industry in
Australia. Mr Franklin says that he
was employed as a coal miner and that he
worked underground operating a road header in the South Bulli Colliery. Mr
Franklin ran
the mains development and ancillary work.
(1) Mr Franklin says that Thin Seam was an American company that was brought
in to specially perform mining on coal seams that were
less than 1.5 metres in
thickness. Mr Franklin worked on the Balgownie seam of the Russell Vale Mine as
an underground miner.
(1) Mr Franklin says that he worked for Alterrain as an underground miner on
the South Bulli Mine and the Wongawilli Mine. In the
first two years of his
employment he did 60% coal work and 40% civil work. In the later years he did
30% coal work and 70% civil
construction.
(1) Mr Franklin says that he was employed by Alminco to perform work
recovering the Thin Seam equipment that had been abandoned in
the mine when Thin
Seam went broke. Mr Franklin worked for Alminco for six weeks to recover the
equipment from the mine. Mr Franklin
was then moved to another project and was
involved in excavating a tunnel between the Avon Dam and Kembla Grange.
Affidavit of J Wade 25 October 2023 (PX 4)
third affidavit of Ms Wade refers to her conferences with Mr John Marsden
Williams, who was a director of a number of the deregistered
companies. A
statement of Mr Marsden is annexed to the third affidavit. Ms Wade says that Mr
Williams has approved the statement
and has indicated that he is prepared to
give evidence to the effect of the statement if he is served with a
statement of Mr Williams deals with the coal mining activities of:
(1) Allied Construction.
(2) Allied Meridian.
(3) Allied Mining.
(4) Allied Mine Services.
(5) Alterrain.
(6) Alminco.
formal parts, Mr Williams says in his statement (pars 5-20):
“5. I was a director of Allied Constructions Pty Limited
(ACN 000 076 086) from 30 December 1991 to 2016. The company was
established by
my father and he was a director from 1948 to 1991. My father established a
number of companies with the name Allied
at the start of the name. The Allied
companies were part of a group of companies controlled initially by my father
and then by me.
6. I was involved in the operations and became intimately aware
of the business of Allied Constructions Pty Limited from the 1970's,
even before
I became a director of the company. My father started the
business, but I was just keeping an eye on it all. From the
commencement of my
involvement in business, Allied Constructions Pty had a substantial connection
with the coal mining industry and
performed at least half of its work in the
development of coal mines. About the other half of its business was in civil
tunnelling.
7. Our company did so much work in the coal mining industry and
employed many workers in the coal mines, and to the best of my
knowledge Allied
Constructions Pty Limited always had an employers' indemnity insurance policy
with Coal Mines Insurance.
8. Allied Constructions Pty Limited were contracted to the
owners of the coal mines to do ‘whole projects’ including
complete development of coal mines. The development phase of coal mining
involves mining and sinking shafts, drives and roads
through rock and
coal. Coal cannot be extracted from any coal mine without
development work being undertaken. Allied Constructions
Pty Limited had a
substantial connection with the coal mining industry, and for as long as I was
involved in the company it maintained
a very substantial part of its business
employing coal miners and other workers in the development of coal mines
including mining
shafts, drivages and roads through rock and coal.
9. During my many years in the coal mining industry, I became
very familiar with a company called Allied Meridian Pty Limited.
I was not a
director of that company but I was involved in its business. Allied Meridian was
part of the family of Allied companies
conducting substantial business/work in
the coal mining industry. One of my companies Allied
Constructions (Contractors) Pty Ltd
(now called Allied Industrial Services Pty
Limited) was a large shareholder in Allied Meridian Pty Limited. I was a
director of Allied
Constructions (Contractors) Pty Ltd as was my father and that
is how I know about the operations of Allied Meridian Pty Limited.
10. Two of the directors of Allied Meridian were Geoffrey
O'Donnell and Hugh Gordon. They were also directors of Allied Constructions
Limited and Allied Constructions (Contractors) Pty Ltd. I know both men very
well and worked with them for many years.
11. The sole business of Allied Meridan [sic] Pty Limited was
"development" of and in coal mines. It employed coal miners who mined
roads and drivages through rock and coal in coal mines. Anyone who worked for
Allied Merdian [sic] was working in a coal
mine, either on the development phase
or as coal miners extracting coal. Allied Meridian did not do any business in
the civil construction
industry - its business was only in the coal mines.
Allied Meridian had a very substantial connection with the coal industry. To
best of my knowledge, it paid yearly insurance premiums to Coal Mines Insurance
to maintain employers' indemnity insurance for
its workers.
12. I was a director of Allied Mining Pty Ltd (ACN 075 964 519)
between 2004 and 2007. This was another company in the Allied family
companies. I am intimately aware of the business of Allied Mining Pty Limited as
it was another company related to Allied Constructions
Pty Limited and within
the Allied family of companies. Hugh Gordon and Geoffrey O'Donnell who were
directors of Allied Constructions
started Allied Mining Pty Ltd.
13. Allied Mining Pty ltd only every [sic] worked in the coal
industry. It employed coal miners to perform the development phase
work in coal
mines and it also employed coal miners to extract coal. This company did not do
any work/business outside of the coal
mines. During the time I was involved with
Allied Mining Pty ltd, to the best of my knowledge, it held an insurance policy
Mines Insurance and it paid the premiums to Coal Mines Insurance every
year for employers' indemnity insurance.
14. I was a director of Allied Mine Services Pty Limited
(formerly known as Allied Mining Australia Pty Limited) ACN 087 983 560
November 1999 to October 2003. Geoffrey O'Donnell was also a director of this
15. During the time I was involved with Allied Mine Services
Pty Limited from 1999 to 2003 the company always worked in the coal
industry. To
the best of my knowledge It always held an insurance policy with Coal Mines
Insurance and it always paid the premiums
to Coal Mines Insurance every year.
Allied Mine Services did contracts and projects in coal mines. The contracts and
projects concerned
the ‘development phase’ of the coal mines, and
focused on the development roads in and out of the coal mines. It also
coal miners who worked extracting coal. The company did not do any business
outside of the coal mining industry. It always
had a very substantial connection
to the coal mining industry.
16. I was a director of Alterrain Pty Limited, ACN 107 287 702.
Luke Franklin was also a director and employee of this company.
I was a director
from 2003 to 2009 and I was company secretary from 2003 to March 2013.
17. During the time I was involved with Alterrain the company
performed substantial work in both the coal industry and the civil
construction
industry. When Luke took over the company he did more civil work than coal work
but the company always maintained a
very substantial connection with the coal
mining industry and derived very significant amount of its business working in
coal mines.
To the best of my knowledge, the company always had insurance in
place with Coal Mines Insurance and paid the premiums every year.
18. I was a director of Alminco Pty Limited (ACN 001 546 130)
from January 1992 to about June 2004.
19. During the time I was involved with Alminco Pty Limited the
company provided machinery and equipment predominantly for the
coal mining
industry. It employed workers to ensure the coal mining machines were
operational and also to problem solve any issues
with the machines. To the best
of my knowledge, it always held an insurance policy with Coal Mines Insurance
and it always paid the
premiums to Coal Mines Insurance every year.
20. I am aware of the company called Allied Plant Services Pty
Limited (ACN 104 715 559). It is now called BIS Quarries Pty
I was a director of this company from 14 May 2003 to 7
October 2003. This company was a plant hire company similar to Alminco and
supplied machinery and equipment to the steel and mining industries. It always
had a very substantial connection with the coal
mining industry and derived
significant business from it. To the best of my knowledge, it always had
insurance with Coal Mines Insurance
for its workers in the coal mining
Affidavit of J Wade dated 24 June 2024 (PX 5)
Wade annexed to her affidavit a paginated bundle of documents which had been
provided to her by the solicitors for CMI.
1-29 of the annexure consisted of enquiries made with the State Insurance
Regulatory Agency (SIRA) to ascertain whether the
deregistered companies had
taken out workers compensation insurance. SIRA provided a table (pp 23-27 of the
annexure) showing that
such policies had been taken out with insurers, other
than CMI, by: Allied Constructions; Shaft and Tunnel; Allied Meridian; Allied
Mining, Thin Seam, Alterrain and Alminco.
of the documents annexed was a bundle of material from CMI relating to Policy
M030 issued in favour of Alterrain. The relevant
part of the insuring clause is
clause 3(b) which is to be found at p 32 of the annexures. It provided that CMI
will indemnify Alterrain
against any amount which Alterrain becomes liable to
pay “independently of the Act” (meaning a payment other than
compensation
under the WC Act) for any injury to any person.
4 of the Policy (p 32 of the affidavit) provided that the policy applies to a
business or industrial activity described in
the Schedule of Employee
Particulars.
Schedule of Employer Particulars is at p 40 of the annexures. The business or
industrial activity of Alterrain was said to be
“Earthworks”. The
location of the operations was said to be “Metropolitan Colliery”.
Allied Construction
79 of the annexures to the affidavit is a reference provided on the letterhead
of Tahmoor Colliery by A J Pryor, Master Sinker.
The reference is dated 30 May
1990 and speaks highly of Mr Franklin “as a miner and shiftboss at Tahmoor
No. 3 Shaft”.
This would have been during the second period of employment
with Allied Construction.
80 of the annexures to the affidavit is a “Form of Appointment by
Manager” on the letterhead of Thin Seam. By the
form, Mr Paul Coxhead,
manager of the Balgownie No. 1 Colliery appoints Mr Franklin to give technical
instructions under various
legislation and codes of practice. Mr Coxhead has
signed the appointment against the date 8 April 2003, but Mr Franklin has
the appointment by signing against the date 8 April
Affidavit of T Keizer dated 7 June 2024 (PX 6)
Keizer is the Group Leader of Legal Services in the employ of CMI. Ms Keizer
sets out the policies (of which she was then aware)
that CMI issued relating to
certain of the deregistered companies. Those policies were:
(1) Bentham: Policy B678 for the period 3 January 1977 to 1 October 1984.
(2) Allied Construction: Policy B543 for the period 1 October 1969 to 30 June
(3) Shaft and Tunnel Pty Ltd: Policy B805 for the period 3 March 1993 to 19
November 1999.
(4) Allied Meridian: Policy B852 for the period 3 February 1997 to 24 April
(5) Thin Seam: Policy P021 for the period 1 August 2001 to 6 June 2003.
(6) Alterrain:
(a) Policy P171 for the period 13 September 2004 to 20 September 2006.
(b) Policy M030 for the period 7 February 2011 to 3 June 2011.
(c) Policy M692 for the period 17 April 2014 to 30 June 2014.
Newspaper Article (PX 7)
plaintiff tendered an article from the Sydney Morning Herald newspaper dated 3
November 2003. The article concerned the financial
collapse of Thin Seam, which
had been engaged to do specialised mining in the Illawarra
Thin Seam Letter (PX 8)
plaintiff tendered a letter dated 25 July 2001 from Thin Seam to the General
Manager of CMI. The letter was presented by Thin
Seam in support of their
request for CMI to provide workers compensation insurance in its first year of
operation. Attached to the
letter was a CMI Employer’s Indemnity Proposal
indicating that the nature of the business of Thin Seam was “Contract
Mining”. Also attached to the letter was a CMI Premium Quotation Sheet by
which CMI noted that the risk to be covered
was an “underground coal mine
at Russell Vale”. This document was signed by CMI as being agreed on 13
August 2001.
Affidavit of J Wade dated 5 August 2024 (PX
Wade deposes that CMI produced four more files on 12 July 2024 evidencing the
existence of further insurance policies and files
which may relate to the
proceedings. This led Ms Wade to issue a further Notice to Produce which is
annexure JLW-4 to this affidavit.
Plaintiff’s Further
Tender Bundle (PX 10)
bundle contained further documents produced by CMI which related to the
existence of CMI policies issued to some of the deregistered
companies, or which
contained correspondence concerning CMI insurance provided to some of the
deregistered companies. In view of
the analysis of all of the material in the
case, contained in the CMI document MFI 13, it is unnecessary to describe this
Plaintiff’s Second Further Tender
Bundle (PX 11)
11 is paginated. Pages 1-9 of PX 11 is an ASIC search for W.G.W. Pty Ltd. The
was “Colrok
Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd”. Pages 10-11 of PX 11 contained an
Employers’ Indemnity Proposal made
to CMI by “Colrok
Constructions”. It is dated 3 June 1975. The Proposal contained the policy
number “B654”.
11 pp 12-13 is an Employers’ Indemnity Proposal made to CMI. The name of
the employer is “Colrok Constructions Pty
Ltd trading as Colrok”.
This Proposal is dated 19 October 1982. The Proposal relates to policy number
11 p 14 is a letter dated 22 April 1988 from Mr Thomas, the accountant for
“Colrok Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd”. It
advises the Insurance
Manager of the Joint Coal Board that Colrok Constructions Pty Ltd has undergone
a name change to Colrok Constructions
(NSW) Pty Ltd. The letter asks that the
name change be recorded on the workers compensation insurance policy number
11 p 15 is a Policy Advice on the letterhead of the Joint Coal Board which
contains the remark:
“Change of policy name from Colrok Constructions Pty Ltd to Colrok
Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd.”
is noted as a “policy variation” to policy number B654. The document
is dated 27 April 1988.
11 p 16 is a Workers’ Compensation Renewal Notice issued by CMI to
“Colrok Constructions”.
11 p 18 is a letter from CMI dated 6 June 1991 to “Colrok Constructions
(NSW) Pty Ltd” confirming the currency of workers
compensation policy
number B654. The letter confirms that an endorsement has been made on the policy
in relation to work at the North
Cliff Colliery.
11 pp 19-20 is a letter dated 5 September 1995 from “Colrok Australia Pty
Ltd” to CMI. The letter refers to a meeting
with CMI and confirms a
request made for review of the current premium rate. The letter says that
“Colrok Constructions”
ceased trading in October 1994 and
“Colrok Australia” was formed in November 1994 with a new
shareholder structure. The
letter says that in the 1992/1993 year, Colrok
Constructions had approximately 49 employees working in the NSW coal
Allied Mine Services
11 p 21 is a handwritten document stating that an original CMI policy B543 in
favour of Allied Mining Pty Ltd has been transferred
to a new policy B927 for
Allied Mining Australia Pty Ltd.
11 p 22 relates to claims lodged by Allied Mining Australia Pty Ltd on policy
B927 from 1 June 1999 to 30 June 2000.
11 p 24 is a letter dated 14 June 2000 from CMI to Allied Mining Australia Pty
Ltd confirming that the company is fully covered
for workers employed in various
coal mines in NSW by the CMI policy.
11 p 25 is a letter from CMI dated 14 September 1999 to Allied Mining Pty Ltd
enclosing a copy of policy B927, which is subject
to renewal on 1 October each
11 p 26 is a Joint Coal Board Policy Advice in relation to policy B927. It
records a change of name of the policyholder to Allied
Mining Australia Pty Ltd
which commenced on 1 July 1999.
11 p 27 is a CMI policy for Allied Mining Australia Pty Ltd for the period 1
July 1999 to 1 October 1999 in relation to “Construction
Findings Concerning Whether There Were Applicable
CMI Policies
the hearing of the Amended Notice of Motion has progressed in a piecemeal
fashion, more and more documents have been obtained by
the plaintiff’s
solicitors from CMI. The Keizer affidavit (PX 6) dated 7 June 2024 indicates
that by that date CMI was only
aware of policies covering the last date of
employment for Bentham, Allied Construction, and Allied Meridian. CMI was then
of policies for Shaft and Tunnel, Thin Seam, and Alterrain, but those
policies were thought to be not current as at the last date
of employment. CMI
did not acknowledge the existence of any policies for Colrok, Allied Mining,
Allied Mine Services or Alminco.
the final day of hearing, further documents obtained from CMI were tendered, and
Senior Counsel for CMI produced a table setting
out CMI’s final position
regarding insurance for each deregistered company (MFI 13).
recited above, a plaintiff seeking leave under the Third Party Claims Act must
show the following elements:
(1) There is an insurer in existence.
(2) The insurer has issued a policy to the relevant defendant.
(3) The policy covers the risk.
(4) The policy was in place at the time of the risk.
Element 1: There is an Insurer in Existence
1 is satisfied in relation to each deregistered employer. CMI has been in
existence since 1948.
Element 2: The Insurer Has Issued A Policy
To The Relevant Defendant
relation to Element 2, the following table, adapted from the CMI document MFI
13, summarises the evidence by setting out the short
name of each deregistered
company, the end date of the period of alleged employment, and the CMI policy
issued to the deregistered
company and in force on the last date of
employment:
Short Name of Company
Last Date Period of Alleged Employment
CMI Policy in Force on Last Date of Employment
September 1979
(3/1/1977-1/10/1983)
Allied Construction
January 1991
(1/10/1969-30/6/1999)
(9/6/1975-29/10/1994)
Shaft and Tunnel
February 1997
(3/3/1993-19/11/1999)
Allied Meridian
30 June 1997
(3/2/1997-28/4/1999)
Allied Mining
(30/1/1997-30/6/1999)
Allied Mine Services
(1/7/1999-1/7/2003)
October 2003
(1/8/2001-6/6/2003)
(17/4/2014-30/6/2014)
No CMI policy in evidence
CMI accepts that it issued policies to all deregistered companies except
Issues Raised by CMI in MFI 13
13 CMI raises the following issues in relation to the existence and
applicability of CMI policies:
(1) In relation to Bentham, Allied Construction, Shaft and Tunnel, Allied Mining
and Allied Mine Services, there was a CMI policy,
but because there were workers
compensation policies issued by other insurers, there is “dual
insurance”.
(2) Colrok – CMI does not indemnify Colrok, because its policies were
issued to different entities.
(3) Thin Seam – the last date of employment is outside the period of
insurance, invoking s 151AB of the WC Act.
(4) Alterrain – the last date of employment is outside the period of
insurance, and Alterrain was not an employer in the coal
(5) Alminco – there is no CMI policy of insurance in evidence, and Alminco
was not an employer in the coal industry.
Dual Insurance
tendered a large folder of material (DX 1) which showed that many of the
deregistered companies had taken out workers compensation
policies with insurers
other than CMI. A summary of the workers compensation policies taken out with
insurers other than CMI was
provided to the court as part of MFI 13. The
plaintiff did not dispute that many of the deregistered companies had taken out
existence of dual insurance has no relevance to the application made by Mr
Franklin for leave to proceed against CMI. If he is
entitled to that leave
because he can satisfy the requirements of the legislation, then it does not
matter that there is dual insurance.
If there truly is dual insurance, and if
CMI proves to be liable to Mr Franklin upon a final hearing, then CMI can pursue
against those other insurers in accordance with the principles of
dual insurance.
was a matter acknowledged by Senior Counsel for CMI (Tcpt 9/10/24 pp 3/7,
am satisfied from the evidence, particularly the evidence summarised above from
PX 11, that CMI did provide indemnity to Colrok
Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd
between February 1991 and July 1991 under policy B654. Mr Franklin’s case
is that he was last employed
by Colrok in July 1991. On 6 June 1991 CMI wrote to
Colrok (PX 11 p 18) confirming the currency of policy B654, and in particular,
advised of an endorsement for the policy to cover work at North Cliff Colliery.
This is where Mr Franklin says that he worked for
Colrok. That same letter notes
that policy B654 ran until 1 October 1991. Thus, the policy described at PX 11 p
18 issued by CMI
was in force as at July 1991 when Mr Franklin says that he was
last employed by Colrok.
Conclusion on Element 2
find as a fact that CMI had issued policies to all of the deregistered
companies, except Alminco. While Mr Williams said in his
statement that to the
best of his knowledge Alminco had a CMI policy, Mr Williams does not say what
his knowledge was or how he acquired
such knowledge. I am unwilling to draw the
inference that there was an Alminco policy from that vague statement.
Element 3: The Policy Covers the Risk
of the CMI policies are in a statutory form which cover workers compensation
liabilities, which of course includes any liability
for damages as well as
statutory compensation.
pre-2002 liabilities, I find that the work which Mr Franklin did for each
deregistered company (Bentham, Allied Construction,
Colrok, Shaft and Tunnel,
Allied Meridain, Allied Mining and Allied Mine Services) fell within the
description of the business covered
by the policy. The evidence which will be
called from Mr Franklin himself (set out extensively in PX 3, which is
summarised above)
shows that he worked in underground coal mines, usually as a
coal miner.
post-2002 liabilities, I am satisfied (subject to Element 4 dealt with below)
that the CMI policies for Thin Seam and Alterrain
covered the risk. Mr Franklin
says that he worked for Thin Seam as an underground miner in the Balgownie Seam
of the Russell Vale
Mine, and for Alterrain as an underground miner at the South
Bulli Mine and the Wongawilli Mine.
relation to Alminco, I am not so satisfied, for the following reasons:
(1) There is no evidence of a CMI policy. One would expect the plaintiff’s
detailed forensic analysis of all documents produced
in these proceedings by CMI
would have turned up a CMI policy if one existed, given that the Alminco
employment was later in Mr Franklin’s
(2) For s 7A of the WC Act to apply to deem CMI to be the insurer, the phrase
“employer in the coal industry” requires
“a substantial
connection between the entity and the coal industry... beyond merely being the
employer of a person who works
in and about a mine” –
Kuypers v Ashton Coal Operations Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC
(3) Mr Franklin did not work as a coal miner for Alminco, but says he was
performing work for Alminco recovering the Thin Seam equipment
which had been
abandoned in the mine. There is no description of the work actually performed.
Whether he was even working in the
mine itself is not explained.
(4) Mr Williams says that the business of Alminco was providing machinery and
equipment for the coal mining industry. He says nothing
Thin Seam equipment.
evidence thus does not establish that Alminco was an employer in the coal
industry, meaning that s 7A of the WC Act does not operate
to effectively deem
CMI to be the insurer on risk.
Element 4: The Policy was in
Place at the Time of the Risk
all of the pre-2002 periods of employment, the evidence establishes that there
was a CMI policy in place as at the last date of
employment by each of the
deregistered companies.
Thin Seam and Alterrain, there is evidence of policies in existence at dates
earlier than the last date of employment. In relation
to Thin Seam, there was a
CMI policy which ran until 6 June 2003, but there is no evidence of a policy in
place as at October 2003.
In relation to Alterrain, there was a CMI policy which
ran until 30 June 2014, but there is no evidence of a policy in place at the
last date of employment, which was an unspecified date in 2015.
Thin Seam and Alterrain employed Mr Franklin as an underground coal miner. That
means that both were employers in the coal
industry, as that phrase is to be
understood in accordance with the decisions in
Central West
. Thus s 7A(4) of the WC Act applies and CMI is “taken to be
the insurer” of Thin Seam and Alterrain, “whether or
not any such
employer maintains a policy of insurance with that company [CMI]”.
find that CMI is taken to be the insurer of Thin Seam and Alterrain at the time
of the risk.
decline to make such a finding in relation to Alminco, for the reason set out
above ie s 7A does not apply and thus CMI is not taken
to be the insurer of
Conclusion and Orders
is appropriate to grant leave to Mr Franklin under s 5 of the Third Party Claims
Act to sue CMI for the liabilities of all deregistered
companies, except
Alminco, because:
(1) There is an arguable case in negligence against each holder of a CMI
insurance policy.
(2) It is certain that the holder of each CMI insurance policy will be unable to
satisfy any judgment, as it is a deregistered company.
(3) There is an arguable case that the holder of each CMI insurance policy
would, if it found liable to Mr Franklin, be entitled
to indemnity under the
parties requested that the costs of this application be reserved.
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Subject to order (2) grant leave nunc pro tunc to commence and continue
these proceedings against the first defendant Coal Mines
Insurance Ltd in
relation to the claims pleaded in the Second Further Amended Statement of Claim
against deregistered companies.
(2) Decline to grant such leave in relation to the claim pleaded in pars 95-103
of the Second Further Amended Statement of Claim.
(3) Reserve the costs of and incidental to the Amended Notice of Motion filed on
25 June 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (394 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter