URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION v HARPER [2008] NSWCHT 1 (8 December 2008)
CHIROPRACTORS ACT 2001
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
MATTER NUMBER: CH1/2008
REGISTRATION NUMBER: CP 0018370
JONATHAN HARPER
REASONS FOR
(REGARDING PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONLY)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Harper
[2008] NSWCHT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr Gregory Farmer and Mr Darian Nagle (of Counsel) instructed
by Mr Stephen Cox, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Mr Jonathan Harper
(Respondent) represented by Mr Gary Gregg and Ms
Jennifer Beck (of Counsel) instructed by Mr Don Grant, Solicitor, Guild
FILE NUMBER: CH1/2008
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy Chairperson)
Ms Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
Mr Edwin Devereaux AM (Chiropractor Member)
Mr Warwick Bateman OAM (Chiropractor Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 12, 13, 14 & 15 August 2008 & 21 August 2008
DATE OF DECISION: 8 December 2008
FINDINGS (in summary): Particulars (a) to (s) inclusive found proven by the
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – not of good character –
HICAPS claims -
services not provided and/or over servicing.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Chiropractors Act
schedule 5 – clause 6.
CASES CITED: Council of the NSW Bar Association v Power
[2008] NSWCA 135
HCCC v Margiotta [2007] NSW PYT1; Purkiss v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
REASONS FOR DECISION
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONLY)
Introduction
Chiropractors Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professionals
Registration Boards (HPRB) Tribunal Hearing Room in
Sydney on 12, 13, 14 &
15 August 2008 to conduct an inquiry into a complaint made by Karen Mobbs,
Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 25
November 2007 in relation to a registered chiropractor (the Respondent).
The Respondent conducted a
practice in a southern suburb of Sydney. The Responded completed a Bachelor of
Science and Masters of Chiropractic
in 1997 at Macquarie University.
The Complaint relates to
claims made by the Respondent and other health care providers in his practice
through the HICAPS payment
system for services to the Respondent, his wife and
two young children. The claims processes through the HICAPS system were on the
medical insurance fund The Hospitals Fund of Australia Limited, known as HCF,
the Respondent and his family subscribing to the insurance
offered by that fund.
By agreement, the Inquiry
undertaken by this Tribunal is being undertaken in ‘stages’. The
hearing of evidence in the
first stage was held over the first 4 days, as
indicated above, followed by a brief hearing on the question of amendment of the
Complaint (as described below) between the legal representatives and the Deputy
Chairperson sitting alone. Subsequently, written
submissions were made by each
party and this document sets out the Tribunals findings with respect to the
Particulars of the Complaints.
The Inquiry is set to resume on 11 & 12
December this year to consider evidence and submissions relevant to findings
with respect
to the Complaints and any other issues
The Tribunal is not bound by
the rules of evidence and may conduct the Inquiry as it sees fit. While
ensuring procedural fairness
is afforded to both parties the Tribunal is
concerned to find the truth of the matter.
The Complaint
The Complaint was amended, by
agreement, during the Inquiry. Particulars (n), (o) and (p) of the original
Complaint essentially contained
three issues, which, it became apparent, would
be more conveniently considered if they were separated. Each of the original
(o) and (p) were divided into three Particulars, becoming Particulars (n)
– (v) inclusive. The Complaint, as amended, alleges
that the Respondent,
being a registered chiropractor under the
Complaint One
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
of the Act in that the chiropractor has engaged in conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgement possessed, or
exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice of chiropractic is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level
of training or experience,
has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of chiropractic.
Complaint Two
Has been guilty professional misconduct within the meaning of
the Act in that the chiropractor has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that
the knowledge, skill or judgement possessed, or
care exercised, by the
chiropractor in the practice of chiropractic is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training or
experience,
has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of chiropractic.
Complaint Three
Is not of good character.
Particulars of Complaints One, Two and Three
Between 11 April 2003 and 14
November 2003 the chiropractor made 36 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Mrs A by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist.
The claims made were false because Mr Ray did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 11 April 2003 and 2
September 2003 the chiropractor made 40 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master B by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist.
The claims made were false because Mr Ray did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 11 April 2003 and 14
November 2003 the chiropractor made 38 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master C by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist.
The claims were false because Mr Ray did not in fact provide
those services.
Between 11 April 2003 and 30
September 2005 the chiropractor made 38 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment for [the Respondent] by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Mr Ray did not in fact
provide the services on the dates claimed by the
chiropractor.
Between 17 August 2005 and 30
September 2005 the chiropractor made 16 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Mrs A by Voula Partsas, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Partsas did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 2 September 2003 and
30 September 2005 the chiropractor made 12 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master B by Voula Partsas, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Patsas did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 2 September 2003 and
30 September 2005 the chiropractor made 12 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master C by Voula Partsas, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Patsas did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 13 August 2005 and 30
September 2005 the chiropractor made 17 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to [the Respondent] by Voula Partsas, a
registered physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Patsas did
not in fact provide those services.
Between 5 January 2000 and 11
February 2005 the chiropractor made 44 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for Mrs A by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor.
38 of the claims were false because Mr Royse only provided six
Between 5 January 2000 and 7
January 2002 the chiropractor made 44 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his chiropractic
practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for Master B by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor.
38 of the claims were false because Mr Royse only provided six
Between 5 January 2000 and 19
February 2001 the chiropractor made 21 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for [the Respondent] by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor. Six of the claims were false because Mr Royse only provided
fifteen services.
Between 2 January 2002 and 13
April 2005 the chiropractor made 68 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his chiropractic
practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for [the Respondent] by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor
at the Gymea practice. The claims were false because Mr Royse did
not provide the services and was not employed at the practice
during this
Between 19 January 2000 and
30 September 2005 the chiropractor made 141 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for himself. The claims made were
Between 1 January 2000 and 25
March 2006 the chiropractor failed to create and maintain records of his
chiropractic treatment of Mrs
Between 1 January 2000 and 25
March 2006 the chiropractor failed to create and maintain records of his
chiropractic treatment of Master
Between 6 November 2002 and
25 March 2006 the chiropractor failed to create and maintain records of his
chiropractic treatment of
Between 19 January 2000 and 5
September 2005 the chiropractor did falsely claim through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59 - 61 Gymea Bay
Road, Gymea that he had provided chiropractic services to Mrs A which he had
in fact provided.
Between 19 January 2000 and 5
September 2005 the chiropractor did falsely claim through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59 - 61 Gymea Bay
Road, Gymea that he had provided chiropractic services to Master B which he
not in fact provided.
Between 6 November 2002 and 5
September 2005 the chiropractor did falsely claim through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59 - 61 Gymea Bay
Road, Gymea that he had provided chiropractic services to Master C which he
not in fact provided.
Between 1 January 2000 and 1
October 2005 the chiropractor did provide chiropractic services to Mrs A which
were excessive in number
and/or such as to amount to
overservicing.
Between 1 January 2000 and 1
October 2005 the chiropractor did provide chiropractic services to Master B
which were excessive in number
and/or such as to amount to
overservicing.
Between 6 November 2002 and 1
October 2005 the chiropractor did provide chiropractic services to Master C
which were excessive in
number and/or such as to amount to
overservicing.
Suppression Orders
7. The Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation
to the names of members of the Respondent’s
family referred to in the
Complaint as having HICAPS claims made through the Respondent’s practice
over the relevant period.
In accordance with Schedule 5 Clause 6 of the Act, the
name of these people, as indicated in the schedule annexed hereto and marked
‘B’, and any information that may identify them is not to be
The Respondent indicated by
letter dated 5 August 2008 from his solicitors that there was no contest with
respect to Particulars of
Complaint (a) to (m) inclusive and that he would admit
and explain them (although confirmation of admission with respect to (h) came
the fourth day of the Inquiry). The Respondent indicated that there would be a
contest with respect to the original Particulars
(n), (o) and (p). Ultimately,
as indicated elsewhere, Particulars (n), (o) and (p) were divided into three
parts in the amended form
of the Complaint and became (n) to (v). The
Respondent did not require any of the HCCC witnesses for
cross-examination.
The documents received into
evidence are set out in Annexure ‘A’
10. Dr Hayek (peer reviewer), Mr Craig Moore (peer reviewer), the Respondent,
Background information
Background of the Respondent
11. The Respondent was born in 1972. After completing a Bachelor of Science at
Sydney University in 1995 and a Master of Chiropractic
at Macquarie University
in 1998, the Respondent was first registered as a Chiropractor on 12 March
After gaining
his registration, the Respondent worked in a practice at Parramatta for about 12
months, followed by a period of working
from home, before an 18 month period at
a practice in Miranda. In October 1999, the Respondent commenced his own
practice. The Respondent
is a member of the Chiropractic and Osteopaths College
of Australia (COCA).
Background of the Complaint
13. A letter from HCF dated 3 February 2006 received by the Chiropractic Board
of New South Wales (Board) requested the Board consider
and investigate its
complaint that since 2000 the Respondent had used an electronic claiming
facility (HICAPS) for services to himself.
14. The letter also informed the Board that the Respondent had indicated to them
that the services had in fact been provided by other
chiropractors in the
practice but he had failed to provide their details.
On 17 February
2006, HCF wrote to the Respondent recounting information provided by the
Respondent to a member of HCF staff who had
visited the practice of the
Respondent on 8 February 2006. HCF noted that only one of the chiropractors was
‘approved for payment’
at the practice address and that there were
no clinical records kept with respect to the chiropractic or physiotherapy
provided to the Respondent and certain other people (as detailed in
the Particulars of Complaint herein). The letter concludes that
the Respondent
owes HCF the sum of $27,060 and requests that amount be forwarded to them
(exhibit 4).
Further information from HCF
disclosed that some of the services of concern to HCF had been provided to a
baby, with claims being
made for services provided on and from the baby’s
date of birth (exhibits 5 & 6).
On 28 March 2006 the
Complaints Committee of the Board referred a complaint to the HCCC for
assessment. Subsequently the Tribunal
required the complaint dated 25 November
2007 as noted above.
Evidence before the Tribunal (at this stage)
18. An investigator from HCF spoke to the Respondent on 5 October 2005 regarding
claims that had been made on 8 June 2005 through
HICAPS for 38 HCF members. The
Respondent could not locate the records for two of the HCF members at this time.
The investigator
recorded that the Respondent told him it was impossible for a
chiropractor to treat themselves but stated that he had received treatment
a number of other practitioners in his practice. Further the investigator
recorded that the Respondent told him that he was
of the view that it was not
necessary for his practice to maintain records in relation to treatment provided
to his family or to
members of his staff (exhibit 6). The Tribunal notes at
this point that the HCF investigator was not called for cross examination.
19. On 2 February 2006 the Respondent wrote the HCF indicating that
‘Reception staff’ from his practice had ‘occasionally’
taken shortcuts when processing payments at the ‘very busy clinic’
and that a former (unnamed) staff member had processed
the Respondent as the
client using his provider number when he had in fact been a patient of one of
the other members of the practice.
The Respondent classified the transactions as
‘clerical errors’ and he expressed ‘sincere embarrassment and
for the appearance of impropriety’. The letter acknowledges that
the sum of $3,000 was sought to be recouped by HCF but did
not provide any
indication as to whether this amount would be forthcoming, however he did
request the return of his HICAPS facility
to his practice.
The Respondent wrote to the
HCCC on 4 August 2006. The letter sets out a detailed account of the
Respondent’s ‘philosophy
of chiropractic’ and the ailments
suffered by him, his wife and sons which required treatment. The letter also
expressed ‘sincere
embarrassment and regret for any appearance of
impropriety’ regarding the ‘error in accounting’ which
from staff entering his name as the treatment provider for treatments
to himself, when in fact it had been provided by other practitioners
his practice but who had not been registered as working in the practice with
HICAPS at the time.
21. In this letter, the Respondent also stated that he had commenced
‘formal patient files with records’ for his family
acknowledging
that such records would assist with the preparation of treatment plans. The
Respondent offered an accounting document
regarding transaction as a record that
the service was ‘fundamentally’ provided as evidenced by the
transaction record.
The records show that on each occasion of billing, there is
an entry for the fee, a fee reduction and a payment received. As to the
the services, these records substantially coincide with the dates recorded for
the HICAPS payments and do not record any
other occasions of billing outside of
those claims made on HCF.
22. In the ‘Conclusion’ section of the letter dated 4 August 2006,
the Respondent wrote:
I also acknowledge the discrepancy in the recording of my provider number with
respect to my receipt of chiropractic and emphasise
that all treatments were in
fact provided by other practitioners and the discrepancy caused by my lack of
vigilance. There was at
no time any attempt to obtain benefits through the fund
by improper means.
Statements -
Mr Leonard Madar
23. Mr Madar is a registered chiropractor who worked for a number of weeks in
the practice of the Respondent. In a statement dated
29 August 2006 (exhibit
10), Mr Madar stated that he had never formally treated the Respondent, and
therefore had kept no clinical
notes but that he had demonstrated
‘different manipulation styles’ on the Respondent. Further, Mr Madar
stated he was
not aware that the Respondent had claimed payment and billed HCF
when he had given the Respondent these manipulations.
Ms Voula Partsas
24. Ms Partsas is a registered physiotherapist who worked two sessions a week in
the Respondent’s practice for a period of
time. Each work session lasted
two hours, during which time she saw four patients. In her statement dated 28
August 2006 (exhibit
11), Ms Partsas stated she had never met the
Respondent’s family nor had any dealing with payments. Payments by
patients for
treatment were processes by a receptionist. Ms Partsas stated she
did not have the authority, password or log-in access to be able
to process a
HICAPS claim system.
Mr Glen Cameron
25. Mr Glen Cameron is a registered chiropractor who provided a statement dated
23 September 2006 (exhibit 12). He stated that he
had a business arrangement
with the Respondent between August 2005 and May 2006 whereby he worked at a
practice in Bondi Junction
and received a percentage of the takings. Mr Cameron
stated that he had never treated the Respondent’s family members, but
he had received a letter regarding an insurance claim made by the
Respondent’s wife with respect to a work injury. Mr
Cameron disclosed that
he had the legal proceedings pending against the Respondent relating to this
business arrangement.
Mr Paul Ray
26. Mr Paul Ray is a registered physiotherapist who was employed at the
Respondent’s practice from 5 May 2003 until 22 December
2003. Mr Ray made
a statement dated 4 October 2006 (exhibit 13) which annexed a schedule of
payments that had been processed under
his provider number with HCF for the
Respondent and his family. The schedule records that approximately 40 claims had
been made for
the Respondent and for each of his family members. Mr Ray stated
that he had not provided any services to the Respondent’s
family but that
he had provided 14 treatments to the Respondent as part of a workers’
compensation claim over the period 15
August 2003 to 22 December 2003. Further,
Mr Ray stated that some of the services are recorded as having been provided
date he commenced working in the Respondent’s practice and also
on a day that he was absent from the practice attending a funeral.
Mr Kirk Royse
27. Mr Royse is a registered chiropractor who worked on a locum or as need basis
for the Respondent until September 2001. Mr Royse
made a statement dated 29
August 2006 (exhibit 15) stating that he had provided some chiropractic services
to the Respondent his
wife and elder son as set out in the schedule of payments
annexed to his statement. The schedule recorded the claims with HCF for
provided under his provider number for these three people. Of the 108 claims for
treatment to the Respondent, Mr Royse states
he would have provided
‘twelve to fifteen’ services, and of the 44 treatments of the
Respondent’s wife and 41 to
the Respondent’s elder son he would have
provided a service to ‘each, approximately four to six times’. Mr
stated that he had made handwritten notes in relation to these services
and that they had been placed in the patient file.
28. In summary, it is the unchallenged evidence of Mr Royse that he provided
treatment to the Respondent, his wife and son on a maximum
of 27 occasions over
a period of time that 193 claims were made by the Respondent’s practice on
HCF through the HICAPS system
for services provided by Mr Royse’s to
Witnesses –
29. Mrs A gave evidence that she had received chiropractic treatment since the
age of 15 or 16 years as had a number of members of
her immediate family.
30. Mrs A had received treatment to her neck, back and shoulder and for
headaches. Mrs A stated she had a congenital fusion of C2/3
vertebrae of her
31. This round of treatment lasted about a year, initially consisting of three
treatments a week, then down to two and eventually
once a week. The treatment
relieved the symptoms and eased the pain in the other area, with the back pain
‘almost gone’.
32. When Mrs A was 16 years old, she was injured in a motor vehicle accident, a
whiplash injury. The injury caused symptoms which
required chiropractic
treatment and her parents decided to ‘sign-up’ for a longer
treatment plan.
33. Mrs A gave evidence that she participated in the martial art sport, Tae Kwon
Do, up to six nights a week from the age of nine
to 18 as well as participating
in school based sports.
34. Mrs A gave evidence that some time before she completed high school, Mrs A
started to receive physiotherapy treatment and remedial
35. After completing high school, Mrs A stated that she undertook training in
child care. The activity of lifting children was a
part of her duties caused
aggravation of her symptoms requiring further treatment. In more recent years
she has undertaken book keeping
work requiring the use of computers which has
also aggravated her symptoms.
36. Mrs A gave evidence that she attended the chiropractic clinic where the
Respondent was undertaking his assessment prior to registration
week, as best she could remember, depending on how often ‘they
me to come in’
(emphasis added)
37. Mrs A gave evidence that she experienced low back pain for the first time
through each of her pregnancies, and from middle back
pain when breastfeeding.
38. Detailed evidence was given by Mrs A regarding the frequency she received
chiropractic treatment and benefits she derived from
the chiropractic treatment.
39. Mrs A also gave evidence that she believed all babies should receive
chiropractic treatment after birth because of the way in
which the neck is
‘moved in different directions’ while coming down the birth
40. Treatment from a chiropractor experienced with children was sought for their
first born child. When their second child was born,
Mrs A considered the
Respondent had developed sufficient expertise in the treatment of newborns,
after having observed the experienced
chiropractor, to provide treatment from
the day of birth onwards.
41. Mrs A detailed chiropractic treatment received by both of her children, in
general terms it assisted with sleep in their early
years and thereafter the
frequency of treatment varied with school and sporting activities. Activities
such as the rough and tumble
of play and falling when learning to walk all
precipitated a need for chiropractic treatment. Master B plays rugby league five
a week and also swims regularly.
42. With respect to Master C, Mrs A gave evidence of difficulties during the
pregnancy. As a new born, Mrs A reports that Master
C did not sleep well and had
difficulties feeding. Master C now also plays rugby league and requires
additional chiropractic treatment
as a result.
43. Both Master B and Master C now request treatment from the Respondent,
although Mrs A’s evidence is that she would take
them for treatment even
when they had not asked for it as she was of the view they required regular
chiropractic. Mrs A gave evidence
that she sought chiropractic treatment when
she decided she needed it, for symptoms or for maintenance.
44. When asked about her role in the Respondent’s practice, Mrs A gave the
following evidence (T25. 3-6, 12.8.08):
I didn't work as a receptionist or clerical within the clinic in any way, I
do the takings and count the money and bank the money,
and I do the girl's pays,
pay the superannuation and do the preparation for the accountant for the BAS
statements.
45. Mrs A gave evidence that she could not remember the dates of specific
treatments of herself, Master B and Master C, however the
records from the
practice (in evidence) accorded with, her recollection of the frequency of
treatment received.
46. Mrs A confirmed under cross-examination that she had received treatment from
a physiotherapist and a remedial massage therapist
that did not work in the
Respondent’s practice during the period of time covered by the Particulars
of Complaint. On reviewing
the notes provided by these two practitioners, Mrs A
agreed that they provided an accurate record of the treatment she had
47. Also under cross-examination, Mrs A gave evidence that when she attended the
Respondent’s professional rooms she was taken
into the treatment room
along with Master B and Master C. Usually they attended the practice without
having previously booked an
appointment. After the treatment, Mrs A did not
attend to the payment for the services provided, having no role in providing the
HCF card or the authorisation of payments.
The Respondent
48. After an indication that the Respondent would not give oral evidence before
the Tribunal, the Respondent did in fact provide
evidence regarding a number of
issues such as his qualifications, techniques and chiropractic philosophies.
The Respondent refused
to answer a number of questions on the basis that the
answer may tend to incriminate him. Specifically the Respondent refused to
answer any questions relating to the matters admitted (Particulars (a) –
(m) inclusive) and to the use of the HICAPS system
within his practice.
49. A full account of the Respondent’s evidence would be unduly lengthy.
The Tribunal has not undertaken the task of providing
a summary of every aspect
of the Respondent’s evidence. The Tribunal has had regard to the entirety
of the evidence. Some of
the evidence is summarised below and references to
other parts of the Respondent’s evidence is found in other parts of this
decision, particularly in the sections dealing with submissions and findings.
50. When asked by the Tribunal during the Inquiry if he had made any changes to
his practice since these matters had come to light,
the Respondent told the
Tribunal that he had commenced keeping records of the treatment provided to Mrs
A, Master B and Master C.
When asked a further question by the Tribunal
confirming changes to his practice in the last ’18 months’ the
replied ‘Well, of course, records of [Mrs A] and [Master B and
Master C] have been commenced’ (T20.14, 13/8/08 and T60-61,
51. During the Inquiry, the Respondent produced, in answer to a call made by the
Tribunal, the records he said he had commenced keeping
with respect to Mrs A,
Master B and Master C.
52. The records produced by the Respondent to the Tribunal only contained notes
relating to the period of time March 2006 to late
2006. They represented the
totality of the notes kept by the Respondent. When questioned about this matter,
the Respondent gave
further evidence to the Tribunal that he had only kept those
records because of a potential civil claim becoming available to Mrs
A, Master B
and Master C as a result their involvement in a motor vehicle accident (MVA).
The notes were marked with the annotation
‘MVA’. The MVA occurred in
March 2006. The Tribunal notes at this point, for clarity, that an inspector
from the HCF
fund visited the Respondent’s practice in February 2006 and
raised the question of clinical notes in addition to the question
of treatment
53. The Respondent ultimately accepted in his evidence (T73-76, 78-79, 15/8/08)
that he stopped making notes when it became apparent
that there would not be a
civil claim available to Mrs A, Master B and Master C arising out of the MVA.
After further questions
from the Tribunal, the Respondent supported his lack of
note keeping by reference to the practice of his cousins, who were also
chiropractors,
and who did not maintain notes with respect to treatment provided
to him. The Respondent acknowledged that he knew it was proper
to keep notes but
as he looked up to his cousins he did not challenge their practice. The
Respondent acknowledged that it was inappropriate
not to keep records (T75.30
& T76.18, 15/08/08).
54. The Respondent gave evidence that he practiced the ‘wellness based
model of chiropractic’. He provided treatment
to his wife, on average two
to three times a week either in the clinic or at home and classified her need
for treatment at the ‘upper
echelon of needs’ and that she was a
‘rare case’. The Respondent stated that he would not put Master B or
C in the same category but did state that they both had ‘chronic
problems’. The Respondent accepted when questioned by
the Tribunal that he
was not able to diagnose the problems as chronic when they were one week old.
55. When asked whether he had sought a second opinion regarding the continued
repeated treatments required by Master B and Master
C, the Respondent, after
describing consultations with an Ear, Nose and Throat Specialist and a
Paediatric Allergy Specialist in
relation to Master C’s allergic rhinitis
and eczema gave the following evidence (T40.16-41.2,
Q. So as far as the second opinion; my question was sort of aiming at a
second opinion about the treatment of both [Master B] and
[Master C].
A. Well, expanding on [Master C]; I thought that that was a second opinion
because it was one of the presenting symptoms that he
had, so I made the booking
or [Mrs A] made the booking and we went together for both the referral and for
the attention of the matter
on the day. [Master B]; he's seen massage therapy.
He regularly attends with [Mrs A]. They like to go together to the Chinese
massage at the Westfield Miranda. It's something that they do. And that's to
Q. So as far as the treatment with [Master C] is concerned; is it only - is
the only professional that has made a decision that [Master
C] should have
regular chiropractic treatment - are you the only professional person who has
made that decision?
A. I believe - because I think [Dr] Ajam might have been the referring
doctor for [Master C] and he's aware of all of the family
receiving chiropractic
care and he has no issue with it.
Q. When you say referring doctor; what do you mean?
A. Well, to see a specialist such as [Dr] Kwok you do need a referral from a
general practitioner. They're like gatekeepers for
specialists.
Q. And so you're not meaning that there was a referral to you?
A. No. No, no.
Q. But doctors do make referrals to you sometimes?
A. Yes. Yes, although it is not required. It's more of a courtesy rather
than a professional requirement.
Q. So do you think that it's Dr Ajam's professional opinion that it's
appropriate for [Master C] to be receiving treatment once a
A. Yes, I believe so.
Q. And the same with [Master B]?
A. Yes, yes.
Q. It would be Dr Ajam's--
A. Yes, absolutely.
56. There was no evidence before the Tribunal regarding Dr Ajam’s opinion
of the treatment of Master B or Master C. In relation
to Mrs A the only
significant evidence from Dr Ajam was a report dated 10 August 2006, the
content of which is discussed in detail
57. As to the pattern of treatment, the Respondent stated that he had provided
treatment to Master B and Master C initially at a
frequency of about three times
per week but that for the last 12 months they had received treatment
approximately once a week, ‘generally’
seeing them at home rather
than at the practice. The Respondent could not indicate why the level of
treatment had reduced in recent
58. The Respondent denied that the treatments detailed in the Particulars of
Complaint had not been provided by him and denied that
this level of treatment
was ‘overservicing’.
59. The Respondent confirmed that the HCF card was not used to make claims for
services at the practice once the relevant maximum
benefit limit had been
60. The Respondent authored a number of written documents in evidence including
a statement dated 4 August 2006 (exhibit 22). As
noted above this statement
claimed that the services being questioned by HCF had in fact been provided by
other practitioners working
in his practice. Statements from a number of
practitioners who had worked in the Respondent’s practice are noted above.
Tribunal notes at this point that more of these witnesses were required by
the Respondent for cross examination. Further, the Respondent
claimed that
errors in the HICAP claims occurred because of clerical errors.
Documentary evidence
61. Clinical notes made by a physiotherapist and a remedial massage therapist
who provided treatment to Mrs A outside of the Respondent’s
practice came
in to evidence. A letter from a general practitioner, Dr Ajam, is also
included in the evidence. While the entirety
of this evidence is regarded by the
Tribunal, the particular parts submitted by the parties as relevant to the
decision in this matter
are set out under the heading of submissions.
Peer Reviewers –
Mr Craig Moore
62. A report dated 1 August 2008 was provided by Mr Craig Moore. Mr Moore
qualified as a chiropractor in 1984, and has operated his
own practice in Sydney
since 1987. Mr Moore lists ‘Lower limb/orthotic analysis and clinical
prescription’ Advanced accreditation
in Chiropractic Biophysics and
‘Training assistant under Dr Deed Harrison for Chiropractic Biophysics
method in Australia’
under the heading of Post graduate studies in the CV
provided to the Tribunal.
63. Mr Moore provided details of the ‘wellness’ model of
chiropractic and enclosed a document produced by the Chiropractic
Association of
Australia (CAA). Mr Moore’s reports expands on the core values outlined by
the CAA that ‘clearly embraces
the wellness philosophy as follows:
We recognize that the practice of chiropractic focuses on the relationship
between structure (primarily the spine) and function (as
coordinated by the
nervous system) and how that relationship effects the preservation and
restoration of health.
• broadly understood to mean that poor spinal position and or function may
harm or compromise related nerve function and the
potential ability for the
brain and nervous system to sustain optimal
health/function.
We recognize that subluxations compromise the expression of innate intelligence
and that prevention and removal of subluxations will
facilitate the expression
of optimal health.
• broadly understood to mean that poor spinal position and or function is
referred to as spinal subluxation. Subluxation can
limit health and well-being.
Correction of subluxation can improve health and
well-being.
We respect, care about and are committed to the individual’s holistic well
being and emphasize the inherent recuperative power
of the body to heal itself
without the use of drugs or surgery.
• broadly understood to mean that chiropractic is committed to the broader
well-being of the patient and fosters a philosophy
around assisting the bodies
ability to health through natural means outside the realm of medical drugs and
64. Mr Moore states that ‘it is widely accepted within chiropractic our
potential role within this wellness-health model as
it relates to restoring and
preserving the health of the spine and the relationship the spine has to nervous
system function’.
65. In response to the following question asked by those representing the
Respondent –
‘In your opinion, and based on information provided, was the frequency of
chiropractic treatment provided by Mr Harper to his
family consistent with the
principles inherent in the wellness model of chiropractic
66. Mr Moore commented:
While this sound philosophical principle may provide the
cornerstone for a practicing health care practitioner, this does not provide
protection from our responsibilities in conforming to the standards of practice
required in recording within patient records a history,
examination, diagnosis
and the initial treatment plan of the individual. (
emphasis added
Assuming that the appropriate clinical procedures were followed, it is widely
considered reasonable for Mr Harper to suggest that
many patients may receive
regular and ongoing chiropractic care at some level of frequency. Indeed this
general premise can also
be consistent within both prescriptive medicine and
dentistry where a specific form of care is required or advantageous
indefinitely.
In natural health-care, the principle of regular
maintenance/wellness care applies at physical, nutritional, emotional (stress
management)
and structural (including spinal posture/motion) levels.
67. In relation to Mrs A, Mr Moore makes the following comments:
The health history provided for [Mrs A] within your letter of
instruction (pages 3 and 4) reveals a number of sound clinical facts
support a symptomatic need alone for regular drugless chiropractic care as
opposed to the long-term complications of prescriptive
medical alternatives
(attachment five)
A history of physical trauma and the physical bending
and lifting children are common backgrounds to a patient with chronic recurrent
spine related pain as [Mrs A] appears to have.
This is further by [Mrs A’s] medical records (attachment four)
where both congenital and degenerative spinal changes are listed in her
cervical spine and where associated nerve encroachment is
Evidence-based standards for the frequency of management of acute
musculoskeletal pain must always be seen in the context
of that patient’s
individual ongoing and recurring clinical picture.
All patients have the right to choose chiropractic care as the chosen method
of ongoing musculoskeletal management, especially where
medical alternatives may
provide no guarantees for long-term results, or, may provide clinical dangers
unacceptable to that patient.
68. In relation to Master B and Master C, Mr Moore makes the following
A history of physical impacts and/or physical trauma and/or aberrant physical
loads provides the common background to patients with
aberrant spinal function
or alignment. This is commonly referred to as reoccurring spinal subluxation by
[Mr A] and by most chiropractors
in general. This clinical history is provided
by [Mr A] (pages 4 and 5) in your letter of instruction for [Master C and Master
[Master C’s] broader systemic health problems are less supported by
chiropractic research to date. However, ongoing research
continues to slowly
find supportive data that clearly crosses the musculoskeletal boundary for the
application and the benefits of
chiropractic care on a far wider basis than
relieving musculoskeletal pain. There is increasing proof of a general systemic
benefits to chiropractic care.
69. In his oral evidence Mr Moore expanded on his evidence. On the basis that
the total amount of treatment provided to Mrs A, Master
B and Master C was as
recorded as HICAPS claims (i.e. frequent treatment occurring during the early
months of the year) he expressed
the view that such a pattern of treatment would
be unusual, it would be less unusual if that level of treatment continued
the year. However, if this was the case he would look at reducing
the number of consultations. At transcript page 78.4-8 (13/08/08)
One of the things I am always looking for in clinical practice is ways of really
supporting what I am doing so that one can look
towards bringing the volume of
treatment down in some cases. That frequency of treatment over a year might
suggest that one needs
to look outside the square at options that would reduce
the need for treatment on that level. I think that would be worthy of
consideration.
70. Mr Moore expressed the following view regarding the volume of treatment
provided (T78.31-35, 13/08/08):
It is at the larger end of volumes of treatments typically had by patients. I
might draw the conclusion that the convenience and
availability of the
chiropractor by a wife might be partly a factor in the treatment being more
accessible and more available and
more common than the average patient might
have the luxury of affording.
71. Mr Moore’s evidence indicated that he generally considered the level
of treatment to be high, uncommon, but not beyond
his experience, although he
personally would have been actively exploring alternative treatment and
strategies to reduce frequency.
72. Mr Moore gave evidence regarding articles he had regard to for the purpose
of his general education and the preparation of his
report. He was unable to
inform the Tribunal about any subsequent studies in which the research findings
had been replicated or whether
they were published in a peer reviewed
Dr Ray Hayek
73. Dr Ray Hayek provided a Peer Report dated 15 January 2007 to the HCCC
(exhibit 18). Dr Hayek has a First Class Honours Bachelors
Degree in Science, a
Masters of Chiropractic and a PhD. He is a Fellow of the International College
of Chiropractors and the Australasian
College of Chiropractors and currently he
is the Director of the Centre for Spinal and Medical Research at Macquarie
University,
an Adjunct Research Fellow at the Palmers Research College (USA) and
a registered chiropractor. The report expressed the view that
keeping records of
treatment provided ‘...is paramount and forms the cornerstone of health
care provisions’. Dr Hayek
expressed the opinion that he would consider
the failure to establish clinical records for any family members that he treated
be a failure to discharge his duty of care.
74. With respect to the question of providing treatment to family members, Dr
Hayek stated that this was not uncommon. However such
treatment should be
managed in the same manner as any other treatment session with record keeping
being a non-negotiable element.
75. Dr Hayek also pointed to the potential for a clinician’s judgment and
objectivity to be ‘clouded at times’
because of the family
relationship. Without clinical notes Dr Hayek stated he could not determine what
treatment protocols were employed
or what initial presentation and prognosis
were made by the Respondent with respect to the family members he treated. Dr
commented that as there were a number of therapists at the practice
who also provided treatment to the family members that the keeping
of notes was
‘paramount’.
76. Dr Hayek stated that he could make no comment about the duration of the
treatment without the benefit of the clinical notes.
A further consequence of
the failure to keep records was the difficulty in obtaining a second opinion
without the information contained
in the clinical notes. Dr Hayek also expressed
concern about the absence of care plans and treatment records/outcomes.
77. Dr Hayek was ‘not sure how [the Respondent] would have administered
chiropractic care to himself’. He noted that
the Respondent had stated
that the treatment was in fact provided by someone else and raised the question
as to why it was that the
relevant provider had not made the claim for service
78. Dr Hayek expressed ‘particular concern’ with respect to the
treatment program offered to the newborn baby. While
Dr Hayek stated that there
was strong practical and scientific evidence to suggest that ‘forms of
chiropractic care are beneficial
for newborns and children, the clinical history
is essential here to determine what the presenting complaint was’.
79. A further reason Dr Hayek considered the keeping of records with respect to
each patient was an obligation for a primary health
care provider was that a
review of information such as the outcomes of pathological tests and
radiological reports allows a complete
clinical picture to be formed by the
practitioner.
80. Under the heading ‘Inaccuracies in billing records’, Dr Hayek
expressed the view that ‘The inconsistencies
in the billing records are
concerning and in my opinion are the result of sloppy record keeping’. The
report goes on to express
the opinion that the whole billing process is the
responsibility of the treating clinician and if ‘secretarial errors’
occur then the error should be corrected at the end of the shift and ‘not
allowed to accumulate’.
81. Dr Hayek expressed concern that there was no record that informed consent
(either verbal or written) had been received from the
family members that the
records indicated had been treated. Dr Hayek expressed the opinion that there
was nothing that would preclude
a practitioner from ‘administering the
same informed consent procedures to family members in their clinic’.
82. Dr Hayek expressed the view that based on the information he had been
provided with that the level of service provided for each
patient ‘may
constitute over servicing’. Dr Hayek explained this opinion was supported
by his view that ‘...a
condition that is amenable to Chiropractic care
should be resolved in a measurable and tangible time frame’. Generally a
of progress may warrant a second opinion. Dr Hayek qualifies this opinion
by stating that rarely there may be a patient that does
not have any measurable
changes in the pathophysiology of their condition and may require ‘ongoing
chiropractic maintenance
care’. The lack of clinical notes that would
allow Dr Hayek to make an assessment of the reasons why the patient required
consultations fell ‘significantly below the standard that one
would expect from a health care provider’.
83. Dr Hayek stated that he was of the opinion that it was
‘unacceptable’ that the Respondent had employed a trained
chiropractor who was not registered. The Tribunal notes that this matter is not
the subject of a Particular of Complaint and has
dealt with it accordingly.
84. The Tribunal also heard oral evidence from Dr Hayek, and once again salient
parts of this additional evidence are recorded elsewhere
in this document.
The Codes of Conduct
85. Chiropractors registered in NSW have been subject to three ‘Codes of
Conduct’ since registration was introduced in
1991. The first code
introduced by the Board (then called the Chiropractors and Osteopaths
Registration Board) published the ‘Chiropractic
Code of Professional
Conduct’. Paragraph 5 of this code states:
5. A chiropractor’s ordinary place of practice must provide privacy and
confidentiality for his or her patients and their records.
86. A new ‘Chiropractic Code of Professional Conduct’ was approved
in October 2000. The terms of paragraph 5 of this
code are identical to those
set out above.
87. By February 2004, when the next edition of the ‘Chiropractic Code of
Professional Conduct’ was published there was
a separate Chiropractors
Registration Board. The terms of paragraph 5 of this code are in identical terms
to that set out above except
that the following words have been added
‘...in accordance with the Commonwealth
[and the National
Submissions made by the HCCC regarding the Particulars of
88. The Respondent has admitted Particulars (a) to (m) inclusive relating to the
making of false claims for himself, Mrs A, Master
B and Master C.
89. The HCCC submission summarised the evidence of Mrs A.
90. The HCCC summarised the evidence of the Respondent with respect to the
keeping of records. The HCCC submit that the evidence
given by the Respondent
was ‘completely misleading, despite the respondent’s denial that
this was the case’.
91. The Submission summarised the evidence of the Respondent regarding the
treatment provided particularly details regarding its
92. The HCCC submitted that little weight should be given to the documentary
evidence provided by the Respondent. In support of this
submission, the HCCC
point to his statement made on 4 August 2006. This document claimed the
treatment in issue was provided by other
practitioners in the Respondent’s
clinic. Each of those practitioners has, in essence, denied that assertion. The
HCCC submit
that the Respondent now resiles from that position. It is further
submitted that the Respondent had claimed some errors were a result
of clerical
errors. The Respondent did not support this assertion with any statements from
any of the clerical staff employed in
his practice and he refused to answer
questions on this topic on the basis that the answers may tend to incriminate
93. The HCCC made submissions regarding the question of whether any adverse
inference could be drawn from the Respondent exercise
of the right to silence.
The HCCC made reference to a number of authorities on this point including
Council of the NSW Bar Association v Power
[2008] NSWCA 135
paragraphs 28 & 29) which include the following comments (per Hodgson
In my opinion, this obligation of candour should not be overridden by a right to
silence to any greater extent than is strictly required
by that right.
In all the circumstances, in my opinion the court can have regard to the
opponent’s failure to offer any explanation of what
happened to the
F-drive or to give evidence concerning the matter, in considering whether to
draw inferences from the material before
94. The HCCC submit that the Respondent had not initially sought to rely on his
right to silence as he made statements asserting
all treatment claimed had been
provided, if not by him then by others. The Respondent then made certain
admissions (as noted above).
The HCCC submit that the Respondent must be taken
to acknowledge that his earlier statements were wrong. During the Inquiry the
refused to answer many questions asserting his right to silence and
the HCCC submit that he does not offer explanation of what happened
in any other
way. It was further submitted that the Respondent in particular refused to
answer questions regarding the Particulars
(q), (r) and (s) wherein he was
recorded as the provider of the services and therefore he was in a position to
provided additional
facts ‘peculiarly within his knowledge’
especially as he had already attempted to do so in his earlier statements. The
HCCC submit that it is therefore open to the Tribunal to have regard to his
failure to offer any explanation of what happened in
considering whether to draw
inferences from the balance of the material before it and that the Tribunal
would not accept any other
assertions made by the Respondent unless supported by
objective evidence.
95. The HCCC noted that the report provided by Mr Moore (peer reviewer called on
behalf of the Respondent) assumed that number of
services provided to each of
the patients was as recorded in the HICAPS documentation. Mr Moore expressed the
view that this would
be ‘unusual’ and not consistent with the
‘broader wellness approach’.
96. The submission notes that Mr Moore was asked while giving his oral evidence
to assume that the same volumes of services were
provided to the patients
throughout the year. On this basis Mr Moore expressed the view that this would
be at the ‘larger end
of volumes of treatments typically had by
patients’. If was submitted that Mr Moore view was that such a number of
may be realised because of the access Mrs A had to treatment. He also
gave evidence that he would be looking for alternate treatment
approaches,
attempting to reduce the number of treatments and that people may ‘over
depend’ on chiropractic treatment.
The HCCC submitted that this had
clearly not occurred during the six years over which it is said that these
services were provided
by the Respondent.
97. In relation to Master B and Master C, Mr Moore stated that it was ‘not
so common to be examining young children two or
three times a week on a long
terms basis. I’d say that’s certainly not so common’ (T66.40,
98. The HCCC submitted that Mr Moore gave evidence that repetitive treatment can
give rise to a risk of injury. The Tribunal notes
no reference was given for
this submission.
99. The HCCC submitted that the evidence of Dr Hayek was that such a number of
treatments was ‘excessive from a therapeutic
point of view’ and that
it did not accord with the ‘wellness theory’ as postulated by the
Respondent (T88.15, 14/08/08).
Further, Dr Hayek expressed the view that
children were more resilient than adults and in the absence of any documented
‘that amount of therapy is not warranted’ (T88.40,
100. Dr Hayek expressed the view that more than 15-20 episodes of the same
treatment is excessive. He gave evidence that there was
consensus in the
profession that 12-16 sessions for non-complicated treatments was accepted
practice. It was submitted that Dr Hayek
opinion of the treatments as excessive
was on the basis that they were ‘not reasonably necessary’. He would
be concerned
with a level of treatment of two per week over one year, or even
over three months.
101. The HCCC further submitted that like Mr Moore, Dr Hayek was of the view
that attempts should be made to reduce such high levels
of service whether or
not the treatment was providing symptomatic relief or being provided as part of
the ‘wellness theory’.
102. The HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should note that both Mr Moore and Dr
Hayek were constrained in their opinions because
of the absence of records. Dr
Hayek expressed the view that ‘if you don’t have records
you’ve got nothing to measure
against’ (T51.10, 15/08/08) which the
HCCC submitted must apply to all ‘branches’ of chiropractic.
103. The HCCC makes submissions regarding the records kept by a physiotherapist
consulted by Mrs A for treatment. This physiotherapist
did not work in the
practice of the Respondent. The notes record that Mrs A was complaining of
‘chronic i/t headaches’,
‘migraine like’. A form in the
notes held by this physiotherapist recorded that Mrs A was not ‘currently
the care of a health care professional’. The HCCC submitted that Mrs
A was unable to explain this apparent anomaly.
104. When Mrs A attended a remedial massage therapist the major presenting
complaint is recorded as headaches.
105. A letter from Dr Ajam dated 10 August 2006 regarding Mrs A was included in
material held by the Respondent. The letter includes
the following comments:
Prior to the accident
[presumably the MVA in March 2006]
had previous
problems with her neck, re congenital fusion but this had given
problems before
. I feel that the accident has aggravated this condition.
(clarification and emphasis added by the Tribunal)
106. The same letter from Dr Ajam indicated that following the accident Mrs A
on a management plan of physiotherapy and massage.
She had also
chiropractic treatment’.
(emphasis added
by the Tribunal)
107. The HCCC submitted that the above two statements made by Dr Ajam contradict
much of the evidence given by Mrs A regarding her
condition, her need for
chiropractic treatment prior to the accident and the amount of chiropractic
treatment she claimed she needed
from the Respondent. It was further submitted
that this evidence also casts doubt on the claim made by Mrs A regarding
said to have been provided to her sons by the Respondent.
108. With respect to Particulars (n), (o) and (p), the HCCC submission noted
that the Respondent admitted he failed to keep records
in relation to treatment
of Mrs A, Master B and Master C for which claims were made to HCF via the HICAPS
system for the period 1
January 2000 to 5 September 2005. The Respondent and Mrs
A gave evidence that treatment continued after 5 September 2005. The Respondent
gave evidence that he had commenced record keeping from March 2006. The HCCC
submitted that this was not entirely true as the records
were only maintained
until 20 December 2006, the Respondent explaining that the only reason he had
kept those records was the potential
availability of a civil claim (arising out
of the MVA). The HCCC submitted that apart from an assertion that his relatives,
also chiropractors, did not always keep records, the Respondent had
failed to give a clear reason why he stopped keeping records.
109. The HCCC submitted that the Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied that
these Particulars were established and that it was
open to the Tribunal to amend
the complaint further to reflect the additional periods to date that the
Respondent had failed to maintain
110. In relation to Particulars (q), (r) and (s), the HCCC submissions note that
the Respondent denies each of these allegations.
The HCCC submit that the
Tribunal cannot be satisfied that each and every one of these claims was for
services that had been provided
by the Respondent. The HCCC relies upon the
following circumstances to support this conclusion:
• an absence of evidence to support the need for treatment at such levels,
especially in relation to both of the children,
even taking into account the
respondent’s statements regarding the “wellness
the nature of the
treatment said to have been provided to the children, for example, adjusting
Nathan if he thought it was reasonably
required (that is, not on all occasions)
(T13/8/08 p 35.42) or “mini-massages” for [Master
the absence of records
of the treatment, including the absence of a treatment plan and the absence of
any record of presenting problems;
the fact that the
respondent has admitted to making false claims through the HICAPS system in
relation to his wife and sons (particulars
(a)-(c), (e)-(g) and (i)-(j) and in
relation to himself [particulars (d), (h) and (k)-(m)]. There are in excess of
500 false claims
covered in particulars (a)-(m)
the evidence of both
[the Respondent and Mrs A] was that chiropractic services were provided at home
and at the clinic. The claims
are for services said to have been provided at
the clinic. The claims do not distinguish between services said to have occurred
the respondent’s
complete abrogation of his responsibilities under his contract with
the incredibility of the
assertion, made by both Mr Harper and Mrs Harper, that there was a need to
chiropractic treatment for Mrs
Harper and her two children on the same day on
approximately 500 occasions between January 2000 and September
the opinions of both Mr
Moore and Dr Hayek that the number of services said to have been provided was
excessive from a therapeutic
point of view and that, if such a number of
services was provided, that fact ought to have resulted in the respondent
different approach to the treatment, such as obtaining a second
opinion or some other alternative treatment, with a view to reducing
of chiropractic treatments;
the fact that the
respondent has not provided an explanation as to how each of the claims came to
be made through the HICAPS system
and his general lack of candour in relation to
information provided to the Tribunal, both in writing and in
the fact that the
respondent initially claimed that treatments provided to him were clerical
errors (Ex 1 Tab 6, letter dated 2/2/06),
coupled with the fact that he now
admits that they were false claims but does not provide any explanation for the
difference between
his initial claim and his later admissions. Nor does the
respondent provide any explanation of how it was the false claims
the fact that the
respondent only made records of treatments said to be required as a result of a
motor vehicle accident in 2006 and
the fact that he stopped keeping such records
when he realised that the claims would not proceed
the absence of objective
material which would support the assertions of Mr and Mrs Harper that the
services had in fact been carried
out, such as clinical records, appointment
book records or receipts;
the presence of
objective material which supports the assertion that the services were not in
fact carried out, for example, the records
of Mr Morgan and the report of
Dr Ajam, both of which implicitly assert that Mrs Harper was not in receipt
of chiropractic treatment;
the serious doubts cast
over the credibility of the respondent, particularly in relation
his changed position regarding the false
his evidence regarding the records Exhibits
R4, R5 and R6;
his assertion that his wife and two sons
each required chiropractic treatment on the same day on over 500 occasions;
his lack of candour as to what
111. The HCCC submitted that the Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied that
claims made to HCF for chiropractic treatment of Mrs
A. Master B and Master C
included false claims. Therefore, it is open for the Tribunal to find that all
of the claims are false rejecting
the evidence that each of these claims arose
as a result of chiropractic services being provided by the Respondent.
112. Further, the HCCC submitted that the Tribunal was able to be comfortably
satisfied that a number of the claims must have been
false, even if the Tribunal
was unable to precisely identify which claims fell into that category.
113. Particulars (t), (u) and (v) are brought as an alternative to Particulars
(n), (o) and (p). At paragraph 52 of its submission
dated 12 September 2008, the
HCCC submitted:
If the Tribunal is not satisfied that the claims were false, in the sense that
the treatment said to ground the claim did not take
place, it is still open to
the Tribunal to conclude that the services rendered were “excessive in
number and/or such as to
amount to overservicing”.
114. The HCCC set out detailed submissions in paragraphs 53 – 58 of the
submission dated 12 September 2008. In light of the
Tribunals findings below,
the submissions, while obviously considered by the Tribunal, are not set out in
detail herein.
The Respondent’s Submissions regarding the Particulars of
115. The Respondent provided a detailed submission to the Tribunal dated 20
October 2008. The Tribunal accepts the submissions set
out in paragraphs 9-11
regarding the standard of proof to be applied, essentially the
‘Briginshaw’ standard.
116. Submissions regarding the evidential burden were set out at paragraphs
12–14 were noted by the Tribunal.
117. With respect to the failure to keep clinical notes as described in the
Particulars, the Tribunal was referred to a paragraph
23 of the decision in
HCCC V Margiotta
[2007] NSWPYT 1
wherein the following observation was
When looking at the issue of improper and unethical behaviour, one of the
matters to which the Tribunal will have regard is any relevant
118. It is submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the relevant code
(Chiropractors Code of Professional Conduct- February 2004)
‘...does not
state that chiropractors must create and maintain clinical records for their
patients at large, let alone for
members of the chiropractor’s immediate
family’. The Respondent submits that the only mention of records on the
Chiropractors
Code of Professional Conduct, contained in paragraph 5, is not
applicable to the present circumstances.
In a document
dated 18 October 2002, the then President of the Chiropractors Board issued a
document entitled ‘Guide to the
Chiropractors Act 2001
document contains the following statement:
The provisions of the Code are a consideration in determining what
constitutes proper and ethical conduct by a chiropractor.
The Respondent submitted
that the Guide also does not contain any reference to the need for a
chiropractor to create and maintain
The Respondent then made
the following submission at paragraphs 19 and
19. The Complainant’s case that the services were not provided appears
to rely primarily upon the submission that because no
clinical records were
kept, the inference should be drawn that the treatments did not take place.
20. The framing of the Complainant’s case in the alternative, viz, that
if the treatments were in fact provided, then the number
of treatments amounts
to overservicing, is tacit recognition of the weakness of the evidence
supporting the complaint.
With respect to the
allegations of overservicing, the Respondent submitted that there is no
statutory definition of ‘overservicing’
in the Act or Regulations.
Neither do the Code nor the Guide make any reference to the concept of
‘overservicing’, nor
give any warning or guidance to chiropractors
as to what level of treatment provided to a patient is or may be seen as
overservicing.
The Respondent submitted
that Mrs A was uniquely placed to testify that the treatments to her and her
sons did in fact take place.
It was submitted that the Tribunal should accept
her evidence as she had adhered to her testimony despite extensive
cross-examination.
The Respondent’s
submissions set out a detailed summary of Mrs A’s evidence regarding
chiropractic and other treatment
she had received since the age of 15 or 16
years and this in all relevant regards accords with the summary of her evidence
above. The entirety of the submission and the evidence has been
considered by the Tribunal.
The submission does not
deal with the inconsistency between the evidence of the Mrs A and the Respondent
on the one hand and the report
of Dr Ajam and the notes of the physiotherapist
on the other.
The Respondent submitted
that the HCCC led no evidence to rebut the evidence of Mrs A and therefore had
failed to discharge the shifting
onus of proof placed upon it
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164).
This was submitted at paragraph 31 of the
Submissions dated 20 October 2008 and the Tribunal has had regard to the
entirety of the
submission.
The Respondent’s
submission set out a significant portion of the evidence given by Mrs A in
relation to her need for chiropractic
treatment, the relief she received from
chiropractic treatment and the preventative nature of the treatment. When asked
children, Mrs A gave the following
They are my children, I don’t wait for them to ask all the time, I
think it is best for them and I like them to get regular
treatment, so if I am
there getting treatment, I like them to get treatment too. Heaven forbid I get
back home and they then complain
that they are sore, I like to just make sure it
The Respondent’s
submission also contains an outline of the circumstances surrounding the
Respondent’s coming to give
evidence before the Tribunal. The submission
noted that the Respondent had answered question on the topics of the nature of
his clinical observations and the need for adjustment (treatments).
The Respondent’s
submits that the evidence of the Respondent was that Mrs A, Master B and Master
C ‘were different cases
with specific presentations and each was treated
accordingly (eg. T38.46)’ which does not assist the HCCC to discharge the
onus of proving that the treatments in question did not take place.
The Respondent submitted
that the HCCC submissions did not suggest any contrary position, and that they
largely focused on an attack
on the Respondent’s credit. Further the
attempted criticism of the Respondent by the HCCC for declining to answer
relating to Particulars (a) to (m) inclusive, on the basis that they
might tend to incriminate him, was submitted as inappropriately
conflagrating
the relevant considerations of the ‘no contest’ of Particulars (a)
– (m) with the contested Particulars
(n), (o) and (p) which are presently
considered.
In answer to the HCCC
submission regarding the Respondent’s earlier documentary replies, the
Respondent submits that there is
an air of unreality about them as those replies
related to a time when Particulars (a) to (m) were to be contested. The
submitted that clearly there had been a change in position by the
Respondent which was indicated to the Tribunal and the HCCC prior
The Respondent submitted
that if the Tribunal acceded to the HCCC submission in this regard, particularly
as set out in paragraphs
24-27 inclusive, the Tribunal would be misdirecting
itself and falling into error.
The Respondent submitted
that the Tribunal should conclude that the Respondent did perform all of the
relevant treatments covered
by Particulars (n), (o) and (p) as the HCCC failed
to lead any evidence to satisfy the shifting evidentiary onus upon it to rebut
the evidence given by the Respondent and Mrs A.
At paragraphs 39 to 53
inclusive, the Respondent made submissions regarding the overservicing
Particulars. These submissions have
been considered and as indicated below, as a
consequence of the Tribunals findings in relation to Particulars (q), (r) and
Tribunal will not set out the detail of these
submissions.
Submissions in reply made by
the HCCC regarding the Particulars of Complaint
The HCCC submitted that the
Respondent’s submissions regarding the failure to keep notes have the
character of a submission
in mitigation. The HCCC submitted that the absence of
a specific reference to record keeping in the Code does not excuse the
Respondent’s
failure to keep clinical records.
The Respondent does not
dispute that part of his training included the need for records to be kept or
that it forms part of the proper
practice of chiropractic. The HCCC submitted
that the requirement to keep records is obvious from the point of view of a
health professional
and was clear from the evidence of both Dr Hayek and Mr
Further, the
HCCC submitted that the Respondent had not attempted to make the case that the
Code had misled him by absence to a reference
to an obligation to keep records.
The HCCC submitted that the
Respondent had contractual obligations to keep records for patients for whom a
claim for treatment was
made through the HICAPS system and notes the
Respondent’s submission is silent on this point.
The HCCC submitted that the
Respondent has failed to adequately explain why he failed to keep records in
relation to some of the treatment
provided to his family. The Tribunal
interrupts the account of the submissions to note that the records kept by the
Respondent related
only to small fraction of the treatments covered by the
Particulars and on the Respondent’s evidence related to a potential
claim in relation to a MVA. The HCCC submitted that in the absence of a proper
explanation for the failure to keep records,
the Tribunal may take this into
account in determining whether the claims were
In relation to the
submission made in paragraph 31 of the Respondent’s submission (see
above), the HCCC submitted that an overall
view of the cross-examination of Mrs
A ‘was to the effect that the number of treatments claimed could not
possibly have been
provided’. The ‘need’ for the children to
undergo treatment at such a level was not supported by reference to any
particular objective fact.
The HCCC submitted that Mrs
A gave evidence that the only treatment she had received at the
Respondent’s practice was chiropractic
treatment. The HICAPS records
reveal that claims were made for Mrs A and her children for physiotherapy
treatment and remedial massage.
This should detract, it was submitted, from
accepting the evidence of the Respondent and Mrs A that all of the chiropractic
were administered.
The HCCC submitted that the
same submission could not be made with respect to the Respondent as the matter
had been put ‘fairly
and squarely’ to him. The Respondent did not
produce any objective evidence to support his denial. The Respondent did not
any appointment books, receipts or other records, or call staff from the
practice to confirm the regular attendance at his practice.
The HCCC therefore
refutes that it has failed to discharge the onus on it in relation to these
complaints.
The HCCC submitted that the
Respondent is incorrect in his submission that a clear reason had been given by
the Respondent regarding
the levels of treatment required by his children (see
paragraph 34 of the Respondent’s submissions). The HCCC submitted that
this was ‘simply incorrect’. Further, the submission that
‘none of the evidence given by [the Respondent] assists
the complainant to
discharge its onus in proving that the treatments in question to his wife and
children did not take place’
(being a reference to part of paragraph 34 of
the Respondent’s submission), ignores the fact that the Respondent refused
give evidence about the circumstances which led to the individual claims
through the HICAPS system.
Although the Tribunal has
not proceeded to find the Particulars relating to overservicing established, a
submission made under the
heading of ‘Overservicing’ the HCCC is of
assistance:
It is asserted that [the Respondent] made his own clinical judgement as to
whether to administer chiropractic treatments to [Mrs A,
Master B and Master C].
The [HCCC] submits that the submission defies commonsense. It is simply not
possible to accept that [Mrs
A, Master B and Master C] each required
chiropractic treatment on the same day, at an average of 10 treatments per
month, for a period
of approximately 6 years.
The HCCC submitted that the
Respondent’s adherence to this evidence ought be taken into account
against him when the Tribunal
is making an assessment of his
credibility.
The HCCC refute the
Respondent’s submission that the evidence of Mr Moore supports the level
of treatment provided to Mrs A,
Master B and Master C as consistent with the
wellness model of chiropractic. It is the submission of the HCCC that the
passage quoted
by the Respondent in paragraph 43 of his submission ignores the
evidence of Mr Moore when he was asked to have regard to there being
higher level of treatment than was recorded in the documentary evidence.
Further, it is submitted that the Respondent’s
submissions ignore the
evidence of Dr Hayek that the number of treatments was more than required and
was excessive from a therapeutic
perspective, as it could increase the risk of
The HCCC submitted that the
evidence of Mrs A and the Respondent had been rebutted by other evidence in this
Findings in relation to the Particulars of Complaint
Tribunal accepts the submission made by the HCCC that the evidence of the
Respondent regarding the commencement of note taking
was misleading. The
Respondent was putting forward the commencement of note taking as a matter he
had instigated in response to the
allegations he was facing, whereas his later
evidence, supported by the actual notes, indicate that there was an ulterior
for the commencement of the record keeping and it appears it was mere
coincidence that resulted in the notes commencing at a time
shortly after the
visit to the Respondent’s practice by the HCF
The fact that the
Respondent commenced taking notes after the MVA indicates that the Respondent
was aware of the value and importance
of note taking. Had the civil claim
progressed, the Respondent would have been able to provide a copy of his
clinical notes in support
of any claim made for reimbursement of his
professional fees and to support any report regarding the condition and
treatment he provided.
At T104.17-35 (15/08/08),
the Respondent gave the following evidence
Q. And do I understand that Mr Royce, Mr Madar, Mr Ray and
his partners all worked in your clinic?
Q. They were all subject to directions that you might choose to give them
from time to time, I take it, in your practice?
A. They were contractors, they were not employees. So, I don't dictate to
therapists what they are and what they are not required
Q. Did you request that they keep records of treatment?
Q. Did you expect that as health professionals they would keep records of
their treatment?
A. In the context of the relationship with me, no.
You expected them to keep records of their treatment of the
clients, the patient?
A. Absolutely.
The Tribunal is of the view
that record keeping is an essential element of any professional person’s
practice. It is fundamental
and elementary. There is no basis upon which the
Tribunal could find that keeping of no records in a health professionals
or even the keeping of accounting or claim records only is appropriate.
This is supported by the reference in paragraph 5 of the
Chiropractors Code of
Professional Conduct which requires that the notes be kept securely.
There is no doubt that the
scope of the records will vary on the circumstances. The basic premise of the
provision of chiropractic
care would be for a patient record to be established.
Such a record would contain salient details such as name, address, date of
birth, health insurance details. The reason for the consultation will also form
the fundamental foundation of treatment and must
therefore be recorded. If the
patient has suffered from a trauma, a description of the trauma frequently
assists with diagnosis when
combined with findings upon initial examination.
Details of the treatment and the patient’s response to the treatment will
guide the chiropractor as to what treatment modality has proved to be the most
effective for the patient. Progress should be noted.
This would be true if the
‘Wellness’ model of care was
The value of notes when
there is a potential for a civil claim was recognised by the Respondent. Notes
clearly assist if a request
for a report regarding the patient is requested as
part of a civil claim for compensation that may arise from an injury. The
expected other health professionals to keep
Other matters ordinarily
expected in a clinical record would be details of relevant medication taken by
the patient, treatment plans,
the results of any relevant investigations (x-ray,
CT, MRI and the like), copies of any reports made by the practitioner, reports
from other practitioners, referrals from doctors and correspondence with
insurance companies.
A further reason why the
keeping of records is part of a professional practice is the possibility that
the care of a patient has to
be transferred to another practitioner, sometimes
at short notice, and such records will assist the continuity of the treatment.
It is the vicissitudes of life that make it so. The Respondent’s
contractual obligation to HICAPS is also
The Respondent’s
evidence on this issue was indeed misleading and in the view of the Tribunal
significantly damaged the credibility
of the Respondent. Further, his evidence
regarding the keeping of records only for the purpose of supporting a potential
civil claim
reinforces the conclusion that the Respondent was aware of his
responsibility to keep records. The keeping of records would have
provided some
degree of support for the Respondent’s assertion that all treatments
recorded in the HICAPS documentation did
The Tribunal accepts the
submissions of the HCCC with respect to the ‘keeping of record’
Particulars. Considering all
of the evidence the Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that particular (n), (o) and (p) are established.
False claims or overservicing
The Tribunal has taken care
not to be distracted by any perceived discrepancy between evidence based
chiropractic treatment and the
‘wellness’/maintenance dogma. It is
the view of the Tribunal that the Particulars of Complaint currently before it
be resolved and is able to be resolved on the objective evidence.
Further, it is the view of the Tribunal that there is generally
no difficulty
with treatment being provided by chiropractors to members of their own family if
professionally undertaken.
The Tribunal accepted the
submission of the parties that the Particulars relating to false claims are
alternate to the Particulars
relating to overservicing. The first question to
resolve is whether or not the treatment as claimed was in fact provided. If that
question is resolved in the affirmative Particulars (q), (r) and (s) would fail
and then the Tribunal would move on to a consideration
of the question of
whether this level of treatment was overservicing. If the level of treatment was
not considered overservicing
then Particulars (t), (u) and (v) would fail.
The Tribunal accepts the
summary of the evidence of Mrs A provided in the HCCC submissions. The Tribunal
notes that despite complaint
of significant problems requiring chiropractic
treatment, Mrs A has continued with an active lifestyle, including sporting
activities.
The Tribunal also notes the activities of Master B and Master C as
have been described in evidence are what would be expected from
healthy active
Further, nothing in the
evidence provides a diagnosis that goes to the complaints made by Mrs A
regarding her shoulder and mid-back
problems. Mrs A reports symptomatic relief
only from the treatments.
The physiotherapist and
massage therapist who provided treatment to Mrs A kept notes of their treatment.
The physiotherapy clinical
notes record that Mrs A’s neck and upper
thoracic problems responded well to treatment.
The assertion that
consultation with an ENT and an Allergy specialist regarding rhinitis and eczema
suffered by Master C amounted
to a second opinion regarding chiropractic
treatment is not accepted by the Tribunal. There can be no misunderstanding
meaning of a ‘second opinion’ by a health professional.
Whilst the consultations with these medical specialists may have
confirmed for
the Respondent his ‘diagnosis’ of Master C’s allergic symptoms
they cannot be rational viewed as
second opinions to support the chiropractic
treatment the Respondent alleges he was providing to Master C, let alone support
The Respondent made
reference to Dr Ajam’s awareness of the chiropractic care received by
members of the family, to the fact
that Dr Ajam had ‘no issue with
it’. He asserted that Dr Ajam would endorse the weekly treatment of both
Master B and
Master C. This evidence is difficult for the Tribunal to accept in
light of the inconsistency between the evidence of Mrs A and the
regarding the treatment of Mrs A on the one hand and the contents of the report
of Dr Ajam on the other hand. Even if
the Tribunal accepted that Dr Ajam was
aware of the treatment being received by Mrs A, Master B and Master C and that
he had indicated
he ‘had no issue with it’ it does not amount to a
second opinion or a referral. There is no evidence before the Tribunal
level of treatment that both the Respondent and Mrs A gave evidence about was
clinically supported by the opinion of any
other health care professional except
the Respondent.
Both Mr Moore and Dr Hayek
indicated they would not only be looking for strategies to decrease the
frequency of treatment if the levels
were as described. Mr Moore was not asked
directly about whether or not he would seek a second opinion but when asked
at a high frequency he said (T70.13-14, 13/08/08): “... if
a patient is getting that much treatment I might be wanting to look
bit at what other co-factors are important’. The Respondent pointed to
radiological investigations and exercise
regimes prescribed for Mrs A but
otherwise had no strategy to reduce the level of treatment. The Respondent also
gave evidence that
the level of treatment had decreased over the last 18 months
or so without firm explanation for this occurrence.
If the evidence of Mrs A
and the Respondent regarding the frequency of treatment is accepted then over
500 treatments were provided
to each of Mrs A, Master B and Master C between
January 2000 and September 2005. The pattern of these treatments is significant.
All three required treatment on the same day for a period of over six years at
an average rate of about ten per month. This was in
addition to the
physiotherapy and remedial massage received by Mrs A and the ‘Chinese
massage’ all three had from time
to time at the local shopping
It may be that members of
the same family may require treatment from the same health care provider on the
same day. This would of
course be the case for illness that involve an
infectious disease where the members of the family were exposed to the same
vector. However, that cannot be said to be a pattern expected in
chiropractic. Even taking into account the convenience of members
of the same
family receiving treatment on the same day it is the suggestion that all three
members of the one family required treatment
on the same day on 500 occasions
over a number of years, that is the evidence.
Mrs A gave evidence that
she had no involvement in the actual claiming from HCF through the HICAPS
system. Her HCF card was not used
to make the claim and she stated she kept no
records. She did however give evidence that a receptionist may have entered some
the appointments into the Respondent’s practice computer appointment
diary and seen her and the children arriving or leaving
the practice. Her
evidence was not inconsistent with the levels of treatment that the computer
records from the Respondent’s
practice regarding payments and the records
from HICAPS, these being the only records of the treatment. The evidence of Mrs
at its highest, can only be that the records of treatment accord with
her recollection of treatment and cannot be that it is an absolutely
record of the treatment given the lack of involvement she stated she had in the
actual claim process.
The Respondent described
the problems of Master B and Master C as chronic but provided no diagnosis. For
a problem to be termed ‘chronic’
it would be expected to be
accompanied by degenerative changes. Without a diagnosis or evidence to support
degenerative changes there
is no support offered by the Respondent for the
condition of Master B or Master C to be considered
The Tribunal accepts the
submission of the HCCC that little weight can be given to the initial
documentary evidence of the Respondent
regarding his assertion that the services
were provided by other practitioners within his practice or that the claims were
of clerical error. The Respondent provided the names and contact
telephone numbers of several people who had been employed in clerical
within the practice; however none of these people were called to give evidence.
On the face of the records
in evidence, the clerical errors extend to a large number of claims made for
each member of the Respondent’s
family. The data input into the computer
recorded a code applicable (item number) to a service provided by the particular
of the ‘incorrect practitioner’. The identical error
being repeated time and time again. Allowance could be made for
the fact that
claims for each member of the family were generally made on the same day which
increases the likelihood of a ‘clerical
error’ being repeated with
each claim on the assumption that it is one operator making the entries. The
errors with respect
to claims for physiotherapy treatment occur, substantially
and significantly, after the limit of the medical insurance cover is reached
chiropractic treatment. The Tribunal notes the subsequent admission by the
Respondent to Particulars (a) – (m), however,
it may or may not have been
explained by him.
The report of Dr Ajam dated
10 August 2006 clearly states that Mrs A had not suffered from any problems with
her neck flowing from
her congenital fusion prior to the MVA in March 2006. The
Respondent had an opportunity to put evidence before the Tribunal. Dr Ajam
not called to give evidence to challenge or clarify the contents of his report.
There is no doubt that Dr Ajam, being a registered
medical practitioner, would
have appreciated the import of providing accurate reports regarding his
patients. The Tribunal concludes
that Mrs A had not complained of problems with
her neck to Dr Ajam prior to the MVA in March 2006. The same report stated that
on a management plan of physiotherapy and
massage. She had also
chiropractic treatment’
(emphasis added)
. This further indicates that Dr Ajam was only informed
of the treatment received by Mrs A after the MVA and not of the high level
treatment Particularised in this Complaint.
The Tribunal accepts that
the report of Dr Ajam is at odds with the evidence of Mrs A regarding her need
for chiropractic treatment
prior to the MVA. If the evidence of the Respondent
and Mrs A regarding the ‘sympathetic’ and supportive attitude of
Ajam towards chiropractic treatment of Mrs A is accepted then a conclusion that
Dr Ajam’s report is false would have to
be reached. The Tribunal
prefers the evidence of Dr Ajam as an accurate account of what was reported to
him by Mrs A. It flows that
the Tribunal does not accept the evidence of the
Respondent and Mrs A contrary to the contents of Dr Ajam’s
The Tribunal was not
provided with any corroborative evidence to support the assertions of Mrs A and
the Respondent that all the treatment
claimed had in fact been provided. The
Tribunal is mindful that the evidentiary burden with respect to the Particulars
falls to the
HCCC. The bare assertions of the Respondent and Mrs A, is at odds
with so much of the evidence that the Tribunal cannot accept this
evidence. The
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the services were not provided as
The Tribunal has not drawn
an adverse inference from the Respondent invoking his right to silence. The
Tribunal notes however that
the prior statements of the Respondent alleging all
services were provided as detailed is totally contradicted by the evidence of
various health professionals who had worked within his practiced and who had
been recorded as the ‘provider’ for numerous
services. The Tribunal
notes none of these health care professionals were required for
cross-examination. It flows that there were
over 500 false claims made for
treatment allegedly provided by other practitioners claimed through the HICAPS
system. This certainly
impacts upon the Respondent’s
credibility.
Even without regard to the
contents of the report of Dr Ajam, the Tribunal could not accept in the context
of the evidence in this
matter that all treatments as particularised in
Particulars (q), (r) and (s) had in fact been
Summary of Findings with respect to the Particulars of
Particulars (a) – (m)
177. After considering all the evidence in this matter, particularly the
unchallenged evidenced of the various health practitioner
mentioned in the
Particulars and noting that the Respondent admits Particulars (a) – (m),
the Tribunal finds that these Particulars
are proven.
Particular (n), (o) & (p)
178. The ultimate evidence of the Respondent was that he only maintained records
of the treatment he provided to Mrs A, Master B
and Master C for a number of
months in the middle of 2006 for their use in support of a potential civil
claim. The Respondent admitted
he failed to keep records between 1 January 2000
and 15 March 2006. The Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that Particulars (n),
and (p) are all proven. The keeping of notes is an obligation on all
professional people. They serve as a record of the treatment
and in the case of
chiropractic (as with other health professions) as a tool for essentials such as
making assessment, planning treatment,
reviewing progress and making reports.
This obligation exists no matter what the familial (or other) relationship
between the patient
and the professional may be.
Particular (q), (r) & (s)
179. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the Respondent falsely claimed for services (detailed
in each of these
Particulars) which he did not in fact provide and therefore finds Particulars
(q), (r) and (s) established.
Particulars (t), (u) & (v)
180. For the reasons set out above the Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied
that the Respondent provided the services. Particulars
(t), (u) and (v)
therefore fail.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision
(with respect to Particulars) document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal advisers
2) The HCCC and its legal
3) The Board and
4) In accordance with statutory requirements.
Dated: 8 December 2008
__________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Jacqueline Milne
___________________
Edwin Devereaux AM
___________________
Warwick Bateman OAM
Annexure A – Schedule of documents in evidence
– Schedule of names suppressed
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (355 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter