URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Assadourian v Roads and Maritime Services (GD) [2013] NSWADTAP 46 (22 October 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Assadourian v Roads and Maritime Services (GD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 46
Hearing Date(s):
Decision Date:
22 October 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Judge K P O'Connor, President
S Frost, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
1. The appeal is dismissed as it relates to the Tribunal's decision to
affirm the decision to disqualify the appellant from holding
an operator's
2. The appeal as it relates to the appellant's driver certificate is
extended to the merits. The Registrar is to fix a date for the
directions for the hearing on the merits.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONAL REGULATION - Tow Truck Industry - Operator Licence - Driver
certificate - Tribunal affirmed administrator's decisions
to disqualify
applicant from both authorities - reduced period of disqualification - Appeal -
Operator decision affirmed - Fitness
may vary having regard to nature of
authority - Operator history not necessarily relevant to driver certificate -
Conduct as driver
during stay period to be taken into account - Leave granted to
extend appeal to merits
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Tow Truck Industry Act
Cases Cited:
Assadourian v Roads and Traffic Authority
[2013] NSWADT 6
Assadourian v
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales (Northern Region)
[2011] NSWSC
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR
Beale v Government Insurance Office (NSW)
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
v Anderson, unreported, 28 September 1994, Court of Appeal
Collector of
Customs v Pozzolanic
[1993] FCA 456
; (1993) 43 FCR 280
D'Amore v Independent
Commission Against Corruption
[2013] NSWCA 187
Haining v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Service
[1999] NSWADT 6
Lo v Chief Commissioner of State
[2013] NSWCA 180
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
v Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
185 CLR 259
Singh v Director-General,
Department of Finance and Services
[2011] NSWADT 296
Principal judgment
John Assadourian (Appellant)
Roads and Maritime Services
(Respondent)
Representation
M Condon SC (Appellant)
K Eastman SC (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Sage Solicitors (Appellant)
Smythe Wozniak Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
General Division
- Date of Decision:
11 January 2013
- Citation:
Assadourian v Roads and Traffic Authority
[2013] NSWADT 6
- Court File Number(s):
093327, 113148
REASONS FOR
appellant, Mr Assadourian, has applied to the Tribunal for review of three
administrative decisions made by Roads and Maritime
Services (RMS) as
administrator of the
Tow Truck Industry Act 1998
(the Act): decision to
refuse his application for renewal of his tow truck driver's certificate
(November 2009); decision to disqualify
him from being eligible for a tow truck
driver's certificate for ten years (June 2011) and decision to disqualify him
eligible for a tow truck operator's licence for ten years (June
December 2009 he applied to the Tribunal for review of the first decision
(application no 093327), and was granted a stay, with
the result that he
continued to drive. He lodged a second application for review after the
disqualification decisions (application
no 113148). The stay was continued.
Following a hearing held in June and July 2012, the General Division of the
Tribunal affirmed
all three decisions but varied the disqualification period to
one of two years:
Assadourian v Roads and Traffic Authority
[2013] NSWADT
(11 January 2013). The appellant now appeals against the Tribunal's decisions,
while the respondent has lodged a notice of contention,
arguing that the
Tribunal wrongly excluded certain material from its consideration, and seeks
reinstatement of the ten year disqualification
periods. The appellant obtained a
stay from the Appeal Panel pending disposal of the case, with the result that he
continues to drive.
November 2009 decision
: As at November 2009 Mr Assadourian had held for many
years a tow truck driver's certificate issued under the Act. In deciding to
refuse his application for renewal, RMS relied on a history of contraventions of
the law, which, in its opinion, demonstrated that
he could no longer be regarded
as a 'fit and proper person' to hold such a certificate and demonstrated that it
would be 'contrary
to the public interest' for him to hold such a certificate
s 26(3)(d)).
The history of contraventions referred both to his record
as a driver and his record when he was a licensed tow truck operator. Mr
Assadourian had held an operator's licence between November 2004 and April 2008
on behalf of Towman Pty Ltd (Towman), of which he
was the sole director,
secretary and shareholder.
relinquished the licence in April 2008 after Mr Assadourian sold his two trucks
to Northern Division Towing Pty Ltd (NDT).
NDT held an operator's licence and
was, in turn, a wholly owned subsidiary of a major operator, Combined Towing
Services (NSW) Pty
Ltd (CTS). Mr Assadourian leased the trucks back, and entered
into an agreement with NDT under which he was to work for them as a
receive payments from NDT for work done. However, under the agreement, he or
Towman would remain responsible for many
aspects of the cost of operation and
maintenance of the trucks and for workers compensation, and superannuation. In
November 2008
RMS's inspectors expressed concern to Mr Assadourian, and
suggested that he was still doing business as an operator, in breach of
The Act, s 15 provides:
15 Requirement for tow truck operators to be licensed
A person must not carry on business as a tow truck operator unless the person
holds a tow truck operators licence that authorises
the kind of towing work
carried on by the person in the course of that business.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units or imprisonment for 12 months, or
June 2011 decisions
: In its November 2009 reasons RMS referred to its
concern that he had conducted himself as an operator unlawfully in the period
Towman relinquished its licence.
the June 2011 reasons it referred to the fact that it had commenced a
prosecution of Mr Assadourian and Towman Pty Ltd for breach
of s 15 alleging
that they carried on business on 21 occasions in the period July 2009 to
December 2009 by operating as an 'owner/driver'
under 'the guise' of licensed
tow truck operator, NDT. These matters remain before the Parramatta Local Court
pending disposal of
these proceedings.
it referred to further convictions incurred by Mr Assadourian and Towman in 2010
referable to the period when Towman held
a licence, i.e. failure to leave the
scene of an accident when required, non completion of invoices for towing work,
and failure
to keep a record of towing work and failure to make entries in the
holding yard register.
most important additional matter was conduct Mr Assadourian was said to have
engaged in at the scene of an accident on 3 May 2011,
which he had attended as
tow truck driver. The reasons referred to charges laid by the police on 24 May
2011 - intimidation of the
owner of a damaged vehicle (an indictable offence),
and disobeying directions given to him by a police officer to leave the scene
an accident.
matters led RMS to decide on 3 June 2011 to take 'disciplinary action' against
Mr Assadourian pursuant to s 42 of the Act. It
decided to disqualify Mr
Assadourian from holding an
operator's licence
or from holding a driver's
certificate until 1 June 2021 on the following grounds: that he had been
'charged with an indictable offence'
(s 42(1)(b)); that he had 'contravened
provisions of the Act and regulations' (s 42(1)(d)); that he was 'not a fit and
proper person'
to hold an operator's licence or a driver's certificate (s
42(1)(f)); and that, in its opinion, he had engaged in 'fraudulent or
conduct or activity in connection with the licensee's business as a tow truck
operator' (s 42(1)(h). Mr Assadourian applied
for review; the Tribunal continued
the stay order applying to the driver's certificate.
of Question of Law, December 2010 - September 2011
: The first application
for review was still pending before the Tribunal when the disqualification
decisions were made. This was because
the case was before the Supreme Court
following referral of a question of law, done with the agreement of the parties,
basis of an agreed statement of facts. The question of law went to
the operator side of the case. In its reasons of November 2009,
as previously
noted, RMS had relied on, what it regarded, as Mr Assadourian's misconduct in
operating a business in the period after
Towman had relinquished its operator
licence. There was dispute as to whether the conduct infringed s 15, and for
that reason the
parties sought a Supreme Court ruling. The Court (Rothman J)
ultimately declined to make a ruling, but it did make a number of observations
on the interpretation of s 15:
Assadourian v Roads and Traffic Authority of
New South Wales (Northern Region)
[2011] NSWSC 1052
(9 September 2011).
disqualification decisions were made while the case was before the Supreme Court
on the question of law. The administrator's reasons
for the 2009 decision and
for the 2011 decisions are extracted in detail at paras [3] and [6] of the
Tribunal's reasons; and the
facts as agreed before the Tribunal in relation to
the business relationship with NDT are set out at para [38].
the time the case reached hearing in June 2012, there had been some further
developments. RMS revised its reasons to take into
account, most importantly,
the outcome of the charges laid on 24 May 2011. The indictable offence charge,
intimidation of an owner
of a vehicle, was withdrawn. On 24 May 2012 Mr
Assadourian was found guilty of the resist/hinder police charges. He was
on the basis of a s 10 non-conviction bond, to be of good behaviour
for six months.
summary, the history divided as follows:
: 4 convictions as a driver in the period 2004 to 2012 being
resisting/hindering a police officer (the 3 May 2011 event), failure
with direction at scene of accident, failure to leave accident once
authorisation obtained and contravention of condition
of certificate in relation
to exceeding maximum fee.
: 11 convictions. They included repeated failures to keep proper
records and not including in them prescribed contents, in particular
yard records.
submitted to the Tribunal that Mr Assadourian's pattern of contravention of
relevant laws clearly demonstrated that he was not
a fit and proper person to
continue to hold a certificate or an operator's licence, and that a long period
of disqualification was
its hearing the Tribunal received evidence from a police officer who attended
the incident on 3 May 2011 and considered a statement
from the owner of the
vehicle who had complained about Mr Assadourian's behaviour.
The Tribunal's Decision
Tribunal's reasons for decision commenced with a detailed account of the
provisions of the Act that bear on a driver's certificate
and an operator's
licence: see paras [10]-[28]. We will not repeat all that material in this
decision. The Tribunal then set out
the history of the question of law
proceeding: paras [29]-[37]. The Tribunal set out a number of observations made
by Rothman J going
to the interpretation of s 15.
the Tribunal set out the parties' 'agreed facts' as submitted to the Tribunal
hearing: para [38]. This statement expanded on
the agreed facts that were
presented to the Supreme Court in relation to the question of law. Many of the
matters itemised as undervalued
or disregarded by the Tribunal in the grounds
set out in the notice of appeal (see below) are mentioned in the statement of
facts, and are seen as positive by Mr Assadourian.
[39], the Tribunal began its consideration of whether Mr Assadourian was a fit
and proper person to hold a driver's certificate
or a tow truck operator's
licence with an account of the relevant law. It confined its reasons to the
fitness question.
summarised RMS's submissions at [45]-[49] as follows:
45 The proper functioning of the tow truck industry requires public
confidence and reliance on the propriety and integrity of those
licensed to work
within it. Consideration of the question of whether a person is fit and proper
to participate in the industry involves
taking account of the person's
compliance with regulatory requirements and the extent to which their record of
compliance reflects
the person's attitude to the regulatory regime.
46 The Respondent submits that the Applicant has repeatedly breached
requirements of the statutory scheme over a number of years,
and enough chances
have been given to him, bearing in mind the high standards which the Parliament
intended to set for this trouble-prone
47 Further, the Respondent submits that the Applicant's arrangements with
Northern Division Towing ("NDT") mean he is carrying on
a business as a tow
truck operator in breach of section 15 of the Act, and this arrangement
contravenes and undermines the operation
of the Act.
48 The Respondent asserts that the Applicant and/or Towman the submission of
the Respondent is that the Applicant and/or Towman were
carrying on business as
tow truck operators and between July and December 2009 probably committed the 21
offences alleged to have
been committed under section 15 of the Act. The
Respondent submits that if the Applicant and/or Towman are carrying on a
contrary to section 15 of the Act, then that cannot be permitted to
49 It is common ground that this point is relevant to the fit and proper
person issue and both the disqualification and non-renewal
at [50] it turned to the debate over the proper construction of s 15 of the Act,
and its application to the agreed facts as presented
to the Tribunal (a revised
version of those presented to the Supreme Court). It is in this context that the
Tribunal first referred
to the Anderson Report of 1998 (an issue raised by the
grounds of appeal). The report made recommendations for cleaning up the
and imposing tougher regulation. It led to the passage of the current
[60] and following the Tribunal summarised the concerns identified by the Report
the complexities that are
involved in managing the distribution of tow truck services across the State, in
ensuring appropriate responsiveness
to accidents, and the maintaining of order
at the scene of accidents.
Report and the Minister's second reading speech referred to the highly
competitive behaviour and practices adopted by many operators
and drivers. All
of this was covered in order to ascertain the object of s 15 of the Act.
Tribunal continued its examination of s 15 with an account of RMS's submissions,
and Mr Assadourian's submissions. The Tribunal
gave its 'decision on the s 15
issue' at [98]-[102]. It was not satisfied that there were any contraventions.
The RMS has lodged
a notice of contention (see below) going to that part of the
Tribunal dealt with the balance of the case at paras [103]-[130]. Mr
Assadourian's grounds of appeal mainly focus on this part
of the Tribunal's
reasons. The Tribunal referred to the oral evidence received by it, which it
said 'largely concerned' the incident
on 3 May 2011: see [106] to [114]. The
Tribunal heard evidence from the attending police officer. It accepted as
accurate the written
statement made by the vehicle owner, a woman who had gone
to the scene of the accident alone after being called there by police.
parked car had been damaged by a passing car that had got out of control.) In
essence, she said that Mr Assadourian made her
feel anxious and intimidated over
the way he pressed her to give him the towing work, when she wanted to speak
independently to the
NRMA and make her own arrangements. Finally, the Tribunal
referred to the applicant's testimonials at [115] to [118].
Tribunal's substantive assessment appears at [119] to [130]. We will set that
out in full:
119 It has been made clear from the second reading speech and from in earlier
decisions of this Tribunal that the legislature takes
criminal activity within
the tow truck industry extremely seriously. The Respondent argues that the
Applicant's criminal record does
not reflect a person who has the moral
integrity and rectitude of character necessary to fulfil the role of a tow truck
driver within
the tow truck industry. It is further submitted that each of the
offences took place in the course of the Applicant's activities
in the tow truck
industry and relate directly to his fitness to participate in that industry.
120 Further, the Respondent argues that the Applicant's argumentative
behaviour towards police is significant, as is the repeated
nature of the
121 The conduct that resulted in the recent convictions occurred whilst the
Applicant knew that the issue of whether he was a fit
and proper person, and
whether he should retain his drivers certificate was in dispute before this
Tribunal. The Respondent argues
that to commit further offences in those
circumstances is indicative of a contemptuous attitude to the regulatory
122 I agree with the Respondent that the Applicant's behaviour at the
incident on 3 May 2011 casts doubt on his ability to comply
with his obligations
as a tow truck driver. While I accept that it was towards the lower end of the
scale of seriousness, the incident
occurred at a time when the Applicant had the
benefit of a stay of the Respondent's determination. The incident happened
course of these proceedings. It is also relevant that it occurred
within the regulated activity. In that regard the circumstances
different to those in the matter of
A Solicitor v Council of the NSW Law
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
123 The incident also must be viewed in the light of the conduct that has
lead to several offences over the previous several years.
In my view, it is an
issue that goes to his ability to work within the scope of the regulatory
124 As noted above, a person's fitness is to be gauged in light of the nature
and purpose of the activities that the person will undertake
and the ends to be
served by those activities. That involves taking account of a person's
compliance with regulatory requirements
and the extent to which their record of
compliance reflects the person's attitude to the regulatory regime.
125 I agree with the Respondent that the Applicant has demonstrated over
several years that he will breach the Act and at this time
I do not have
confidence that the Applicant will not re-offend or be the subject of further
charges or disciplinary action.
126 On the totality of the evidence before me in this matter it is my view
that the Applicant is not a fit and proper person to hold
certificate.
127 Accordingly it is my view that the determination to refuse to grant the
application was the correct and preferable decision in
all the circumstances and
the decision should be affirmed.
128 It is not necessary that I determine whether the granting of a drivers
certificate would be contrary to the public interest.
129 For the same reasons it is my view that the determination to disqualify
the Applicant from holding an operators licence or a drivers
certificate was
also the correct and preferable decision. In my view, some time out of the
industry would assist in focusing his
mind on the responsibilities of a tow
truck driver and appropriate conduct of those working within the industry.
However, I do not
consider that a period of disqualification for 10 years is
warranted. In my view, a period of disqualification for two years is warranted.
In all the circumstances the decision should be varied to reflect that lesser
130 As this will have a significant effect on the Applicant I think it
appropriate that the orders not have effect immediately. In
my view, it is
appropriate that the decision have effect 28 days after this decision.
will be seen that the Tribunal decided the case solely by reference to the
fitness ground relied upon in both the November 2009
and June 2011 decisions
(see s 26(3)(a) and s 42(1)(f)). It declined to make a finding in relation to
the second ground relied upon
in the November 2009 decision, the public interest
(s 26(3)(d)). It did not refer to the three grounds additional to fitness relied
on in the June 2011 decisions, i.e. being charged with an indictable offence,
which we accept was no longer relevant once it had
been withdrawn; history of
contraventions (s 42(1)(d)); and, most significantly, the allegation that he had
engaged in fraudulent
or dishonest connection with the licensee's business as a
tow truck operator (s 42(1)(h)).
Assadourian emphasised in his appeal submissions that his main concern is to
obtain reinstatement of his tow truck driver's certificate.
has lodged a notice of contention going to the way in which the Tribunal dealt
with RMS's case as it related to the allegations
that he had undertaken
unlicensed work as a tow truck operator in the period April 2008 to November
2009. Clearly if Mr Assadourian
was operating in the period April 2008 to
November 2009 as an operator and was doing so without being licensed that is a
very serious
matter. It would mean that various accountability and consumer
protection requirements mandated by the Act would not have been in
Assadourian seeks orders that the Tribunal's disqualification orders be set
aside, and that he be granted a tow truck driver's
certificate. He has referred
in material filed before the Tribunal to his financial circumstances, the income
he derives from tow
truck work, and his inability to replace that income with
equivalent income from other types of work. He referred to his family situation,
and the extent to which his three children are still dependant.
Assadourian acknowledges that his driver and operator record in the period
2004-2009 was not a good one. However, he refers to
the fact that he pleaded
guilty to the Towman charges that gave rise to the convictions in 2010. He
submits that they were regulatory
breaches and they did not result in severe
penalties. In relation to the incident of 3 May 2011, he notes that two charges
but not the most serious one of intimidation of the owner of the
vehicle, that he pleaded guilty and the penalties were not severe.
says that during the period of the stay which had, at the time of the appeal
hearing in May 2013, been in place for more than three
years, he had attended
around 500 accidents, and only that one had given rise to a complaint against
Grounds of Appeal
appeal may be made on a question of law, and, with the leave of the Appeal
Panel, may be extended to the merits:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
. Mr Assadourian's grounds of appeal are set out in the
amended notice of appeal filed 22 February 2013, as follows:
(1) [The Tribunal] Wrongly decided that the appellant's conduct, as
found by it, justified a finding that the appellant:
(a) was not a fit and proper person to hold a driver's certificate; and
(b) should be disqualified from holding an operator's licence and a driver's
certificate.
(2) Wrongly had regard to the terms of the Anderson Report and the views the
Tribunal attributed to the Parliament in assessing the
appellant's fitness to
hold a certificate.
(2A) Consequently, the findings concerning the appellant tainted by error of
(3) Wrongly decided that the appellant was not a fit and proper person to
hold a certificate by having regard to matters such as:
(a) whether the appellant's conduct on 3 May 2011 'cast doubt on his ability
to comply with his obligations as a tow truck driver''
(b) a lack of confidence on the Tribunal's part that the appellant would not
re-offend in future
without the Tribunal undertaking the necessary assessment of the appellant's
conduct as a whole and the offences he had committed
and without having regard
to the fact that offences against the Act, and the regulations, do not
constitute a ground for automatic
disqualification from obtaining an operator's
licence or a driver's certificate.
(3A) In the premises the Tribunal:
(a) misdirected himself in law as to the relevant tests to be applied; and
(b) failed to have regard to relevant facts and thus failed to accord
procedural fairness to the appellant.
(4) In determining that the appellant:
(a) was not a fit and proper person to hold a driver's certificate; and
(b) should be disqualified from holding an operator's certificate and a
driver's certificate,
the Judicial Member failed to make findings about the past conduct of the
appellant which purportedly justified those determinations
notwithstanding:
(i) the disastrous consequences for the appellant which would flow from the
aforesaid determinations;
(ii) the appellant had given evidence that he had learned from the incident
on 3 May 2011;
(iii) the said conduct was relied upon by the Judicial Member as casting
doubt on the appellant's compliance with statutory requirements
in the future.
(5A) In the premises, the Judicial Member:
(a) failed to exercise the jurisdiction conferred on him;
(b) failed to accord procedural fairness to the appellant; and
(c) failed to provide adequate reasons for his determination.
(5) In making the determinations referred to in paragraph 4, the Judicial
Member failed to have regard to, or take into account, the
(a) the minor nature of the appellant's offences;
(b) the fact that those offences had nothing to do with the mischief
identified by the Anderson Report;
(c )the disastrous consequences that would enure to the appellant as a result
of the said determinations;
(d) the fact that the offences were sporadic, in some cases old and did not
disclose a pattern of disregard for his statutory obligations;
(e) that the respondent itself regarded many of the offences to be minor and
the result of an administrative breakdown;
(f) the fact that respondent Authority had, in relation to the offences which
led to the appellant's conviction on 17 May 2010, eschewed
any suggestion of
dishonesty on the part of the appellant;
(g) the fact that the offences should be seen in the context of the
appellant's long and heavy involvement in the tow truck industry;
(h) the fact that the offences should be seen in the light of the
testimonials of the appellant's conduct made by the appellant's
(i) the fact that the said testimonials were relevant and carried weight
notwithstanding that in many cases the authors did not indicate
appreciation of the appellant's history, because they nonetheless constituted
evidence of the appellant's compliance with
the relevant statutory obligations
and his conduct as a tow truck driver on other occasions;
(j) the fact that the appellant had shown remorse for his conduct; and
(k) the fact that the appellant had taken steps to avoid a repeat of his
(6) The findings made by the Judicial Member were so unreasonable as to
indicate that he did not apply the proper legal test, and
that he misdirected
himself in law.
(7) In the alternative, the appellant seeks leave to extend the appeal to the
Assadourian seeks the following orders: the appeal be allowed, granting Mr
Assadourian a tow truck driver's certificate, and that
the determinations
disqualifying him from holding a certificate or an operator's licence be set
Grounds of Appeal: General Observations
grounds of appeal put in issue the Tribunal's finding that Mr Assadourian was
not a fit and proper person to hold either a driver's
certificate or an
operator's licence, and put in issue the severity of the penalty
(disqualification for two years).
Relevant Considerations.
There is no need to catalogue all possibly relevant
considerations and work through them. The administrative decision-maker, and
Tribunal on review, may decide to concentrate on some of the relevant
considerations and make no reference to others that could
possibly be discerned
from the material. As Mason J noted in
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
Not every consideration that a decision-maker is bound to take into
account but fails to take into account will justify the court
setting aside the
impugned decision and ordering that the discretion be re-exercised according to
law. A factor might be so insignificant
that the failure to take it into account
could not have materially affected the decision .... A similar principle has
been enunciated
in cases where regard has been had to irrelevant considerations
in the making of an administrative decision ... .
Importantly,
as recently noted by Basten JA in
Lo v Chief Commissioner of State
[2013] NSWCA 180
The term "relevant considerations" is widely misunderstood: as used
in leading authorities, such as
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
at 39 (Mason J) it refers to a
matter which the decision-maker is bound to take into account. The obligation
may derive from the
express terms of the power-conferring statute or may be
implied from its subject matter, scope and purpose. A preferable term would
"mandatory consideration". Further, a matter traditionally described as an
"irrelevant consideration" is one which is prohibited
because, having regard to
the subject matter, scope and purpose of the power being exercised, it can be
seen to reflect an extraneous
or improper purpose or to render the decision
arbitrary or capricious. Between these two categories is usually a wide range of
permissible
considerations which the decision-maker may weigh or disregard
without committing an error of law.
JA continued:
10 The next concept is that of "taking into account". It covers a
spectrum of conduct. If a decision-maker who gives reasons for a
decision makes
no reference to a particular matter, it may be inferred that he or she
disregarded it, either deliberately or through
inadvertence. In either case, if
it were a mandatory consideration, there would be an error of law. If, however,
the matter is referred
to there may still be a basis for review. In some cases,
it is asserted that there has been a failure to give "proper, genuine and
realistic consideration", to a particular matter. That is best understood as a
complaint of failure "to give adequate weight to a
relevant factor of great
importance": see
Peko-Wallsend
at 41 (Mason J). The other side of this
complaint is giving "excessive weight to a relevant factor of no great
importance". Dealing
with these circumstances, Mason J continued:
"The preferred ground on which this is done, however, is not the failure to
take into account relevant considerations or the taking
into account of
irrelevant considerations, but that the decision is 'manifestly unreasonable'.
This ground of review was considered
by Lord Greene MR in
Corporation
, in which his Lordship said that it would only be made out if it
were shown that the decision was so unreasonable that no reasonable
person could
have come to it."
assessment of fitness is a classic example of a situation where there will be a
range of 'permissible considerations'. The judgment
does not stand or fall
because other 'permissible considerations' might have been taken into account,
where they are simply additional
factors that might have been placed in the
The Anderson Report.
The grounds of appeal criticise the Tribunal for the
extent of its reference to and reliance upon the Anderson Report. An
administrative
decision maker and the review tribunal as a substitute decision
maker must take as its guide the words of the statute as they appear
statute read as a whole, informed for example by any objects clause, and apply
them to the specific circumstances of the case
before it. Here the Anderson
Report was used as a guide to an understanding of the reasons for the stricter
disciplinary regime seen
in the current Act as compared to predecessor
legislation. It was also used as a guide to informing the Tribunal as to the
of industry participant conduct of most concern to the community.
our view, the Tribunal did not miscarry in using this Report. It did not, in our
opinion, stray into error by for example substituting
the terms of the report
for the terms of the statute or by introducing into its thinking as relevant
considerations matters canvassed
by the Report that could reasonably be said to
be inconsistent or at odds with the terms of the discretion required to be
by the statute.
Adequacy of Reasons.
We agree with Mr Assadourian's submissions that the
Tribunal's reasoning process as found in the final part of its reasons, headed
'Discussion' is relatively sparse. For a recent review of the principles
relating to adequacy of reasons, see
Keith v Gal
[2013] NSWCA 339
Gleeson JA.
Meagher JA noted in
Beale v Government Insurance Office (NSW)
at 441, there is no need to refer to relevant evidence in detail
provided it is clear that it has been considered. There is no need
to refer to
all aspects of the evidence in the way that the grounds of appeal suggest. The
Tribunal's reasons gave a comprehensive
account of the evidence. Nor is this a
case where the conclusion reached by the Tribunal was 'devoid of reason',
'clearly unjust'
or arbitrary. See further the recent discussion of this ground
of objection in
D'Amore v Independent Commission Against Corruption
[2013] NSWCA 187
per Beazley P, esp at [77] ff. See also Basten JA in
at [13] ff.
'the reasons for the decision under review are not to be construed minutely and
finely with an eye keenly attuned to the
perception of error' - is applicable to
the grounds of appeal in this case. The observation was made in
Collector of
Customs v Pozzolanic
[1993] FCA 456
; (1993) 43 FCR 280 at 287 by the Full
Court of the Federal Court (Neaves, French and Cooper JJ) and endorsed by the
High Court in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Wu Shan
[1996] HCA 6
185 CLR 259
higher standard applies to the analysis of 'critical' evidence and critical
issues. The reasons should clearly refer to the critical
matters, and dispose of
them. See also
D'Amore v Independent Commission Against Corruption
ff per Beazley P. Gleeson JA in
Keith v Gal
110 The extent and content of reasons will depend upon the
particular case under consideration and the matters in issue. As stated
Basten JA (Beazley JA (as her Honour then was) and Macfarlan JA agreeing) in
Resource Pacific Pty Ltd v Wilkinson
[2013] NSWCA 33
"It is not the function of an appellate court to set standards as to the
optimal, or even desirable, level of detail required to be
revealed in reasons
for judgment. Rather it is to determine whether the reasons provided have
reached a minimum acceptable level
to constitute a proper exercise of judicial
power. Transparency in decision-making is an important value, but it is not cost
and may involve separate parameters of quantity and quality."
111 A similar reticence when scrutinising judicial reasons was expressed by
Allsop P in
Mitchell v Cullingral Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 389
Honour (at [2]) stated that when dealing with large bodies of evidence, a judge
"forced to economise in expression and approach in order to be coherent in
resolving the overall controversy. The need for coherent
and tolerably workable
reasons sometimes requires truncation of reference and expression .... That
said, central controversies put
up for resolution by the parties must be dealt
with. The competing evidence directed or relevant to such controversies must be
and resolved. "
this instance, we accept that the reasons do not refer directly to a number of
matters set out in the agreed statement of facts.
In our view, on a fair reading
the Tribunal is clearly alluding to this material when it proffers the general
conclusions that appear
in the extract set out at [25] above. However, it will
be seen in the analysis which follows that we do think the Tribunal fell into
error in not separating more clearly than it did the case against Mr Assadourian
in relation to the operator licence from the case
against him in relation to the
driver's certificate.
Assessment of Fitness.
Fitness is a variable concept that takes its hue from
the nature of the authority. There were different authorities under notice
following statements have been noted in many decisions of the Tribunal:
(1) 'The expression "fit and proper person", standing alone,
carries no precise meaning. It takes its meaning from its context, from
activities in which the person is or will be engaged and the ends to be served
by those activities':
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321
, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said at 380.
(2) 'Whether a person is "fit and proper" to hold a licence in a regulated
industry will be affected by general considerations relating
to the character of
the person, special considerations that take account of the nature of the
industry in issue and the public policy
objectives leading the legislature to
regulate the industry':
Haining v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[1999] NSWADT 6
per O'Connor P at [41].
accept that in assessing a person's capacity to be an operator, it would
normally be appropriate to have regard to any driver history
of misconduct
especially as it might bear on such matters as fitness to deal with customers,
and honesty and integrity.
we do think great care needs to be taken in cross-applying operator
contraventions to the question of fitness to hold a driver
certificate. A person
might not be of sufficient competence, integrity and trustworthiness to run a
business with its complex demands
yet be accepted as being competent to
undertake work as a driver employed by a licensed operator. We are concerned
that in this case
the way the cases were presented, and the way they were
examined in turn by the Tribunal did not segregate the two situations. For
relatively recent example of the Tribunal segregating its consideration of
fitness as between two different classes of authority
(real estate agent, versus
employed salesperson), see
Singh v Director-General, Department of Finance
and Services
[2011] NSWADT 296.
now turn to the specific decisions.
The Operator Licence Decision
consider that the decision as it relates to the operator licence is not affected
by any legal error and we are not inclined to
disturb it. In our view, there was
ample material before the Tribunal that might raise doubt as to Mr Assadourian's
fitness to hold
an operator's licence, regardless of the conclusion reached in
relation to the situation between June and December 2009. The Tribunal's
going to this matter were sufficient. The operator's licence allows for the
conduct of a business that holds itself out to
the public and is obliged to
observe numerous obligations in relation to the towing and keeping of vehicles,
and the maintenance
of records. Mr Assadourian's history as an operator was a
poor one, given in particular the short period in which Towman held a licence.
tribunal might, not unreasonably, have concluded that this history justified a
finding that he was not presently fit to be granted
an operator's licence, and
the upgraded sanction of disqualification was appropriate in light of the
offences recorded in June 2010
and in light of what occurred on 3 May 2011. In
these circumstances the decision of the Tribunal to reduce the period of
disqualification
to two years was, we consider, not affected by legal error.
While it is not necessary to demonstrate an error of law to be given
extend an appeal to the merits, we are of the view that this aspect of the
Tribunal's decision ought not be revisited.
The Driver Certificate Decision
case against Mr Assadourian in relation to his fitness as a driver was not as
strong as the case relating to the operator authority.
Mr Assadourian's key
concern is to retain his driver's certificate.
by the number of convictions, Mr Assadourian's driver history was not as bad as
his operator history as at December 2009.
This case is highly unusual in that Mr
Assadourian has now driven (under a stay) for a considerable period of time
since he was refused
renewal in December 2009. He has had, as he submits, a
relatively unblemished history as a driver in the period since December 2009.
The major exception is what occurred on 3 May 2011. In its case before the
Tribunal, RMS relied strongly on the events of 3 May 2011
to demonstrate his
continued unfitness and to justify its disqualification decision. That decision
was based on the information it
had as at 3 June 2011.
the most serious charge was withdrawn by the police. The penalty imposed by the
court on the other charge was a light one.
In our view when regard is had to
these outcomes, it is difficult to justify the imposition of such a harsh
penalty. We are not satisfied
that his conduct on 3 May 2011, as finally dealt
with by the court, could justify such a severe form of disciplinary action.
while there was, nevertheless, a strong case as at December 2009 that Mr
Assadourian was not then fit to hold a driver's
certificate, the Tribunal must
deal with the matter on the basis of his present fitness at the time of hearing.
Burton v Anderson
, unreported, 28 September 1994, the Court of Appeal
(Kirby P, Priestley, Handley JJA) dealt with an unusual case where a veterinary
surgeon had continued to practise despite having been the subject of a
disciplinary order of suspension for 3 months, and requirements
retraining. Under the law relating to veterinary disciplinary appeals at the
time, the lodgment of a notice of appeal gave
rise to an automatic stay.
veterinary surgeon therefore continued to practice pending disposal of the
appeal. Neither party (in particular the agency that
brought the proceedings)
took any steps to bring the appeal on. The result was that by the time his
appeal was heard by the Court
of Appeal he had been in practice for a further
three years.
members of the court agreed that there had been no error in the reasons for
decision of the primary tribunal at the time the decision
was delivered, but now
three years had passed; and it was necessary to have regard to the conduct of
the veterinary surgeon in the
intervening period. The court concluded that the
surgeon had proved by his conduct in the intervening period that he was now
fit to remain in practice, and the suspension should not be enforced.
In the result the suspension was set aside, replaced by a reprimand
parties agreed to a retraining regimen.
accept that this case is different to
Burton v Anderson
in that there is
the further misconduct that occurred on 3 May 2011 while Mr Assadourian had the
benefit of the stay.
are concerned that the Tribunal did not clearly segregate the case against Mr
Assadourian in relation to the operator licence from
the case in relation to the
driver certificate. In our view, and in this regard we do see a problem in
relation to the adequacy of
reasons, the two matters should have been separately
examined. They were mixed together.
acknowledge that it may be proper in assessing fitness and propriety to have
regard to a person's overall history of compliance
with industry standards (in
whatever capacity they have participated in the industry), but we do not accept
that in this case they
should have been mixed to the degree they were. A person
might be clearly unfit to be an operator (or in the real estate example,
agent dealing with the public), but the matters that make them unfit in that
regard may have less or no real relevance to working
in the same industry in a
subordinate and more limited role as an employee.
the examination of the history in the way that, we consider, occurred in this
case carries the danger that the fitness standards
appropriate to a driver
certificate will be assimilated to those appropriate to the more demanding,
operator certificate.
our view it was plain that Mr Assadourian should no longer be allowed to be an
operator, but much less clear that his history warranted
removal of his driver
certificate, especially if the driver certificate has clear conditions in
relation to working for a licensed
our opinion the appeal as it relates to the driver certificate should be
extended to the merits. We will set aside a day to hear
the appeal as it relates
to the certificate. We should indicate that it should not be presumed we have
reached a final view on the
fitness issue. And, as noted earlier, there were
other grounds upon which RMS relied that were not addressed by the Tribunal.
RMS's Notice of Contention
notice of contention relates to the hotly contested matter of whether Mr
Assadourian operated a business without a licence in
the period June 2009 to
December 2009. As previously noted, the question of whether the agreed facts
demonstrated serial contraventions
went to the Supreme Court, and was
not resolved, and then came before the Tribunal. The Tribunal was not satisfied
that the case
had been made out.
provision is an offence provision. As also noted earlier in these reasons, the
charges remain before the Local Court, and are
held up waiting any views of this
our view it would be better if these questions were dealt with in the Local
Court in an environment bound by the rules of evidence
and where detailed
findings can be made to the criminal standard.
seems to us that even if the RMS is correct and the conduct set out in the
agreed statement of facts ought properly be construed
as involving breaches of
, it does not necessarily follow that the breaches would have great weight on
the fitness question so far as the driver certificate
is concerned. It would
appear on the basis of the agreed facts as presented to the Tribunal that Mr
Assadourian entered into an agreement
that had the endorsement of NDT. It may be
that it was a sham, but if so we would have expected to have seen accessory
charges against
NDT. Our understanding from submissions made at the joint
application for referral of the question of law is that Mr Assadourian's
arrangement was not atypical of arrangements being made at that time at least
between small operators and the larger operators; and
that his case was being
treated as a test case.
our view, all that could reasonably be inferred on the basis of the agreed
statement of facts is that the arrangement involved
a good faith attempt by NDT
and Mr Assadourian to turn him into a servant of NDT. It is apparent that
uses words of great generality, and in its terms gives little guidance as to how
to resolve cases of the present kind where the arrangement
between the principal
(here NDT) and the contractor (here Mr Assadourian) seeks to avoid some of the
features found in orthodox employment
relationships.
we have not seen any material to suggest that the various record-keeping and
accountability requirements were not observed
by NDT in the period under notice.
It is not clear to us that there was any direct harm done to the public
interest. In our view
it would be better if RMS developed industry standards in
consultation with affected parties in relation to where the line is to
between certified driver work and operator work in this industry.
The Period of Disqualification in relation to the Operator
Tribunal's order was expressed as one of disqualification for two years from 28
days after the date of its decision. That aspect
of the decision was not stayed
by the stay order made in June 2011. Therefore the disqualification period has
continued to run during
the currency of this appeal, and will according to our
calculations expire on 7 February 2015.
1. The appeal is dismissed as it relates to the Tribunal's decision to affirm
the decision to disqualify the appellant from holding
an operator's licence.
2. The appeal as it relates to the appellant's driver certificate is extended
to the merits. The Registrar is to fix a date for the
making of directions for
the hearing on the merits.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (258 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter