URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/125.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Griffiths v The Owners �e" Strata Plan No 11097 [2025] NSWCATCD 125;
(18 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Griffiths v The Owners – Strata Plan No 11097
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 125
Hearing Date(s):
29 April 2025
Date of Orders:
18 August 2025
Decision Date:
18 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
R Collins, Senior Member
(1) The parties are to jointly engage a contractor to demolish
section A and Section B of the masonry wall as identified in the
survey prepared
by Beyond Measure Surveys dated 16 December 2024 within 60 days of these orders
and remove all debris and vegetation
on the line of the existing fence and
cavity floor. The cost is to be shared equally between the
(2) The applicant may remove all remnant moss,
debris and vegetation on its external house wall adjacent to Sections A and B,
70 days after these orders. These works are to be borne by the partes in
equal shares.
(3) The applicant may repaint its
external house wall the same colour as the rest of the house within 80 days of
these orders, at
the Applicant’s cost.
the painting is complete, and within 90 days of these orders, the parties are to
construct a timber lapped and capped
boundary dividing fence on a concrete kerb
with footing as shown on architectural plans Figures 20, 21 and 22 prepared by
Griffiths Architects. The cost is to be borne equally by the parties.
(5) The fencing work in orders 1 and 4 is to be
carried out in a good and workmanlike manner using new materials. If it holds a
currents contractors license to carry out the work in Orders 1 and 4, then the
work in Orders 1 and 4 is to be carried out by Jensons
Projects in accordance
with its quote dated 19 March 2023, except that items 2.3 and 2.5 on the quote
are excluded from the scope
development consent is required for any of the works at orders 1-4 (including by
application of clause 5.10 of the Woollahra
Local Environmental Plan
(a) the respondent is to lodge development
application seeking consent for the timber lapped and capped fence as described
4, within 4 weeks of the orders;
(b) the costs
of the development application are to be borne by the parties in equal shares;
(c) the timing of the works at orders 1-4 is to run
from the date of any development consent granted by the
(7) Any application for an order in respect of
costs is to be made in writing to the Tribunal and provided to the other party
14 days of the date of this order.
submissions in opposition to an application for a costs order is to be sent to
the tribunal and the other party within 28
days of the date of these orders.
(9) The Tribunal intends to determine any application
for costs without a hearing under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act. Any submission
respect of a costs order should address whether the parties consider that the
matter can be determined on the papers, or if it
disagrees, why. Submissions
should not exceed 3 pages in length.
Catchwords:
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING — Fences and boundaries —
“Dividing fence”
Legislation Cited:
Dividing Fences Act 1991
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2015 (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Purcell v Chadwick
[2018] NSWCATAP 250
Alwiah v Watts
[2004] NSWSC
Muggeridge v Hackney
[2016] NSWCATCD 65
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Llewela Tegan Griffiths (applicant)
The Owners – Strata Plan No
SP11097 (respondent)
Representation:
Farrell (applicant)
(respondent)
Solicitors:
Marsdens Law Group –(respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/331924
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an application by a lot owner against the adjacent lot owner in respect of
the length and type of a proposed replacement dividing
fence between a home and
a carpark in Paddington.
application was filed in the Tribunal on 8 September 2024 in the name of the
applicant’s husband, against the neighbouring
property’s strata
manager. The proceedings were listed for conciliation and group list hearing on
2 October 2024, where the
parties were amended to the current parties. A
procedural decision to refuse leave to amend the applicant’s claim was
however leave to appeal was refused. On 31 January 2025 procedural
orders were made for the exchange of evidence including access
to the respective
parties’ experts.
matter was listed for contested hearing on 29 April 2025.
dispute is in relation to replacement of the dividing fence between the
properties. Both parties agree one section of the fence
is to be replaced. They
differ as to whether the remaining fence should be replaced, and what the
replacement fence should
applicant also seeks orders in relation to the removal of vegetation, painting
of the applicant’s wall and if development
consent is required for the
replacement of the fence, orders in relation to the lodgement of the
Applicants served a Notice to Carry Out Fencing Work on the respondents pursuant
to s 11 of the DF Act on 5 August 2024 (“Fencing
Notice”). There is
no dispute that the Fencing Notice was properly served, and the Tribunal finds
it was served on 4 August
Fencing Notice proposes:
(1) the location of the proposed fencing work be the existing boundary line;
(2) the fencing work to be carried out is:
“as per the recommendations of the Structural Investigation and Assessment
Report prepared by Dunnings Consulting Engineers
dated 7 June 2024, the owners
of 21 Duxford Street need to complete (at their cost):
1. Demolish and rebuild (it is their decision to rebuild it) the section of
masonry wall that has bowed and is defective. All new
cavity construction shall
be in accordance with the requirements of AS 3700 and the recommendations of a
suitably qualified Builder
and/or Structural Engineer.
2. Undertake the maintenance and cleaning to remove all biological growth and
debris build up within the cavity space for the full
extent of the wall.
4. Retrofit weepholes at the base of the existing masonry wall in accordance
with AAS 3700 clause 4.7 to allow adequate drainage
and ventilation.
5. Remove the existing tree and its root system to ensure no further impact to
the existing masonry wall and the surrounding structural
elements. Additional
other trees within proximity of the existing masonry wall for the full extent of
the boundary to 11 Duxford
Street should also be removed.
The owners of 11 Duxford Street need to complete (at their cost)
6. Retrofit a flashing element to the top of the wall in accordance with AS 3700
Clause 4.7to provide a barrier against the downward
passage of moisture within
the cavity space.”
Fencing Notice attached a copy of the report of Dunnings Consulting Engineers.
It also estimated the total cost of the works as
Tribunal is satisfied that the Fencing Notice contains sufficient information to
comply with requirements of s 11 of the DF Act.
respondents did not agree to the fencing work proposed in the Fencing Notice.
Legal Principles
6 of the DF Act sets out its general principle. It states:
“6 General principle—liability for fencing work
(1) An adjoining owner is liable, in respect of adjoining lands where
there is no sufficient dividing fence, to contribute to the
carrying out of
fencing work that results or would result in the provision of a dividing fence
of a standard not greater than the
standard for a sufficient dividing fence.
(2) This section applies whether or not a dividing fence already separates
the adjoining lands.”
to what constitutes a “fence”, s 3 of the DF Act defines a
“fence” as:
a structure, ditch or embankment, or a hedge or similar
vegetative barrier, enclosing or bounding land, whether or not continuous
extending along the whole of the boundary separating the land of adjoining
owners, and includes:
(a) any gate, cattlegrid or apparatus necessary for the operation of
the fence, and
(b) any natural or artificial watercourse which separates the land of
adjoining owners, and
(c) any foundation or support necessary for the support and
maintenance of the fence,
but does not include a retaining wall (except as provided by paragraph (c)) or a
wall which is part of a house, garage or other building.”
in section 3 of the DF Act, “dividing fence means a fence separating the
land of adjoining owners, whether on the common
boundary of adjoining lands or
on a line other than the common boundary.”
Work” is also defined in s 3 of the DF Act as follows:
“fencing work means:
(a) the design, construction, replacement, repair or maintenance of
the whole or part of a dividing fence, and
(b) the surveying or preparation of land (including the trimming,
lopping or removal of vegetation) along or on either side of the
common boundary
of adjoining lands for such a purpose,
and includes:
(c) the planting, replanting and maintenance of a hedge or similar
vegetative barrier, and
(d) the cleaning, deepening, enlargement or alteration of a ditch,
embankment or watercourse that serves as a dividing fence.”
4 of the DF Act requires the Tribunal to make a determination as to what is a
sufficient dividing fence. It states:
“4 Determination as to “sufficient dividing
In any proceedings under this Act, the Local Court or the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal is to consider all the circumstances
of the case when
determining the standard for a sufficient dividing fence for the purposes of
this Act, including the following:
(a) the existing dividing fence (if any),
(b) the purposes for which the adjoining lands are used or intended
to be used,
(c) the privacy or other concerns of the adjoining land owners,
(d) the kind of dividing fence usual in the locality,
(e) any policy or code relating to dividing fences adopted by the
council of the local government area in which the adjoining lands
(f) any relevant environmental planning instrument relating to the
adjoining lands or to the locality in which they are situated,
(g) in the case of a dividing fence affecting land the subject of a
lease under the
Western Lands Act 1901
, any order in force under
of that Act immediately before the repeal of that Act.”
factors listed in s 4 of the DF Act are not exhaustive, and the Tribunal must
“consider all the circumstances of the case
when determining the standard
for a sufficient dividing fence”:
Purcell v Chadwick
NSWCATAP 250.
14 of the DF Act specified the orders that the Tribunal may make in relation to
an application under the DF Act. It states:
“14 Orders as to fencing work
(1) The Local Court or the Civil and Administrative Tribunal may, in
respect of an application under this Act, make an order determining
more of the following:
(a) the boundary or line on which the fencing work is to be carried
out, whether or not that boundary or line is on the common boundary
adjoining lands,
(b) the fencing work to be carried out (including the kind of
dividing fence involved),
(c) the manner in which contributions for the fencing work are to be
apportioned or re-apportioned or the amount that each adjoining
owner is liable
to pay for that work,
(d) which portion of the dividing fence is to be constructed or
repaired by either owner,
(e) the time within which the fencing work is to be carried out,
(f) the amount of any compensation (in the form of an annual payment
to either of the adjoining owners) in consideration of loss
of occupation of any
(g) that, in the circumstances, no dividing fence is required in
respect of all or part of the boundary of the adjoining lands.
(1A) Despite subsection (1), no order may be made for the carrying out of
fencing work on a declared area of outstanding biodiversity
value under
Biodiversity Conservation Act 2016
without the consent of the
Environment Agency Head (within the meaning of that Act).
(2) The occupation of land on either side of a dividing fence, as a result
of an order determining that fencing work is to be carried
out otherwise than on
the common boundary of the adjoining lands, is not taken to be adverse
possession as against the owner or to
affect the title to or possession of the
land, except for the purposes of this Act.”
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine applications in relation to
dividing fences pursuant to section 13(1) of the DF
12 (2) of the DF Act states that either owner may apply to the Tribunal for an
order to determine the manner in which the
fencing work is to be carried
“If adjoining owners do not agree (within 1 month after one of them has
served a notice under section 11) as to the fencing
work to be carried
DF Act does not specify a time limit for applications to be commenced in the
Tribunal. Accordingly, the time limit is that which
is set out in Rule 23(3)(b)
of the NCAT Rules, which requires applications to be lodged within 28 days from
the day on which the
applicant became entitled under the enabling legislation to
make the application.
this case, the Fencing Notice was served on 5 August 2024 and the application
was filed on 8 September 2024. The tribunal is satisfied
that the application
was submitted within time.
Tribunal is otherwise satisfied that it has jurisdiction to hear and determine
this application pursuant to the DF Act.
the contested hearing, the applicant relied on bundles of documents filed with
the Tribunal on 25 September 2024, 5 November 2024
and 24 March 2025, and an
email from 7 April 2025 marked Exhibit 4. These documents relevantly included
photographs, a Fencing Notice
dated 5 August 2024, expert report of Ms Webster
dated 28 April 2025, a letter from Core Consulting Engineers dated 24 July 2024,
Hydromedial expert report dated 7 March 2025, report of Kyle Katt dated 7 June
2024, J & M Group Hydraulic stormwater assessment
dated 19 March 2025,
correspondence and photographs.
the contested hearing, the respondent relied on a bundle of documents filed with
the Tribunal on 23 April 2025 which relevantly
included an expert report dated
23 April 2025 from Mr Kameas, a quotation from National Building maintenance
Remedial Builders dated
3 January 2025, photographs and correspondence. This
bundle was entered into evidence subject to weight and relevance, and, subject
to paragraphs 1.3.2, 1.3.3, the first sentence in 2.6.8(c) and the first
sentence in 2.6.14(b) of the report of Mr Kameas dated 23
April 2025 being not
the hearing, the Mr Kameas gave evidence and was asked by questions by both
parties’ representatives.
parties relied on written submissions provided at the hearing.
Consideration
make orders for fencing work under s 14 of the DF Act, the Tribunal must first
be satisfied that there is not a sufficient dividing
fence in place.
M stated in
Alwiah v Watts
[2004] NSWSC 948
“The content of the Act demonstrates that jurisdiction to make orders is
dependent upon finding that there is an insufficient
dividing fence between the
adjoining lands. Unless that finding is made, no orders can be made. Such a
finding gives rise to the
liability referred to in s 6 and enables the making of
orders pursuant to s 14.”
current dividing fence is of unknown age. I find the fence is at least 58 years
old, and in 1976 was described as “a very
old brick wall”. It can be
viewed as three separate sections:
(1) Section A – a 1.23m high brick wall of 230mm wide, separating the
respondent’s carpark from the applicant’s
house wall. There is a gap
between the back of the brick wall and the applicant’s brick house wall
ranging between 1cm and
11cms in this section. The length of this section is
15.38m running along the boundary line from Duxford Street. It is covered with
mature vines on the respondents’ side of the fence. The applicants submit
this is not a sufficient dividing fence. The respondent
does not agree.
(2) Section B – the same brick wall, which has suffered damage. This
section connects to Section A and is 1.385-1.490m high.
It runs rearward at a
length of 10.84m. It also separates the respondent’s carpark from the
applicant’s house wall and
courtyard wall. It is not covered in vines. The
distance between the back side of the fence and the applicant’s house wall
ranges from 11cm to 0cm, where the fence is leaning against the
applicant’s house. It is common ground that the existing fence
sufficient dividing fence. The parties differ as to the fencing work required.
(3) Section C – this continues form section B rearwards to Suffolk Lane,
being a distance of 4.47m in length and is 1.490m
high. It is the same type of
brick wall, and is covered with vines. The parties agree the fence in this
section is a sufficient dividing
fence and neither party seeks to have fencing
work occur in this area.
Is there a sufficient dividing fence?
is common ground that the fence is not a sufficient dividing fence in Section B.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the fence, which
leans against the
applicant’s house wall in Section B, is not a sufficient dividing for the
purposes of the DF Act.
Tribunal is therefore satisfied that it has jurisdiction to order that fencing
work occur under s 14 of the DF Act. The issue
that remains is the scope and
extent of the fencing work, in particular:
(1) should the fence in Section A be replaced?
(2) whether the fencing work should be a timber lapped fence or brick fence;
(3) what ancillary orders are appropriate (including orders with respect to
development consent, cleaning and painting);
(4) what apportionment of cost of the fencing work.
What fencing work is required?
applicant seeks an order that Sections A and B are demolished, and replaced with
a lapped and capped timber fence, with ancillary
orders. Specifically she seeks
orders that:
(1) the Respondent is to demolish section A and Section B of the masonry wall as
identified in the survey prepared by Beyond Measure
Surveys dated 16 December
2024 (Survey) within 60 days of these orders.
(2) the parties are to arrange a contractor remove all remnant moss, debris and
vegetation on the external wall of the applicant’s
Sections A and B, to occur within 90 days after these orders. These works are to
be borne by the partes in equal
(3) The applicant may repaint its external house wall within 100 days of these
orders, at the Applicant’s cost.
(4) After the painting is complete, and within 120 days of these orders, the
Respondent is to construct a timber lapped and capped
boundary dividing fence on
a concrete kerb with footing as shown on architectural plans A-08, A-09 A-10
prepared by Llewela Griffiths
Architects, at its cost.
(5) If development consent is required for any of the works at orders 1-4
(including by application of clause 5.10 of the Woollahra
Local Environmental
Plan 2014):
(a) the respondent is ordered to lodge development application seeking consent
for the timber lapped and capped fence as described
at order 4, within 4 weeks
of the orders;
(b) the costs of the development application are to be borne by the parties in
equal shares; and
(c) the timing of the works at orders 1-4 is to run form the date of any
development consent granted by the council.
applicant submits that the replacement of Section A is necessary as the fence
itself is causing damage to the applicant’s
property. It particularly
relies on the report of Mr Morris of Hydromedial Consulting Group Pty Ltd dated
7 March 2025 (“Hydromedial
Hydromedial Report states that the fence in Section B has been damaged
“what appears to be vehicle impact all the vegetation growing on the wall
the boundary fence is leaning over and touch the
external wall of number 11
Duxford Rd.
3.7.3 The combination of touching walls the debris in the wall cavity the lack
of drainage and the exposed cavity is allowing water
to become trapped between
the boundary wall and the external wall.
3.7.4 This is causing damage to the internal side of the terrace at number 21
Duxford St Paddington.
3.7.6 The construction off the wall is also not allowing the occupant of 11
Duxford St to carry out maintenance and rectification
works to comply with
current building codes and standards.
3.7.7 The wall presents with what is assumed to be mould an algae and as such
testing should be carried out to determine if the internal
areas of number 11
Duxford Street have been contaminated form by mould spores.
3.7.8 The wall has a coating that appears to have been applied circa 1970. The
costing should be tested for lead to determine if
it is a risk to human health
and also the environment.”
further recommends replacing Sections A and B on the basis that
(a) the cavity between the fence and the applicant’s house wall has
inadequate grade allowing water to enter the cavity with
no way of escaping;
(b) the existing wall cracking in Section B is severe. The existing wall does
not have lateral support and is not designed to support
(c) the existing fence coating is flaking and may contain lead paint.
(d) moisture from bridging cavities has caused the paint coating to flake off on
the interior wall of the applicant’s property
adjacent to her pool. Vines
are also growing through the applicant’s wall which will cause the wall to
fail over time. High
moisture readings along the applicant’s wall show
moisture entering the wall from missing capping and potentially the wall
respondent submits that the Tribunal should limit any order to the rebuilding of
Section B. It submits that Section B is the sole
area of the existing fence that
is not a sufficient dividing fence, and as such the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
to order fencing
work in Section A. It submits that there is insufficient
evidence to establish that Section A is not a sufficient dividing fence.
respondent particularly relies on the expert report of Alexander Kameas dated 23
April 2025 (“Kameas Report”). It
states that:
“2.4.3 The out-of-plane shear deformation exists only at the 6m damaged
section of the wall.
2.4.5 The damaged section seems to be maintaining its axial (vertical) transfer
to self-weight to the base of the Dividing Masonry
Fence. Therefore, it is my
opinion that the Dividing Masonry Fence is not inducing an imposed lad on to the
Adjoining Boundary Wall
of the building at 11 Duxford Street.
This means that if the Adjoining Boundary Wall did not exist, the Dividing
Masonry Fence would be abele to freely stand by itself
in its existing
structural condition.”
The Kameas Report further concludes “the Dividing Masonry Fence appears to
be structurally adequate, except for one section
of wall (approx. 6m in length)
which appears to be touching the Adjoining Boundary Wall of the neighbouring
“I recommend that this section of wall be deconstructed and rebuilt in the
same place, using M3 mortar.
I do not recommend any remedial course of action for the Dividing Masonry Fence
other than the removal and reconstruction of the
6, length of wall that is
respondent also makes jurisdictional submissions in relation the
applicant’s proposed orders. It submits that the Tribunal
it is a sufficient dividing fence. It submits
the demolition and replacement of
the fence would require development consent, and orders in relation to such
development consent
is beyond the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. It submits that
orders for the submission of development consent to council is not contained
within s 14 of the DF Act, and is thus not within jurisdiction, and further that
such an order would result in an uncertain outcome,
offending the principle that
orders should be certain.
respondent also submitted that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to make orders as
to the cleaning of vegetation and the painting
of the applicant’s walls,
on the basis that such a power is not contained in s 14 of the DF Act.
the respondent also opposes the lapped and capped fence on the basis that it is
not in keeping with fences in the local area.
Is Section A a
sufficient dividing fence?
Tribunal must only order Fencing work that results in the provision of a
dividing fence of a standard not greater than the standard
for a sufficient
dividing fence (s6 – DF Act). Therefore the Tribunal should only consider
an order to replace Section A of
the existing fence if it is satisfied that the
fence in this location is not a sufficient dividing fence, or that there are
circumstances that warrant the fencing work in this section in conjunction
with fencing work in Section B, which is agreed to not
be a sufficient dividing
4 of the DF Act sets out a range of factors that can be considered when
determining whether a structure is a sufficient dividing
fence, however these
are not exhaustive.
Tribunal has considered the evidence of Mr Kameas, including his oral evidence.
The evidence of Mr Kameas aligns with the report
of Mr Catt dated 7 June 2024,
in that both recommend the replacement of Section B only. Both Mr Kameas and Mr
Carr are structural
engineers. Mr Catt acknowledges the limitations of his
inspection of Section A, as it is covered by vine growth. Both parties have
relied on surveys, each which support that the existing fence in Section A has
not significantly shifted.
best evidence before the Tribunal, where neither party has inspected Section A
beneath the vines, is that the fence has not significantly
shifted on its
foundations.
Tribunal will now consider whether other factors establish that the existing
fence in Section A is not a sufficient dividing fence.
These include the lack of
weepholes, debris build up, vegetation in the cavity, lack of coating on the
interior face and whether
it is causing damage to the applicant’s
applicants particularly rely on the Hydromedial Report, as well as the report of
Heather Webster, façade engineer, dated
16 March 2025 (“Webster
respondents rely on the report of Mr Kameas.
applicant submits that the cavity between the existing fence and the
applicant’s exterior wall has insufficient grade. The
Hydromedial Report
does not provide measurements to support this. It bases its view on the build up
of debris in the cavity, observation
of vines growing through the wall into the
cavity, and moss and algae growing in the cavity.
Adams used an inspection camera to observe and take photographs of the cavity.
He includes in the Hydromedial Report photographs
of significant collections of
leaves, sticks, vines and other debris in the cavity. He also provides
photographs of moss and algae
in the cavity.
Kameas did not observe debris inside the cavity, and stated in oral evidence
that this was because the cavity is dark.
Hydromedial Report also states there is mould present. I am satisfied that the
cavity contains moss and other organic growth.
I am not satisfied that this
organic growth is mould.
am satisfied that there are sporadic cracks in the mortar and brickwork of the
existing fence. I am satisfied that there are intrusions
of vegetation, being
vines, through the existing fence through these cracks and into the cavity.
consideration of all the evidence, I am satisfied that the cavity contains
debris build up and vegetation.
Webster Report notes that the vertical façade of the applicant’s
house will capture approx. 1-2% of the rain water
of an equivalent horizontal
surface. She also observes that “there is no visible waterproofing or
drainage to the cavity.”
Webster Report also states that “there is no building element to prevent
water ingress into the cavity and no visible drainage
or means of water to
escape from the cavity. As a result there are visible signs of water damage,
biological growth and root system
penetration at the top of the cavity to the 11
Duxford Street boundary wall, and there is there is likely unseen damage to the
on both sides within the cavity.”
am find there is no flashing or other waterproofing treatment to the wall or the
cavity. I find that there is degradation including
loose mortar and cracks in
the existing wall caused by water and degradation due to the wall’s age.
am satisfied based on the existence of moss and algae in the cavity that it is a
moist environment. I find that the vines on the
respondent’s side of the
existing fence are growing through cracks in the fence and into the cavity. I
find that the existing
fence does not contain weep holes.
prefer the evidence of Mr Adams and Ms Webster that the cavity does not
adequately drain, based on Mr Adams’ inspection of
the cavity and Ms
Webster’s observation of water damage. I therefore find the cavity does
not drain adequately as a result
of both the lack of weepholes in the existing
fence and the growth of vines through cracks in the existing fence into the
cavity is between 0cm and 11cm wide, but typically around 4cm wide. I am
satisfied that the design of the existing fence significantly
inhibits the
applicants from performing maintenance to the side of their house behind the
dividing fence. It also prevents the parties
from performing maintenance on the
fence itself.
am satisfied based on the Hydromedial Report and photographs that the vines are
growing through the existing fence in Section A
and underneath the exterior
paint on the applicant’s house wall. I am satisfied that in Section B, the
vines also then grow
through the exterior wall into the applicant’s
am not satisfied that the existing fence in Section A is causing water ingress
into the applicant’s property. Moisture readings
in the Hydromedial Report
were limited to the applicant’s courtyard, adjacent to Section B. I find
that the existing fence
in Section B is trapping additional moisture in the
cavity as a result of the fence bridging the cavity in that area. I am not
that if the original design is rebuilt in section B, that it would
result in water ingress into the applicant’s property.
relation to the Core Engineers Report dated 24 July 2024, it was submitted that
this was unfavourable to the respondent’s
case. The report is brief,
comprising only two pages of text and five photographs. The report observes some
loose masonry units along
the top section of the wall but does not state which
part of the wall that these units were observed. I do not find this report to
of assistance as to whether rebuilding section B alone would result in a fence
to the standard of a sufficient dividing fence.
relation to whether the paint is potentially toxic and contains lead, I find
there is insufficient evidence to establish this as
a relevant consideration. Mr
Adams bases his opinion that marine grade paint containing lead was sometimes
used in the 1970s in residential
applications. There is no evidence that marine
grade paint or other lead paint is on the wall and no testing is in evidence.
in consideration of all the factors in relation to the existing fence, I find
that the existing fence design does not allow
for adequate drainage of the
cavity. I find that the existing fence in Section A contains cracks caused by
water damage and aging,
which are enabling vine growth through the fence and
onto the applicant’s wall. I find the vines are causing damage to the
applicant’s wall paint and ingress into the applicant’s courtyard. I
find that the wall design does not enable the applicant
to perform maintenance
to prevent such damage.
will now turn to consideration of the specific factors set out in s 4 (b) to (g)
of the DF Act.
relation to the purposes for which the adjoining lands are used or intended to
be used, the applicant’s side of the dividing
fence is a cavity between
her house and the dividing fence. The respondent’s side is use as a car
park. I am satisfied that
there are no relevant standards that apply to the
dividing fence next to a car park. In relation to the cavity on the
applicant’s
side, I find that the use is an air gap between the fence and
the external wall of the applicant’s house. I find that the space
not enable ponding of water, as such ponding may damage the fence itself and the
applicant’s house. I therefore find
that the use of the space on the
applicant’s side includes that the space should enable water to drain from
the space to the
relation to privacy, I am not satisfied that there are relevant privacy
considerations. The respondent’s side of the fence
is a car park. The sole
windows in the applicant’s house on that side of the property are at a
height that privacy from the
respondents is not a relevant consideration.
relation to the kind of dividing fence usual in the locality, I am satisfied
that lapped and capped fences and, by its very presence,
the existing brick wall
fence, are both used in the locality.
consideration of all factors set out above, I am satisfied that the existing
fence in sections A and B is not a sufficient dividing
What fencing work should occur
applicant submits that a lapped and capped fence is appropriate, with a spoon
drain between the fence and the applicant’s
approximately 1.5m (following the same height as the applicant’s front
fence). The applicant submits
that this design:
(1) is in keeping with the area;
(2) would enable the water to drain away;
(3) would enable the applicant to perform required maintenance to its side of
the fence; and
(4) would permit the respondent to grow vines if it desires.
respondent submits that the existing wall should be rebuilt and repaired. They
(1) the applicants have failed to establish that lapped and capped fences are of
a kind usual in the area;
(2) that development consent is required for the applicant’s proposed
(3) jurisdictional objections.
Tribunal may order the demolition of the existing fence where it is a part of
fencing work ordered under s 14 of the DF Act.
parties agree there is a likelihood that the demolition will require development
consent as it will not fall within “minor
works” within the
Woollahra Local Environment Plan. The respondent submits that the Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction to
make orders with respect to development consent.
29(2)(a) of the NCAT Act gives the Tribunal “the jurisdiction to make
ancillary and interlocutory decisions of the Tribunal
proceedings.”
am satisfied that the Tribunal may make an order that a party submit development
consent for the purposes of fencing work that it
is otherwise empowered to
order, on the basis that such an order is an ancillary order (see
[2016] NSWCATCD 65
am therefore satisfied that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to make an order for
demolition of the existing fence.
find that there is a lapped and capped fence facing Duxford Street at a
different property. I am satisfied that the applicant’s
proposed lapped
and capped design is of the kind of dividing fence used in the locality.
am satisfied that the applicant’s proposed lapped and capped fence is
appropriate for the respondent’s adjacent use
to the fence as a car park.
I am also satisfied that it will enable water to drain away from the cavity, and
maintenance of the cavity
and the applicant’s wall as required by the
am not satisfied that the existing wall, even if it were rebuilt, would be a
standard of a sufficient dividing fence since it cannot
overcome the lack of
drainage and maintenance issues inherent in its design. Whilst the introduction
of flashing would reduce the
water ingress into the cavity, the extent of vine
penetration and lack of structural drainage remain.
do not consider that there are relevant privacy considerations with either of
the applicant or respondent’s proposed fencing
relation to the council’s codes or policies, I find that the Woollahra
Development Control Plan 2015 (“WDCP”)
is applicable. I find both
the applicant and respondent’s proposed fencing work complies with the
requirement for fencing to
be under 1.8m and consistent with traditional fence,
forms and materials, as required by the WDCP.
relation to any relevant environmental planning instrument, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the Woollahra Local Environmental Plan
2014 (“WLEP”)
is relevant. As stated above, it is likely that the demolition works are not
“minor works”
and as such development approval shall be required for
fencing work requiring demolition of the existing fence.
the Tribunal is satisfied that no development consent is required for the
respondent’s repair proposal, the ease of implementing
respondent’s proposal does not outweigh the deficiencies in the approach,
specifically that such fencing works will not
result in a fence at the standard
of a sufficient dividing fence.
the Tribunal finds that need for a dividing fence which enables drainage,
maintenance of the cavity and does not cause water
and vine penetration damage
to the applicant’s house far outweighs the inconvenience of the parties
seeking a development consent.
The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the
fencing work should include the demolition of the existing fence in sections A
applicant’s side of the fence is the external wall of the
applicant’s house, then the external wall to its courtyard.
satisfied that the external wall of the terrace would be a sufficient dividing
fence to a carpark on the respondent’s
applicant’s proposed fence is a lapped and capped design which includes a
spoon drain on the applicants side of the fence,
and a new kerb to support the
fence. I find that the spoon drain and new kerb elements of the proposed fence
are the foundation or
support necessary for the fence in the location in which
it is situated, in consideration of the drainage requirements on both sides
the fence. I am satisfied that the fence design in Architectural Plans A-01,
A-08, A-09 and A-10 is the standard of a sufficient
dividing fence in this
Tribunal is satisfied that the location of the fence should be in accordance
with the drawings set out in Architectural Plans
A-01, A-08, A-09 and A-10, on
the basis that this would situate the whole of the fence and cavity within the
existing fence and cavity’s
approximate 270mm footprint, and enable
drainage on the applicant’s side of the fence.
applicant seeks an order pursuant to s 8 of the DF Act that the respondent is to
both demolish and construct the new fence at
its cost on the basis that the
damage to the wall has resulted from vehicle impact on the respondent’s
side or the respondent’s
failure to maintain the vine roots
s 8 of the DF Act, one adjoining owner is liable for up to the whole cost of the
fencing work where a dividing fence has been
damaged or destroyed by a negligent
or deliberate act of the owner or a person who has entered the land concerned
with the express
or implied consent of the owner.
Tribunal is satisfied that the lean of the dividing fence in Section B against
the applicant’s house wall is the result
of vehicular impact.
the determination that the entirely of the existing fence in Sections A and B is
not a sufficient dividing fence as set out
above relies on factors unrelated to
the respondent’s maintenance of its side of the fence. The existing fence
design is inadequate
for the ongoing maintenance. The requirement to replace the
existing fence has not arisen as a result of the respondent’s sole
Tribunal finds that the top layer of bricks on the existing fence is loose, the
mortar is cracked, it has no protective coating,
is not waterproofed and has
suffered damage due to water. The design is further inadequate for ongoing
maintenance. The Tribunal
is not satisfied that the vehicular impact or factors
relating to the presence of vines outweigh the defects with the existing fence
that are not caused by the respondent. In consideration of the circumstances,
the tribunal is not satisfied that the requirement
to replace the existing fence
has arisen as a result of the respondent’s negligence or deliberate act.
Tribunal therefore orders that the costs to demolish and replace the existing
fence be shared equally between the parties.
The cleaning
applicant seeks an order that the parties are to equally share the cost of a
contractor to remove “all remnant moss, debris
and vegetation on the
external wall of Number 11...”
Tribunal is satisfied that a cleaning order with respect to the cavity floor is
appropriate. However the Tribunal is not satisfied
that any vegetation growth on
the applicant’s house wall is the responsibility of the parties equally.
Tribunal is satisfied that an order that the applicant, may, if it wishes, clean
all remnant moss, debris and vegetation on the
external wall is within the
Act, as the physical limitations
of the site make such work impractical when a
fence is in situ. The tribunal is satisfied that an order that such cleaning
be carried out within a 14 day period after the demolition of the
existing fence, and prior to the erection of the new fence is warranted
circumstances. The Tribunal finds that this is maintenance work on the
applicant’s property. Therefore such a cost is
to be born solely by the
am not satisfied that 30 days is required for this cleaning. I consider that a
10 day period is adequate to clean the wall.
The painting
applicant also seeks an order that it may repaint the external wall at its cost,
and provides timing for such. I am satisfied
that there is a sufficient nexus
between the painting order sought and the fencing work as the physical
limitations of the site make
such painting impractical when the fence is in
situ. The practical sequence of works is that the painting occur between
of the existing fence and the erection of the new dividing fence.
Therefore the Tribunal is satisfied that the painting order is
an ancillary
order for the purposes of s 29 of the NCAT Act. The Tribunal is further
satisfied that the painting order is justified
circumstances.
The development consent order
set out at paragraph
above, I am satisfied that the Tribunal has
satisfied that
the costs of a development application ought to be shared
equally, as it forms a necessary part of the fencing work.
applicant proposes that the respondent submits the development application. This
was not opposed by the respondent. I therefore
am satisfied that the respondent
is to submit the development application.
Tribunal orders:
(1) the parties are to jointly engage a contractor to demolish section A and
Section B of the masonry wall as identified in the survey
prepared by Beyond
Measure Surveys dated 16 December 2024 within 60 days of these orders, and
remove all debris and vegetation on
the line of the existing fence and cavity
floor. The cost is to be shared equally between the parties.
(2) the applicant may remove all remnant moss, debris and vegetation on its
external house wall adjacent to Sections A and B, within
70 days after these
orders. These works are to be borne by the partes in equal shares.
(3) The applicant may repaint its external house wall the same colour as the
rest of the house within 80 days of these orders, at
the Applicant’s
(4) After the painting is complete, and within 90 days of these orders, the
parties are to construct a timber lapped and capped boundary
dividing fence on a
concrete kerb with footing as shown on architectural plans Figures 20, 21 and 22
prepared by Llewela Griffiths
Architects. The cost is to be borne equally by the
(5) the fencing work in orders 1 and 4 is to be carried out in a good and
workmanlike manner using new materials. If it holds a currents
contractors
license to carry out the work in Orders 1 and 4, then the work in Orders 1 and 4
is to be carried out by Jensons Projects
in accordance with its quote dated 19
March 2023, except that items 2.3 and 2.5 on the quote are excluded from the
scope of work.
(6) If development consent is required for any of the works at orders 1-4
(including by application of clause 5.10 of the Woollahra
Local Environmental
Plan 2014):
(a) the respondent is to lodge development application seeking consent for the
timber lapped and capped fence as described at order
4, within 4 weeks of the
(b) the costs of the development application are to be borne by the parties in
equal shares; and
(c) the timing of the works at orders 1-4 is to run from the date of any
development consent granted by the council.
(7) Any application for an order in respect of costs is to be made in writing to
the Tribunal and provided to the other party within
14 days of the date of this
(8) Any submissions in opposition to an application for a costs order is to be
sent to the tribunal and the other party within 28
days of the date of these
(9) The Tribunal intends to determine any application for costs without a
hearing under s 50(2) of the NCAT Act. Any submission in
respect of a costs
order should address whether the parties consider that the matter can be
determined on the papers, or if it disagrees,
why. Submissions should not exceed
3 pages in length.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (322 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter