URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2005/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Tewake [2005] NSWDRGC 2 (22 November 2005)
of New South Wales
[2005] NSWDRGC 2
Tewake, Dalton
FILE NUMBER(S) :
217 of 2005
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive
CATCHWORDS:
Meaning of Eligible Person :- whether a person charged with an offence
involving “violent conduct” can be an “eligible
Drug Court exercising ordinary jurisdiction of Local Court
– such power available under s 24 Drug Court Act. Offence involving
“violent conduct” can be dealt with under s 24.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
“eligible person” and
“offence involving violent conduct”
“Persons accepted
into program”
CASES CITED:
Chandler v The Director of Public Prosecutors
[2000] NSWCA 125
Attorney General of NSW
[1913] HCA 54
[1913] 17 CLR 356
R v Buttigieg
[2002] NSWDRGC
DATES OF HEARING:
15 November 2005
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
22 November 2005
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
Regina: R. Ranken, Director of Public Prosecutions
Offender: I.
Rodgers, Legal Aid Commission
1 HIS HONOUR: Mr Tewake has been referred to the Drug
Court under
Drug Court Act 1998
. Twelve charges have been
referred, comprising mainly dishonesty offences and offences of breaching an
apprehended violence order;
the later committed by attending premises he is not
allowed to approach. Mr Tewake is seeking to have those matters dealt with under
Drug Court Act
, which allows a sentence is imposed, and then
suspended whilst a Drug Court program is undertaken.
2 Mr Tewake has also
pleaded guilty to a charge of assaulting a police officer in the execution of
his duty, and that charge has led
to this hearing as to whether Mr Tewake can be
admitted into a Drug Court Program, given that offence involves ‘violent
Drug Court Act
prohibits offences involving
violent conduct being dealt with under
Drug Court Act
facts of the assault are as follows. When arrested, Mr Tewake was lifted off the
ground and placed in the rear of a caged police
vehicle. At that time Mr Tewake
has kicked out, striking Constable Ireland in the leg. Mr Tewake was intoxicated
at the time. It
is conceded by the defence that the assault on the police
officer involved violent conduct, and that Mr Tewake cannot be dealt with
Drug Court Act
for that offence. The question today is whether the
matter can be dealt with under any other provision in the
Drug Court Act
thereby still allowing Mr Tewake the opportunity of taking part in a Drug Court
General issues regarding the
Drug Court Act 1998
Before I turn to the detail of the arguments in this matter, there are some
general observations that should be made regarding the
Drug Court Act
operations of this court. The
Drug Court Act
is an innovative piece of
legislation, described as
“an exciting new criminal justice
initiative”
in the second reading speech before the New South Wales
Parliament in 1998. The Act grants the Drug Court a broad jurisdictional
and it is not uncommon for the Drug Court to deal with, at the one time, a
person who has pleaded guilty to strictly indictable
offences, pleaded guilty to
purely summary matters, and who has also appealed to the District Court against
sentences already imposed
in the Local Court. So in the one sentencing hearing,
the Drug Court may exercise the general jurisdiction of the District Court,
appeal jurisdiction of the District Court, and the summary jurisdiction of the
Local Court.
5 The objectives of the Drug Court are set out in
Drug Court Act
, and they set an ambitious agenda for this Court. Those
objectives are:
(a) to reduce the drug dependency of eligible persons and eligible convicted
offenders, and
(b) to promote the re-integration of such drug
dependent persons into the community, and
(c) to reduce the need for
such drug dependent persons to resort to criminal activity to support their drug
dependencies.
6 Those objectives are to be
achieved by
“establishing a scheme under which drug dependent persons
who are charged with criminal offences can be diverted into programs
designed to
eliminate, or at least reduce, their dependency on drugs.”
There can be no doubt that the
Drug Court Act
is beneficial legislation, and it
has long been established that it should be interpreted accordingly. The concept
of legislation
having beneficial purposes was referred to in
Chandler v DPP
[2000] NSWCA 125
[2000] 113 A Crim R 196
, which in turn referred to
Attorney-General of New South Wales
[1913] HCA 54
[1913] 17 CLR 356
, where the concept was
explained (at page 384) in the following way;
“The correct way of reading legislation where there is such an
ambiguity is to construe them generously. Not that the true signification
provision should be strained or exceeded, but that it should be construed to
give the fullest relief with which the fair meaning
of its language will
8 I think it would also be
fair to say that Parliament, in creating such new and innovative jurisdiction,
may not have anticipated
the complexity and variety of situations offenders,
especially drug offenders, can get themselves into. The Drug Court has to deal
with offenders who have multiple offences in different jurisdictions, and who
may have parole, which is either ongoing, or has been
revoked. Participants may
be on good behaviour bonds, or have breached such orders, or may be doing
Community Service Orders, Periodic
Detention or Home Detention. Or perhaps they
have breached those orders as well. Any one offender may have multiple
sentencing complications.
There are many twists and turns before eligibility,
appropriateness, and even availability can be determined, so it would be
understandable,
indeed inevitable, that not all situations were fully
anticipated in the drafting of the legislation.
9 Returning to the case
at hand, there are a number of issues to be determined.
Is Mr Tewake
simply ineligible?
10 As Mr Tewake has been charged with an offence
of violence, does that simply prevent him being dealt with under
A reference to the relevant sections of the
Drug Court Act
is a convenient
starting point, and the relevant parts of
and 8 provide:
5 Definition of “eligible person”
(1) A person is an eligible person if:
(a) the person
is charged with an offence, other than an offence referred to in subsection (2),
(b) the facts alleged in connection with the offence, together
with the person’s antecedents and any other information available
court, indicate that it is highly likely that the person will, if convicted, be
required to serve a sentence of full-time
imprisonment, and
person has pleaded guilty to, or indicated that he or she intends to plead
guilty to, the offence, and
(d) the person appears to be dependent on
the use of prohibited drugs (within the meaning of the
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985
) or other drugs prescribed by the regulations, and
(e) the person satisfies such other criteria as are prescribed by the
regulations.
(2) A person is not an eligible person if the person
is charged with:
(a) an offence punishable under Division 2 of
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
, not being an offence that (under
Chapter 5 of the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
) is capable of being dealt with
summarily, or
(b) an offence involving violent conduct or sexual
assault, or
(c) any other offence of a kind prescribed by the
regulations.
7 Persons accepted into
(1) This section applies to a person who has
been referred to the Drug Court under
(2) The Drug Court may deal with a person under this section in relation
to an offence if, and only if, it is satisfied as to each
of the following
(a) that the person is an eligible person,
that the person has pleaded guilty to the offence (whether before the referring
court or the Drug Court) and has been found guilty
of the offence,
(b) that, having regard to the person’s antecedents, it would
be appropriate for the person to participate in a program under
(c) that facilities to supervise and control the person’s
participation in such a program are available, and have been allocated
person, in accordance with the guidelines prescribed by the regulations,
The Drug Court deals with a person under this section in relation to an offence
by convicting the person and sentencing the person
in accordance with the
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(4) A person who is convicted and sentenced by the Drug Court
under this section with respect to an offence for which the person has
referred to the Drug Court under
may at the same time be convicted and
sentenced for any other offence to which he or she has pleaded guilty (other
than an offence
referred to in
(2)), whether or not the person has
been referred to the Drug Court under
in relation to that other
(5) Nothing in this Act entitles
a person to be convicted and sentenced under this section, and no appeal lies
against any decision
by the Drug Court not to convict or sentence a person under
this section.
8 Persons not accepted
into program
(1) This section applies to a person who has been referred to the Drug
Court under
but whom the Drug Court has not dealt with under
(2) The Drug Court may deal with a person under this section
in relation to an offence if, and only if, it is satisfied as to each
following matters:
(a) that the person has pleaded guilty to the
offence (whether before the referring court or the Drug Court) and has been
found guilty
of the offence,
(b) that the person consents to being
dealt with under this section.
(2A) The Drug Court deals with a
person under this section in relation to an offence by convicting the person and
sentencing the person
in accordance with the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(3) If the person does not consent to being dealt with
under this section or in such other circumstances as the Drug Court may
the Drug Court is to refer the person back to the referring court.
(3A) In the case of a person who has been referred to the Drug
Court for 2 or more offences by 2 or more referring courts, the Drug
refer the person back to any one of the referring courts to be dealt with:
(a) for the offences for which the person was referred by that court,
(b) for such of the other offences as are within the criminal
(3B) In dealing with a person for an
offence referred to in subsection (3A) (b), the court to which the person is
referred back is
taken to be the referring court for the purposes of subsection
(4) If the Drug Court refers a person back to the referring
court, the proceedings against the person are to be continued before the
referring court at a time and place specified in the order, as if:
(a) the person had not been referred to the Drug Court, and
(b) the proceedings had merely been adjourned to the time and place
specified in the order.
(5) A person who is convicted and
sentenced by the Drug Court under this section with respect to an offence for
which the person has
been referred to the Drug Court under
same time be convicted and sentenced for any other offence to which he or she
has pleaded guilty (other than an offence
referred to in
(2)), whether
or not the person has been referred to the Drug Court under
relation to that other offence.
(6) In this section, a reference
to the convicting and sentencing of a person is, in the case of a person who is
referred to the Drug
Court after having been convicted, a reference to the
sentencing of the person only.
any passion for the proposition, but in the proper pursuit of assisting this
Court to comply with all aspects of the Drug
Court legislation, the Crown argues
that Mr Tewake is simply not an eligible person for a Drug Court Program, and
therefore should
be returned to the Local Court from whence he came, to be there
dealt with for all 12 charges in the ordinary way. The defence suggests
13 The first Crown submission is that a person can only be
accepted on to a Drug Court Program if, and only if, the court is satisfied
the person is an eligible person as defined in
Section 5(2)(b)
that a person is not an eligible person if the person is charged with an offence
involving violent conduct or sexual assault.
“deal with a person under this section”
Drug Court deals with a person under
by convicting and sentencing the person
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
my view it is quite clear that the moment in time at which the person must be an
eligible person for the purposes of
is at the time of dealing with the
person under that section, that is, at the time of imposing the initial
sentence. It is not uncommon
for a person to be referred to the Drug Court and
their eligibility to be uncertain. A perceived barrier to entry may be resolved
in a manner favourable to the person, and eligibility is then achieved. This may
occur because, for example, the court has held a
hearing and decided that the
person does usually reside within the catchment area of the Drug Court, or an
offence alleging violent
conduct is dealt with at another court, or perhaps that
allegation is withdrawn. The first Crown submission is rejected.
defence suggests that the offence of violence can be dealt with under s 8 of the
Drug Court Act
, and Mr Tewake’s eligible offences then be dealt with under
The Drug Court has for many years overcome barriers, such as this issue in
Mr Tewake’s case by dealing with offences involving
lower levels of
violence (and which therefore cannot be dealt with under
under s 8 of the
Drug Court Act
. As the late Senior Judge Milson observed in
R v Buttigieg
[2002] NSWDRGC 2:
“...it is quite clear that it was not the intention when the Act was
introduced that minor matters ...exclude people’s
entry. What was intended
was that people who have a violent disposition be prevented from entering into a
Drug Court program.”
17 The defence
suggests that there are ways around the problem, in that the Court could deal
with the “assault police”
matter under s 8 of the
Drug Court Act
and, only if it is the appropriate adjudication, sentence him in such a way that
he is still available in the community, and able
to take part in a Drug Court
Program attached to his other offences.
18 Section 8 applies to persons
who have been referred to the Drug Court under
, but whom the Drug Court has
not dealt with under
So the defence suggestion is that the Court could
deal with the offender for the assault police matter under s 8,
before imposing sentences under
19 There are two problems with that
submission. Firstly, the structure of the Act, and the headings given to those
relevant sections,
suggest that
provides the necessary sentencing powers for
“Persons accepted into program”
and s 8 provides for
“Persons not accepted into program”
. The Act is quite
consistent in referring to
, and, as Mr Ranken
has submitted, the headings to sections, whilst not part of the section, can be
considered in the interpretation
20 Secondly, the rather
troublesome s 8(5) includes a prohibition against dealing under s 8 with
offences referred to in s 5(2) (ie
an offence involving violent conduct or
sexual assault). Why s 8 is restricted in this way makes an interesting
question. Section
8(5) appears to simply mirror 7(4), which includes a
prohibition against dealing with violent conduct offences or sexual assaults
good reason, as persons being dealt with under s 7 must be eligible persons.
Section 7(4) prevents other, non-referred offences
which involve violence being
swept into a Drug Court Program via an alternate route. The same rationale for
the inclusion of the
troublesome words in s 8(5) does not logically apply to
offences being finalised by the Drug Court for a person who has not, and
going to be, dealt with under s 7. Nevertheless, those troublesome words are
there, and so the Drug Court cannot, in my view,
deal with an offence involving
violent conduct under s 8.
Exercising Local Court
21 There is another possibility. It is suggested that
the Court could exercise the jurisdiction of the Local Court, as bestowed on
Drug Court in s 24 of the Act, and sit as a Local Court to deal with the
“assault police” offence, if appropriate,
in a non-custodial
fashion. In my view both s 24 and s 26 are relevant here:
24 Jurisdiction of Drug Court
(1) The Drug Court
has the following jurisdiction:
(a) the criminal jurisdiction of the
District Court,
(b) the criminal jurisdiction of a Local Court,
(c) such other jurisdiction as is vested in the Drug Court by this or
any other Act.
(2) For the purpose of enabling it to exercise its
the functions of the District Court that are exercisable in relation to its
criminal jurisdiction,
(b) all of the functions of a Local Court that
are exercisable in relation to its criminal jurisdiction, including all the
exercisable by a Magistrate under the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Bail Act 1978
(c) such other functions as are conferred
or imposed on it by or under this or any other Act.
(3) For the
purposes of
(1) (b) and (c) of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(a) the Drug Court is a court of like jurisdiction in relation
to the District Court, and
(b) the Drug Court is a court of superior
26 Court proceedings
(1) This section applies to
proceedings before the Drug Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this
Act, but does not apply
to proceedings before the Drug Court in the exercise of
the criminal jurisdiction of the District Court or the criminal jurisdiction
a Local Court.
(2) Proceedings before the Drug Court are to be
(a) in accordance with the directions of the Judge
presiding in the proceedings, and
(b) subject to paragraph (a), with
as little formality and technicality, and with as much expedition, as the
requirements of this
Act and the regulations and the proper consideration of the
matters before the Court permit.
(3) The Drug Court is not bound by
the rules of evidence, but may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it
considers appropriate.
(4) The Drug Court
may adjourn its proceedings from time to time.
22 In my view
quite clearly gives the Drug Court the ordinary jurisdictions of both the
District Court and the Local Court, in addition to its
special jurisdictions
Drug Court Act
23 The next question is whether that
limited meaning
is attributed to
, this court could embark upon summary, or
even jury, trials.
24 Jurors may rest easy, as that is not what is being
considered here. Mr Tewake has been charged with one offence amongst 12 offences
which renders him, technically, to be an ineligible person. I use the word
“technically”, as the criminal act involved
in the assault police
offence being considered is not so serious that it appears he should be
prohibited from taking part in a drug
treatment program in the community. If he
is dealt with in the ordinary way for that offence, it is perhaps unlikely, on
the limited
information before me, that he would be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment which would render him unavailable for a community-based
treatment plan.
25 In deciding as to how widely the Drug Court should
, it is instructive to look at how the problem could have been
otherwise addressed. If, for example, his legal advisers, or the magistrate
the Local Court, had been aware of the problem the “assault police”
charge would create for Mr Tewake in the Drug
Court, then that Local Court could
have separated out that charge, and dealt with it. If the charge had been dealt
with by way of
an adjudication that left Mr Tewake free to take part in a Drug
Court Program, then there would be no issue, and no problem in this
26 The Drug Court could still, today, simply adjourn the
“assault police” charge to the Local Court here at Parramatta,
Mr Tewake could be taken into the court room next door, and again, if dealt with
by the Magistrate in a range of ways, he could
be back here and available for a
Drug Court Program within perhaps the hour. The Crown has argued that
adjournments to resolve the
eligibility issues facing applicants should not be
granted if they are clearly ineligible when referred. I cannot agree with that.
Adjournments are frequently granted for very good reasons before eligibility and
appropriateness for a Drug Court Program are determined,
including on proper
application by the Crown, and the ordinary legal principles regarding
adjournments must apply, including adjournments
to allow uncertainties or
obstacles to be addressed.
27 In my view the Drug Court can exercise the
ordinary criminal jurisdiction of the Local Court, and this Court can, instead
him to the Local Court room next door, convene as a Local Court in
this court room for the purposes of considering his sentence under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. Having formed the view
that the Drug Court
take such a course, I will also indicate that I
am prepared to take such a step.
28 Twelve charges have been referred to
the Drug Court and are before the Drug Court. One of those charges should not
have been. It
would clearly be in the interests of justice for all those charges
to remain before the one judicial officer, and for the charge
which could make
Mr Tewake an ineligible person to be dealt with here, perhaps in a way which
will see him available for a Drug Court
29 It may be that if
this court was being asked to undertake a different aspect of Local Court or
District Court jurisdiction, such
as to hold a defended hearing regarding an
offence alleging violence, then the Drug Court may well not be prepared to do
that. There
is a real difference between this court having a broad jurisdiction,
and deciding to exercise it, given the objectives of the Drug
Court legislation
and the practical issues involved.
30 Mr Ranken has argued that an
expansive interpretation of
negates the need for
, and suggests such a
wide interpretation is not available. I disagree.
appears to sets out
a specific jurisdiction for the Drug Court to deal with offenders to finality
who have not been accepted onto
the program. The section also provides the
“how” and “where” for persons returning to referring
they are not accepted onto program. So the section sets out explicit
powers, but does not thereby limit the general jurisdictional
31 I agree with Mr Ranken that this Court should not be taking on
work, such as defended hearings, which would distract it from its
responsibilities. However the possibility that the Court could distract itself
by undertaking such work should not negate the
power to make sensible, practical
32 Accordingly, at a suitable time, and if Mr Tewake takes
no objection, the Drug Court will convene as a Local Court to deal with
“assault police” charge.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (41.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter