URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Sussich [2023] NSWNMPSC 1 (3 February 2023)
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National
to hold an Inquiry into a
Complaint in relation to:
Madison Jade Sussich
NMW0002297798
Date of Inquiry:
25 January 2023
Committee members:
Ms Diane Robinson
Ms Sheree Smiltnieks
Ms Toni-Marie Anderson
Jennifer Houen
Appearance for Complainant:
Ms Sarah McCarthy, instructed by Ms Nicole Faraj, Legal Officer, Health
Care Complaints Commission
Appearance for Ms Madison Jade Sussich:
Self represented
Decision date:
3 February 2023
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to reprimand Ms Sussich and impose conditions on
registration
Publication of decision:
Refer to page 10 of this decision for details of non-publication
non-publication orders that may apply to this decision. The
onus remains on any
person using material in the decision to ensure that the intended use of that
material does not breach any such
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
THE COMPLAINT
Sussich is an enrolled nurse. Between August 2020 and January 2021, she was
employed in the Eating Disorders Unit of the Northside
Clinic in St
A was admitted to the Northside Clinic as an inpatient for the management of
anorexia nervosa for a six-week period from 7
October 2020 to 23 November
22 July 2022 the Health Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) made a
formal complaint alleging that Ms Sussich is guilty
of unsatisfactory
professional conduct, specifically improper or unethical conduct in the practice
of nursing. In summary, the Complaint
alleges that Ms Sussich failed to maintain
appropriate professional boundaries in that she had a personal and sexual
relationship
with Patient A to whom she had provided therapeutic care at the
Northside Clinic.
LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law NSW
(National Law (NSW)). Section 139B of the
National Law (NSW) and other relevant legislative provisions are set out in
Annexure A to
this decision.
STANDARD OF PROOF
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Ms Sussich is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaint is the civil standard so
the Committee must be reasonably satisfied on the
balance of probabilities of
the matters alleged against Ms Sussich. Given the seriousness of the allegations
and the nature of their
consequences, the Committee needs to be comfortably
satisfied that the Complaints have been established on the Briginshaw principles
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336).
ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED
following issues are to be determined by the Committee:
Which, if any,
of the Particulars of the Complaint are proven?
Does the proven
conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
orders or directions pursuant to the National Law
appropriate?
addition to the documentary material provided by the parties, the Committee
heard evidence from Ms Sussich, the Respondent.
REGULATORY BACKGROUND
terms of her qualifications as an enrolled nurse, Ms Sussich obtained a Diploma
from Navitas Health Skills Australia in 2019. She
was first registered as an
enrolled nurse in New South Wales on 23 September 2019.
3 May 2021 the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales (the Council)
convened proceedings in relation to Ms Sussich under
section 150 of the National
Law to determine if any urgent action was required to protect the health and
safety of the public.
number of conditions were placed on Ms Sussich’s registration including
the requirement that she practice under indirect supervision
and notify the
Council of any change in the nature or place of her
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
Are the Particulars of the Complaint proven?
Complaint alleges:
7 October 2020 and 23 November 2020, the practitioner failed to declare a
conflict of interest to her Nurse Unit Manager in
relation to Patient A, namely
that the practitioner and Patient A had matched on the dating app
‘Tinder’ prior to Patient
A’s admission to Northside Clinic.
practitioner engaged in an inappropriate personal relationship with Patient A
which commenced on 23 November 2020 (the day Patient
A was discharged from
Northside Clinic) in circumstances where:
(a) Patient A was an inpatient at Northside Clinic;
(b) the practitioner provided therapeutic care to Patient A on
approximately 16 occasions.
December 2020, the practitioner engaged in an inappropriate sexual relationship
with Patient A, in circumstances where:
(a) Patient A was an inpatient at Northside Clinic;
(b) the practitioner provided therapeutic care to Patient A on approximately
16 occasions.
Sussich admits the facts alleged in the Particulars of the
summary Ms Sussich’s evidence is that she ‘matched’ with
Patient A on the dating application, Tinder
at some time prior to her
admission. They did not meet in person or video call prior to Patient A’s
admission to Northside Clinic.
However, Ms Sussich realised who Patient A was,
not immediately, but ‘early on’ in her admission. She felt awkward
failed to disclose the situation to her manager.
Sussich provided nursing care to Patient A on multiple occasions during her
admission, often for between 30-45 minutes at a time.
In addition to her mental
health issues, Patient A’s physical health was poor and Ms Sussich said
she provided support by spending
time talking with Patient A. She said the
relationship gradually moved from a nurse/patient relationship to something
more. Ms Sussich
said she was concerned about the situation and knew she should
tell someone, but felt too embarrassed to take any action and hoped
would all ‘go away’.
the day of her discharge Patient A messaged Ms Sussich via Instagram and asked
for her telephone number. Ms Sussich provided her
number. She said at this time
she had feelings for Patient A and felt “that the damage had already been
done”. After
Patient A’s discharge Ms Sussich and Patient A
developed a personal relationship which then became a sexual
relationship.
the basis of the evidence Ms Sussich gave at the hearing and her admissions, the
Committee is comfortably satisfied that the Particulars
of the Complaint are
Does the proven conduct amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct?
Commission has alleged that Ms Sussich’s conduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct on the basis that it is improper
or unethical conduct in
the practice of nursing. The Commission provided written submissions, as
words “unethical” or “improper” are not defined in the
National Law. The Macquarie Dictionary defines
“improper” relevantly
as “not in accordance with propriety of behaviour, manners etc.” or
or irregular” and “unethical” as 1.
“contrary to moral precept; immoral”; and 2. “in contravention
of some code of professional conduct.” (
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Bolton
[2021] NSWCATOD 160)
R v Byrnes & Hopwood
[1995] HCA 1
the High Court of Australia said,
“If conduct is not in conformity with standards of professional conduct
and practice it can
be seen as improper”, and explained the concept of
impropriety as follows:
“Impropriety does not depend on the alleged offender’s
consciousness of impropriety. Impropriety consists in a breach
of the standards
of conduct that would be expected of a person in the position of the alleged
offender by reasonable persons with
knowledge of the duties, powers and
authority of the position and the circumstances of the case.” (at
Commission also noted that the ‘Code of Conduct for Nurses’
proscribes that nurses are to act with professional integrity
(Principle 4),
specifically (at 4.1.d) a nurse is to,
...avoid sexual relationships with persons with whom they have currently or
had previously entered into a professional relationship.
These relationships are
inappropriate in most circumstances and could be considered unprofessional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Nursing and Midwifery Board’s ‘Registered Nurse Standards for
Practice’ state at Standard 2,
‘The RN... [2.1] establishes, sustains and concludes relationships in a
way that differentiates the boundaries between professional
and personal
relationships.’
Commission submits Ms Sussich’s conduct was contrary to these standards by
failing to maintain professional boundaries.
Sussich admits that her conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Ms Sussich accepts that her conduct was improper
and unethical. She acknowledged
that it infringed the Code of Conduct for Nurses.
on the basis of the evidence Ms Sussich gave at the hearing and her admissions,
the Committee is comfortably satisfied that
her conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Are orders or directions
pursuant to the National Law appropriate?
found Ms Sussich guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Committee
must consider what, if any, orders should be
made in relation to her.
General considerations
punitive. Disciplinary proceedings are intended
to maintain proper professional
standards, primarily for the protection of the public. As the Court of Appeal
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
protecting the health and safety of the public “
includes protecting the
public from the similar misconduct or incompetence of other practitioners and
upholding public confidence
in the standards of the profession.”
relation to the relevant protective orders to be made, the Committee notes that
the powers available to it are set out in section146
(B) of the National Law
which provides as follows:
A Committee may do one or more of the following:
a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling;
d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at
the times, in the way and to the persons specified by
the Committee;
f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
Ms Sussich’s evidence - work history and future employment
her registration as an enrolled nurse in September 2019, Ms Sussich was employed
on a casual basis, between December 2019
and May 2020 at the Geelong Clinic in
St Albans, Victoria.
August 2020 and January 2021, she was employed as an enrolled nurse in the
Eating Disorders Unit of the Northside Clinic in
St Leonards. Her employment
there ceased as a result of her relationship with Patient A.
March 2021 to August 2021 Ms Sussich worked for St Johns Ambulance doing Covid
testing at Sydney Airport. Apart from a job in
retail during the Christmas
period, she was then unemployed until starting work as a youth worker in March
2022. She is still employed
in this capacity.
Sussich said she would like to return to nursing and is particularly interested
in mental health nursing. She feels she needs
to do a refresher course because
it has been some time since she worked as a nurse. She has made no particular
plans in relation
to future employment, as she was awaiting the outcome of these
proceedings. Also, for that reason, Ms Sussich has not engaged in
relating to mental health nursing. However, she has undertaken ongoing education
in her role as a youth worker, including
courses on Occupational Health and
Safety and First Aid. She said she has looked into some extra mental health
studies and is enrolled
to do a suicide prevention workshop in the next few
Current understanding of boundary issues
Sussich said her Diploma course did include education on boundary crossing and
she was made aware of the Code of Conduct for Nurses.
She was unable to recall
if there had been any specific training in this area during her induction at the
Northside Clinic.
Sussich was asked about her current understanding of professional boundaries.
She said they were important, particularly as the
public places its trust in
nursing staff. She said that a nurse must maintain a therapeutic relationship,
and no more, with a patient.
Should similar circumstances arise again, she said
she would immediately discuss them with her manager. Ms Sussich acknowledged she
should have done that at the time but said she struggled with embarrassment. She
was in part reluctant to discuss the fact that she
Sussich said she understood a personal relationship with a patient is
inappropriate because ‘there is a conflict of interest’
and because
patients are often vulnerable and such a relationship can involve a nurse taking
advantage of a patient’s vulnerability.
Sussich was able to identify some of the red flags which might signify a risk of
a boundary violation developing in a professional
relationship. She recognised
that spending more time with a particular patient, not sharing the patient load
equally with other members
of staff and feeling more involved and connected to a
particular patient compared to others, were danger signs. She said she was
to these issues in her current role as a youth worker.
Committee asked Ms Sussich how the personal relationship with Patient A had
developed. She said she could not pinpoint a particular
time when the
relationship changed, there had been a gradual progression. Possibly the change
from a therapeutic to a personal relationship
had come through the conversations
she had with Patient A. Ms Sussich said they developed a level of rapport and
her care for the
patient changed from a nurse/patient level of care to a
personal level of care.
Other issues
Committee notes that the clinical records for Patient A indicate that during her
admission to Northside Clinic she was a particularly
vulnerable patient. She has
a diagnosis of bipolar disorder and anorexia nervosa. She had had 4 previous
admissions to Northside,
one of which was earlier in 2020. The records also
indicate she was anxious, emotionally labile, suffering from panic attacks and
unstable mood. She had difficulty participating in group therapy on a number of
occasions and had persistent worry and concern that
she had a brain
Sussich told the Committee she has had a lot of time to reflect on her conduct.
She also said she has been seeing a psychologist.
She started seeing the
therapist at the end of 2022, first once a week and now once a month. However,
she has not discussed the issue
of the sexual boundary crossing directly with
the therapist. Her discussions have focused on managing anxiety generally, which
said has been helpful in managing the stress associated with this
Commission proposed that Ms Sussich be reprimanded and that conditions be placed
on her registration which require her to complete
an Ethics course and to engage
in a mentoring relationship.
Sussich told the Committee she is happy to do an ethics course and the Committee
considers this proposed condition to be appropriate.
Ms Sussich has completed an
18-month Diploma course which did deal with ethical issues, however she has not
undertaken any refresher
courses or ethics specific CPD courses since her
graduation in 2019. The issues she has to confront as a result of her conduct
considerable reflection and to undertake this reflection in the context
of further ethics training will be of benefit to her and
support the health and
safety of the public.
Sussich also agreed to the proposed condition relating to a professional mentor.
The complaint concerning Ms Sussich does not concern
the clinical care she
provided to patients. It relates entirely to her conduct in relation to ethical
issues, specifically professional
boundary violations. Ms Sussich demonstrated
some understanding of these issues during the hearing, however given her
relative lack
of nursing experience, the Committee considers it vital that she
has ongoing support in developing and refining her understanding
of professional
ethical standards in the nursing profession. Having regular access to a mentor
with whom she can discuss these issues
will assist her to develop the level of
understanding she requires to practice in a way that safeguards the health and
the public.
Committee considers that meetings with her mentor should occur once a week for
the first three months and thereafter once a fortnight.
Discussion at these
meetings should focus on professional practice and ethical obligations,
including reflective practice and any
other professional issues as they
Commission proposed that Ms Sussich be reprimanded. Ms Sussich submitted that a
caution may be appropriate and sufficient. Ms
Sussich was concerned about the
impact a reprimand on her registration may have for her future employment
prospects. She also argued
that the combination of a caution and a mentoring
condition would be adequate in terms of public protection.
Committee notes that Ms Sussich was frank and forthcoming in her evidence.
Notably she admitted her unsatisfactory professional
conduct and admitted and
understood that her conduct was both improper and unethical. Ms Sussich was
upset during the proceedings
and it was apparent that she regretted her
relationship between Ms Sussich and Patient A has now ended, but it remains the
case that Ms Sussich failed to maintain appropriate
professional boundaries with
a patient, specifically a patient who was mentally unwell and particularly
vulnerable. The Commission
submits that this is a very serious professional
issue and the Committee agrees. For this reason, it is appropriate that Ms
be reprimanded for her unsatisfactory professional
RECOMMENDATIONS
Committee makes the following recommendations to Ms Sussich:
Ms Sussich resumes nursing practice she arranges to have reflective clinical
supervision, so as to have a supportive environment
to discuss professional
issues with a colleague and peer.
Ms Sussich wishes to pursue a career in mental health nursing that she
proactively undertakes courses of study in this area to
improve and update her
mental health nursing skills.
Committee recommends that Ms Sussich work in a public hospital where she can
have access to structured support and relevant educational
Committee also recommends that Ms Sussich discuss this complaint and the
professional boundary violations with her psychologist.
Her ongoing work with
her psychologist is an opportunity to develop more insight, as well as personal
skills and resilience, around
this important issue in professional
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS
section 146B(1)(a) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law, the
Committee reprimands Ms Madison Jade Sussich.
Conditions and
section 146B(1)(b) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the Committee directs that the following Conditions be imposed on the
practitioner's registration:
practitioner must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 12
months with a registered nurse (Division
1) approved by the Council who does not
have conditions on her practice.
(b) The Practitioner is responsible for any costs arising from the mentoring
relationship in condition (a).
(c) To comply with condition (a), the practitioner must:
(i) nominate a mentor for approval by the Council, within 14 days of commencing
work or as specified by the Council.
(ii) submit a mentoring plan developed in consultation with the mentor within 14
days of the mentor being approved by the Council.
The plan must be signed by
both by the practitioner and the mentor and must detail:
objectives / outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives / outcomes
must relate to, but are not limited to, the
following areas: professional
practice and ethical obligations, including reflective practice;
education, professional development and learning activities planned to achieve
the specified objectives / outcomes;
timeframe/s
for completion of identified activities and outcomes/ objectives;
which will demonstrate objectives / outcomes have been met; and
of planned meetings with the mentor.
(iii) attend meetings with the approved mentor at least but not limited to once
weekly for the first three months and thereafter
meetings can be reduced to
twice monthly. Meetings can take place in person or via digital means, however
at least one face to face
meeting is to take place per month.
(iv) authorise the approved mentor to notify the Council of any breach of the
conditions including repeated failure to attend mentoring
meetings and to
exchange information with the Council in relation to the practitioner’s
compliance with the conditions.
(v) authorise the approved mentor to provide written reports to the Council
(as per the mentoring plan)
every three months or more frequently if the mentor has any concerns about the
practitioner’s ability
to practise the profession.
(vi) provide to the Council, within 14 days of the mentor being approved, a copy
of the Nursing and Midwifery Professional Standards
Committee decision,
including orders made, that has been signed by both the practitioner and by the
mentor indicating awareness of
the decision and orders.
(d) The Practitioner must advise all current and future nursing
employers of any conditions of registration and within one week and
provide the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with a copy of the conditions signed by the
employer or an authorised officer of
the employer as acknowledgement of that
notification.
(e) The Practitioner must authorise each nursing employer to notify the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of any breach of these
conditions, and
within one week of commencing work and practice in a hospital must provide
written acknowledgement of this signed
by the employer.
Under section 146B(1)(d) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
, the Committee orders the following:
Practitioner must successfully complete an ethics course approved by the Nursing
or Midwifery Council of NSW (“the
Council”) which focuses on ethical
and professional obligations in the nursing profession within (6) months from
the date of
these Orders, or as specified by the council.
(b) To comply with condition (a), the practitioner must:
(i) provide evidence to the Council of enrolment in the approved course within
two (2) weeks of being notified that the course is
approved; and
(ii) provide written evidence to the Council of successful completion of the
course outlined in condition (a) within four (4) weeks
of completing the
approved course.
(c) The Practitioner is responsible for the cost associated with complying with
condition (a).
appropriate review body for the purpose of a review under section 163 -163C of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
is the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW when the respondent has a principal place of practice
125 and 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
apply while the respondent’s principal place of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than NSW, so that a review of
these conditions can be conducted
by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
REVIEW RIGHTS
Ms Madison Jade Sussich has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW
Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Ms Madison Jade Sussich also has the right to seek a review by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of NSW of the Committee’s order
conditions. Should Ms Madison Jade Sussich’s principal place of practice
be anywhere other than NSW at the time
of seeking a review of conditions, Ms
Madison Jade Sussich may make an application for review to the National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
The non-publication order made on 15
September 2022 in respect of Patient A continues so that the name, address or
any information
which might identify Patient A is not to be published.
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
We will provide a copy of this
written statement of our decision to:
Madison Jade Sussich,
Health Care Complaints Commission,
National Board,
complainant.
_________________________
Diane Robinson Date: 3
February 2023
Chairperson
139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct” of
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is subject; or
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on behalf
of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or reward
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the health
service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation to a
health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or reward
for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
(ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in overservicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with the
practitioner’s professional practice) who
is not a registered health
practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in respect of
matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health practitioner
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the
practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular class.
(4) In this section-
means money, property or anything else of value.
"recommend"
a health product includes supply or prescribe the health
includes sell.
146B General powers to caution,
reprimand, counsel etc [NSW]
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following in relation to a relevant
health practitioner the subject of a complaint referred
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising
of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be imposed on
the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to,
psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at
the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction may
still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order or directs that
any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the
Committee may order that a contravention of the order or condition will result
in the health practitioner’s
registration in the health profession being
(4) The order or condition concerned is then a
"critical compliance
order or condition"
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter