URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Michael Bar-Mordecai v The Medical Council of New South Wales [2013] NSWMT 5 (3 April 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Michael Bar-Mordecai v The Medical Council of New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 5
Hearing Date(s):
25 March 2013; 3 April 2013
Decision Date:
03 April 2013
Colefax SC DCJ
1. Amended application dated 24 April 2013 is dismissed.
further application to be accepted by the Tribunal without a further order from
the Supreme Court of NSW.
3. Each party to bear its own costs.
Catchwords:
Medical practitioner - application to disqualify Deputy Chairperson refused
- application to Tribunal struck out as an abuse of process
- failures to comply
with conditions of Supreme Court leave and directions of the Tribunal - inherent
power in Tribunal of its own
motion to strike out proceedings as an abuse of
Legislation Cited:
Supreme Court Act 1970
Vexatious Proceedings Act 2008
Cases Cited:
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie
[2011] HCA 2
Re Dr AKS [2011] NSWMT 14
Metropolitan Bank v Pooley (1885) 10 App Cas 2
Rogers v the Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 251
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 197 CLR
Batistatos v The Roads and Traffic Authority
(2006) HCA 27
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 171
Interlocutory applications
Mr Michael Bar-Mordecai (Applicant)
Medical Counsel of NSW
(Respondent)
Representation
Ms. D. Ward (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Mr. M. Bar-Mordecai (self represented) (Applicant)
File Number(s):
40009/12 & 40011/12.
Publication Restriction:
25 March 2013, I directed that the application filed in this tribunal by Mr
Michael Bar-Mordecai should be listed for hearing for
him to show cause why that
application should not be struck out as an abuse of process.
2 April 2013, Mr Bar-Mordecai filed in court a document which I have had marked
for identification three in which he foreshadowed
an application that I
disqualify myself from undertaking today the show cause hearing which I fixed on
anticipated in that document, Mr Bar-Mordecai has today formally made
application that I disqualify myself from considering the
show cause matter. Mr
Bar-Mordecai made submissions both as to the disqualification issue and more
generally on the abuse of process
Mr Bar-Mordecai's application that I disqualify myself is successful, it is of
course unnecessary for me to address the abuse of
I have understood Mr Bar-Mordecai's submission on the disqualification issue, he
has submitted that at the directions hearing on
25 March 2013, I exhibited
towards him both prejudice and self-interest. The relevant authority for a judge
(or a judicial officer
such as a deputy chairperson of this tribunal)
disqualifying himself from undertaking the duties of such a judicial officer is
out in the decision of the High Court of Australia in
British American
Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie
[2011] HCA 2.
the High Court split as to the ultimate outcome, their Honours were, generally
speaking, of one mind as to what the appropriate
test should be, and that is
whether a fair-minded lay observer would conclude, bearing in mind all of the
material, that the judge
would not bring an open mind to determining the issues
before him.
this regard, Mr Bar-Mordecai submits that because he wishes to assert that other
judicial officers who have functioned as either
the chairperson or the deputy
chairperson of this tribunal have engaged in what he describes as corrupt
conduct, a fair-minded observer
would conclude that I, being a judicial
colleague of those other judges, would be prepared to participate in some form
of judicial
conspiracy.
statement needs only to be articulated for it to be seen to be without
have had no dealings with Mr Bar-Mordecai of any kind before 25 March 2013, and
my knowledge of the background to his application
has been formed exclusively by
reference to the tribunal file.
reject his application to disqualify myself from further involvement in these
proceedings.
to the question of whether Mr Bar-Mordecai has shown cause why his application
should not be struck out as an abuse of process,
as I have understood his
submission, there are three broad reasons (apart from the conspiracy issues)
which he seeks to advance -
or at least there are three issues which require
significant consideration.
first submission is that the tribunal contains no power to strike out an
application as an abuse of process. The second submission
is that the order of
Beech-Jones J precludes the tribunal from striking the proceedings out as an
abuse of process, assuming the
first question is resolved adversely to Mr
Bar-Mordecai. The third broad submission is that in the absence of an
application by the
Medical Council, it is not appropriate, nor does the tribunal
have power of its own motion, to consider a strike-out application
(or even to
formulate for itself a strike-out application).
have had previous occasion to consider whether or not the tribunal of its own
motion has power to strike out an application by reason
of it being an abuse of
process of the tribunal.
[2011] NSWMT 14, I reviewed what I thought to be the relevant
authorities in that regard. In that decision at para 36, I cited the
judgment of
Lord Blackburn in
Metropolitan Bank v Pooley
(1885) 10 App Cas 210
the proposition that the power existed to enable a court to protect itself from
abuse of its processes, thereby safeguarding
the administration of justice; and
I noted that that purpose may transcend the interests of any particular party to
the litigation.
in that case, I cited the judgment of McHugh J in
Rogers v the Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 251
where at p 286 his Honour said:
"Many, perhaps the majority of, cases of abuse of procedure arise from the
institution of proceedings. But any procedural step in
the course of proceedings
that have been properly instituted is capable of being an abuse of the Court's
in that judgment at para 38, drawing on
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 197 CLR
"Extra curial tribunals, such as this tribunal, can call in aid this doctrine
of abuse of process, a doctrine which 'is insusceptible
of a formulation
comprising closed categories. Development continues.' see
Batistatos v The
Roads and Traffic Authority
(2006) HCA 27
at 9 per Gleeson CJ, and Gummow,
Hayne and Crennan JJ."
decision was the subject of appeal. In
Sudath v Health Care Complaints
[2012] NSWCA 171
, the three justices of appeal concluded that my
ultimate order was wrong, and their Honours set it aside. Significantly,
the Court of Appeal did not say that I was in error in holding that
this tribunal had the power of its own motion to strike out proceedings
abuse of process per se.
the extent therefore that Mr Bar-Mordecai's submissions today are based upon an
assertion that this tribunal has of its own motion
no power to strike out
proceedings as an abuse of process, I reject those submissions.
ruling however does not deal with Mr Bar-Mordecai's second principal submission,
and that is that the orders of the Supreme Court
on 24 April 2012 preclude this
tribunal from taking the step which I have been discussing.
order to understand my conclusion in relation to that submission, some
background material is necessary.
25 February 2005, Patten AJ made an order under s 84(1) of the
Supreme Court
that Mr Bar-Mordecai not institute proceedings in any court without the
leave of the Supreme Court. The order of his Honour became
"a vexatious
proceedings order" upon the coming into effect of the
Vexatious Proceedings
the purpose of a vexatious proceedings order, any application in this tribunal
was covered.
19 March 2012, without the leave required by
Proceedings Act
, Mr Bar-Mordecai filed an application in this tribunal.
24 April 2012, Beech-Jones J made orders in the Supreme Court granting leave to
Mr Bar-Mordecai to make an application in this
tribunal to review earlier orders
removing his name from the register of medical practitioners. His Honour was
fully seized of the
nature of the material which Mr Bar-Mordecai had filed
without leave on 19 March 2012 because in granting that leave his Honour made
very specific conditions as to the nature of the material which Mr Bar-Mordecai
could file.
the same day as the Supreme Court made those orders, Mr Bar-Mordecai filed an
amended application in this tribunal. That application
was in general terms
consistent with the orders made by Beech-Jones J.
on 8 May 2012, Mr Bar-Mordecai filed an application in the tribunal in effect
seeking summary judgment at the then next forthcoming
directions hearing which
was to be conducted on 10 May 2012. The application for summary judgment which
Mr Bar-Mordecai filed repeated
much, if not all, of the allegations that
Beech-Jones J did not give him leave to bring.
the directions hearing on 10 May 2012, it is unclear what occurred. The tribunal
does not have a transcript of the proceedings,
and the relevant deputy
chairperson's associate's note is not relevantly helpful or enlightening.
next happened was that on 21 June 2012, a further directions hearing was
conducted, and a hearing date was fixed for 22 October
that directions hearing, apart from fixing a hearing date, an evidentiary
timetable was fixed, and Mr Bar-Mordecai was directed
to file and serve
affidavits and submissions by 28 June 2012. In addition to fixing that
timetable, the deputy chairperson granted
liberty to apply.
22 October 2012, the hearing date which had been fixed in June was vacated. It
was vacated because Mr Bar-Mordecai filed and served
material that went
significantly beyond and indeed was in contravention of the leave granted by
Beech-Jones J. It in effect sought
to reagitate matters in respect of which
leave had been specifically refused.
is appropriate to note that Mr Bar-Mordecai on that occasion acknowledged that
much of the material he had filed and served was
contrary to the leave granted
by his Honour. It is further appropriate to note that the respondent made no use
of the liberty to
apply before the hearing date.
vacating that hearing date, the tribunal gave detailed directions for the
preparation of evidence for a further hearing date, and
stood Mr Bar-Mordecai's
application over for directions to 21 February 2013 when it was expected (in the
light of the served material)
that a fresh hearing date would be fixed.
21 February 2013, that directions hearing took place. In the meantime, Mr
Bar-Mordecai had filed and served further material. It
too was also contrary to
the leave granted by Beech-Jones J and the earlier directions of the
tribunal adjourned the proceedings for six weeks to allow Mr Bar-Mordecai to
approach the Supreme Court if he wished to vary the
conditions of leave so that
the material that he had repeatedly placed before the tribunal in breach of the
orders of the Court might
be reconsidered. The tribunal noted that if, in the
meantime, no such application were made to the Supreme Court, then at the next
directions hearing six weeks later, a timetable would be set for the filing of
material within the scope of the existing Supreme
Court orders.
matter was therefore stood over for directions to 25 March 2013.
18 March 2013, Mr Bar-Mordecai filed a substantial affidavit and submissions.
Those have been marked for identification one and
two. Both the affidavit and
the submissions again persist in breaching the conditions of leave fixed by
Beech-Jones J and earlier
rulings of the tribunal.
those documents go further than previous documents filed. The documents filed on
18 March 2013 also extend an attack to Beech-Jones
will therefore be seen that on four separate occasions, Mr Bar-Mordecai has
filed material in the tribunal which have been inconsistent
with and in breach
of the condition of leave granted by the Supreme Court on 24 April 2012.
way in which this persistent breach of the Supreme Court's ruling might have
been dealt with would have been for the Medical Council
to take the matter back
to the Supreme Court to have the grant of leave withdrawn. That has not
Bar-Mordecai has submitted that the tribunal is unduly concerned with criticism
of judicial officers and he points to Canadian
authority which correctly says
that Courts ought to welcome public scrutiny.
tribunal is not concerned at the moment with criticism. Nor is the tribunal
concerned about proper public scrutiny.
the tribunal is presently concerned about is that Mr Bar-Mordecai is subject to
a vexatious proceedings order. That order mandates
that he may only bring
proceedings with leave of the Supreme Court. He has persistently breached that
leave, and it is because he
has persistently breached that leave that in my
opinion the continuation of the application would be an abuse of process. I
order that Mr Bar-Mordecai's
WARD: Before your Honour does so - I am sorry to interrupt - but will I have
an opportunity, your Honour, to address your Honour in
relation to some of the
matters that your Honour has just set out in your Honour's extempore
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, Ms Ward.
WARD: Because I'm concerned that your Honour is referring to a vexatious
proceedings order that talks about the way in which
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Ms Ward, I'm talking about the order which Beech-Jones J
made on 24 April 2012.
WARD: Yes, and your Honour's judgment refers to the order as if in terms it
addresses the question of evidence that the applicant
can file as opposed to
proceedings.
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I won't hear you, Ms Ward.
WARD: As your Honour pleases.
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have got to the end of this judgment. I am about to
pronounce orders.
WARD: Yes. That's why I intervened when I did, your Honour, because I did
want to be heard on that point.
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.
APPLICANT: Your Honour
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Both of you please sit down.
order that the amended application filed by Mr Bar-Mordecai on 24 April 2012 be
dismissed as an abuse of process of the tribunal.
further order that no further application or document be accepted by the
tribunal for filing without a further order being made
by the Supreme Court.
[Note: draft received on 22 April 2013 and revised 23 April 2013].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter