URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/852.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bryant v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited [2025] NSWPICMP 852; (4 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Bryant v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited [2025] NSWPICMP 852
Stephen Bryant
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
REVIEW PANEL
Elizabeth Medland
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Christopher Oates
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Margaret Gibson
DATE OF DECISION:
4 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of
medical certificate of single Medical Assessor; assessment of whole person
impairment (WPI) for physical injuries caused
by motor vehicle accident; various
physical injuries alleged including fracture to the left scapula and T7
compression fracture of
the thoracic spine; assessment of the loss of height due
to compression fracture; whether more than 25%; consideration of imaging
discussion of preferred method of assessment under the Motor Accident
Guidelines; when utilising correct method loss of height
is less than 25%,
resulting in a DRE category II;
– 5% WPI found of the
thoracolumbar spine and 1% of left clavicle and left scapula giving total of 6%
WPI; medical certificate
revoked and new certificate provided.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
ASSESSMENT OF WHOLE PERSON IMPAIRMENT
Certificate issued under
Accident Injuries Act 2017
The Review Panel:
the cerficate of Medical Assessor Alan Home dated 5 November 2024.
that the following injuries caused by the motor accident give rise to a
permanent impairment of 6% and is NOT greater than
thoracic spine,
T7 compression fracture loss of vertebral body height at T7;
cervical spine,
soft tissue injury;
left shoulder,
comminuted fracture to the left scapula;
right shoulder,
musculoligamentous injury;
fracture of the
left clavicle with associated soft tissue injury;
right wrist,
fracture to right scaphoid trapezium and musculoligamentous injury;
right elbow,
fracture to right radial head, and
left leg, soft
tissue injury.
that the following injuries were not caused by the motor accident:
right hand,
musculoligamentous injury, and
musculoligamentous injury to left foot and 4
left toe; injury to
left foot impacting foot reflexes consequent upon injury to thoracic spine
(pursuant to the principles in Nguyen).
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Stephen Bryant, (the claimant) is a 53-year-old male who suffered injury on
23 January 2023 as a result of a motor vehicle accident.
claim was lodged upon QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited (the insurer) who is the
insurer of the vehicle considered to be at fault.
The insurer has a liability to
pay statutory benefits and/or damages under the
Motor Accident Injuries
issue in dispute between the parties is whether the “degree of permanent
impairment as a result of the injury caused by
the motor accident is greater
is a review of a medical assessment pursuant to s 7.26 of the MAI Act. The
medical assessment the subject of this review was
conducted by Medical Assessor
Alan Home. He issued a certificate dated 5 November 2024. The Medical Assessor
certified that injuries
caused by the motor accident give rise to a permanent
impairment of 7% which is not greater than 10%.
claimant sought a review of the medical assessment in accordance with s 7.26 of
the MAI Act (review). On 18 January 2025, the
President’s delegate
determined that there was reasonable cause to suspect the medical assessment was
incorrect in a material
respect. As such the review application was accepted and
referred to a Review Panel (the Panel).
review panel consists of two Medical Assessors and a Member assigned to the
Motor Accidents Division of the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission).
review of the medical assessment is not limited to a review of only that aspect
of the assessment that is alleged to be incorrect
and is to be by way of a new
assessment of all the matters with which the medical assessment is concerned: s
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules
2021 (Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A review panel determines how it conducts and
determines the proceedings
and may determine the proceedings solely based on the
written application: Rule 128 of the Rules.
an initial preliminary conference, the Panel issued directions dated 26 March
2025 requiring the parties to provide further
medical material.
a preliminary conference, directions were issued requiring the claimant to
attend a medical examination with Medical Assessor
Oates on 18 July 2025 at the
Commission’s medical suites. The medical examination took place as
final preliminary conference occurred with a newly constituted Review Panel
(Medical Assessor Kenna being replaced by Medical Assessor
Gibson) on 12 August
2025. The clinical examination findings of Medical Assessor Oates and the
material provided by the parties was
discussed by the Panel as a whole.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Permanent impairment assessment
7.21 of the MAI Act provides that the degree of permanent impairment of
injured person
assessed in accordance with the Motor Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines).
Guidelines are issued pursuant to s 10.2 of the MAI Act. The Guidelines adopt
the fourth edition of the
American Medical Association’s Guides to
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
(AMA 4). Where there is any
difference between AMA 4 and the Guidelines, the Guidelines are
definitive.
of injury is addressed from cl 1.5 of the Guidelines. Whilst the clauses are set
out in respect of permanent impairment
they are relevant to a dispute as to
threshold injury.
cls 1.6 and
1.7 provide:
“1.6 Causation is defined in the Glossary at
page 316 of the AMA 4 Guides as follows:
Causation means that a physical, chemical or biologic factor contributed to
the occurrence of a medical condition. To decide that
a factor alleged to have
caused or contributed to the occurrence or worsening of a medical condition has,
in fact, done so, it is
necessary to verify both of the following:
‘1. The alleged factor could have caused or contributed to worsening
of the impairment, which is a medical determination.
alleged factor did cause or contribute to worsening of the impairment, which is
a non-medical determination.'
This, therefore, involves a medical
decision and a non-medical informed judgement.
1.7 There is no simple common test of causation that is applicable to all
cases, but the accepted approach involves determining whether
the injury (and
the associated impairment) was caused or materially contributed to by the motor
accident. The motor accident does
not have to be a sole cause as long as it is a
contributing cause, which is more than negligible. Considering the question
this injury (or impairment) have occurred if not for the accident?' may
be useful in some cases, although this is not a definitive
test and may be
inapplicable in circumstances where there are multiple contributing
determining the issue of causation, the Panel is to also have regard to s 5D of
Civil Liability Act
2002 (CL Act),
General principles:
(1) A determination that negligence caused particular harm comprises the
following elements:
(a) that the negligence was a necessary condition of the occurrence of the harm
factual causation
(b) that it is appropriate for the scope of the negligent person’s
liability to extend to the harm so caused (
scope of liability
(2) In determining in an exceptional case, in accordance with established
principles, whether negligence that cannot be established
as a necessary
condition of the occurrence of harm should be accepted as establishing factual
causation, the court is to consider
(amongst other relevant things) whether or
not and why responsibility for the harm should be imposed on the negligent
(3) If it is relevant to the determination of factual causation to determine
what the person who suffered harm would have done if
the negligent person had
not been negligent—
(a) the matter is to be determined subjectively in the light of all relevant
circumstances, subject to paragraph (b), and
(b) any statement made by the person after suffering the harm about what he or
she would have done is inadmissible except to the
extent (if any) that the
statement is against his or her interest.
(4) For the purpose of determining the scope of liability, the court is to
consider (amongst other relevant things) whether or not
and why responsibility
for the harm should be imposed on the negligent party.”
ASSESSMENT UNDER REVIEW
Assessor Home in his certificate dated 5 November 2024 found that the following
injuries caused by the motor accident give
rise to a 7% WPI:
thoracic spine
T7 compression fracture loss of vertebral body height at T7;
cervical spine
soft tissue injury;
left shoulder
comminuted fracture to the left scapula, and
fracture of the
left clavicle with associated soft tissue injury.
examination of the cervical spine there was no muscle spasm or guarding and the
Spurling’s test negative. Movement was within
normal ranges and
neurological examination was normal. An increased sensitivity was said to be the
in lateral aspect of the left
arm and forearm in a non-dermatomal pattern. A DRE
Category I impairment was found.
respect of the thoracic spine, examination revealed increased lumbar kyphosis in
mid-thoracic region, and no scoliosis. Lumbosacral motion was preserved
in all planes. Straight leg raising performed to 80 degrees
bilaterally in a
long sitting position. There was a normal neurological examination.
Medical Assessor noted the T7 fracture with the latest radiology (24 November
2023) demonstrating a 15% loss of vertebral height.
A 5% whole pair impairment
(WPI) was found in respect of the thoracic spine.
Examination
of the left shoulder, with consistent movement noted, found a 2% WPI.
respect of the right elbow and right wrist a 0% WPI was found with the range of
active movement noted as normal.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s review application submissions dated 4 December
claimant submits that the Medical Assessor made an “egregious error”
when assessing the thoracic spine. The claimant
submits that the loss of
vertebral height at the T7 level is 30%, and therefore a finding that the loss
of vertebral height is less
than 25% is incorrect.
claimant submits that the “most recent” imaging referred to be
Medical Assessor Home is not in fact the most recent
and the claimant refers to
an MRI of the cervical and thoracic spine dated 2 May 2024 which refers to a
“chronic wedging of
T7 with 30% loss of height”. The claimant notes
that a 30% loss of height would translate to a 15% WPI finding of the thoracic
Insurer’s review submissions in reply dated 8
January 2025
insurer agrees that Medical Assessor Home failed to refer to the entirety of the
later radiological investigation in his reasoning
which constitutes a material
the insurer contends that the Medical Assessor has primarily erred in finding a
compression fracture of the T7 was caused
by the accident, when the injury to
the thoracic spine is wholly pre-existing. It is submitted that the Medical
Assessor failed
to engage with the insurer’s submission as to the T7
fracture being wholly pre-existing.
Accordingly,
the submissions regarding the loss of disc height are irrelevant where the
injury was not caused by the accident.
insurer submits:
“...the thoracic compression fracture and
related loss of disc height was not caused in the subject accident, given the
in complaints about the thoracic spine, the notation in the radiological
report in November 2023 the age of the compression was difficult
to determine,
and the finding of longstanding pathology in the setting of Schmorl’s
nodes in the hospital records.”
Claimant’s further review submissions dated 23 January 2025
claimant submits that it has been long held by the courts that the absence of
recorded complaints in contemporaneous records in
and of itself is not
determinative that complaints were not in fact made. It is asserted that the
absence of recorded complaint
regarding the thoracic spine by ambulance staff
would not be unusual as medical staff attended to the claimant’s more
and pressing injuries such as fractures to other parts of the body.
response to the insurer’s submissions regarding the comment on chest CT at
the hospital, regarding the fracture of the T7
being longstanding, the claimant
submits that the opinion of the radiologist at the hospital was given in a
complete vacuum. The
claimant submits:
“She has no medical
background, records, earlier scans or history to compare the CT findings with.
In the absence of any context
or history her comment is mere speculation and
holds no weight. Indeed it ought to be noted how carefully and tentatively she
her opinion – ‘
favoured to be longstanding
No doubt this is because she is unable to state with certainty the cause of the
pathology at T7 and T9 and therefore the
best she can do is to speculate based
the setting of Schmorl’s nodes’
Claimant’s submissions for original application dated 11 June
submissions list the injuries and not reliance on the opinion of Dr Patrick who
assessed a 22% WPI in his report of 29 May 2024.
claimant also refutes the insurer’s submission that Dr Wallace considered
the fracture to be longstanding. The claimant
submits that this is not true and
is not an opinion expressed in his report. The claimant points out that Dr
Wallace diagnosed a
T7 vertebral fracture.
claimant refers to the X-ray report of 24 November 2023 and that Dr Julie Arora,
radiologist noted that it was difficult to determine
the exact age of the
compression fracture and it had developed since the previous study (referring to
an X-ray of 7 August 2020 more
than two years prior to the accident).
respect of the records of Associate Professor Eisman, the claimant objects to
the documents being part of the material before the
Panel, noting it did not
form part of an application to admit late documents. However, if allowed, the
claimant refutes a suggestion
that the doctor concluded that the T7 fracture
pre-dated the accident. Instead he expressed uncertainty about the age of the
The claimant notes that the Associate Professor states in his report
of 21 March 2024 “...would appear to be old ie. Remote
in time. He also
would appear to have a Schmorl’s node there, which may be confusing the
Insurer’s reply submissions to original
application (undated)
insurer refers to medical records that document pre accident issues. In this
regard the records of Linfield Medical Practice are
mentioned which note
previous arthralgia in the joints at a consultation on 18 February 2015.
insurer also notes an X-ray of the cervical and thoracic spine dated 17 July
2014 on a history of the claimant experiencing paraesthesia
on the left side of
the neck with the radiology revealing mild narrowing of the C4/5 and C6 disc
spaces with early degenerative changes
in the facet joints.
insurer notes a reliance on a report of Dr Patrick by the claimant and that
there is a reference to a different named person,
which suggests a “cut
and paste” type error in the report and therefore “...there must be
considerable doubt as
to the accuracy of the report and the stated findings and
conclusions.”
respect of the cervical spine, the insurer notes an absence of recorded
complaint in the ambulance report and the hospital discharge
in respect of the thoracic spine the insurer notes an absence of complaint in
the ambulance report, hospital records or
the records of Chatswood Medical &
Dental Practice.
respect of the thoracic spine the insurer submits:
diagnosis of a T7 compression fracture, kyphosis of the mid-thoracic region of
T7 and chronic compression of the T8
superior endplate with loss of vertebral
height is predicated upon a comment as to the anomaly identified in an
investigation report
24 November 2023 when compared against a scan
performed 7 August 2020 but which is not available.
The fact that the anomalies are no present and have appeared in the
intervening period is seized upon to relate them to the sequelae
of the subject
accident in the absence of any further reasoning. The assessor will see that the
investigation report itself stated
that the age of the compression was said to
be difficult to determine.
The insurer notes the absence of any complaint about the level of T7 at the
time of the accident. It would be expected that if there
was a blunt force
injury sufficient to cause a T7 vertebral fracture together with endplate
fractures at T9, such would have been
extremely painful and immediately
apparent. It would be expected that there would be reference to such an injury
in the records of
RNS Hospital.
CT Pan scan performed at RNS Hospital at the time of his admission identified
the superior end plate depression of T7 and T9 however
these findings were
favoured to be longstanding in the setting of Schmorl’s nodes.
It is significant that this was the impression of the reporting radiographer
at the time the scan was performed on the day of the
It is submitted this argues against the anomalies being accident related.
Rather it supports a finding the anomalies were pre-existing
co-incidental.”
insurer submits that the claimant has recovered from the various fractures and
there would be no assessable impairment. It is
submitted that a finding of soft
tissue injury of the cervical spine would not be made, and if a finding is made
there would be no
assessable impairment.
insurer disputes any injury to the left lower limb beyond minor abrasions, and
would not give rise to an assessable impairment.
DOCUMENTATION
Panel issued interim directions dated 5 February 2025 requiring the parties to
lodge single paginated and indexed bundles of documents
relied upon. The Panel
has considered the following bundles of documents in reaching its
determination:
● claimant’s bundle of documents relied
upon – review application” consisting of
79 pages lodged on 3
March 2025;
additional documents’– consisting of 18 pages lodged on
Bryan–Insurer’s index of additional documents –
2025.03.19’ – consisting of 49 pages
lodged on 19 March 2025;
‘2025.03.19
– Insurer’s PIC Reply (Review Application of Certificate of Assessor
pages lodged on 19 March 2025;
Application to
admit late documents – claimant’s bundle ‘RP Paginated Bundle
(Per Directions 26.3.25)’ consisting
of 181 pages lodged on 13 May
Application to
admit late documents – claimant’s bundle ‘AALD – Dr
Moharami report’ consisting of 6
pages lodged on 30 June 2015;
response to claimant’s application to admit late documents’ lodged
on 10 July 2025, and
bundle lodged on 14 July 2025 –‘AALD – Link to CT Imaging
(sic) from RNSH taken on 23 January 2023’.
Panel notes the claimant’s objection to the insurer’s inclusion of
the file of Associate Professor Eisman, on the
basis that it is not part of an
application to admit late documents. However, the Panel notes that the Panel
directions of 5 February
2025 called for documents relied upon which included an
allowance for additional documents that were not before Medical Assessor
Furthermore, it is apparent that the claimant later included these documents in
a subsequent bundle. Noting that the material
is from a treating specialist and
is relevant to the issues in dispute, the Panel has considered the documents.
Panel notes the insurer’s objection to the claimant relying upon the
Dr Moharami. The insurer submits that the report has been lodged
outside the timeframe prescribed by Rule 67C of the Rules. The insurer
that the report of Dr Korber was served in February 2025 and therefore there has
been significant delay in obtaining the subject
report of Dr Moharami. The Panel
acknowledges the timeframe allowed for in Rule 67C of the Rules. However, the
Panel considers the
report of Dr Moharami as relevant to the issues in dispute
and it would be in the interests of justice for the claimant to have the
opportunity to respond to the report of Dr Korber, even in circumstances where
there has been some delay. The Panel therefore dispenses
with the requirement of
Rule 67C pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the Rules.
Panel has not referred to every document considered within these reasons. Some
material has been referenced that is directly relevant
to the findings made.
However, the certificate and reasons have been provided within the context of
all material having been considered.
Medico-legal
Report of Dr John Korber, radiologist, dated 19 February 2025 –
addressed to insurer
doctor, within the report, analyses the radiology films. In summary he finds:
“In relation to the thoracic vertebrae, I have no doubt that
there is an anterior compression of T7 (14%) and a superior endplate
compression
of T9 (without anterior compression). The imaging I have seen also demonstrates
the scapular fracture as well as the
clavicular fracture. It also demonstrates
the scaphoid fracture. The hand x-ray does not confirm the triquetral fracture
which would
be better seen on CT.”
answer to a question as to whether he agrees or disagrees with the reporting
radiologists the doctor answers: “without having
seen the CT of the chest,
it is reasonable that the T7 and T9 vertebral changes are recent.” He also
confirms his opinion that
the pathology identified in the thoracic spine was not
pre-existing. He further states “I am of the opinion that T7 and T9
recent since the X-ray of 23 January 2023. They are clearly not present on
August 2020.”
when asked whether he agreed or disagreed with Associate Professor
Eisman’s opinion that the thoracic fracture appeared
older than the
pathology noted on the left scapular, left clavicle and left anterior second
rib, Dr Korber replies:
“It would appear the patient has had
a significant injury given the peripheral injuries. With the limitation that the
performed ten months after the injury, I do not have any reason to
suggest a variation to when the fractures occurred simply based
appearance.”
Dr Benham Moharami, radiologist, dated 30 June 2025 – addressed to
consideration of the radiology, the doctor concludes:
chest xray of 2020, pre-incident, there is no evidence of fracture and the
appearance and morphology of T7 is within
normal limits.
On Thoracic spine image of 2023, on my measurement (please note the
measurements are different compared to the previous reports as
has been used the
electronic version), T6 is 22.8mm, T7 is 22.5 and T8 is 27 mm. This is almost
10% loss of vertebral body height
anteriorly. However, there is central loss of
body height due to superior and end-plate fracture with central vertebral body
18.6mm, with T6 measuring 19.6mm and TB measuring 25.2mm, using same
calculation method as previous reports, this is equal to vertebral
loss of 17%.
Using different method of height calculation which is comparing the anterior to
the posterior height of same vertebral
body (T7), the vertebral body height loss
is equal to (28.6-22.5)/28.6=21.4%.
On MRI study of May 2024, when using previous method of calculating anterior
body height of T6, T7 and T8, the body height loss will
be equal to 23%. When
using the more common method of comparing anterior and posterior column of same
vertebral body, the body height
loss is equal to (22.9-16.2)/22.9=29%.
Overall, when reviewing previous study, in my opinion the wedge deformity has
progresses (sic) since study of 2023 to the study of
2024 and considering the
common method of calculation of vertebral body height and the latest imaging
(MRI) confirms that there is
more than 25% (29%) loss of T7 vertebral body
Dr Wallace dated 8 December 2023 addressed to the insurer
examination, the doctor stated that the claimant’s injuries to his left
shoulder, right elbow, right wrist and thoracic
spine (including a T7 fracture)
had been caused by the motor accident. He found a DRE Category II impairment in
respect of the thoracic
spine giving rise to a 5% WPI and a 0% WPI in respect of
the balance of the injuries.
Dr Patrick dated 29 May 2024
addressed to the claimant
examination, the doctor assessed a 22% WPI. This includes a 5% WPI in respect of
the cervical spine, a 5% to the thoracic
spine, a 7% in respect of the right
shoulder and 8% in respect of the left shoulder.
RE-EXAMINATION
are the examination findings of Medical Assessor Oates following his assessment
of the claimant on 18 July 2025 at the Commission’s
medical suites in
Darlinghurst.
Permanent impairment disputes to be
thoracic spine:
T7 compression fracture with 30% loss of vertebral height; kyphosis at the
mid-thoracic region of the spine; chronic
compression of T9 superior endplate
with loss of vertebral height;
cervical spine:
Posterior disc protrusion at C6/7; musculoligamentous injury;
left shoulder:
Comminuted fracture of left scapula; musculoligamentous injury;
right shoulder:
musculoligamentous injury;
left clavicle:
fracture to left clavicle;
right wrist:
fracture to right scaphoid trapezium; musculoligamentous injury;
right hand:
musculoligamentous injury;
right elbow:
fracture to right radial head;
left leg: soft
tissue injury to left calf, and
musculoligamentous injury to left foot and 4
left toe; injury to
left foot impacting foot reflexes consequent upon injury to thoracic spine
(pursuant to the principles in Nguyen).
Details of who attended
the Assessment
Bryant was assessed unaccompanied.
Pre-accident medical history and relevant personal details including
details from the file of evidence
claimant is right hand dominant.
was born in the UK and came to Australia in 2012. He works as a medical
recruitment consultant and was a full-time employee at
the time of the accident.
was on no regular medications and has had no surgery. He was taking medication
for ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder),
which was diagnosed in
his thirties, he had a fracture of left scaphoid which was treated by
immobilisation in a plaster cast and recovered.
his early thirties, he had a fracture of the left elbow when he fell off a
mountain bike. This recovered.
2014, he had X-ray of thoracic and cervical spine with clinical history playing
piano and pins and needles and tightness in the
left paracervical. This
condition settled with physiotherapy. There was no radiation of symptoms to the
left arm beyond the trapezius.
I asked him about it, he did not recall having had a 2015 X-ray to the lumbar
told me that a 2017 MRI scan was done for numbness in the perineum and this
settled with ergonomic adjustment of the bicycle seat.
the time of the accident, he lived in a house with his wife and two children and
did cycling and was a musician.
History of the motor
claimant confirmed on 23 January 2023, he was riding a pushbike in St Ives and
entered a roundabout, when his bike was hit from
behind by a vehicle which
entered the roundabout subsequently.
was knocked off the bicycle, landing heavily on the road on his upper back and
left shoulder blade area. He had a gravel rash to
the lateral left lower leg
from contact with the car tyre. He was not knocked out and the bicycle helmet he
was wearing was not significantly
damaged. He felt upper back pain and left
shoulder girdle pain and the pain levels were high. An ambulance attended.
ambulance record indicates 10/10 left scapular pain and an abrasion to left
was transported to Royal North Shore Hospital. The hospital investigations
showed a left scapular fracture and there was also complaint
of pain in the left
elbow, left wrist and left mid-shaft of clavicle, with a right distal pole
scaphoid fracture and trapezium fracture,
and a right elbow radial head
chest CT scan showed superior endplate depression of T7 and T9 which were
favoured to be long-standing in the setting of Schmorl’s
nodes, along with
a minimally displaced fracture of mid left clavicle.
was discharged on 25 January 2023 after receiving analgesia.
control was difficult at first until an anti-inflammatory, diclofenac, was
added, after which pain levels became more manageable.
saw Dr Papadimitriou, orthopaedic surgeon, and Dr Lawson, orthopaedic surgeon,
in fracture follow-up clinic. His fractures were
managed conservatively.
had progress imaging. He also had an X-ray and MRI scan of cervical spine on
1 March 2023 but does not recall having any symptoms radiating from the neck
into either arm.
was off work for eight weeks and then returned to work on a gradual basis over
one to two months, before attaining full-time work.
He then resigned and started
his own business in the same field, medical recruitment for specialists. His
company is called MBBS
Recruitment.
hospital management, his general practitioner (GP) organised analgesics and
physiotherapy with treatment to the upper body for
strengthening using
Therabands and pulleys, and then he joined a gym to continue with weight
Current symptoms
claimant has chronic lower interscapular level pain, and he can’t get that
part of his mid-back comfortable when sitting
in a chair, and there are
intermittent mid-thoracic numbness feelings.
can drive a car about one hour, then gets restless and starts moving around in
his seat because of thoracic discomfort. He also
gets discomfort which disturbs
still rides a bicycle but for less time now, 25 – 30 minutes when he has
to start adjusting his position, and he can manage
one and half hour maximum. He
plays the piano but for a reduced time.
notices soreness in the left olecranon at the elbow when lifting barbells at the
gym, and he gets occasional right scaphoid discomfort
at the wrist when lifting
and gripping combined with a twisting action, or if he overplays the piano.
Current and proposed treatment
claimant attends self-funded physiotherapy about three monthly to monitor his
range of movement. He goes to the gymnasium once
or twice per week.
stretches out his thoracic back by lying on the floor. If he is in discomfort,
which stretching doesn’t settle down, he will
take ibuprofen +/-
paracetamol but tries to avoid too much medication.
EXAMINATION
General presentation
claimant was of proportionate build with height 181cm and weight 82.8kg.
was increased mid-thoracic kyphosis on inspection of the spine from one side.
was no chest pain on springing of the ribs and no chest
tenderness.
Cervical spine (cervicothoracic)
was no spasm and no guarding. There were no non-verifiable radicular complaints.
There was full, free range of movement in flexion,
extension, lateral flexion
and rotation in both directions.
were all of low amplitude but symmetrical. Power and sensation in the upper
limbs were normal.
arm girth; right 31cm, left 31.5cm.
girth; right 29.5cm, left 29cm.
Thoracic spine
(thoracolumbar)
was no spasm, no guarding, no non-verifiable radicular complaints.
was full rotation bilaterally when tested at 90° of lumbar flexion and when
tested whilst sitting to eliminate lumbar spinal
over the trunk was intact.
Lower extremity
claimant confirmed there was no skin mark or scarring remaining from the left
leg abrasion, which had fully healed.
Upper extremities
was full range of movement in the right shoulder in flexion - 180°,
extension - 50°, abduction - 180°, adduction
- 50°, internal and
external rotation – both 90°.
the left shoulder measured with a goniometer - flexion 160°, extension
70°, abduction 160°, adduction 40°,
internal rotation and
external rotation both 80°.
AC joint was intact.
was some mild deformity of the mid-shaft of left clavicle, with no tenderness
and no instability at the healed fracture site.
Impingement
test negative bilaterally.
abduction and flexion strength at the shoulders was equal bilaterally.
and left elbows showed full range of movement in flexion, extension, pronation
and supination measured by goniometer.
and left wrists showed the following movements by
goniometer:
Wrist Movements
Active ROM Measured
Active ROM Measured
Ulnar deviation
Radial deviation
Comments on consistency
Bryant presented in a straightforward consistent
was no additional imaging brought to the Panel re-examination. However, links
to the relevant radiology has been provided and
the Medical Assessors of the
Panel have viewed same. This is discussed further below.
above clinical examination findings were discussed by the Panel at the
teleconference on 12 August 2025. The Panel after discussion,
agreed with the
examination findings of Medical Assessor Oates and agreed that same would be
incorporated into these reasons.
Diagnosis, causation and
Cervical spine
Panel is satisfied that on the balance of probabilities, the claimant did suffer
a whiplash associated disorder musculoligamentous
injury, considering the
mechanics of the accident, where he was thrown off his bicycle after being hit
from the rear by a motor vehicle,
and landing heavily on his upper back and left
scapular region, which are adjacent to the cervical spine.
he denied neck pain according to the ambulance record, and there was no neck
tenderness and he was moving his neck freely
according to the hospital record,
he subsequently had investigations of the cervical spine on 1 March 2023 to
check for the presence
of a whiplash soft tissue injury or a disc injury.
Left clavicle
fractured left clavicle was related to the accident, as this is mentioned in the
hospital record, within the claim form and the
accompanying certificate of
Right elbow
right elbow fracture of the radial head was caused by the accident, as is
mentioned in the hospital records, the claim form and
the accompanying
certificate of capacity.
condition is not related to the accident. It is not mentioned in the
contemporaneous medical record including ambulance notes,
hospital notes and GP
record. The claimant confirmed that this condition had its onset after he kicked
his foot on a door frame.
is no contemporaneous medical evidence of an independent injury to the right
hand, although there is clear evidence of a right
wrist injury. On the balance
of probabilities, the Panel is not satisfied that the claimant suffered an
injury to the right hand
caused by the motor accident.
was a soft tissue injury abrasion to the left calf from contact with the tyre of
the car which hit him. This injury is mentioned
in the ambulance records. The
Panel is satisfied that the claimant suffered an injury to his left leg caused
by the accident.
Left shoulder
Panel is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the claimant suffered a
comminuted fracture of left scapula caused by
the accident. The ambulance record
indicated he hit the concrete with his left scapula adjacent to thoracic spine,
and this injury
is mentioned in the hospital record, the claim form and the
accompanying certificate of capacity.
Thoracic spine
T7 compression fracture is an acute fracture according to expert radiological
evidence and was not present on a previous X-ray
taken prior to the motor
vehicle accident, therefore the Panel is satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that the accident is
a cause of T7 compression fracture and a T9
superior endplate compression. The Panel considers the motor accident mechanism
consistent with such injury.
Panel notes the comments of the radiologist at the Royal North Shore Hospital.
Having considered the entirety of the medical evidence,
including from the
expert radiologists,
Dr Korber and Dr Moharami, the Panel is satisfied that
the mechanism of the motor accident is capable to giving rise to a compression
fracture. Secondly, on the balance of probabilities, the Panel is satisfied that
the compression fracture was caused by the motor
accident. It is also noted that
Dr Wallace similarly expressed his opinion that the fracture was caused by the
motor accident.
Right wrist
was a scaphoid and trapezium fracture of which the accident is a cause, as this
injury is referred to in the hospital record,
the claim form and the
accompanying certificate of capacity.
Right shoulder
is a musculoligamentous injury, and the Panel is satisfied that that the
accident was a material cause of this injury, noting
the claimant’s
complaints recorded in the hospital file.
the cervical spine, there are intermittent symptoms but no guarding, no spasm,
no non-verifiable radicular complaints, and no radiculopathy
as prescribed by
the Guidelines. The descriptors place him in DRE Cervicothoracic Category I
giving 0% WPI.
left clavicle and left scapula are assessed by means of range of movement at the
left shoulder. Flexion 160° gives 1% upper
extremity impairment and
abduction 160° gives 1%. Adding these gives 2% upper extremity impairment,
equivalent to 1% WPI.
right elbow showed full range of movement in flexion, extension, pronation and
supination, hence 0% WPI.
left leg abrasion soft tissue injury has healed, resulting in 0% WPI.
right wrist showed full range of movement, hence no assessable permanent
impairment.
right shoulder showed full range of movement, hence no assessable permanent
impairment.
had ongoing interscapular pain from the time of the accident and measurements
have revealed he has lost 2cm in height, with development
of a mid-thoracic
kyphosis. Before the accident he was 183cm and now is 181cm.
24 November 2023, he saw his GP after he had put down a barbell at the gym and
got sudden onset of right intercostal pain radiating
to the thoracic spine. He
was sent for a bone scan to check the ribs and the status of T7 +/- a
Schmorl’s node.
X-ray of the chest and thoracic spine on even date showed mild T7 superior
endplate compression with 15% loss of vertebral body
height. This was reported
to have developed since the previous study of 7 August 2020, although it was
difficult to determine the
age of the compression fracture of T7. There was no
rib fracture.
had a bone mineral densitometry DEXA scan showing a mix of osteoporosis and
osteopaenia.
was referred to Associate Professor Eisman, endocrinologist, after the DEXA
scan. He had a nuclear bone scan on 1 December 2023
showing fractures of left
scapula and left clavicle, undisplaced fracture of anterior right second rib and
T7 mild compression fracture,
which was said to be old or remote.
Professor Eisman, after further investigation, diagnosed hypercalciuria, meaning
his kidneys were leaking calcium into the
urine, with the calcium then being
leached out of the bones. He initiated treatment with Dithiazide 25mg per day
from October 2024
and as a result of treatment, he is no longer leaking calcium
into the urine.
is to have a repeat DEXA scan in February 2026 to check on the status of his
bone density.
was referred to a neurologist for “moving toe” syndrome of the left
foot, which is unrelated to the motor vehicle accident.
He recalls this came on
after he kicked his left foot on a doorframe.
Korber, radiologist, on 19 February 2025, referred to an anterior compression of
T7 vertebral body of 14% and superior endplate
compression of T9 vertebra
without anterior vertebral body compression. Both of these vertebral changes are
recent, as they were
not present on the X-ray of 7 August 2020.
Moharami, radiologist, on 30 June 2025 noted 17% vertebral body height loss at
T7, or 21.4% when comparing the anterior and posterior
vertebral body height on
MRI scan of 2 May 2024 using the method of comparing anterior body height
resulted in 23% compression of T7 against adjacent vertebra,
and if measuring
anterior and posterior heights of the T7 vertebra gave 29% loss of T7 vertebral
body height.
cl 6.148 of the Guidelines, prescribes the preferred method of assessing the
amount of compression in a vertebral fracture is
to use a lateral X-ray of the
spinal region with the beam parallel to the disc spaces, or a CT scan if the
former is not available.
The area of maximum compression is measured in the
vertebra with the compression fracture. The same area of the vertebrae directly
above and below the affected vertebra is measured and an average obtained.
measurement from the compressed vertebra is then subtracted from the average of
the two adjacent vertebrae and the resulting figure
is divided by the average of
the two unaffected vertebrae and turned into a percentage. If there are not two
adjacent normal vertebrae,
then the next vertebra that is normal and one
adjacent to (above or below) the affected vertebra is used. The calculations
documented in the impairment evaluation report.
the case of this claimant, the superior endplate compression of T9, which does
not involve anterior compression, is assessed as
DRE Category II because there
is no measurable compression of the vertebral body (cl 6150 of the Guidelines).
this claimant, both independent expert radiologists (Drs Moharami and Korber)
confirm less than 25% T7 anterior vertebral body
height loss, when using the
preferred assessment method set out at cl 6.148 of the Guidelines. The
“more common method”
of assessment of vertebral body height loss,
comparing the anterior and posterior columns of the same vertebral body as
by Dr Moharami in his report of 30 June 2025, is not the method
prescribed by the Guidelines. It is therefore rejected by the Panel.
assessment of 29% loss of T7 vertebral body height based on the MRI study of 2
May 2024, uses this invalid assessment method,
whereas when the method
prescribed by the Guidelines is used, his assessment is 23% loss of T7 vertebral
body height. The Panel notes
that cl 6.148 states that lateral x-ray is to be
preferred for this assessment, or if unavailable, a CT scan can be used. The
are silent on the use of an MRI scan for assessment purposes,
however, it cautions that the error rate will be significant unless
the Medical
Assessor is able to magnify the images electronically.
Medical Assessors of the Panel made their assessment based on the magnified CT
images dated 24 January 2024, and using the preferred
method of assessment as
stipulated by cl 6.148 of the Guidelines. Both Medical Assessor Oates, and
Medical Assessor Gibson calculated
a 21% loss of height in this regard,
utilising the method prescribed by the Guidelines.
the Guidelines stipulate the use of lateral x-ray or CT scan, for the sake of
completeness, the Panel recently requested a
link to the MRI study of 2 May 2024
which was promptly provided. Both Medical Assessors have viewed same and when
utilising the
method of assessment prescribed by cl 6.148 of the Guidelines,
agree on a calculation of 23% loss of height. It is to be noted that
accords with the findings of Dr Moharami when he utilised the Guidelines
prescribed method of assessment.
Panel notes that Dr Korber did not have access to the MRI study of May 2024.
than 25% compression of a vertebral body is DRE Thoracolumbar Category II giving
thoracic spine has a T7 compression fracture with 25% or less loss of vertebral
body height when calculated according to the method
prescribed in the
Guidelines.
is also compression of the T9 superior endplate without compression of the
vertebra. This endplate compression, whether single
or multiple, results in DRE
Category II. A compression fracture of less than 25% of the vertebral body in
the thoracic spine also
results in DRE Thoracolumbar Category II giving 5%
combined impairment is 5% (thoracolumbar spine) by 1% (left clavicle and left
scapula) giving 6% WPI.
the findings of the Panel differ from Medical Assessor Home the certificate of
5 November 2024 is revoked and a new certificate is provided at the
beginning of these reasons.
Section 4.11 of the MAI
Section 7.26(5A) of the MAI
Clause 6.2 of the
Guidelines.
Briggs v IAG Limited
t/as NRMA Insurance
[2022] NSWSC 372
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (528 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter