URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Topalovic v BlueScope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd [2024] NSWDDT 7 (11 June 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Topalovic v BlueScope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 7
Hearing Date(s):
3 June 2024
Date of Orders:
11 June 2024
Decision Date:
11 June 2024
(1) Pursuant to cl 20(1)(c) of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal
Regulation 2019
, the proceedings are removed from the Claims Resolution
(2) I will hear from the parties as to the
appropriate directions to be made to bring the matter to mediation as soon as
practicable.
(3) The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion and the costs thrown away by the refusal to attend the medical
examination
with Professor McKenzie on 29 May 2024.
grant liberty to either party to seek a different costs order.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES — refusal to attend medical appointment – removal
from CRP - mediation
Legislation Cited:
Civil Liability Act 2002
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
Procedural rulings
BlueScope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd (Applicant/Defendant)
Momcilo Topalovic
(Respondent/Plaintiff)
Representation:
A Giurtalis
(Respondent/Plaintiff)
Solicitors:
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
(Applicant/Defendant)
Nikolovski Lawyers (Respondent/Plaintiff)
File Number(s):
2023/213804
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
defendant, BlueScope Steel (AIS) Pty Limited (BlueScope), seeks an order that
the proceedings be removed from the claims resolution
process (CRP) pursuant to
cl 20(1)(c)
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(the Regulations), on
the basis that the plaintiff has failed to comply with a requirement of the CRP
and the failure has resulted
in substantial prejudice to BlueScope or
substantial delay.
read an affidavit of David Christopher Andersen affirmed on 29 May 2024.
plaintiff read an affidavit of Chris Nikolovski affirmed on 1 June 2024.
the reasons that follow, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has failed to comply
with a requirement of the CRP and that as a result
BlueScope will suffer
substantial prejudice. Accordingly, the proceedings will be removed from the CRP
and be the subject of judicial
management with a view to holding a mediation as
soon as is reasonably practicable.
plaintiff was born on 8 March 1936 and is presently 88 years of age.
plaintiff alleges that he was employed by BlueScope at the Port Kembla
Steelworks between 1958 and 1992.
4 July 2023, the plaintiff filed a Statement of Claim seeking provisional
damages for asbestos-related pleural disease (ARPD) and
asbestosis. On 22
December 2023, the plaintiff filed and served his Statement of Particulars which
commenced time to run on the CRP
requirements for a non-malignant claim.
16 January 2024 BlueScope requested an extension of 20 business days in which to
file and serve cross-claims pursuant to cl 25(3)-(4)
of the Regulations.
22 January 2024, the plaintiff consented to BlueScope’s request to extend
the time for the filing and service of cross-claims
by 20 business days.
26 February 2024 BlueScope sought particulars from the plaintiff in the
following terms:
BlueScope seeks “the following further particulars and information
pursuant to clause 26 of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(a) Please specify the full name and date of birth of the
plaintiff’s wife;
(b) Please provide particulars of the plaintiff’s
wife’s treating general practitioner(s) over the last five years;
(c) Please provide particulars of the person or persons who
provide the plaintiff with domestic assistance. Please particularise
of birth and their employer.
(d) Please provide particulars of persons whom it is alleged
will provide the future domestic assistance or gratuitous care to
the plaintiff.
Please provide the date of birth of each such person and their employer.
We would appreciate your response within 14 days of the date of this letter and
look forward to hearing from you.”
1 March 2024 BlueScope enquired if the plaintiff was well enough to travel to
attend a medical examination with Professor David
McKenzie in Randwick.
5 March 2024, the plaintiff responded that he was well enough to travel but
required BlueScope to pay for the cost of transporting
the plaintiff by a
private car to and from the appointment, which was estimated to cost $750.
7 March 2024 BlueScope advised that it would meet the transport cost and would
advise when an appointment with Professor McKenzie
had been arranged.
11 March 2024 BlueScope advised that the medical examination with Professor
McKenzie had been arranged for 29 May 2024.
12 March 2024 BlueScope sought a response to the particulars requested on 26
February 2024. On 25 March 2024 BlueScope sent further
correspondence seeking a
response to the particulars requested on 26 February 2024.
27 May 2024, a law clerk employed by the plaintiff’s solicitor sent an
email to BlueScope’s solicitor advising that
the plaintiff objected to
attending the medical examination with Professor McKenzie because it was
scheduled outside of the timeframe
set out in clause 29 of the Regulations.
27 May 2024 BlueScope wrote to the plaintiff setting out that it expected the
plaintiff to attend the medical examination, or that
it would file a motion in
the Tribunal to have the proceedings removed from the CRP.
28 May 2024, the plaintiff’s solicitor advised that the plaintiff could
not attend the medical examination by reason of his
age and condition,
suggesting that if BlueScope still wanted to have the plaintiff examined that it
could organise an appointment
with a doctor in Wollongong or by audio-visual
Relevant Clauses of the Regulations
12 of the Regulations provides:
12 Objectives of claims resolution process
The objectives of the
resolution process
as follows--
(a) to foster the early provision of information and
particulars concerning
asbestos-related
(b) to encourage early settlement of
(c) to reduce associated legal and administrative
16 of the Regulations relevantly provides:
which this Part applies is subject to the
resolution process
provides for some
be removed from the
resolution process
subject to the
resolution process
(a) until the
otherwise and the Tribunal makes an order to give effect to the settlement,
not settled by the time
concluded--until
concluded and
has been complied with.
(3) The parties to a
agree to extend the period for which the
subject to the
resolution process
17(1) of the Regulations provides:
17 Effect of claim being subject to claims resolution process
(1) While a
subject to the
resolution process
(a) the parties to the
comply with the provisions of this Part, and
(b) proceedings in the Tribunal to determine the
deferred and the
not subject to case management by the Tribunal, and
not subject to the provisions of rules of court, or any direction or order of
the Tribunal under a provision of the Act, any other
Act or rules of court, as
to any steps to be taken in proceedings on the
for the referral of the
alternative dispute resolution, such as
provides for the removal of certain
resolution process
20(1) of the Regulations provides:
removed from (and is therefore not subject to) the
resolution process
(a) the Tribunal determines, on application by the
on the basis of medical evidence presented for the
(b) all the parties to the
following the
information exchange
not be the subject of the
resolution process
notify the registrar accordingly, or
Note : For example, the parties may consider that the
novel issues (in the nature of a "test case") that are unlikely to be resolved
resolution process
(c) the Tribunal determines on application by a
"applicant" ) that the
be removed from the
resolution process
failed to comply with a requirement of the
resolution process
that failure has resulted in substantial prejudice to the
substantial delay, or
(d) the Tribunal determines, of its own motion, that
be removed from the
resolution process
no documents have been filed, and the
not otherwise progressed in the
resolution process
within the previous 12 months.
22 of the Regulations provides:
22 General obligations to update documents and information
is required by a provision of this Part to provide documents or information to
way of a statement of particulars or reply must, while the
subject to the
resolution process
update or notify any necessary changes to the documents and information provided
(as and when any relevant new or changed documents
or information become
available).
25(7) of the Regulations provides:
An extension of the time for filing and serving a cross-claim extends (for the
period of the extension) all subsequent time periods
within which anything is
required to be done under the claims resolution process in respect of the claim
26(8) of the Regulations provides:
comply with any reasonable requirement of the
more information concerning the
made as part of the
reply or subsequently) and must provide that information as soon as practicable
and, in any case, no later than 5
the start of
29 of the Regulations relevantly provides:
29 Medical examinations
requires the
attend for a medical examination in connection with the
that requirement within--
more than one
non-malignant
non-malignant
more than one
after service of the
statement of particulars on the last of the
(2) Any medical examination of the
must take place within--
more than one
non-malignant
non-malignant
more than one
after service of the
statement of particulars on the last of the
(3) The period within which a medical examination is required
to take place under subclause (2) may be varied by agreement between
parties to the
Any variation has no effect on the running of any other time period for the
purposes of the
resolution process
Consideration
Failure to respond to particulars sought on 26 February 2024
failing to provide an answer to the particulars first sought on 26 February
2024, the plaintiff has failed to comply with a requirement
of the CRP. The
particulars sought, set out at [10] above, were capable of being provided within
a very short period of time, and
I am satisfied that by not being provided for
now more than three months, the plaintiff has failed to provide the information
soon as practicable” in accordance with cl 26(8) of the
Regulations.
plaintiff seeks damages under s 15A and s 15B
Civil Liability Act 2002
and alleges that he has had the relevant incapacity for an extended period. The
particulars sought are essential to BlueScope’s
understanding of the case
it is required to meet and to BlueScope’s ability to test the evidence to
be relied on by the plaintiff,
by taking appropriate steps such as issuing
am satisfied that the plaintiff’s failure to respond has resulted in
substantial prejudice to its case, which is continuing.
to attend medico-legal appointment with Professor McKenzie
effect of the plaintiff consenting to an extension to the time for filing
cross-claims was to extend the timetable in all other
respects: cl 25(7) of the
Regulations. Accordingly, BlueScope’s notification of the medical
examination with Professor McKenzie
was within time, but the appointment itself
was not. The plaintiff could have consented to the examination being held later,
any corresponding impact on the remaining steps to be completed: cl
29(3) of the Regulations. The extension was unlikely to have
had any impact on
the ability to organise a mediation on or before 30 July 2024.
could not have done much more to ensure that the plaintiff was physically able
to attend a medical examination. It first
asked if the plaintiff was well enough
to attend and then agreed to pay a substantial amount to provide personal
transport to enable
the plaintiff to attend.
explanation offered by the plaintiff’s solicitor for the change in heart
was that there was a change in personnel with carriage
of the plaintiff’s
matter and that the plaintiff was not physically able to attend. There is no
evidence that the previous
lawyers with carriage of the matter failed to obtain
instructions from the plaintiff as to his ability to attend the assessment.
There is no evidence that the plaintiff’s condition deteriorated in the
relevant period and he became unfit to attend the medical
examination. Further,
the plaintiff’s solicitor did not communicate the change in heart until
two days before the scheduled
appointment. I am satisfied that in all material
respects the plaintiff conducted himself as if there was an agreement to attend
the medical examination with Professor McKenzie on 29 May 2024.
refusal to attend the medical appointment and the conduct leading to it, are
unacceptable. The plaintiff is bound by the conduct
of his solicitors.
is entitled to have the plaintiff examined by a medical expert as part of its
case and I am satisfied that it will suffer
significant prejudice if it is
precluded from doing so.
will hear from the parties as to the appropriate directions to be made to bring
the matter to mediation as soon as is practicable.
orders I make are as follows:
(1) Pursuant to cl 20(1)(c) of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation
, the proceedings are removed from the Claims Resolution Process.
(2) I will hear from the parties as to the appropriate directions to be made to
bring the matter to mediation as soon as practicable.
(3) The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion and the costs
thrown away by the refusal to attend the medical examination
with Professor
McKenzie on 29 May 2024.
(4) I grant liberty to either party to seek a different costs order.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (336 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter