URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2010/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V TRAN, Joseph [2010] NSWPHT 4 (17 December 2010)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
[2010] NSWPHT 4
(17 December
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
, Section114,
Complainant
: NSW Health Care
Complaints Commission
: Mr. Joseph
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS
Mr. Peter Dwyer,
(Chairperson)
Mrs. Elizabeth Anderson (Pharmacist Member)
Ms. Jennifer
Zwart (Pharmacist Member)
Dr. Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
place of Hearing
: 2, 3 & 4, November 2010; 13 &15 December 2010;
Pharmacist—Professional Misconduct—Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct—Failure to comply with statutory requirements
concerning Drugs of
Addiction and Restricted Substances—Convictions for breach of statutory
requirements concerning the recording
and making of a periodic inventory, of
Drugs of Addiction.
Legislation cited
Pharmacy Practice Act
; Schedule 6, Clause 6;
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
, Clauses 53, 109,
112, 117(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
, Clauses 175 (1),
101 (1), 101 (2)
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Cases cited
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
v NSW Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
176 CLR 239.
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
(1957) 97 CLR 279
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of
[2004] HCA 1.
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR
Law Society of NSW v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185.
Law Society of
NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408.
Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
Appearances
Ms. S. McNaughton of
Counsel (instructed by Ms. Lewis, HCCC), for the Complainant;
Lonergan of Counsel (instructed by Mr. Grant, Guild Lawyers), for the
Respondent.
Tribunal finds the complaints of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct as particularized in Complaint
1 and 2 of the Complaint
dated 31 March 2010, proved;
Tribunal finds that the Respondent has been convicted in New South Wales, of
offences, as particularized in Complaint 3 of the
Complaint dated 31 March
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of professional
misconduct.
Respondent is cautioned and reprimanded;
to be appointed by the NSW Pharmacy Council (“the
Council”) is to be accepted by the Respondent to assist him in relation
the management of his pharmacy practice relevant to his obligations pursuant to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
(“PTG Act”) and the
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(“PTG Regulation
2008”). Such
is to continue for a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of the Council’s appointment. Such
shall report to the Council as and when required by it, during the term of his
or her, appointment as such;
a period of three (3) years from the date on which these Orders become
effective, the Respondent is required to complete annually,
not less than forty
(40) continuing professional development (CPD) credits acquired from Group Two
or Group Three Continuing Professional
Development activities as defined in the
Pharmacy Board of Australia
Guidelines on Continuing Professional
Development
; and the Respondent is to provide to the Council at the end of
each year in the three-year period, evidence of those CPD activities
throughout the year.
Respondent is to complete by 31 March 2012, the ‘distance learning’
Course to be offered in 2011 and to be administered,
by the Australian College
of Pharmacy (ACP) entitled
Drug Use and Misuse
; and the Respondent is to
provide evidence from the ACP of his completion of such Course to the Council
within thirty (30) days of
the Respondent’s receipt of such evidence.
Auditor appointed by the Council, is to attend the Respondent’s
Prescription Centre Pharmacy, Maroubra (“the Respondent’s
Pharmacy”), to conduct an audit at approximately six (6) monthly
intervals, for a period of three (3) years commencing from
the date on which
these Orders take effect, of the Respondent’s compliance with and
procedures concerning, the PTG Act and
PTG Regulation 2008 relevant to receipt,
possession, recording, storage and inventory checking requirements for Drugs of
and for ensuring appropriate quantity and purpose in the supply of
Drugs of Addiction and Restricted Substances; the first such audit
undertaken within three (3) months of the date on which these Orders take
effect; and the auditor’s report of each
such audit is to be provided to
the Council within one (1) month of the audit.
a period of three (3) months from the date on which these Orders take effect,
the Respondent is to deliver to a panel of pharmacists
selected by the Council,
a presentation on a pharmacist’s obligations concerning the receipt,
possession supply and recording
of Restricted Substances and Drugs of Addiction
pursuant to the PTG Act and the PTG Regulation 2008;
a period of twelve (12) months from the date on which these Orders take effect,
the Respondent is to obtain accreditation in
respect of his current pharmacy or
any other pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary interest, in the
Care Pharmacy Program
conducted by the Pharmacy Guild of Australia (NSW
Branch) and thereafter to maintain such accreditation for a period of three (3)
years; and evidence of such accreditation and of annual Standards Maintenance
Assessment, is to be provided annually to the Council.
a period of five (5) years from the date on which these Orders take effect, the
Respondent is to maintain his membership of the
Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia whilst a registered pharmacist; and to maintain his membership of the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia
whilst the proprietor of his current pharmacy or of
any other pharmacy; and evidence of each such membership is to be provided to
the Council annually.
Respondent is to meet the costs of compliance with the above Orders.
Respondent is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed, or, if agreement
cannot be reached either party may have the matter
of costs re-listed for
assessment by the Tribunal.
names of persons identified in prescriptions and other related patient
documentation in evidence in this matter together with
the names of those
patients identified in the Schedule to the Complaint as “A” and
“B” and the names of any
family members of Patient “B”
appearing in any documentation, and the above Schedule, are suppressed from
publication
in any medium, to anyone other than the parties to this matter and
their legal advisers and the Pharmacy Council of New South
Orders are to take effect one (1) calendar month from the date on which the
Orders are made.
Date of Orders
: 17 December
REASONS FOR DECISION
The three (3) complaints dated 31 March 2010 the subject
of this inquiry, were referred to the Pharmacy Tribunal (“the
pursuant to the
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
Act”) prior to the commencement of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
No. 86A on 1 July 2010 and accordingly, were dealt with
in accordance with the 2006 Act.
It should be noted that there are
references within the Complaints, to ‘Drugs of Addiction’ a
statutory classification
of which the medication
cited in the
Complaints, is a member, and which class was referred to in the proceedings from
time to time, as a ‘Schedule 8’
or ‘S8’ medication,
being alternate, abbreviated ways in which medications within the class are
described in pharmacy
Likewise in the Complaints, there is a
reference to the medication
which during the hearing, was from
time to time described as a member of the statutory class ‘Restricted
Substances’
or by its common abbreviation ‘Schedule 4’ or
The Complaints are that the Respondent, a person
registered under the
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 39(2)(b)
of the Act in that the pharmacist:
(i) Demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of pharmacy is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience; and/or
(ii) Contravened Clause 109 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
(iii) Contravened Clause 53 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(iv) Contravened Clauses 112 and 117 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
PARTICULARS OF
COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times, the practitioner was the pharmacist in charge and the
sole proprietor of The Prescription Centre at 876A Anzac
Parade, Maroubra
Junction, in the state of New South Wales.
7 February 2007 and 17 December 2007 the practitioner dispensed prescriptions
in quantities not in accordance
with recognized therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the
circumstances;
23 May 2007 and 12 November 2007 the practitioner dispensed prescriptions for
in quantities not in accordance with
recognized therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the
circumstances;
2 December 2008 at Waverley Local Court the practitioner was convicted and fined
for a charge of breaching clause 117(1) of the
for failing to make a
periodic inventory of
drugs of addiction
in stock between 1 March 2007
and 30 September 2007;
2 December 2008 at Waverley Local Court the practitioner was sentenced under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
for forty-one charges
of breaching clause 112 of the
for failing to enter details of
transactions into a drug register between 11 October 2006 and 1 December
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
of the Act in that the pharmacist:
(i) Demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by him in the practice of pharmacy is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience; and/or
(ii) Contravened Clause 109 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
(iii) Contravened Clause 53 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(iv) Contravened Clauses 112 and 117 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
PARTICULARS OF
COMPLAINT TWO
At all relevant times, the practitioner was the pharmacist in charge and the
sole proprietor of The Prescription Centre at 876A Anzac
Parade, Maroubra
Junction, in the state of New South Wales.
(1) Between 7 February 2007 and 17 December 2007 the practitioner dispensed
prescriptions for
in quantities not in
accordance with recognized therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the
circumstances;
(2) Between 23 May 2007 and 12 November 2007 the practitioner dispensed
prescriptions for
in quantities not in
accordance with recognized therapeutic standards of what is appropriate in the
circumstances;
(3) On 2 December 2008 at Waverley Local Court the practitioner was convicted
and fined for a charge of breaching clause 117(1) of
for failing
to make a periodic inventory of drugs of addiction in stock between 1 March 2007
and 30 September 2007;
(4) On 2 December 2008 at Waverley Local Court the practitioner was sentenced
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
for forty-one
charges of breaching clause 112 of the
for failing to enter details
of transactions into a drug register between 11 October 2006 and 1 December
COMPLAINT THREE
Has been convicted in New South Wales of offences the circumstances of which
are such as to render the pharmacist unfit in the public
interest to be
registered as a pharmacist within the meaning of
(2) (a) of the
2 December 2008 at Waverley Local Court the practitioner was convicted and fined
for a charge of breaching clause 117(1) of the
PTGR for failing to make a
periodic inventory of drugs of addiction in stock between 1 March 2007 and 30
September 2007;
2 December 2008 at Waverley Local Court the practitioner was sentenced under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
for forty-one charges of
breaching clause 112 of the PTGR for failing to enter details of transactions
into a drug register between
11 October 2006 and 1 December
the commencement of the Inquiry, the Respondent’s Counsel formally
admitted on his behalf, “...the conduct complained
of within the factual
material within the HCCC brief.” (TS 5, Line 35). During her submissions
following conclusion of the
evidence, Respondent’s Counsel
“conceded” that the admitted conduct within the Complaints amounted
to “...unsatisfactory
professional conduct...” (TS 140, Line
in this Inquiry, the real issues in dispute between the Complainant and
Respondent were narrowed, in effect as to whether
the Respondent’s
admitted conduct should be categorized as submitted by the Respondent’s
Counsel, as “unsatisfactory
professional conduct” (defined in
of the Act) or, as submitted by the Complainant, “professional
misconduct” (as defined in
of the Act); and as to the nature and
extent of consequential Orders the Tribunal might make.
The evidence
to the commencement of the Inquiry, the Complainant and Respondent agreed to the
Tribunal members being provided with the documentary
materials upon which each
party would rely at the hearing.
tendered by the Complainant were admitted into evidence without objection:
Exhibits 1 and 2
comprised 2 volumes of documents paginated
continuously—
: (Volume 1) pages 1 to 496 inclusive;
: (Volume 2): pages 497 to 1086 inclusive. The
Complainant’s Index to these exhibits appears at the end of these
tendered by the Respondent were admitted without objection:
being a single volume divided and numbered 1 to 12
inclusive. An index to Respondent’s Exhibit “A” appears at the
end of these Reasons, below, together with other of the Respondent’s
Exhibits admitted into evidence.
only evidence called by the Complainant was that of
Mr. Max Szwarcberg
(at TS 73-77), a pharmacist and Pharmaceutical Adviser in the Pharmaceutical
Services Branch of the NSW Department of Health, who
was the main investigator
of the matters the subject of the complaints before the Tribunal. Mr.
Szwarcberg’s report and attachments
are contained in Exhibits 1 and 2,
(pages 47 to 635 inclusive).
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal (TS 7-70; 125-128) as did
Paul Mahoney
, pharmacist (TS105-125) whose reports dated 12 November 2008
and 6 August 2010 appear in Tab 2 of Exhibit “A”; and
, pharmacist (evidence at TS 77-102) whose report appears at Tab 11
of Exhibit “A” and whose Certificate of Registration
as a pharmacist
was admitted as Exhibit “B”.
Respondent was 16 years old when with his parents, he arrived in Australia from
Vietnam in the latter part of 1990. At that time
he spoke very little English.
He attended school and completed his Higher School Certificate (HSC) but because
his results were insufficient
to allow him entry to the University of Sydney to
study Pharmacy, he repeated his HSC through a TAFE institute and achieved the
appropriate
level. He commenced his Bachelor of Pharmacy undergraduate course at
the University of Sydney in 1996. He “struggled somewhat”
second year and completed his degree by the end of 2001 (“Exhibit A”
Document 1).
his TAFE and university studies, the Respondent worked part-time in a variety of
non-pharmacy occupations. In 2000 he commenced
working part-time as a pharmacy
assistant at a pharmacy in West Ryde and continued in this capacity until he
finished his degree.
He completed the last three months of his practical
training with his sister, a pharmacist who owned a pharmacy.
Respondent became registered as a pharmacist in 2003. He worked in a number of
pharmacies. He purchased his pharmacy at Maroubra
in August 2005 having worked
as a pharmacist in that area. He incurred significant financial debt to achieve
ownership of the pharmacy.
He worked long hours including part of Saturdays and
Sundays. He had married his wife in 1998 when she came from Vietnam to
They purchased a house in 2001, quite distant from
Respondent’s first child was born in 2001; the second in 2002 and the
third, in 2005, about 10 days after he had purchased
the pharmacy. His
determination to make the pharmacy a success reflected the considerable efforts
he had made since his arrival in
Australia, in his studies and working whilst
studying. From the evidence, his commitment to his pharmacy and to his family,
led to his “...feeling exhausted.” (Exhibit A, Statement,
Ibid.) This may have contributed to the difficulties resulting
in the Complaints
before the Tribunal.
his own words (Exhibit “A”, Statement, Ibid.) “...from about
late 2006...[he]...had let things slide...[and]...he
knew...[he]...was getting
behind with the record keeping.” He had planned to go with his family to
Vietnam for a holiday in
February 2008. Despite efforts to rectify his failure
to maintain required records for Schedule 8 Drugs of Addiction, he said (Ibid)
I panicked. I felt overwhelmed and postponed dealing with it and the
problem got worse.”
December 2007 the Respondent became aware of NSW Health Department
investigations of prescriptions written by a Dr. Gorondy-Novak
for scheduled
medications. He was disturbed and “overwhelmed” (Para. 27,
Statement, Ibid.) when told of the death of
a young child, the daughter of two
patients for whom Dr. Gorondy-Novak had written prescriptions dispensed by the
Respondent.
February 2008 when in Vietnam, the Respondent realized he needed to address the
problems in his pharmacy on his return, which included
receiving his
wife’s assistance. It was decided also, in order to assist them, to leave
their daughter in Vietnam in the care
of her grandmother, where she stayed until
pharmacy practice and the
associated problems...
had caused were all much more under
.” (Para 28, Statement, Ibid). He also realized that his hard
work in the context of his financial obligations was misplaced
as this led to
his inability to maintain the administrative aspects of the
Respondent reduced his working hours and arranged to go home early on Tuesday
afternoons to spend some time with his family. To
facilitate this intention and
to enable him to “...
get on top of
...” (Statement, Ibid. Para. 31), the Respondent in about
March 2008, engaged pharmacist Mr. Brinos Notaras, to assist him,
for about 10
hours weekly. Mr. Notaras was first registered in NSW as a pharmacist, in 1972
(Exhibit “B”) and with whom
the Respondent had a prior professional
practice relationship.
2 December 2008 at the Waverley Local Court, the Respondent was convicted
pursuant to the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
offence in failing to make a periodic inventory of drugs of addiction in stock
between 1 March 2007 and 30 September 2007;
and of 41 charges of failing to
enter relevant details into a Drug Register, of transactions involving Drugs of
Addiction (c/f Complaint
3). On 8 July 2009, these convictions were upheld on
appeal to the District Court and the fines imposed by the Waverley Local Court,
reduced (Exhibit “2”, p 640).
171 (1) and 171 (2) (a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
making prohibitions relevant to Drugs of Addiction. The Respondent also
agreed to an Order pursuant to
Section 18AA
Poisons and Therapeutic
and Clause 175 (1) of the above Regulation, prohibiting his
benzodiazepine
medication other than as a Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme item or Repatriation Benefit item (c/f Exhibit “A”:
NSW Health, Pharmaceutical Services Branch, 12 March 2009). These
statutory prohibitions continue, according to the evidence before
The Investigation
December 2007 Justice Health Administration notified the NSW Health Care
Complaints Commission of its concerns about certain medications
prescribed and
dispensed to two patients recently received into custody in the NSW Criminal
Justice System. It appeared that both
patients had been prescribed
“...large daily quantities of benzodiazepine and codeine based medications
prior to coming into
custody” and that both had medications in their
possession apparently prescribed “...by the same doctor and dispensed
two pharmacies.” The notification included information to the effect that
the two persons had been remanded in custody
charged in respect of the death of
their eight year old daughter. (Exhibit 1, page 8).
investigation undertaken by the Pharmaceutical Services Branch
(“PSB”) following the Justice Health notification,
prescribing by Dr. Gorondy-Novak at Maroubra, as a result of which the
Respondent’s pharmacy came to the attention
of the PSB. Mr. Szwarcberg
was the main investigator relevant to the Respondent.
detailed report by Mr. Szwarcberg dated 30 December 2008 was in evidence before
the Tribunal (Exhibit “1” Tab 8, pp
47-59; Exhibit “2”
pp 47 to 635). It included his assessment of relevant aspects of the
Respondent’s pharmacy including
the dispensing of
patient identified as “A” in a Schedule to the Complaint; and the
dispensing of
5mg tablets in a quantity of 250 on single
occasions, to the patient identified in the above Schedule to the Complaint as
Other areas of concern identified in Mr. Szwarcberg’s
report (above) included a range of issues relevant to the above medications;
the Respondent’s various statutory obligations pursuant to the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Respondent agreed to be formally interviewed at the PSB on 16 July 2008,
undertaken by Mr. Szwarcberg and a PSB colleague. The
Records of Interview were
admitted into evidence without objection, before the Tribunal as part of Exhibit
C2 (at Tab 8, Attachment
10, Page 497).
Szwarcberg recommended that the Respondent be prosecuted for a range of breaches
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
which ultimately led
to 42 charges (c/f Court Attendance Notices at Exhibit 2, pp 545-559) to which
the Respondent pleaded guilty
and was convicted, at the Waverley Local Court.
These convictions are the subject of Complaint 3 before the Tribunal.
Szwarcberg’s report concluded with a recommendation (Exhibit 1, at page
59) that his report and all associated documentation
relevant to it, be provided
to the Complainant with a view to laying a complaint of professional misconduct
against the Respondent.
his evidence, Mr. Szwarcberg explained the process generally (TS 74-77) for
restoration of the authorities currently withdrawn,
as to the Respondent’s
dispensing of Drugs of Addiction and his dispensing of
benzodiazepine
medications beyond the maximum quantity allowed under the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (c/f TS 74).
Respondent Pharmacist’s
Respondent confirmed his relevant, personal and pharmacy practice information
contained in his statement referred to above. He
described how after he
purchased his pharmacy at Maroubra, the number of authorized patients to whom he
was providing
, increased from five (5) to twenty (20), a causal
element amongst others, including those referred to above, he saw as having
contributed
to his problems relevant to the PSB investigation, to his
convictions and ultimately, to the Complaints before the Tribunal.
conceded his system of management of these
patients was in
effect, quite inadequate and in 2006 inappropriate, having regard for the
demands of the individual dispensing and
recording requirements for so many
patients. In achieving better management of these
patients the
Respondent told the Tribunal of the benefit he gained from a lecture on the
topic given by Mr. Dennis Leahy of the Pharmacy
Guild of Australia. He
eventually reduced the number of such patients to six (6) a level maintained
currently, the dispensing to
whom is undertaken by Mr. Notaras, as the
Respondent remains unauthorized to dispense
after withdrawal of
the relevant authority, described above.
Respondent described the limited assistance he had in the pharmacy in 2006 after
his pharmacy assistant left employment, including
a Pharmacy student who worked
part-time and some assistance from his wife. He realized after being reminded by
Mr. Szwarcberg that
only a registered pharmacist was authorized to acknowledge
the receipt of Drugs of Addiction in the pharmacy. Thereafter he alone
this function until his authority was withdrawn as described above and this task
is now carried out by Mr. Notaras who
is present at an arranged time weekly,
when such medications are delivered to the pharmacy. The Respondent took no
holidays in 2006
and 2007 during which he opened the pharmacy every day of the
year including Christmas Day.
not raised or relied on during the Respondent’s evidence before the
Tribunal nor in submissions, the Tribunal notes
the report dated 25 November
2008, from a psychiatrist, Professor Lorraine Dennerstein, tendered by the
Complainant and admitted
without objection (Exhibit “2”, p 713), who
had assessed the Respondent. The report includes a note (Ibid. p 719) to
effect that the Respondent did not make excuses for his failure to meet his
statutory responsibilities; but the psychiatrist
elicited from him, information
as to his decreased thyroid hormone level in 2007 resulting in the need to
increase his dose of Oroxine—medication
prescribed to treat it. Professor
Dennerstein noted the adverse effects of this condition and expressed the
opinion that whilst the
Respondent was hypothyroid he “...would have been
less likely to have completed his obligations and to realize the importance
doing so...” (Ibid p719). Neither Counsel referred to such evidence in
their submissions.
also to this aspect is the report from the Respondent’s General Medical
Practitioner Dr. Vandebona dated 5 October
2010 including a medical record,
admitted without objection (Exhibit “A”, Tab 12) in which the above
condition and medication
are mentioned. Again, neither Counsel referred to this
evidence in their submissions. The Tribunal does no more than merely note
aspect in trying to appreciate the
of the Respondent’s
admitted conduct the subject of the Complaints.
Respondent told the Tribunal of his willingness to co-operate with the advice of
the PSB and in March 2009, he voluntarily accepted
withdrawal of his authority
concerning Drugs of Addiction and certain quantities of
benzodiazepine
medications. He had earlier been given time in which to organize aspects of his
Drugs of Addiction obligations, during which he approached
Mr. Notaras for
assistance and who commenced employment with the Respondent early in
on the advice of Mr. Notaras, the Respondent reduced the number of
patients attending the pharmacy. Mr. Notaras also advised the
Respondent on the management of his pharmacy and made helpful suggestions.
withdrawal of the Respondent’s authorities, Mr. Notaras is employed from
8.30am to 10.30am Monday to Friday except for
Tuesday when he works from 3.30pm
to 5.30pm. Should there be a need for a Drug of Addiction to be dispensed
outside these times,
the Respondent can call on Mr. Notaras who lives nearby, to
dispense it.
Importantly,
those elements of Complaints 1 and 2 concerning the Respondent’s admitted
contraventions during 2007, of Clauses
109 and 53 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
—in effect inappropriate dispensing
respectively—cause the Tribunal
some concern given the Respondent’s concession that at the relevant time
he did not know
that when contacted by a pharmacist concerning what appeared to
be an inappropriate quantity, a prescriber’s approval was not
necessarily
conclusive. Nor did he know in 2007, that he could have contacted the PSB to
notify it and seek advice about quantities
and doses of such medications
prescribed to those patients identified in the Complaint as “A” and
was only with Mr. Szwarcberg’s intervention that he
realized the necessity to challenge a prescriber and not simply accept
prescriber’s approval as he did when he contacted her about these
medications prescribed for her patients. The Respondent
told the Tribunal he now
fully understands his responsibility and accepts the statutory obligations and
the purpose of those statutory
provisions and indeed, all statutory obligations
of a pharmacist concerning those medications to which they apply. The evidence
Mr. Mahoney and Mr. Notaras supports that of the Respondent.
the matter described above, which led to the investigation by the PSB and the
respondent’s statutory obligations
to ensure the appropriateness of supply
of Drugs of Addiction and Restricted Substances, the Respondent during
cross-examination
by Complainant’s Counsel, acknowledged that his belief
that he had acted appropriately and fulfilled his duty concerning the
identified (in the Schedule to the Complaint, above) as “B” and the
patient’s wife, simply by accepting
the prescriber’s confirmation
without any challenge, was wrong. The following questions from Counsel and
Respondent’s
answers addressed this issue:
Q. So you were thinking that during that time because you had rung the
prescribing doctor you had fulfilled your professional obligations?
Q. And now you realise that's not the case?
A. Not the case.
Q. What would you do now? Could you just tell the Tribunal what you said
A. If the prescription come in like this, first of all I will ring the
doctor again to confirm. Second, if she still insist that
that is the quantity,
250 as said, I would say to the patient that I can dispense the prescription but
I will reduce the quantity
of supply. I will only give them one bottle instead
of five. Probably they will say no. If they say no I will refuse to dispense
them. Also I will ring the doctor and let her know that I wouldn't accept any
more of this prescription and if she still doing that
I probably have to do
something about ringing the PSB and let them know. (TS 46).
Complainant’s Counsel’s cross-examination of the Respondent about
his letter dated 2 December 2008, to the Magistrate
of the Waverley Local Court
(Exhibit “2”, p708), the Respondent corrected the period when he
stopped making relevant
entries in the Drug register—from “...10
months...” which appeared in the letter, to “...18 months...”
following exchange (at TS 23) between the Respondent and his Counsel is relevant
to seeking an understanding of the likely
of his admitted
failures including those aspects of the earlier management of his pharmacy and
what he has done since his admitted
failures, to remedy his
deficiencies:
Q. Did you think in the early years after you purchased the pharmacy that
you would be able to manage everything to do with the pharmacy
without employing
A. I thought so.
Q. What do you think about that now?
A. No, that was wrong. I need help and I need somebody to, you know, like to
I'm wrong. I realise one
thing now, money is not really everything. What I am suffering now is just so
terrible, nothing can pay
for the happiness. That's the reason why I reduce the
hours and cut off a lot of things.
Q. Mr Tran, whose fault is it, do you think, that you found yourself in
this position with the complaint before the Tribunal?
A. No, it is because of me. I done the wrong thing. (TS 23).
the Tribunal, the Respondent expressed contrition for his admitted failures and
a determination to avoid any repetition:
A. To me becoming a pharmacist is a privilege already. I remember when
Mr Power, when I came to see him and he said that to me and
I remember that
because he said to me becoming a pharmacist is a privilege and I acknowledge
that very much in my mind that what
I done is terrible and is unacceptable. I
regret what I have done and I feel ashamed that every time when I look at my
and my patients that they put a trust in me and I betray them. (TS
The Respondent expressed his resolve in answering the following question from
his Counsel:
Q. The Tribunal needs to be satisfied, Mr Tran, that you won't ever
make these errors again, or fall into this level of inadequate
record keeping.
How can you reassure the Tribunal that this won't happen again and you won't
find yourself in that situation again?
A. I promise that I never do this again. I learn a big lesson. Every day I
go to work I appreciate, because I didn't know the system,
you know. I thought
I can get a letter any time and they stop me from practising, so every day I
come to work and at the end of
the day I say okay, thank God I am still able to
come here and work. To me I have learned a big lesson from this and I never do
it again. I will put myself, you know, like knowing the paperwork straight away
and learn from that, as I did with everything else.
Like from the tax I am up
to date now. On paperwork I am up to date now. Everything is up to date, so
never let anything behind.
times during his evidence, the Respondent described his admitted recording
failures concerning Drugs of Addiction as “bookwork”
“paperwork”, descriptions that troubled the Tribunal given a
pharmacist’s compliance with these relevant statutory
obligations is a
paramount obligation in the practice of pharmacy as noted in the Code of
Professional Conduct of the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia (c/f the
Principle in Exhibit “2” at p725). The Tribunal Chairperson explored
the above description
with the Respondent during his evidence:
Q. In your evidence today many times you described your obligations to
complete the drug register and those sorts of things in relation
to S8s, drugs
of addiction. From time to time you have described it as book work, paperwork.
You would agree with that? That's
how you have described it this morning and
this afternoon? You have mentioned it as paperwork or book work?
A. I don't know what other term to use for that. Honestly my English is not
I don't know other term but I know the importance of
doing that, as I said, very
important. If there is problem I have got a record so I know the importance of
keeping the record, but
I don't know any other word to describe it.
The Tribunal Chairperson explored the state of Respondent’s awareness
of his obligations:
Q. You know the word obligations?
A. Yes, I know the word obligations.
Q. Did you appreciate before this Tribunal your obligations concerning all
of the regulations requiring your compliance concerning
restricted substances
and Schedule 8 drugs of addiction?
A. I honestly learnt before this has happened, I have to go to the court, I
was thinking about like why it has happened to me, but
after I sit down and
think about it, I appreciate that's why I still ring Max and ask him if there is
any problem because I realise
like, you know, he helping me. Even though he
took me to court and got me into this later on, however I appreciate he done
to wake me up and I know it is my duty to go back to like now, to make sure
nothing wrong. If there is anything wrong I have more
regretting than this, so
I appreciate what he has done to me, even though at the beginning I was really
upset about it, thinking
down and think about it, I appreciate what he has done to me, wake me up and
learn from that and make sure I never do it again. (TS 63)
It was Mr. Szwarcberg to whom the Respondent referred above, as
also, during his evidence to the Tribunal, Mr. Paul Mahoney, a pharmacist who
provided a peer report on the Respondent relevant
to the nature and purpose of
such mandatory recording, was asked the following question from the Tribunal
Chairperson:
Q. Questions have been put to you about the layout of the pharmacy and staff
and so forth. Ms McNaughton, for the Complainant, questioned
you about the
staffing levels and the pharmacist involved. If and when the authority was
restored to Mr Tran and taking that into
account, and you have referred to the
pressure of working by yourself for long hours and so forth, that from
Mr. Tran's evidence
it appears that from his use of prescribing, the need
to record schedule 8s and so forth as part of book work or paperwork, in your
experience is the compliance with recording and other obligations under the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
and Regulations something which is dependent
upon your time in doing it? In other words, would you do it straight away, or
should happen?
To which Mr. Mahoney responded:
A. I suppose I can only speak, or I can speak largely from personal
experience. I always found and I had a firm policy in place
for myself but
also for any staff, registered staff working for me, that no Schedules 8 was to
leave the dispensary until the prescribed
recording and cancelling and signing
and cautionary labelling and consideration of that script was completed because
of the nature
of the product. But nothing went out until that had been none,
ever. [TS 122]
Respondent’s
Counsel asked the Respondent about his current knowledge concerning aspects of
requirements for Drugs of Addiction
(the evidence before the Tribunal confirming
that it was in March 2009 when the Respondent agreed to voluntary withdrawal of
relevant authorities [c/f Para 18, above):
Q. Do you feel that you know how to do receipts and supply of
A. Yes. Before I had been stopping I was I still can dispense. That was
before April 2009 when I was stop. Before that I still
dispense and I keep my
record up to date. (TS 54)
Respondent’s evidence the Tribunal was able to observe his demeanor and
apparent determination to learn from his failures
especially by better
management of his pharmacy including the necessity of support staff and a
regular opportunity for respite from
the demands of his practice assisted by the
contribution from Mr. Notaras.
During cross-examination, Complainant’s Counsel explored the
Respondent’s current strategy to meet any recurrence of his
overworked at the pharmacy:
Q. What would be your strategy if you found that you were getting overworked
again? Would you ask someone for advice, or what would
A. Actually, as I said, I learn the lesson why I did like the book works
and all the other matters, like the tax and the BAS, because
honestly I haven't
got any experience in business. I start the business in 2005, get in trouble in
2006, because the workload about
the tax and all the other. I have no excuse.
I know not doing the book work is wrong but I keep delay and then I get into
too hard for me. If I get into the situation about workloads I don't
think so, because I have got Tammy and Brinos and a lot of
think I will get into that situation again. However, if I get into that I will
ask them for help, especially
Brinos. He is quite helpful. (TS 55)
Respondent explained (TS 50-51) that “Tammy” referred to above, is a
Pharmacy student who has worked for him on a
part-time basis but whom he
recommended to fulfill her ‘preceptor’ requirements at another
pharmacy. The Respondent then
expects to again employ her on a part-time basis
in December 2010 the extent thereof being dependent on if and when, his
drug authorities are restored. “Brinos” to whom the
Respondent referred above, is Mr. Brinos Notaras.
Respondent told the Tribunal that he had been a member of the Pharmacy Guild of
Australia (PGA) for three (3) years and he commenced
membership of the PSA
“...about a month ago.” (TS 58). Following conclusion of the hearing
it became apparent to the
Tribunal independently of the evidence, that there was
likely confusion in the Respondent’s answer (above) as to how long he
been a member of the PGA. The Chairperson convened a special, limited hearing,
alone, to clarify this issue expeditiously, with
the legal representatives of
the Respondent and Complainant. In summary, the Respondent intended to convey a
three (3) year period
approximately, of participation in the PGA
Quality Care
Pharmacy Practice
Program, not of the PGA itself. It was confirmed by PGA
correspondence dated 8 October 2010, produced to the Tribunal and to the
Complainant,
by the Respondent’s legal representative, that the
Respondent’s membership of the PGA actually commenced in October 2010.
Complainant accepted the revised answer, as does the Tribunal (c/f Transcript 13
and 15 December 2010). The Respondent also told
the Tribunal of his current
knowledge and awareness of the laws relevant to the matters the subject of the
complaints (TS 61).
following question from the Tribunal Chairperson and the Respondent’s
answer, were directed to pharmacist’s legal
obligations:
Q. Do you know why the government says you, a pharmacist, have
obligations?
A. Yes, as a pharmacist to me now I understand it is a privilege to be a
pharmacist. By not only taking order from the doctor, me
being a pharmacist is
a privilege not only just dispense the medication but relate to the patient as
well and look, I am the bridge
between the doctor and the patient and make sure
everything is right and under control. Giving the medication out is a privilege
as well and giving a patient advice, my knowledge is another privilege so, to
me, the role of the pharmacist is really important
because you make sure the
person get, treat them right and to understand any further problem, pressure
from the hospital as well
if I apply the knowledge to helping the patient. (TS
Tribunal Chairperson asked the Respondent (TS 68) about his capacity to employ a
pharmacist:
Q. And looking at the economics of your pharmacy, is it able to support an
employed pharmacist?
Q. Fulltime?
A. Not fulltime, just a parttime.
Respondent told the Tribunal of his continuing education activities; and in
evidence admitted without objection, were some certificates
confirming his
participation in various educational activities (Exhibit “A” Tab
response to the Tribunal Chairperson’s question as to the
Respondent’s approach to determining whether a prescribed
medication is in
a quantity and for a purpose such as to be appropriate, he provided a
comprehensive response:
Q. I did ask some questions earlier about the Regulation and the need for
quantity and
purpose of supply to be appropriate. You are familiar with that
Regulation?
Q. Can I ask you this, as a pharmacist, when you are working out whether
something prescribed is in a quantity and for a purpose
such as to be
appropriate, how do you approach, in your mind, how you work that out? You are
presented with a prescription. It
might be a drug of addiction or a restricted
substance. It might be a benzodiazepine and there might be some large doses and
forth. When you look at it what goes through your mind, the process which
sets your mind to thinking about that?
A. Okay. First of all if I receive some prescription like that, the thing
in my mind is I need to be more careful about this prescription.
If the patient
was a regular customer, I know them and I know if they tell me lies I know and I
know the history is why they need
this one. For example, why they need the
Panadeine Forte, because recently they just got a broken limb or something like
They need these things or they got something to see a dentist and it is a
pain killer, so I know the situation but, you know, if
another person came in
and they present me a prescription with this one, if according to the quantity
and according to the dosage
if the person are coming that's the first time, I
will ask him. But sometimes if they smell of alcohol or something like that and
they want to get the benzodiazepines, I say no, I can't do. This will interfere
with alcohol. You can kill yourself. I explain
to them and I done that. I
refuse to dispense them. If a person came in and they come in so regular I just
refuse them. I just
say to them you need to be more careful. This might harm
you at the end, so I explain to them and I refuse to dispense them. You
go to the doctor if I need to, but later I just refuse them. I just refuse. I
don't want to get involved. I just say to
them no, I haven't got it, or I send
Q. And you realise as a pharmacist that not only the law requires that, but
you have the interests of the person in front of you?
Evidence of Mr. Notaras
Notaras provided a testimonial in support of the Respondent admitted without
objection (Exhibit “A” Tab11). He was
required by the Complainant to
attend for cross-examination. He was first registered as a pharmacist in 1972
and after working in
a number of pharmacies together with his brother, he
established a pharmacy in Maroubra in 1976 in which he practised until 2003.
first met the Respondent at Mr. Notaras’ former pharmacy where the
Respondent was working and where Mr. Notaras continued
occasionally.
April 2008, the Respondent contacted Mr. Notaras, needing help with some
problems with Drugs of Addiction (Schedule 8 Drugs) and
Mr. Notaras agreed to
work at the Respondent’s pharmacy (for about 10 hours weekly according to
the Respondent’s Statement,
Exhibit “A” Tab 1, Para. 31). Mr.
Notaras told the Tribunal (TS 83):
“ Well, I think he couldn’t keep up with the bookwork.”
withdrawal of the Respondent’s authorities in March 2009, Mr. Notaras
looked after all aspects of Drugs of Addiction
administration to authorized patients, by working two hours in the morning on
Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays; and two
hours on Tuesday afternoons
when Drugs of Addiction were delivered to the pharmacy from the wholesaler.
Should there be any prescription
for Drugs of Addiction at a time when Mr.
Notaras was not on duty, the Respondent keeps the prescription until he is or,
as Mr. Notaras
is nearby to the pharmacy he can if necessary, attend the
pharmacy and dispense it (TS 84).
Mr. Notaras’ guidance, the Respondent reduced the number of
patients from 20 to a present figure according to Mr. Notaras of
“...about six or seven.” (TS 81). Mr. Notaras believed
patients was
excessive and in effect disruptive. He told the Tribunal
such patients are now disciplined to attend to receive their doses, between
8.30am and 10.30am, administered by Mr. Notaras.
Notaras told the Tribunal of the improvement of systems at the pharmacy and
“...he knows not to trust the doctor...in relation
to prescriptions
outside the regular.” (TS 86). He confirmed the Respondent’s
attendances with him, at continuing education
programs at the Prince of Wales
Hospital, South Eastern Division of General Practice (c/f Attendance records in
Exhibit “A”
Notaras described the Respondent’s professional skills with his customers
as “quite good...Good at handling them and
he knows to knock them back
when they are asking for things outside what’s legally possible and
according to the regulations.”
cross-examination Mr. Notaras expressed his confidence that the Respondent
is well versed in procedures in the pharmacy now
88). He told the Tribunal of the way in which the Respondent had over-worked and
had little assistance beyond the contribution
from his wife and with the
responsibility of a young family. He believed that should there be a further
stressful time for the Respondent
he would be able to manage it a
lot better.”
(TS 89). The following addressed Mr. Notaras’
confidence in the Respondent:
Q. So if you think that Mr Tran was naive before, what do you think of
his ability to deal with different excuses offered by patients
A. Excellent. No, he knows to be very suspicious.
an issue of considerable importance to the Tribunal’s task, the
Respondent’s future practice, the following
question was put to Mr.
Notaras by Complainant’s Counsel in cross-examination and
Q. You understand this Tribunal has to assess a number of things in relation
to Mr. Tran but one of the things they have to assess
is whether or not he
is able to continue operating as a pharmacist. Do you have any qualms at all
as a pharmacist?
A. I have no qualms whatsoever.
Q. Do you have any concerns at all that you believe the Tribunal should be
response to questions from the Tribunal (TS 95-96) Mr. Notaras regarded the
Respondent’s pharmacy as “...quite viable...”
but would be
better “...if he had some relief staff occasionally...” to give the
respondent a “...break away from
the pharmacy...” and even half a
day weekly...would be good for him.”
Notaras confirmed to the Tribunal that in expressing his opinion (above) he
appreciated that the purpose of the Tribunal is to
look to the protection of the
community (TS 96).
responding to the Tribunal Chairperson’s questions concerning the
obligations of a pharmacist relevant to the need to ensure
appropriate quantity
and purpose of the supply of Drugs of Addiction and Restricted Substances in
accordance with statutory requirements,
Mr. Notaras said that he had opportunity
to assess the Respondent querying and “challenging” a prescriber and
his opinion that the Respondent was able to deal with this procedure and
“...has become quite good...
[at it]...” (TS
Chairperson asked Mr. Notaras whether, in his opinion, the Respondent would be
assisted in the management of his practice:
Q. Whether there are courses available, or reminder courses about how to
manage a pharmacy, best practice, how to best manage your
time and that sort of
thing, would those sorts of things, do you think, assist Mr Tran?
A. It could, if he had a mentor.
Q. Do you endorse the idea of a mentor?
A. I think it would be an advantage.
Q. What's your understanding of the role of a mentor?
A. A mentor tries to minimise role conflict. Yes, that's managed okay
there. A mentor is to make sure that
no role conflict. Do you know what I mean by role conflict?
Q. And would your idea of a mentor extend to somebody who would be on tap,
if I can use that expression, when things might be getting
a bit out of control,
or too busy, where a pharmacist could ring up and say I am in a bit of strife
can you give me a hand, or give
me a bit of advice?
A. Something like that would be excellent. (TS 99)
Notaras also expressed his opinion in response to a question from the Tribunal
that based on his years of experience as a pharmacist
and proprietor-pharmacist,
some contact with professional colleagues is useful.
Mr. Notaras indicated to the Tribunal that if required pursuant to any Order the
Tribunal might make, he would be prepared
to provide a report to the NSW
Pharmacy Council and he did not think any such obligation would cause any
impediment to his relationship
with the Respondent (TS 102).
was clear to the Tribunal from his evidence, that Mr. Notaras had a beneficial,
professional and personal, influence on the Respondent.
Evidence of Mr. Szwarcberg
Mr. Szwarcberg’s evidence before the Tribunal he was asked the following
question by Respondent’s Counsel to which
he responded, as follows (TS 75,
Q. Did you form a view about Mr Tran in terms of his likelihood to reoffend?
A. Yes, I did form a view. I don't believe he would.
Szwarcberg also confirmed the PSB’s former practice of conducting
educational lectures at the university for students, but
these were not
presently conducted (TS 75). He did refer to an educational document—
“Guidelines for Pharmacists in
relation to the Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods legislation” which is available and basically covers as he described
it “...most
things that pharmacists would come into contact with.”
and which he used to structure his lectures upon, “...basically
start through to the finish” including the way to determine inappropriate
supply of medication and how to respond
to it by contacting the prescriber (TS
76). He also confirmed that the PSB has a ‘duty pharmacist’ able to
pharmacists’ requests for assistance.
Evidence of Mr. Mahoney
Mahoney provided two ‘peer review’ reports concerning the Respondent
tendered by the Respondent and admitted without
objection, as part of Exhibit
“A” (at Tab 2), the first, dated 12 November 2008 and the second,
dated 6 August 2010.
Each report responded to a request from the
Respondent’s solicitors and followed a visit to and inspection of, the
Respondent’s
pharmacy, the first on 12 November 2008 and the second, on 6
August 2010.
Mahoney graduated from Sydney University in 1964 and was registered as a
pharmacist in 1965 and thereafter practised in hospital
and community pharmacy.
From 1974 to 1998 he was a proprietor pharmacist and since 1998 has practised
regularly, as a
pharmacist.
his first visit to the Respondent’s pharmacy having been made aware of
offences with which the Respondent had been charged,
being the 42 described in
Complaint 3, Mr. Mahoney inspected the premises and the Respondent’s
practice in general, his routines,
protocols in place and interviewed the
Respondent. During such inspections he normally observes that regulations are
being met with
respect to medications within the statutory classifications S3,
. His inspection was to include current compliance with statutory
provisions concerning such medications. [TS 107]
his evidence to the Tribunal he described the Respondent’s pharmacy
premises as “...
neat and well laid out
.” (TS 107) with a
reasonably professional atmosphere gained from his impression based on many
years as a pharmacist. He was
able to observe the Respondent’s involvement
in completed prescription transactions. During his inspection he did not observe
any dispensing of prescriptions for
medications but he did suggest to the
Respondent that he obtain and use a ‘
relevant, completed prescriptions in preference to writing the word
‘cancelled’, for greater security.
Mahoney checked the safe containing Schedule 8 items and noted that the
mandatory six (6) monthly inventory had been done; and
he confirmed that the
quantities in the drug safe balanced with the quantities appearing in the Drug
Register with respect to those
items he cross-checked. He agreed that the
reduction in
20 to six (6) was
appropriate and thereby reduces the demands on the pharmacist.
his inspection, Mr. Mahoney found the Respondent to be
cooperative.
Mahoney expressed his opinion to the Tribunal in effect, about the
of the Respondent’s problems as “...pressure of
business, working too many hours, young family to support...and travelling
a way from his place of work to home, there and back, twice daily and I think
generally, he just became probably physically
and mentally stale.” (TS
his first visit in November 2008 Mr. Mahoney found the Respondent to be
“...an effective and competent pharmacist...”
based on his review of
the relevant documentation and his personal observation, together with
“...the conversation I had with
him, which was quite lengthy.” (TS
Mahoney was asked whether his conversation with the Respondent in November 2008,
“...showed a satisfactory degree of insight
into the error of his previous
ways...” to which he responded:
A. Absolutely. Yes, straight away I picked up the impression that he felt
very guilty about having allowed his practices to slip
to that standard. He
didn't say that to me as such but I could tell that from his demeanor and, apart
from a professional disappointment,
I think he had a profound personal
disappointment as well. (TS 110)
asked whether the conclusion reached as recorded in his report, that he
“...had no reservations about...[the Respondent’s]...professional
performance...[in November 2008]...and that he is a fit and proper person to
continue practice as a registered pharmacist...”
“...lightly...” Mr. Mahoney responded:
not at all, because when I make that comment I'm putting my reputation on the
line. (TS 110)
Mr. Mahoney’s second visit to the Respondent’s pharmacy on 6 August
2010, he had the opportunity also, to speak
with Mr. Notaras whose opinion he
invited about the Respondent’s practice performance and Mr. Notaras
indicated that he “...
was quite pleased, very pleased with his
.” (TS 111) Mr. Mahoney told the Tribunal that Mr.
Notaras’ presence in the pharmacy even for a short period each day,
“...the workload pressure away from
...[the Respondent
...[him]...
to establish contact with a more senior
colleague, who was able to advise him
.” (TS 111)
Mahoney agreed “...
...” with a question put to him
by Respondent’s Counsel that in addition to Mr. Notaras providing the
essential assistance with the dispensing of
medications
...[i.e. in the current situation of withdrawn authority for such
medications, there was also a]...”
mentoring aspect to it
(TS 111). On this topic, the following exchange between Respondent’s
Counsel and Mr. Mahoney, elicited the benefit
“mentoring”:
Q. Did you consider that the mentoring that Mr Notaras appeared to be
providing was helpful to the management issues related to the
A. I think so, very helpful. Very helpful. He seems to be a very well
informed fellow and has good experience in the profession
and I could see that
he had been able to have an influence on Mr Tran and I think it has helped his
understanding of professional
expectation. (TS 111)
Mahoney ‘s evidence included expanding on his awareness that the
Respondent had become a member of the PSA although as the
Respondent later
corrected in his evidence when recalled to clarify when he joined the PSA (TS
126), this occurred not “...in
2008...” (as noted in Mr.
Mahoney’s second report at page 1) but about a month prior to the
Tribunal’s hearing.
The following response from Mr. Mahoney’s
evidence-in-chief, demonstrates the usefulness of continuing education including
that offered by the PSA:
A. The Pharmaceutical Society is the major provider of continuing
professional education programs and there are others. There are
mean, for example, there is the Prince of Wales activity which Mr Tran and Mr
Notaras are involved in. That's all very
good stuff and there are various
others. The Australian College of Pharmacy plays a subsidiary role to the PSA,
in my opinion.
The PSA has, I think, the most comprehensive continuing
education program available and it also, as part of membership, does give
Australian Pharmacist publication once a month in which there are some very good
articles. Also the Australian Journal of Pharmacy
is another which I think Mr
Tran will be getting through his membership of the Pharmaceutical Society.
Q. When you say they employ a good range of activities in terms of
continuing professional development, would that include lectures
and information
regarding management of patients who have a drug addiction or drug dependence
A. Yes. There is a fairly consistent range of lectures and workshops
available in that area through PSA.
Q. Are you able to say what time those lectures are on?
A. Generally they are 7.30 to 8 p.m. week days or, alternatively, there are
weekend programs which sometimes can be Saturday and
Sunday, but it can be, if
it is going to be one of those days, it will be Sunday generally and it will be
all day and CE points are
specifically asked by Respondent’s Counsel whether he had made his
endorsement of the Respondent as a fit and proper person
to practise in the
pharmacy “...
with care and consideration
Mahoney’s response was “
cross-examination by Complainant’s Counsel, Mr.Mahoney was asked about Mr.
Notaras, including the following:
Q. Did you get any understanding from Mr Notaras if he was planning to stay
on in his role at Mr Tran's pharmacy?
A. Yes, I got the feeling that he enjoyed doing what he was doing. He felt
he was being very useful to Mr Tran and I think he was
generally pretty happy
with being there and he had no plans to leave.
Mahoney was asked during cross-examination about the Respondent’s
understanding of the impact of his offending:
Q. Did Mr Tran indicate by anything he said to you as to whether or not he
understood the impact his offending had on the profession
of pharmacy as a
A... no, I don't think he directly said that, or anything in relation to
that, but he certainly gave the impression that he was proud
to be a pharmacist
and he was not very proud of what had happened, not proud at all of what had
happened. In fact, he was very ashamed
and he felt obviously that was for a
variety of reasons and I didn't push the point. (TS 116)
Mahoney told the Tribunal that the Respondent was “happier” at the
time of his second visit to the pharmacy, which
he attributed to his reduced
“working load” resulting from Mr. Notaras’ contribution and
the reduction in the pharmacy’s
opening hours, adding that he was sure the
Respondent “...was happy to be spending a bit more time with his
family” (TS
Complainant’s
Counsel explored during cross-examination, an issue as to the staffing situation
at the pharmacy should the withdrawn
authorities (Schedule 8 and
benzodiazepine
medications) be restored:
Q. Even if he kept Mr Notaras and Mr Tran got his dispensing rights back,
what would you think of his staffing needs?
A. I don't think it would affect his need to employ staff really, because
the workload involved in the supply of Schedule 8s, while
it is a considerably
more time consuming process than a nonschedule 8, I don't really think it would
require an adjustment to the
staffing levels at all, or for benzodiazepines for
that matter. (TS 118)
Chairperson sought Mr. Mahoney’s views concerning continuing education and
professional development for the Respondent:
Q. In relation to your observations concerning continuing education and
continuing professional development for Mr Tran, the subject
complaints before the Tribunal concerns noncompliance with the law and indeed
ethical obligations concerning the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Regulations?
Q. Do you consider that that is an area where Mr Tran might need some
ongoing reinforcing education?
A. Yes, I think actually that would be probably a good idea. I believe
there is a program run through PSA, I think, through the
pharmaceutical side,
which deals with drugs of addiction and the professional's role in dealing with
drug addicted people.
Q. Apart from drug addicted people, with education concerning the
pharmacist's obligations to comply with all aspects of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
and Regulations, do you regard that as an area of
education that might be addressed more by Mr Tran in the light of the
complaints?
A. I think it certainly wouldn't do any harm and I think it could be very
useful. I think the terminology is dependency, drug dependency
they call their
course. I have heard it is quite good.
concluding his second report dated 12 November 2008, Mr. Mahoney indicated that
he would like to see a determined attempt
Respondent]...
increase his CPE
...[i.e. continuing pharmacy
education]...
levels substantially
.” Reference has already been made
(above) to Mr. Mahoney’s recommendations for areas of continuing education
Respondent to undertake.
Evidence of Mr. Payne
other ‘peer review’ of the Respondent concerning the Complaints in
evidence before the Tribunal, additional to Mr.
Mahoney’s, was provided by
Mr. Francis Payne at the request of the Complainant, and whose report dated 26
August 2010, was
admitted without objection, as part of Exhibit “2”
(at pp 688-692).
addition to information provided to Mr. Payne by the Complainant relevant to the
subject matter of the Complaints before the Tribunal
upon which to make his
assessment, he was also provided with certain information (“Patient
History”) concerning prescriptions
for the spouse of the patient
identified as “B” in the Schedule to the Complaint reproduced above,
which is not part
of the Complaints as confirmed by Complainant’s Counsel
during submissions (c/f TS 135 Line 48; 134, Line 45ff). Accordingly,
Tribunal does not take that part of Mr. Payne’s report into account in
reaching its decision (c/f Report, Ibid. p686).
his report, Mr. Payne confirms that he has had more than 40 years experience as
a community pharmacy owner and currently practices
and as an accredited pharmacist conducting Medication Reviews.
Payne did not visit the Respondent’s pharmacy. He was not called to give
evidence before the Tribunal.
respect of the matters comprising Complaints 1 and 2, in summary, Mr. Payne
expressed in his report, his opinion that the Respondent’s
conduct was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of similar
training and experience; and in each
case the departure from the standard,
invited his strong criticism.
respect of the convictions comprising Complaint 3 of the Complaints, Mr. Payne
noted in his report, that the Respondent had pleaded
guilty to the charges at
the Waverley Local Court and which conduct invited his strong
to Mr. Payne’s report, in submissions to the Tribunal, Complainant’s
Counsel in response to questions from the
Chairperson (at TS 135, Line 51 to
TS136, Line 17) confirmed that Mr. Payne did not visit the pharmacy but he was
the only person
who gave evidence, in his report, “...about the conduct
at the time
” whereas Counsel continued, “ those two
gentlemen...[i.e. Mr. Mahoney and Mr. Notaras]...only give evidence in relation
subsequent conduct
.” (TS 136, Line 4, Emphasis added).
Respondent’s
Counsel relied on Mr. Payne’s categorization noted above, in his report,
for her submission that the Respondent’s
admitted conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct
’ (which he conceded) and
professional misconduct
’, defined respectively, in
Pharmacy Practice Act
Complainant’s submissions—An outline
Complainant’s
Counsel noted that the only matters in issue between the parties are whether the
Respondent’s admitted conduct
the subject of the complaints amounts to
professional misconduct
and whether or not the circumstances of the
offences of which the Respondent was convicted render him unfit in the public
to be registered as a pharmacist.
provided the Tribunal with an outline of her submissions and included a document
listing proposed Orders for the Tribunal’s
consideration.
Complainant’s submissions, Respondent’s Counsel (TS 140, Line 12)
conceded on Respondent’s behalf,
unsatisfactory professional
professional misconduct
submitting that the Respondent was guilty of
professional misconduct
Counsel emphasized the very serious nature of the respondent’s failing to
comply with his legal obligations in relation to
recording in the Drug Register
together with the period of 14 months over which it occurred, although it was
conceded by the Respondent
in his evidence to the Tribunal that in fact, this
occurred over an 18 month period. The offences to which he pleaded guilty and
was convicted, occurred over a period of 14 months. Counsel further submitted
that non-compliance commenced less than a year after
the Respondent purchased
his pharmacy; and that his attempts to rectify the situation were “chaotic
and unsuccessful”;
and he appeared to have no understanding of the public
policy reasons for the statutory requirements. Counsel submitted that the
Respondent started to comply with his obligations only after intervention by
relevant authorities following an investigation of the
death of a young child
and the incarceration of her parents.
to the Complaints relevant to failures to comply with the Respondent’s
statutory obligations not to supply the subject
medications in a quantity, or
for a purpose, that does not accord with the recognized therapeutic standard of
what is appropriate
in the circumstances, Counsel submitted that these failures
also occurred over a lengthy period in 2007, on many occasions and in
more than one patient; and accordingly, Counsel submitted, such failures
amounted to
professional misconduct.
respect to the convictions relevant to Complaint 3, Counsel submitted that the
Tribunal must look closely at the circumstances
of these offences and the facts
constituting them, relying on
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of
New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253.
Counsel emphasized that “...criminality
is not the sole determinative factor in the question before the
Tribunal...[which]...must
determine if the circumstances of
the...[offences]...render...[the Respondent]...unfit in the public interest to
practise...[pharmacy]...”
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Taylor
[2008] NSWNMT 9
. Counsel also relied on the PSA
Code of Conduct and Competency Standards for Pharmacists in Australia,
relevantly emphasizing the
necessity for compliance with the
also emphasized the protection of the public as paramount and which includes an
element of general deterrence in relation
to other members of the profession.
Counsel referred to the Respondent’s admitted conduct as going to
“central activities”
in the practice of pharmacy.
was conceded by Complainant’s Counsel that the Respondent has
“...demonstrated a degree of insight into his misconduct”
“...has taken steps to change the circumstances which led to the situation
arising ”, but that his insight into the
effect on the profession or how
it “...has brought the profession into disrepute...” is
“...quite limited.”
submitted that the Tribunal could not be confident “that his current
arrangements are sufficient in terms of staffing
was submitted on behalf of the Complainant, that cancellation of
Respondent’s registration is open to the Tribunal on the
alternatively a period of suspension in respect of the Respondent by way of
deterrence to him and for general deterrence to
the profession; and also, that
he be cautioned and severely reprimanded.
Complainant sought further Orders—that the Respondent be required at the
conclusion of each year, to submit to the NSW Pharmacy
Council (“the
Council”), a report of all continuing professional education undertaken by
him; together with evidence
of his continuing professional membership, the
Tribunal assumes, of the PSA.
submitted by the Complainant is the need for a period, to be determined by the
Tribunal, in which there is an annual inspection
and / or audit by a pharmacist
appointed by the Council, of policies and procedures relevant to all aspects of
Schedule 8 drugs at
his pharmacy and any other pharmacy in which he acquires a
pecuniary interest.
Complainant also submitted that the Respondent obtain and maintain,
Care Pharmacy Program
Accreditation for his current pharmacy and any other
pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary interest.
Additionally,
the Complainant seeks an Order whereby the Respondent is to accept the services
being an experienced pharmacist approved by the Council; and
to agree to visits by the
to his pharmacy following which a report
is to be made to the Council within a month of each such
Complainant also seeks an Order that the Respondent complete by 30 June 2011
distance learning Modules entitled “Drug Abuse
and Misuse Parts I & II
provided and administered by the Australian College of Pharmacy Practice.
Complainant submits that the costs of such Orders sought, should be borne by the
Respondent.
response to questions from the Chairperson, Complainant’s Counsel
indicated that based on the evidence of Mr. Notaras and
Mr. Mahoney, the
Respondent’s current conduct appeared to be significantly improved
compared with the period of misconduct
and that significant changes have been
made; and that there was no risk to the community if the Respondent was allowed
to continue
to practise (TS 136).
Complainant’s
Counsel in response to the Chairperson’s questions, submitted in effect,
that although Mr. Notaras was well
qualified to act as a
Respondent and could report to the Council if and when required, it would be
desirable for there to be an independent
as well; but both would
be “desirable” (TS 139).
was submitted by Complainant’s Counsel that it appeared, the process of
bringing the Respondent before the Tribunal has had
a considerable effect on him
that it would be unlikely that he would revert to his old
...” (TS 145).
Complainant seeks an Order for costs.
Respondent’s submissions—An outline
for the Respondent provided the Tribunal with an outline of her
submissions.
Respondent’s
Counsel submitted that the Respondent does not seek to diminish the significance
of his admitted conduct including
the convictions, but Counsel submitted that
such behaviour was attributable to his “...naivety...” and although
that his conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional
, it is not sufficiently serious to justify suspension or
cancellation of his registration.
Additionally,
Counsel submitted that the Respondent’s excessive working hours in 2006
and 2007 were unsustainable and relevant
to his failures; and that the
Respondent’s evidence confirmed his acceptance of the need to reduce such
hours and he now takes
Tuesday afternoons off to spend time with his children
with Mr. Notaras looking after the pharmacy during his absence.
submitted that the Respondent’s evidence demonstrates a clear
understanding of his conduct and of its reflection on
his colleagues and his
loss of their trust and respect.
submitted that it is the Respondent’s current fitness rather than past
conduct, that is to be considered by the Tribunal,
as the evidence demonstrated
improvement in his compliance with relevant statutory obligations the subject of
the Complaints.
submissions were directed to the evidence of Mr. Mahoney and Mr. Notaras
concerning the better systems now in place at the
Respondent’s
Counsel submitted that the various (documentary) references from a number of
practising pharmacists, in evidence
before the Tribunal, were positive in
endorsing the Respondent’s skills and abilities to continue practice as a
pharmacist.
submitted that the Tribunal consider as appropriate disciplinary action, a
caution and reprimand together with special, continuing
professional development
requirements with a focus on drug dependence and obligations under the Act and
Regulations the subject of
the Complaints, with such continuing education
additional to existing, mandatory requirements for registration of pharmacists.
submissions included those endorsing the valuable contribution of a
in effect currently and for some time, provided to the
Respondent by Mr. Notaras but that an independent
would be of
further value. Counsel conveyed to the Tribunal the Respondent’s
instructions that he was prepared to accept additional
the Tribunal make such an Order. Responding to a question from the Tribunal,
Counsel submitted that the Tribunal might be “...
circumspect
...” about any Order that might involve Mr. Notaras in
effect as a designated
given his employment by the Respondent (c/f
a reasonable exercise of the Tribunal’s protective function, Counsel
submitted that Orders in the nature of inspections or
audits, of the
Respondent’s pharmacy would provide assurance of compliance with relevant
statutory obligations; Counsel conveyed
to the Tribunal her instructions that
the Respondent would submit to such measures.
Respondent’s
Counsel referred to the current withdrawal of the Respondent’s authorities
concerning Drugs of Addiction
and his supply of prescribed
benzodiazepine
medications being limited to the maximum quantity allowed under the PBS, the
criteria for restoration of such authorities having
been alluded to in general
terms during Mr. Szwarcberg’s evidence (in response to a question from the
Chairperson), Counsel
submitted that the Tribunal might include some comment
for the Respondent in any application he might make to the PSB for restoration
of his withdrawn authorities. The Chairperson indicated
to Counsel that it would
be a matter for the Respondent to seek restoration of his authorities from the
PSB (c/f TS 157).
addressed the Complainant’s proposed Orders for Continuing Professional
Education (CPE) both generally and in respect
of the specific, distance learning
Modules offered by the Australian College of Pharmacy Practice referred to
above. Counsel conveyed
Respondent’s preparedness to accept any CPE
requirements beyond the current mandatory, minimum levels for registration,
that this could well be very helpful.
to the Complainant’s proposal for a period to be determined by the
Tribunal (following a period of suspension as proposed
by the Complainant)
during which the Respondent should be required to submit to an annual inspection
and / or audit of relevant procedures
and policies for S8 medications at his
current pharmacy or any other in which he might gain a pecuniary interest, it
was submitted
by Respondent’s Counsel that a period of three (3) years was
reasonable in the circumstances and that the Respondent was willing
inspection and audit (c/f TS 161).
Respondent’s
Counsel referred to the Complainant’s proposed Order that the Respondent
for a period to be determined by
the Tribunal, obtain and / or maintain
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
(QCPP) accreditation for his current
pharmacy and any other in which he may acquire a pecuniary interest, to include
the Respondent’s
submitting to an annual Standards Maintenance Assessment
and the results of which are to be provided annually, to the Council.
to proposed Order described above, Tribunal Pharmacist Member Ms. Zwart,
referred Respondent’s Counsel’s attention
to a document in evidence
(Exhibit “A” within Tab 3)—a Pharmacy Guild of Australia (NSW
Branch) certificate dated
25 February 2009, recording the Respondent’s
Continuing Development Activity of “QCPP Implementation Training”.
Ms Zwart assisted Counsel by explaining that the QCPP looks to”... having
in place, procedures for all aspects of professional
practice and business
within...[a]...pharmacy” (TS 161 Line 53 – TS 162 Line 5). Ms. Zwart
asked Respondent’s Counsel
whether the Respondent intended to pursue the
training or whether he is thinking of doing so. Counsel took instructions and
the Tribunal that the Respondent is currently in the process of
undertaking it. Additionally, Counsel confirmed that should there
Order concerning QCPP as submitted by the Complainant, the Respondent had no
objection to it.
considering the complaints before it, the Tribunal needs to be satisfied to the
standard articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
, that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of
probabilities, but that having regard to the serious nature of the Complaints
the consequences, the satisfaction cannot be produced by “
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect references
Respondent admits the Complaints as particularized and submits that the Tribunal
should find his conduct as
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
defined in s. 37 of the Act, as such conduct does not amount to
professional
as defined in s. 36 of the Act which includes the availability of
suspension or cancellation of registration. The Complainant submits
appropriate finding should be that of
professional misconduct
convictions the subject of Complaint 3, are also included in the Particulars
described in Paragraphs 3 and 4 within each of Complaints
1 and 2. The Tribunal
by reason of the powers available to it in s.66 (2) (c) of the Act, can order
suspension or cancellation of
registration if satisfied that the circumstances
of the offences render the Respondent unfit in the public interest, to be
as a pharmacist. The Tribunal pursuant to s. 66 (1) may exercise any
power that the Pharmacy Board can exercise under Division 5
the Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal must first determine by applying
the requisite
standard to the evidence, whether the subject
conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
as defined in the Act.
admitted conduct during 2007 in
, a Drug of
Addiction, on prescription, for the patient identified in the Schedule to the
Complaint as “A”, in quantities
not in accordance with recognized
therapeutic standards of what is appropriate, occurred over a ten (10) month
period approximately;
likewise, the Respondent’s dispensing of
on prescription, for the patient identified as “B”,
occurred over a six (6) month period, approximately. These periods
number of occasions, of such inappropriate supply in breach of the
Respondent’s legal obligations are considerable.
They were not isolated
events. The Respondent failed to act appropriately even after contacting the
prescriber as the evidence disclosed.
Respondent’s admitted failures on 41 occasions, to enter details into a
Drug Register of transactions involving Drugs of
Addiction, occurred over a
fourteen (14) month period approximately, for which offences he was convicted
having entered a guilty
plea to the charges. The period commenced in October
2006. He purchased his pharmacy in August 2005. These were not isolated
and the period was considerable.
Respondent attempted to redress the way in which compliance with his
responsibilities had declined especially by late 2006 and
into 2007, as noted in
the ‘background’ above. His efforts to rectify his S8 recording
deficiencies were not successful
and fell seriously below the professional
standards expected of a pharmacist.
was only following intervention by the PSB—alerted to the need to
investigate the Respondent consequent upon the Complainant
Commission being
notified by Justice Health, of two persons in custody concerning the death of
their child, one of whom was the patient
identified as
“B”—that the Respondent started to address his statutory
obligations. Mr. Szwarcberg contacted the
Respondent in January 2008. He reduced
his working hours in early 2008 and Mr. Notaras commenced his part-time work at
the pharmacy
in March 2008.
Respondent’s description during his evidence before the Tribunal, of his
statutory S8 recording obligations as “paperwork”
“bookwork” does not and cannot ever, avoid the serious nature of his
failures as evidenced by the convictions. The
necessity for pharmacists to
observe such laws is obvious, especially given the public interest the
legislation is intended to protect.
The facts and circumstances of the offences
are serious and fall well short of the principles underlying the proper
professional
practice of a pharmacist.
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite standard, that Complaints 1 and 2 have
been proved and that the Respondent has been convicted
of the offences as
particularized in Complaint 3.
Accordingly,
given the nature, extent and seriousness of the Respondent’s failures, the
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty
professional
misconduct.
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
176 CLR 239
at 250-251). Professional disciplinary proceedings are
intended for the protection of the community, to maintain proper and ethical
professional standards and to protect the good standing and reputation of the
profession of pharmacy. Deterrence is also an important
element in the exercise
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction both as to the Respondent personally and
with respect to the profession
Tribunal has had regard for the circumstances of the offences for which the
Respondent was convicted:
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales
a decision of the High Court of Australia.
considered by the High Court in
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society
of New South Wales
in which it emphasised the need to closely examine the facts
constituting the offence to determine whether the practitioner is a
proper person to practise. The principles enunciated within these decisions are
equally applicable to pharmacists.
upon its finding that the Respondent is guilty of
professional
misconduct,
the Tribunal turns to consider the nature and extent of
such Orders it considers necessary, given its protective jurisdiction and
ancillary objectives described above.
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s evidence concerning the way his
inexperience as a pharmacy proprietor contributed to his
decline in strict
observance of those legal requirements concerning Drugs of Addiction, the
subject of the Complaints. Additionally,
in looking to this decline, the
Tribunal is satisfied that it is likely also, that such failures were
contributed to by the long
hours the pharmacy was open and with a less than
optimal staff level. Further as the evidence of Mr. Mahoney and Mr. Notaras,
by the Tribunal, confirms, the original number of
(20) patients authorized to be supplied
by the Respondent
was in the circumstances excessive for the reasons they gave to the Tribunal.
Their evidence reflected the Respondent’s
evidence as to how such a number
of patients was difficult to manage, a number he ultimately reduced to about six
(6) patients, which
proved to be manageable.
is also accepted by the Tribunal, that the Respondent in giving evidence about
his admitted failures, did not advance the above
matters as excuses but rather,
with the benefit of hindsight, saw them as reasons for the manner in which they
was no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that prior to purchasing his
current pharmacy, he lacked knowledge of his legal
obligations concerning Drugs
of Addiction or had failed to observe them when employed in other pharmacies. He
is supported by the
testimonials admitted without objection (as part of Exhibit
“A”) provided by experienced pharmacists Messrs. Abrams,
Walsh, Eggins, Tacey and Notaras, each of whom was willing and able, to express
an opinion on the respondent’s practice
as a pharmacist, prior to his
purchase of the pharmacy. Each of those pharmacists was aware of the Complaints
before the Tribunal
and other than Mr. Notaras, none were required by the
Complainant, for cross-examination.
Respondent concedes that his knowledge and observance of those parts of
Complaints 1 and 2 concerning his admitted failures to
comply with his legal
obligations—as to the need to ensure that the supply of dispensed
prescriptions for Drugs of Addiction
and Restricted Substances, is in a quantity
and for a purpose that accords with the recognized therapeutic standard of what
is appropriate
in the circumstances—was deficient at the relevant time. He
now understands that when
he contacts a prescriber about a
prescription which causes the Respondent any relevant concern as above, a
prescriber’s direction
to dispense may need to be challenged; and a
pharmacist may well have to refuse to dispense such a prescription when
appropriate.
He told the Tribunal as noted above, that he understands and
accepts, the critical role of the pharmacist in the protection of the
and that to practise as such, is a privilege.
the Respondent’s evidence, from that of Mr. Notaras whose practice
association at the pharmacy has continued since about
April 2008 and from that
of Mr. Mahoney based on his visits and assessments in 2008 and 2010, the
Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence,
that the Respondent’s pharmacy with
Mr. Notaras’ participation, has complied with those legal requirements
Drugs of Addiction and those concerning the appropriate supply of
Restricted Substances the subject of the
Complaints.
Fitness to practise
considering whether or not the Respondent is fit to practise, the Tribunal must
address this by assessing his current fitness or
otherwise, having regard for
the Tribunal’s exclusively protective jurisdiction.
observed by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630:
The lapse of time since the events giving rise to a complaint ...
may ... be relevant in determining whether the doctor has undergone
reformation of character and behaviour, or whether the incidents can be viewed
as isolated or passing departures from proper professional
standards attributed
to youth or inexperience
an order for suspension or removal is made, its purpose is “...
public point of view, for the protection of those who require protection, and
from the professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not
lead to loss of privilege
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
104 CLR 186
at 201-202.
The words of Beazley JA
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
at pp 33-34, are apposite to the Respondent in this matter: Her Honour referred
with approval, to a passage from the judgment of
Mahoney JA in
Law Society of
New South Wales v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Whilst a practitioner’s expressed intention not to re-offend
is relevant to mitigation, it will have little weigh unless
accompanied by
an understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct which was the subject of the
disciplinary charge.
In considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of Mahoney JA in
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Respondent:
In judging whether an applicant will, in the future, act
differently from the past, the Court
is not required to act on
psychological theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide
what a man will do and the
decision in a particular case is, to a greater or
lesser extent, dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And
in making that assessment it may draw inferences from what he has done in the
past and, in particular, what led to his being removed
from the roll. An
understanding of that may assist the court to determine what are his standards
and his understanding...
[of his]...
responsibility and, from this, what he
is apt to do in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what
has been done
in the past has been sufficient to indicate his ‘probably
permanent unfitness’
Ex parte Lenehan
at 422; the court
will require ‘
solid and substantial grounds’
conclusion that his standards have changed or that he will act
differently
.” (Emphasis added)
In light of the evidence of the
Respondent and of Messrs. Mahoney, Szwarcberg and Notaras, the Tribunal is
satisfied to the requisite
standard, that there are sufficient and substantial
grounds to conclude that the Respondent has changed his standards in respect
the matters the subject of the Complaints.
Tribunal accepts on the basis of the evidence, that the cause of each of his
failures has been identified and addressed—in
the case of issues relevant
to Drugs of Addiction, by assistance in his practice management; and in respect
of the legal obligation
to ensure appropriate supply of Drugs of Addiction and
Restricted Substances consistent with the relevant therapeutic standard, by
improved knowledge, understanding, application and acceptance, of the necessary
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is satisfied that cancellation or suspension of the
Respondent’s registration is not justified.
given its protective jurisdiction, the Tribunal needs to ensure by appropriate
Orders, that the Respondent’s standards
are maintained by a variety of
measures referred to during the hearing and during submissions, accepted in
principle, by the Respondent.
Accordingly
the Tribunal made its Orders and a Suppression Order.
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION v JOSEPH
[201O] NSWPHT 4
(17 December
AMENDMENT OF ORDER
Introduction
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales (“the Council”) has advised the
Tribunal that
number 4 cannot be fulfilled; and accordingly, the
Respondent pharmacist Mr. Tran, cannot comply with it. The Tribunal now amends
this Order by application of the “
Civil Procedure Rules
, Reg. 36.17), to correct it and thereby give
effect to the Tribunal’s intention;
an assurance from the
Australian College of Pharmacy
prior to the Tribunal’s decision and
, dated 17 December,
2010, that its distance-learning course ‘
Drug Use and Misuse
as specified in
4, would be available, the Council advised that the
course has not been and will not be, offered. Accordingly, the Order cannot be
complied with;
Council has advised the Tribunal that following Council’s investigation
and consideration, another course it considers to
be equivalent in content and
relevance to that formerly offered by the ACP, is
available—‘
Prescription Drug Misuse Module’
‘online’ by the
Royal Australasian College of Physicians’
(RACP) Australasian Chapter of Addiction Medicine
(“RACP “). The
Council advises that the course was developed by a Module Working Group
comprising experienced specialists
in addiction medicine;
Accordingly,
the Tribunal as advised by the Council and having considered the RACP course to
replace that originally named in Order
4, orders such replacement;
originally formulated,
4 required that the above course be
completed by 31 March 2012.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal
Order 4 as originally provided and
the above described, RACP course is to be completed by the Respondent by
; and that the Respondent is to provide evidence from the RACP of
his completion of such course, to the Council within thirty (30)
days of the
Respondent’s receipt of such evidence.
making the above amendment to Order 4, the Tribunal grants leave to the
Respondent and to the Complainant, to advise the Tribunal
Registry of any
objection to these Orders or the terms thereof, in writing; and any such
objection is to be received by
not later than, 24 February 2012
absence of any objection, the above Orders will become effective on and from
7 February 2012
Tribunal orders accordingly
Peter Dwyer
Chairperson
9 February 2012
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (469 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter