URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/154.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v McCarron [2025] NSWCATOD 154; (14 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v McCarron
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 154
Hearing Date(s):
23 October 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Occupational Division
S Westgarth, Deputy President
M Sindler, Senior Member
General Member
(1) The Tribunal finds that the Respondent has engaged in professional
misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of the Legal Profession
Uniform Law
2014 (NSW) (“the Uniform Law”) with respect to the alleged conduct
particularised in the Instrument of Consent.
(2) Pursuant to s 299(1)(b)
of the Uniform Law, the Tribunal orders that the Respondent be
reprimanded.
(3) Pursuant to s 302(1)(l) of the Uniform Law, the Tribunal
orders that the Respondent pay a fine of $3,000.
(4) The Respondent is to pay
the Applicant’s costs, as agreed, in the sum of $27,000.
(5) The sums
referred to in orders (3) and (4) are to be paid by the Respondent within one
month of the date of publication of these
orders or within such longer period as
may be agreed by the Applicant.
(6) The Respondent’s application for
an order for confidentiality pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (“the NCAT Act”) is
Catchwords:
Occupations – legal practitioners – solicitors –
disciplinary proceedings – Respondent found guilty of professional
misconduct – Respondent engaged in a conflict of interest involving his
own interests and those of clients – instrument
of consent –
Respondent having given up his practising certificate and undertaking not to
apply for a fresh practising certificate
– consideration of personal
circumstances of Respondent – application for an order for
confidentiality.
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Legal Profession
Uniform Law 2014 (NSW)
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors
Conduct Rules 2015
Legal Profession Uniform General Rules 2015
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Council of the Law Society of
New South Wales v Clarke
[2022] NSWCA 57
Council of the Law Society of NSW v
DDQ [2017]NSWCATOD 123
Law Society of New South Wales v Bannister
Law Society of New South Wales v Harvey
[1976] 2 NSWLR 154
Society of New South Wales v Maharaj
[2017] NSWCATOD 79
Maguire v Makaronis
[1997] HCA 23
(1997) 188 CLR 449
Prothonotary v Gregory
[2017] NSWCA 101
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
(Applicant)
Christopher Francis McCarron (Respondent)
Representation:
N Evans (Applicant)
P Griffin SC
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Hicksons Lawyers (Applicant)
David Castle
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00095212
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Applicant (the Council of the Law Society of NSW) lodged an application on 11
March 2025 seeking disciplinary findings and orders
against the Respondent (a
solicitor) following a complaint made about the Respondent’s conduct.
Application seeks the following findings and
The Respondent has engaged in professional misconduct within the meaning of
s 297 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
2014 (NSW) (Uniform Law)
with respect to the alleged conduct contained in the grounds for
application.
(1) An order in terms of any one or more of such orders as are provided in
s 302 of the Uniform Law as the Tribunal deems fit.
(2) An order that the Respondent pay the costs of the Applicant of these
proceedings.
(3) Such further or other orders as the Tribunal deems fit.
the parties later entered into an Instrument of Consent, which contains the
factual background, there is no purpose in reciting
the grounds set out in the
Application.
in brief the facts as asserted in the Application may be summarised as follows:
from about 2016 onwards, the Respondent engaged
in a conflict-of-interest by his
conduct in connection with the sale of the properties “Homeward
Bound” and “Sunnyside”
in circumstances where the Respondent
and his wife, were:
(i) the creditors and second mortgagees at the time of the sale of
“Homeward Bound”; and/or
(ii) the mortgagees in possession exercising a power of sale with respect to the
sale of Sunnyside; and/or
(iii) the mortgagees for the purchaser, D&C Partners Unit Trust in the sale
of Sunnyside.
1 August 2025, the parties lodged with the Tribunal an instrument of consent
signed by a representative of the Applicant and by
the Respondent personally.
is helpful to set out the Instrument of Consent in full, which is as
Council of the Law Society of NSW v Christopher McCarron
INSTRUMENT OF CONSENT
Consent orders pursuant to
section 144
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Act 2014
The NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal, having found that the conduct of
the Respondent particularised in the Agreed Statement
of Facts below amounts to
professional misconduct, makes by consent, the following orders:
pursuant to s 299(1)(b) of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSVV) 2014
(Uniform Law), the Tribunal orders that the Respondent be
reprimanded.
pursuant to s 302(1)(l) of the Uniform Law, the Tribunal orders that the
Respondent pay a fine; and
the Respondent to pay the Applicant's costs as agreed between the
AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
INTRODUCTION
1. The Respondent was admitted to the Supreme Court of NSW on 29 November
2. From 28 February 1999 to 30 June 2006, the Respondent was a Principal
solicitor at Priest McCarron.
3. Between 1 July 2006 and 31 December 2011, the Respondent practised at
Priest McCarron as an employed solicitor.
4. From 3 January 2012 to 29 July 2016, the Respondent was employed as a
solicitor at Searson Shannon.
5. From 1 August 2016, the Respondent commenced employment at HB Legal Pty
6. On 31 August 2021, Andrew Gartrell
(Complainant)
made a complaint
concerning the Respondent to the Office of the Legal Services Commissioner
(OLSC) (Complaint).
7. On 20 September 2021, the Complaint was referred by the OLSC to the
8. On 12 September 2024, following its investigation, the Professional
Conduct Committee of the Applicant resolved that proceedings
be commenced
against the Respondent in the Tribunal pursuant to s 300(1) of the Uniform Law
in respect of Allegation I (as set out
9. On 4 November 2024, the Respondent surrendered his practising
certificate before the commencement of these proceedings on 11 March
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT
10. The Respondent and his wife are the trustees/beneficiaries of a
self-managed superannuation fund known as J & C McCarron
11. The Complainant was at all relevant times a director of various
companies in Australia, including Homeward Bound Holdings Pty
Ltd (Homeward),
Very Cherry Pty Ltd (Very Cherry) and Great Southern Fresh Produce (Australia)
Pty Ltd (Great Southern).
12. The Complainant's wife, Mrs Angela Gartrell and Mr Elias Azzam, were
both formerly directors of Homeward.
13. Homeward owned a homestead property in Nashdale NSW consisting
land with a cherry orchard property known as "Homeward
(Homeward Bound).
The Complainant owned a house on or near
(Sunnyside).
Complainant's relationship with Mark Smith
(stated here for the purpose of context only. Cannot be agreed or denied by
the Respondent given they pertain to matters not within
14. Mark Smith
owned several companies including DC
Partners (Nominees) Pty Ltd
(DC Partners)
and DC Partners (Solutions) Pty
(DC Solutions)
and DCP Litigation Holdings Pty Ltd
Litigation)
which offers litigation funding and other loans.
15. Mr Smith and his wife, Lisa Smith are also Trustees of DC Partners Unit
(DC Trust),
16. In or around October 2016, the Complainant entered into an assignment
deed assigning his rights in a variety of choses in action
arising out of
disputes between Homeward and various parties to DC Partners and DC Solutions
(Assignment
The Assignment Deed was amended on 27 March 2017, 3
October 2018 and 21 November 201 to assign the rights to DCP Litigation.
17. On or about 29 February 2016, the Complainant appointed Mr Smith as
prepared by the
Respondent and his firm at the time, Searson Shannon.
Loans and Mortgages
18. In 2005, the McCarron Fund loaned the Complainant/Homeward $30,000. At
this time, the Complainant was not a client of the Respondent.
19. The Respondent contends that on or around this time, he assisted the
Complainant, including by informing him of the existence
of Stacks Managed
Investments Limited
(Stacks Finance)
as a potential lender.
20. In 2008, the Complainant obtained an additional loan from the McCarron
Fund with the Respondent and his wife as the lenders to
the amount of
approximately $13,000.
21. During 2008 the Complainant made no repayment on any principal or
interest amount owing to the McCarron Fund.
22. On or about 11 March 2009, the Respondent wrote to the Complainant
under the letterhead of Priest McCarron, confirming that the
principal amount
due on 11 August 2009 totalled $83,345.92.
23. On or about 12 May 2010, Homeward executed a mortgage document
(AF513875) in favour of the McCarron Fund confirming a debt of
$84,000 secured
against Homeward Bound. The Complainant, Mrs Gartrell and Mr Azzam were all
personal guarantors to the new loan.
24. On or about 19 May 2010, Homeward also executed a mortgage document
(AF513874) in favour of Stacks Finance for the total loan
of $930,000. The
Complainant, Mrs Gartrell and Mr Azzam were all personal guarantors for $20,000
of that loan. The mortgage was secured
against Homeward Bound and Sunnyside
(Stacks First Mortgage).
25. Homeward also executed two other loan agreements and mortgage documents
with Mr Robert Ware, Ms Janice Ware and Mr John Cole (Ware
for $150,000 and with the NSW Rural Assistance Authority (RAA) for $130,000.
Both of these loans were secured by mortgages against
both Homeward Bound and
26. On 11 August 2011, a priority agreement was executed confirming Stacks
Finance, the McCarron Fund, Cole & Ware and RAA as
the first, second, third
and fourth mortgagees respectively on Homeward Bound
(First Priority
Agreement).
27. On the same day, a second priority agreement was executed with respect
to the Sunnyside property confirming that Stacks Finance,
Ware & Cole and
RAA were the first, second and third mortgagees respectively on the Sunnyside
(Second Priority Agreement).
28. The McCarron Fund was not a mortgagee on the Sunnyside property.
Sale of Homeward Bound, Sunnyside and other properties
29. The Respondent contends that he first commenced acting for the
Complainant in November 2013 with respect to the sale of a property
"Lot 400" or "Nancarrow Lane".
30. On or about 17 January 2014, a report was commissioned by Stacks
Finance which valued Sunnyside at a market price of $500,000
and with a forced
sale price of around $375,000 to $425,000.
31. The Respondent contends that from about 2015, he liaised between Stacks
Finance and the Complainant to negotiate "the best possible
pay out for the
Complainant".
32. In or around 2015, the Complainant was in the process of selling
Respondent and Ms Gow (a licensed conveyancer) from Searson Shannon acted for
the Complainant with respect to the sale.
33. Mr Smith was acting as the Complainant's Attorney and also provided
instructions to the Respondent.
34. As at 2015, Homeward Bound was mortgaged to Stacks Finance for around
$900,000, to the McCarron Fund for a claimed debt of $250,000,
Cole to partially secure a debt of originally $130,000 and to the RAA for around
35. From in or around March 2016, the Respondent (using
both personal and professional email accounts) contacted Mr Cole and Mr
Stack (a director of Stacks Finance) about an agreement in which:
(a) Stacks Finance would execute a Contract of Sale as the mortgagee in
possession for the
(b) Stacks Finance would accept a payment of $650,000 from the settlement
of Homeward Bound and assign its rights on the mortgages
of Homeward Bound and
Sunnyside on payment of the residual sum of $128,336.31 following refinance of
(c) the residual of about $187,000 to the McCarron Fund (as second
mortgagee) would be reloaned on the security of Sunnyside which
achieved by Stacks Finance assigning the mortgage to the McCarron Fund (such
that it would become the first mortgagee on
the Sunnyside mortgage);
(d) RAA would not be part of the negotiations such that they would not
receive any funds from the sale.
36. By email dated 5 April 2016 at 4:07pm, Mr Stack wrote
to the Respondent with reference to his telephone conversation in which
Respondent confirmed he acted for Homeward. Furthermore, Mr Stack stated (in
"Dear Chris
/ refer to the writer's telephone conversation with you of today's date
and note you act for Homeward Bound Holdings Pty Limited (the
Your client has entered into a Contract for the sale of Land with Top
fruit Australia Ply Limited on 22 February 2016 (the Contract)
with settlement
expected this week.
The Company has requested Stacks Managed Investments Limited (the
Lender) sign a Transfer by Mortgagee under Power of Sale (the Transfer).
Company and the Lender entered into a Deed on 22 February 2016 (the
As discussed the Lender will authorise the settlement of the Contract to
proceed on the basis of the following agreed terms:
The Company acknowledges that this non-monetary default has not been
subsequently rectified by the Company (or the Deed) and the loan
At the request of the Company the Lender has agreed to execute the
Transfer in accordance with section 58 of the Real Property Act
7. The Company accepts receipt of the Notice and waives all rights to
complain about the nonservice or any defectiveness of the Notice;
11 On settlement, in addition to the amount owing to the Lender on I
May2016 ($650,000), the Company [Homeward] has agreed to repay
the residual debt
of $128, 336.31 (the Residual Debt);
12. In accordance with the Deed, on receipt of payment of the Residual
Debt, the Lender will assign its mortgage to the Company or
as the Company
directs, We would be grateful if you could confirm your client's instructions in
relation to the above and advise
to whom the Company would like the Lender's
mortgage assigned to."
(Stacks Transfer Agreement)
37. The Stacks Transfer Agreement was agreed by the Respondent acting as
same day (5
Apr11 2016).
38. The sale of Homeward Bound proceeded and it was sold under mortgagee in
possession by Stacks Finance exercising a power of sale.
The Respondent prepared
the settlement figures as follows;
Stacks Finance $778,336
Rates $14,450
Legal Expenses $11,000
Payment to other mortgagees $32,000
Complainant $1,000
Respondent $8,811
39. The Respondent acted for Homeward with respect to the sale of Homeward
Bound and also acted as a representative of the McCarron
Fund in its
negotiations with the other creditors/mortgagees, namely, Mr Cole and Mr Stack
with respect to the sale of Homeward Bound.
40. At the time of the sale of Homeward Bound, the Respondent and his wife,
as trustees of the McCarron Fund, were the creditors and
the second mortgagees
of Homeward Bound.
41. However, as a result of negotiations, the McCarron Fund was assigned
the mortgages of Homeward Bound and Sunnyside such that it
became the first
mortgagee to the Sunnyside property.
42. At the time of the sale of Sunnyside, Mr Smith was assisting the
Complainant with litigation funding on several litigation matters
obtain refinancing in order to obtain further
funding for these litigation
43. Between 20 and 26 October 2016, the Respondent and Mr Smith
corresponded about the terms and conditions of the sale of Sunnyside.
44. On or about 3 November
the McCarron Fund, as mortgagee
under possession sold Sunnyside to DC Partners for the sum of $250,000 and the
McCarron Fund also
became the registered mortgagee of Sunnyside as it executed a
mortgage loan document with DC Trust.
GROUND ONE — the Respondent engaged in professional misconduct by
acting in a conflict of interest
45. From about 2016 onwards, the Respondent engaged in a conflict of
interest by his conduct in connection with the sale of the properties
Bound' and 'Sunnyside' in circumstances where the Respondent and his wife,
(a) the creditors and second mortgagees at the time of the sale of
'Homeward Bound'; and/or
(b) he mortgagees in possession exercising a power of sale with respect to
the sale of Sunnyside; and/or
(c) the mortgagees for the purchaser, DC Partners Unit Trust, in the sale
of “ Sunnyside”.
the mortgagees for the purchaser, DC Partners Unit Trust, in the sale of
'Sunnyside.'
Date: 30 July 2025
Chloe Ellis, Solicitor for the Applicant, On behalf of the Applicant
Date: 31 July 2025
Christopher McCarron, Respondent
The Hearing
Application came before us for hearing on 23 October 2025 when the following
evidence, in addition to the Instrument of Consent,
was tendered:
(1) Affidavit of Valerie Anne Griswold affirmed on 16th April 2025 together with
the exhibits referred to in that affidavit (marked
Exhibit A) – tendered
by the Applicant.
(2) Affidavit of the Respondent affirmed on 28 August 2025 together with
annexures referred to in that affidavit (marked Exhibit
1) tendered by the
Respondent.
(3) Letter dated 21 November 2023, from HB Legal to the Respondent (marked
Exhibit B) – tendered by the Applicant.
The affidavits were received without objection and the deponents were not
required for cross-examination.
the course of the hearing Counsel for the Respondent made an application that
the Respondent’s name and other identifying
facts remain confidential. We
will revert to that matter subsequently in these reasons. At the conclusion of
the hearing when we
stated that our decision would be reserved, we indicated to
the parties that our tentative view was that that Application for
confidentiality
should be dismissed.
The Evidence
is no need to refer to the evidence contained in the affidavit of
Ms Griswold (Exhibit A) having regard to the Agreed Statement
contained within the Instrument of Consent other than to say that we are
comfortably satisfied that the Agreed Statement
of Facts accurately records the
salient facts relevant to these proceedings.
it is of relevance (particularly in relation to the proposed protective orders)
to make reference to some of the facts contained
in the affidavit of the
Respondent (Exhibit 1). The facts to which we refer are the following:
(1) The Respondent was admitted as a solicitor in 1970 and has been in practice
for over 50 years.
(2) The Respondent acknowledges that by acting for the complainant in 2016 he
had a conflict of interest and that he “stupidly
believed that by
following instructions” he could wear “two hats”. He deeply
regrets that decision.
(3) The affidavit states that he has no intention of ever seeking to reapply for
admission. As we state elsewhere in these reasons,
he has now given an
undertaking not to reapply.
(4) The Respondent is currently 82 years of age and on the full age pension. The
affidavit states that he jointly owns his home with
his wife and that his other
assets are insubstantial. He earns a salary of $180 per week (a matter to which
we will return later).
We were informed that his Senior Counsel and solicitor
were acting on a pro bono basis.
(5) The affidavit describes how the error of acting in a conflict-of-interest
situation has caused detriment to his family, friends
and others. These
proceedings have also affected him financially, as well as having an effect on
his physical and mental health.
(6) The affidavit sets out a summary of services he has provided to his
community over many years. These include to churches, charities
institutions involved in public service.
(7) The affidavit attaches five references. Three are from solicitors, one from
a retired member of Parliament, one from a real estate
agent and one from a
client. The former member of Parliament was also a client. All referees speak
very highly of the Respondent
referring to his professionalism and compassion,
honesty and integrity, and willingness to assist others.
is also relevant to refer to Exhibit B which is a letter from HB Legal dated
21 November 2023 recording that the Respondent is
employed by that firm of
lawyers as a consultant. By the letter, the Respondent is required to work
part-time (five hours per week)
for an annual salary of $15,600. The nature of
the Respondent’s work is described in a schedule to the letter. The
states that the Respondent’s duties are to encourage clients to
give or continue to give instructions to the firm and to encourage
“referrers” to give or continue to refer potential clients to the
firm. The duties, include being available to discuss
legal issues and
strategies.
do not express a view as to whether the activities described in the letter can
coexist with the fact that the Respondent no longer
has a practising certificate
and has undertaken not to apply for one. Whether the Respondent may continue to
perform the duties described
in the letter consistently with the fact that he no
longer has a practising certificate is a matter for the Respondent and for HB
Legal to consider.
will now turn to the submissions of each of the parties.
Applicant’s submissions
Applicant submits (and we agree) that, notwithstanding the Respondent’s
consent to the proposed orders, the Tribunal must
be independently satisfied
that the conduct described in the Agreed Statement of Facts occurred, that it
amounted to professional
misconduct and that it is appropriate to make the
orders sought: Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Clarke
Application arises from a complaint dated 31 August 2021 made by Andrew Gartrell
to the Office the New South Wales Legal Services
Commissioner (OLSC) in relation
to the Respondent’s conduct in connection with the sale of particular
properties from 2016
onwards (the Complaint). The complaint was referred by the
OLSC to the Applicant.
4 November 2024, the Respondent surrendered his practising certificate before
the commencement of these proceedings on 11 March
interpose here to record that during the hearing the Respondent through his
counsel gave an undertaking to the Tribunal not to
make an application for a
practising certificate.
Applicant’s submissions record that it is not in dispute that the
Respondent acted for Homeward Bound Holdings Pty Ltd (Homeward)
complainant in circumstances where he was also the second mortgagee and
creditor. We add that the creditor was the Respondent
and his wife as trustees
and beneficiaries of a self-managed superannuation fund (termed the McCarron
factual matters are set out in detail in the Instrument of Consent. However, in
summary, the Homeward Bound sale proceeded in
circumstances where the
Respondent, acting as the legal representative for Homeward Bound negotiated the
sale of that property with
the first mortgagee on terms which included the
McCarron Fund becoming the first mortgagee (by assignment from the outgoing
mortgagee) of the Sunnyside property.
November 2016, the McCarron Fund as mortgagee in possession sold Sunnyside to DC
Trust, and the McCarron Fund also became the registered
mortgagee of Sunnyside
executing a mortgage loan with DC Trust.
Applicant’s submissions state that it is a well-established principle that
a solicitor must not act for a client when there
is a conflict between serving
the client’s best interests and the solicitor’s own interest:
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Australian Solicitors Conduct
. As stated by the High Court in
Maguire v Makaronis
[1997] HCA 23
there is an inherent conflict of interest between a mortgagor and
mortgagee considering that the interest of a mortgagor is to obtain
interest rate on the loan and the interest of a mortgagee is to obtain the
highest return on the loan. Similar conflicts
exist between a debtor/creditor.
The Applicant submits that such conflicts mean that a legal practitioner’s
loyalty had not
remained undivided, with the result that it could not discharge
its duties to the clients unless informed consent had been obtained
independent legal advice.
the Instrument of Consent records, the complainant was in default of the
McCarron Fund loan, and interest had accrued to the sum
of about $250,000 over
the period of 10 years (2005-2015). When it became clear that the complainant
was experiencing financial distress
requiring him to sell the mortgaged
security, the Respondent acted for the complainant in the sale of Homeward Bound
in disregard
of his competing interest in the property as second mortgagee and
submissions go on to state that the Respondent denied that he had received any
benefit from his involvement with the sale of the
two properties but it is clear
that he used his dual position as the complainant’s legal representative
and as the creditor
to negotiate with other creditors an alternative arrangement
resulting in the benefit of an assignment of the Sunnyside mortgage,
that he would not otherwise have had security over.
submissions go on to state that a further benefit obtained by the Respondent as
a result of the agreement reached with the first
mortgagee of Sunnyside was that
the Respondent and his wife were able to exercise the power of sale selling
Sunnyside and to execute
and register a new mortgage with the purchaser of that
property (Mr Smith).
Applicant submits that, contrary to the Respondent’s submission that he
did not receive a benefit, the Tribunal may properly
form the view that the
conduct of the Respondent stemming from the sale of Homeward amounted to a
serious conflict of interests.
Applicant's submissions refer to the well-known and unarguable proposition that
the relationship between client and solicitor
is one of the most important
fiduciary relationships known to the law. Conduct involving conflicts of
interest may amount to professional
misconduct: see
Law Society of New South
Wales v Harvey
[1976] 2 NSWLR 154.
the solicitor had
interests in companies where the client had provided loans, the Court of Appeal
held that the solicitor had “deliberately
and for his own benefit, caused
the affairs of his clients to be intermingled with his affairs and that, while
supposedly acting
for them, he grossly preferred his own interests to those of
his clients”. The court held that the conduct amounted to gross
trust by the solicitor which justified a finding of professional misconduct.
Applicant's submissions deal with the standard of proof and with the definition
of professional misconduct. So far as the standard
of proof is concerned, the
Applicant submits that it is necessary for the Tribunal to be satisfied to the
standard described in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Respondent engaged in the alleged conduct, and that the alleged conduct amounts
to professional misconduct.
expression “professional misconduct” is defined in s 297 of the
Uniform Law to include “unsatisfactory professional
conduct of a lawyer,
where the conduct involves a substantial or consistent failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence” and
“conduct of a lawyer whether occurring in connection with the practice of
law or occurring
otherwise than in connection with the practice of law that
would, if established, justify a finding that the lawyer is not a fit
person to engage in legal practice”.
submissions of the Applicant refer to s 297(2) of the Uniform Law which
provides that the Tribunal may have regard, when determining
whether conduct
constitutes professional misconduct pursuant to s 297(1)(b) to the matters
that would be considered if the lawyer
were an applicant for admission to the
Australian legal profession or for the grant or renewal of an Australian
practising certificate.
These matters are set out in r 13 of the
Profession Uniform General Rules
provides that the Tribunal may consider whether the Respondent is
currently of good fame and character. That consideration has a
twofold aspect,
fame referring to a person’s reputation in the relevant community, and
character as to the person’s actual
nature (see
Prothonotary v Gregory
[2017] NSWCA 101
298 of the Uniform Law identifies certain conduct that, of itself, may
constitute professional misconduct (or unsatisfactory
professional conduct).
Section 298(b) provides that conduct contravening the Uniform Rules is conduct
that is capable of constituting
professional misconduct (or unsatisfactory
professional conduct) for the purposes of ss 296 or 297 of the Uniform Law.
Applicant submits that when an assessment is made of the Respondent’s
conduct, the Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied
that it is of such
seriousness as to justify a finding of professional misconduct.
Applicant’s submissions go on to deal with the statutory power of the
Tribunal to make orders having made a finding of professional
misconduct. That
power is conferred by s 302(1) of the Uniform Law. The matters for
consideration which apply to the formulation
of appropriate protective orders
are summarised in
Law Society of New South Wales v Maharaj
NSWCATOD 79
which may be summarised as follows:
(1) The gravity of the misconduct.
(2) The deterrent effect of any protective order on the further conduct of the
practitioner.
(3) The deterrent effect of any protective order on the conduct of other
practitioners.
(4) The enhancement of confidence in the public in the integrity of the
profession.
it is uncontroversial that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is protective, not
Law Society of New South Wales v Bannister
[1993] NSWCA 157.
Applicant submits that it is appropriate for the Tribunal to make an order
issuing the Respondent with a reprimand and an order
requiring him to pay a
fine. The submissions state that it would be appropriate for the Respondent to
be issued with a reprimand
as such order would protect the public by:
(1) Publicly marking the seriousness and appropriately reflecting the
Tribunal’s disapprobation of the Respondent’s conduct.
(2) Identifying professional standards, the establishment and maintenance. of
which protect the public.
(3) Deterring other practitioners from behaving in a similar manner.
(4) Maintaining and promoting public confidence in the integrity of the legal
profession in New South Wales.
Applicant also submits that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to impose a
fine on the Respondent. The element of deterrence
(both of the Respondent and
the professional generally) constitutes an assurance to the public that serious
lapses in the conduct
of legal practitioners will not be passed over or likely
put aside but will be dealt with appropriately. The fine to be imposed must
convey to the legal profession and to the community in general that the
Respondent’s conduct identified in the instrument of
unacceptable.
maximum fine that the Tribunal may require a person found guilty of professional
misconduct to pay is $100,000: s 302(12)(l) of
the Uniform Law. However,
noting the Respondent’s financial circumstances as set out in his
affidavit affirmed on 28 August
2025, the Applicant submits that it would still
be appropriate for the Tribunal to make an order requiring the Respondent to pay
a fine, as the imposition of a fine would appropriately reflect the seriousness
of the conduct while having a deterrent effect and
is appropriate when viewed in
the context of also reprimanding the Respondent. The Applicant submits that a
fine of $3,000 is appropriate
in the current circumstances, given the
seriousness of the conduct and taking into account the Respondent’s
financial circumstances.
Applicant’s submissions go on to deal with the subject of costs,
relevantly, cl 23 of sch 5 to the NCAT Act which provides
that the Tribunal
must make orders requiring a Respondent lawyer whom it has found to have engaged
in professional misconduct (or
unsatisfactory professional conduct) to pay costs
unless the Tribunal is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist. The
submits that there are no exceptional circumstances in this case.
Therefore, the Tribunal, if it determines that the Respondent is
professional misconduct should make an order for costs against the Respondent.
The Applicant advises that, subject to the
Tribunal making an order for costs
against the Respondent as proposed in the Instrument of Consent, the parties
have agreed that
the amount the Respondent will pay the Applicant is $27,000.
Submissions of the Respondent
the following paragraphs we summarise the submissions of the Respondent.
Respondent’s submissions make it clear that the Respondent does not resile
from the consent orders or the Agreed Statement
of Facts. However, the
Respondent is entitled to and makes submissions concerning the seriousness of
the conduct of the Respondent
and extenuating circumstances.
Respondent submits that he was not guilty of any “intermingling” of
funds or of the affairs of the parties as submitted
by the Applicant. The
conduct of the Respondent is different from the conduct described in
where client monies were not only mixed with the monies of the
solicitor but the clients were investing in companies owned by the
Here, the debtor/creditor relationship was established well before the
solicitor/client relationship took place and at
no stage were either the monies
or the affairs of the parties mixed or intermingled.
interpose here to say that in our view, it was not part of the Applicant’s
case that the Respondent mixed funds of the Respondent
with those of the
Respondent’s clients.
Respondent’s submissions state that intermingling of “affairs"
contains the connotation of the mixing of an entity
or enterprise of the
solicitor with the funds, entity or enterprise of the client. This submission
emphasises that there was no such
mingling or mixing of affairs in this case.
The relationship of debtor/creditor predated the impugned sales by many years.
The Respondent’s
submissions state that the impugned sales themselves
reflected the Respondent endeavouring to act in the best interests of the
complainant
who was insolvent and in the hands of his creditors, (particularly
the first mortgagee).
Respondent’s submissions also state that it is important for the Tribunal
to consider the context of the Respondent’s
relationship with the client.
The relationship of the lender/borrower commenced in 2005 preceding the
relationship of solicitor/client
between the parties by seven years, until the
Respondent first commenced acting for the complainant in November 2013 and
thereafter.
Respondent submits that in 2013 Stacks Finance, as first mortgagee of both
relevant properties, was in complete control of the
situation and, as such, able
to dictate the manner in which both sales proceeded. Thus, the impugned sales
were outside the control
of both the complainant and the Respondent.
submissions of the Respondent state that between 2005 and 2016 no payments had
been made by the complainant on all the mortgages
over both properties. It is
submitted that the Respondent had the intention to get the best outcome for all
involved (including the
complainant). The impugned sales occurred in 2016 and it
was not until 31 August 2021 that the complaint was made.
Respondent submits that the impugned sales and the events of 2016 should not be
looked at in isolation, but in the context of
a series of complex ongoing
relationships dating back to 2005, which were designed to achieve the best
possible outcome for the complainant
who, at all relevant times, was insolvent.
submissions go on to deal with what is submitted to be extenuating circumstances
in mitigation of the seriousness of the allegation.
Respondent submits that in this case:
(1) There was no personal dishonesty alleged – unlike
(2) There is no present or continuing threat to the public because the
Respondent resigned as a solicitor at least four months before
these proceedings
were commenced (and has since given an undertaking not to apply for a fresh
practising certificate).
(3) The insight and contrition of the Respondent are demonstrated by his letter
of apology dated 30 October 2024 and the unconditional
surrender of his
practising certificate in November 2024.
(4) More serious complaints involving allegations of dishonesty were closed by
the Applicant in September 2024.
(5) The Respondent has at all times cooperated with the Applicant at
considerable time and cost and at the expense of his physical
and mental health
and well-being.
(6) The complaint was not lodged until five years after the impugned sales and
since then it has taken four years to reach the Tribunal,
through no fault of
the Respondent.
submissions go onto make application that the identity of the Respondent be
suppressed. The basis for that application is that
there is no continuing threat
posed by the Respondent to the public. The public interest in publishing the
identity of the Respondent
is outweighed by other factors. The Respondent was in
practice for over 50 years with an extensive record of service to the
profession,
his clients and the community. The purpose of educating the
profession to avoid this type of conduct can be achieved without identifying
him. The Respondent submits that the Tribunal should make an order suppressing
the name of the Respondent and any information that
may result in his
identification as not being necessary in the public interest and more punitive
than educational or protective.
submissions make specific reference to the Respondent’s affidavit,
including the references attached to the affidavit. We
have already summarised
that evidence.
Consideration
are comfortably satisfied that the Agreed Statement of Facts, as set out in the
Instrument of Consent fairly and accurately describe
the matters giving rise to
the Applicant bringing these proceedings on the basis that the Respondent has
been engaged in acting for
a client or clients whilst having a conflict of
agree with the submissions of the Applicant that the Respondent breached his
obligations as a fiduciary by acting both for a client,
whilst at the same time
representing his own interests in the same transactions. We agree with the
Applicant's characterisation of
the conduct of the Respondent, namely that the
Respondent’s amounted to a serious conflict of interests.
Accordingly,
we are comfortably satisfied that the Respondent's conduct amounts to
professional misconduct.
now turn to the question of what protective orders should be made and, in
particular, whether the proposed consensual orders should
be made. As the
Respondent's submissions state a number of matters should be considering when
determining the nature of the appropriate
protective orders.
first consideration is the gravity of the misconduct. There is no doubt that the
conduct was serious going to the heart of the
solicitor client relationship. In
the Respondent's favour it may be said that the conduct did not involve the
intermingling of money,
nor was there evidence that the Respondent actually took
steps to prefer his own interests over those of the clients.
agree that the protective orders ought to be sufficiently severe as to create a
deterrent effect. However, in this case, there
is little point in taking steps
to deter the Respondent as he has given up practice and undertakes not to seek a
new practising certificate.
Nevertheless, the broader deterrent effect on other
practitioners remains relevant and our orders must be sufficiently appropriate
to reflect that consideration.
our orders must have regard to the maintenance of confidence of the public in
the integrity of the profession. In this
case, there is extensive evidence that
the Respondent has acquired a reputation over many years of being a person of
honesty, integrity
and generous in his assistance to the community more
generally. Against this is the fact that the Respondent has made a regrettable
error and there must be some mark of the Tribunal’s disapproval.
conclusion is that the Instrument of Consent appropriately proposes a finding
that the Respondent has been guilty of professional
misconduct and that it is
appropriate that the Respondent be reprimanded.
now turn to the question of a fine. The fine proposed is $3,000. On its face
that is a small amount of money having regard to what
we have described as a
serious breach of fiduciary duty. However, we have also had regard to the
Respondent’s age, financial
circumstances and the fact that imposing a
fine for a higher amount is, in our opinion, unlikely to add to the deterrent
the orders.
conclusion is that the proposed fine of $3,000 is appropriate.
far as costs are concerned, we have already set out the Applicant’s
submissions and agree that costs must be awarded in this
case, as there are no
exceptional circumstances. The parties have agreed to an amount of $27,000. This
is not an insignificant sum,
and we are of the opinion that there is no basis to
impose upon the parties an order for costs to be paid in an amount assessed by
costs assessor or to impose a higher specific amount. Accordingly, we think it
appropriate to make the order proposed to the effect
that costs of $27,000
should be paid by the Respondent to the Applicant.
stated earlier, the Respondent made submissions that his name and other
identifying features should be suppressed. The Tribunal
has power to make such
an order if it is thought desirable to do so. However, the starting principle is
that proceedings of this
kind ought to be open and not anonymised. This acts as
an added deterrent. In this case the Respondent has partly retired (a factor
which might support anonymisation), but the evidence contained in Exhibit B
shows that the Respondent continues to have a consultancy
role with a law firm
interacting with the public. Additionally, we are required to have regard to the
need to consider the deterrent
effect on the profession more generally and also
to take steps to ensure that the integrity and confidence of the public in the
is maintained. Unlike in
Council of the Law Society of New
Wales v DDQ [2017] NSWCATOD123
( case to which we were referred
by the Respondent ) there are no special or exceptional circumstances in this
matter of the kind
described in DDQ such as to warrant an order prohibiting or
restricting disclosure of the Respondent’s identity.
these reasons, we confirm the tentative view expressed at the hearing that the
application for anonymisation is refused.
following declaration and orders are made:
(1) The Tribunal finds that the Respondent has engaged in professional
misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of the
Legal Profession Uniform
2014 (NSW) (“the Uniform Law”) with respect to the alleged
conduct particularised in the Instrument of Consent.
(2) Pursuant to s 299(1)(b) of the Uniform Law, the Tribunal orders that
the Respondent be reprimanded.
(3) Pursuant to s 302(1)(l) of the Uniform Law, the Tribunal orders that the
Respondent pay a fine of $3,000.
(4) The Respondent is to pay the Applicant’s costs, as agreed, in the sum
of $27,000.
(5) The sums referred to in orders (3) and (4) are to be paid by the Respondent
within one month of the date of publication of these
orders or within such
longer period as may be agreed by the Applicant.
(6) The Respondent’s application for an order for confidentiality pursuant
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(“the NCAT Act”) is dismissed.
************
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (351 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter