URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/153.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Trades Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Customer Service [2025] NSWCATOD 153; (12 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Australian Trades Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Customer Service
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 153
Hearing Date(s):
05 September 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Occupational Division
J Gatland, Senior Member
(1) The decision made on 27 August 2025 to impose conditions on the
Applicant’s licence is stayed pending further order of the
Tribunal to the
following extent:
(a) The decision to impose Condition 1 is stayed.
The decision to impose Condition 2 is stayed.
(c) The decision to impose
Condition 5 is stayed.
(2) The timetable set out in direction 4 by
the Tribunal on 25 August 2025 is amended as follows:
(a) time for compliance
with 4(a) is extended to 12 September 2025.
(b) time for compliance with 4(b)
is extended to 19 September 2025.
(c) time for compliance with 4(c) is
extended to 24 September 2025.
The effect of order 1 above
is that no stay has been granted with respect to the decision to impose
conditions 3 and 4, which concern
the requirement that the Applicant not alter
its name, and it must include the name Australian Trades Pty Ltd next to any
name or other name identifying itself when it is advertising on websites
or in other electronic advertisements. The application,
as amended, remains
listed for final hearing on 30 September 2025.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Interlocutory applications – application for
interim orders staying a decision pending the determination
of an administrative
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Licensing and Registration (Uniform
Procedures) Act 2002
Cases Cited:
Attorney-General for the State of New South Wales v XY
[2014] NSWCA
AVS Group Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2012] NSWADTAP 24
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force v
[2025] NSWCATAP 180
Commissioner of Taxation v Industrial Equity Ltd
(2000) 98 FCR 573
[2000] FCA 420
Hunter Development Corporation v Save Our
Rail NSW Incorporated (No 2)
[2016] NSWCA 375
Jardin v Metcash Ltd
Loveday v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2018] NSWCATAD 80
McGuiffick v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2022] NSWCATOD 176
with Disability Australia Incorporated v Minister for Disability Services
QLD Protection Security Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2018] NSWCATAP 113
Secretary Department of Customer Service v
BOB Building Services Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCATAP 48
Secretary, Department of
Communities and Justice v Feeney
[2021] NSWCATAP 139
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
Australian Trades Pty Ltd ACN 164 770 852 (First Applicant)
Charbel Alha
(Second Applicant)
Secretary, Department of Customer Service
(Respondent)
Representation:
T Lynch SC, M Klooster (Applicants)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
New South Lawyers (Applicants)
Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00320958
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
First Applicant in the proceedings is Australian Trades Pty Ltd, a licensed
plumbing contractor. The Second Applicant in the substantive
proceedings, Alha
Charbel, is a director and nominated supervisor of Australian Trades.
Mr Charbel also holds a licence or contractor
authority. Aside from his
interest as a director of the First Applicant, Mr Charbel is not affected by the
matters the subject of
these reasons.
proceedings arise because of investigations conducted by the Building
Commissioner of NSW into, among other things, complaints
made against the First
Applicant by several consumers alleging over-charging, harassing or coercive
practices and unfair contracts.
27 August 2025, a delegate of the Respondent under the
(NSW), imposed conditions on the First Applicant’s licence (Conditions
5 September 2025, I granted a partial stay of the Conditions Decision. The
orders made on that date were:
1. The decision made on 27 August 2025 to impose conditions on the
Applicant’s licence is stayed pending further order of the
Tribunal to the
following extent:
(a) The decision to impose Condition 1 is stayed.
(b) The decision to impose Condition 2 is stayed.
(c) The decision to impose Condition 5 is stayed.
2. The timetable set out in direction 4 by the Tribunal on 25 August 2025 is
amended as follows:
(a) time for compliance with 4(a) is extended to 12 September 2025.
(b) time for compliance with 4(b) is extended to 19 September 2025.
(c) time for compliance with 4(c) is extended to 24 September 2025.
The effect of order 1 above is that no stay has been granted with respect to the
decision to impose conditions 3 and 4, which concern
the requirement that the
Applicant not alter its name, and it must include the name Australian Trades Pty
Ltd next to any trading
name or other name identifying itself when it is
advertising on websites or in other electronic advertisements. The application,
as amended, remains listed for final hearing on 30 September 2025.
the hearing on 5 September 2025, the Respondent requested reasons for my
decision to make order one, granting a partial stay of
the Conditions Decision.
These are the written reasons arising from that request.
second order, concerning the timetable to progress the substantive issue to
final hearing, has subsequently been amended, including
to allow for the
Attorney-General of NSW to intervene in the proceedings, such that the
proceedings are now listed for final hearing
commencing on 4 December 2025.
Matters relevant in considering whether to grant a stay
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) provides that an
administrative decision is not stayed by an application for review. A respondent
decision-maker is entitled
to take action to implement the decision, the subject
of administrative review, pending before the Tribunal. That section also allows
any party to apply for a stay or other interim orders to secure the
effectiveness of the Tribunal’s determination. Before the
Tribunal makes
any such order, it must be satisfied that it is desirable to make interim
orders, having regard to the interests of
those affected by the decision, the
views of the respondent decision-maker and the public interest.
QLD Protection Security Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2018] NSWCATAP 113
, the appeal panel made the following,
oft quoted, statement which helpfully amplifies and annotates
Administrative Decisions Review Act
. The appeal panel said:
[31] The Tribunal recently considered the power under s 60 of the ADR Act
Loveday v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2018] NSWCATAD 80
). In that decision it was held at [8]:
“... Section 60(2) and (3) give the Tribunal a single discretionary power
to make a stay order or to refuse to make such an
order taking into account all
relevant considerations. Secondly, the words “to secure the effectiveness
of the hearing”
include a situation where the applicant will suffer
irreparable loss in the sense that no recompense for it can be obtained if the
application is ultimately successful:
Re Pelling and
Secretary, Department of Aviation
[1984] AATA 179
(1984) 5 ALD 638
639. It is not confined to the situation where a hearing would be pointless
because the applicant will go out of business if a
stay is refused. ...”
[32] The relevant considerations in deciding whether to make an order under
s 60(2) include:
(1) whether the order is appropriate to secure the effectiveness of the
determination of the application for review: ADR Act, s 60(2);
(2) whether the order is desirable taking into account:
(a) the interests of any persons who may be affected by the determination of the
application for review: ADR Act, s 60(3)(a),
Re Scott and Australian Securities and Investments
[2009] AATA 798
(b) any submission made by or on behalf of the administrator who made the
decision to which the application relates: ADR Act,
s 60(3)(b),
(c) the public interest: ADR Act, s 60(3)(c),
(3) the applicant’s prospects of success on the application for
AVS Group of Companies Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
[2010] NSWCA 81
at [10] and [11],
[33] The circumstances that are relevant in any particular case to the
considerations identified above may well overlap or be interrelated.
Factual Background
to making the Conditions Decision, there had been earlier action taken by the
Building Commissioner as delegate of the Respondent,
which had also come before
the Tribunal as presently constituted. I outline some of that earlier action and
the Tribunal’s
involvement by way of context and background.
Show Cause and 60-day Suspension Notices
19 August 2025, the Respondent issued notices to show cause to both Australian
Trades and Mr Charbel. The show cause notices were
issued under
. The show cause notices invited the Australian Trades
and Mr Charbel to respond to allegations contained in two grounds that broadly
concerned matters raised by the consumer complaints and the concerns of the
Respondent in the course of its investigation of those
complaints up to that
on 19 August 2025, the Respondent suspended the authorities (i.e. the licences)
of Australian Trades and Mr Charbel for a period
of 60 days (Suspension
Decision). The Respondent’s power to suspend the licences arises under
, which allows the Respondent to
suspend licences in circumstances where a show cause notice has been served, and
it has formed the
requisite opinions set out in the section. Suspensions under
can be imposed for no longer than 60 days.
21 August 2025, Australian Trades and Mr Charbel applied to the Tribunal for
administrative review of the Suspension Decision.
They also applied for a stay
of the Suspension Decision pending the determination of the Tribunal.
The stay of the Suspension Decision
22 August 2025, the Tribunal, as presently constituted, heard the application
for a stay of the Suspension Decision and on 25 August
2025, consequently, of
that hearing, I granted a stay of the Suspension Decision, among other
a subsequent date, one or other of the parties requested reasons for my decision
to grant a stay of the Suspension Decision on
25 August 2025. No reasons have
been provided in relation to that decision because, on 18 September 2025,
the Tribunal made orders
by consent setting aside the Suspension decision
pursuant to
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW). Consequently, the Suspension Decision is no longer a live issue before
the Tribunal and any reasons on the granting of a
stay of a decision
subsequently set aside can have no utility or, at most, might be considered an
advisory opinion.
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force v Parish
NSWCATAP 180
, the appeal panel
A proceeding, or an aspect of it, will lack utility if its determination serves
no practical purpose. One way a proceeding or issue
can become moot is if,
due to supervening events or circumstances, there is no longer a controversy
between the parties: Hunter Development
Corporation v Save Our Rail NSW
Incorporated (No 2)
[2016] NSWCA 375 (Hunter
Development) at [40].
As a matter of general principle, courts will ordinarily refuse to determine
issues which no longer have utility or have become moot.
Permanent Trustee Co Ltd
(1999) 198 CLR 334
[1999] HCA 9
Court explained:
“Because the object of the judicial process is the final determination of
the rights of the parties to an action, courts have
traditionally refused to
provide answers to hypothetical questions or to give advisory opinions.”
there are some recognised exceptions to that general rule and those exceptions
have been considered judicially in
People with Disability Australia
Incorporated v Minister for Disability Services
[2011] NSWCA 253
v Metcash Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 409
Hunter Development Corporation v Save Our
Rail NSW Incorporated (No 2)
[2016] NSWCA 375
Attorney-General for the
State of New South Wales v XY
[2014] NSWCA 466
Commissioner of
Taxation v Industrial Equity Ltd
(2000) 98 FCR 573
[2000] FCA 420
the appeal panel of the Tribunal in
Parish, Secretary, Department of
Communities and Justice v Feeney
[2021] NSWCATAP 139
Australia Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2012] NSWADTAP
). The circumstances in which a court (and all the more so,
the Tribunal) would reach a decision where there were no practical consequences
for parties are rare:
, per Campbell JA at [35] and none of the
known exceptions apply to the Suspension Decision or my decision to stay.
Accordingly,
I have not given reasons in relation to the interim orders made staying the
Suspension Decision.
The public warning
27 August 2025, in addition to the Conditions Decision, the Respondent published
a warning concerning both Australian Trades and
Mr Charbel. The Respondent has
the power to publish a notice warning of risks involved in dealing with the
holder of a contractor
licence in connection with residential building work or
specialist work under
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to review a decision to publish a warning under
. The terms of
Respondent to authorise the publication of a warning notice in “any one or
more of the following ways”:
(1) By publishing the warning to any person making inquiries of the Respondent
(2) By advertisement by the use of any medium; and
(3) By authorising the publication of the warning to any media representatives.
warning notice was in the following terms (though I have not included the
heading text box, which is in bolded red font on a yellow
highlighted
background; nor have I included the bolding of text or hyperlink to the
Respondent’s website as it appears in the
copy of the warning attached to
the amended application for administrative review):
NSW consumers are warned not to deal with Australian Trades Pty Ltd (300418C)
and Charbel Alha (190178C) in connection with residential
building works or
plumbing and drainage works because of the risk that consumers may be exposed to
unconscionable conduct, use of
unfair contract terms, and undue harassment and
Other trading names associated with Australian Trades Pty Ltd, include:
ANDERSONS PLUMBING AUS, BOB’S PLUMBING NSW, Dan’s
Electrical AUD,
Dan’s Electrical NSW, Dan’s Plumbing AUS, Dan’s Plumbing NSW,
LLOYD’S PLUMBING & GAS,
Wilson’s Plumbing NSW. The licence
holder also advertises under the name of Fergusons Plumbing Group.
Customers who have dealt with Australian Trades Pty Ltd, Mr. Charbel Alha or
persons operating under the trading names outlined above,
and are not satisfied
with their interaction are urged to lodge a complaint with the Building
Commission NSW. You can lodge a complaint
via our website by calling
13 27 00 or at any Service NSW centre.
public warning is relevant to the stay of the Conditions Decision because the
Respondent relied heavily on the submission, in
opposing the stay, that the
Conditions Decision was necessary to aid the public warning. While I have taken
account of that submission
as addressing the public interest consideration, as I
expressed at the hearing, I have significant reservations about that necessity
because Parliament has prescribed, in
complete scheme for the publication of warnings and, while the
is undoubtedly consumer protection legislation, there is no express
provision authorising the making of conditions on a licence in
furtherance of a
public warning published under
This is another matter that weighed,
albeit to a limited extent, in my consideration of the prospects of Australian
success on the final application.
Conditions Decision of 27 August 2025, made by the Respondent in respect of the
Australian Trades’ licence, was in the following
section 36(1)(c)
, I as delegate of the
Secretary, impose the following conditions on licence number 300418C with
immediate effect, for a period of
one (1) year:
1) The Authority Holder must display, prominently and in large font, at the top
of any website advertising or offering, or in any
other electronic advertisement
advertising or offering, the Authority Holder’s services that are
authorised by the Authority,
the following statement: ‘
WARNING: As a
requirement of our ongoing licencing under the
we are required
to notify you that the regulator, Building Commission NSW, has warned consumers
not to deal with our company in connection
with residential building works or
plumbing and drainage works because of the risk that consumers may be exposed to
unconscionable
conduct, use of unfair contract terms, and undue harassment and
coercion. A copy of the warning is available on the public register
which can be
accessed at verify.licence.nsw.gov.au’
2) The Authority Holder must not allow any person engaged, directly or
indirectly by the Authority Holder, to attend any premises
to provide a quote or
advice in relation to the doing, the necessity of doing, or contracting to do,
any works authorised by the
Authority, unless that person is the holder of a
relevant contractor licence, supervisor certificate or tradesperson certificate
3) The Authority Holder must not alter its name from Australian Trades Pty Ltd;
4) The Authority Holder must include the name Australian Trades Pty Ltd next to
any trading name or other name identifying itself,
when it is advertising on
websites or in other electronic advertisements; and
5) Authority Holder must store and retain records of compliance with condition
(1) to (4) above and provide those records on request
of the Secretary within
where I refer to each condition separately, I refer to them by their number; for
example, Condition One.
is common for government decision-makers to notify a licence holder of proposed
action before that action is taken. This achieves
two goals: firstly, to afford
procedural fairness to the subject of the decision; and second, to allow
practical input that will
make the decision workable. There was no mystery or
surprise in the making of the Conditions Decision – proceedings were
commenced, yet somewhat surprisingly, I was informed by Australian
Trades in oral submissions that the conditions Decision had been
made without
notice or warning, and Respondent had not afforded Australian Trades the
opportunity to comment on the conditions in
draft before the Conditions Decision
lack of consultation has, possibly, led to conditions that are drafted in such a
way as to require interpretation; what, for example,
is required by the term
“prominently” in Condition One; what constitutes “any
premises” in relation to Condition
Two, does it exclude, for example,
telephone attendances (which otherwise appears to be entirely unregulated,
though older and often
vulnerable consumers commonly telephone plumbing
contractors); what is the form of records that would mean Condition Five,
as it relates to Condition One, which applies to a live website?
These are matters that, although I am not required to decide, are
nonetheless
relevant to my consideration of the prospects of success that Australian Trades
may have in its application.
Conditions Decision also foreshadowed further intended conditions, proposed to
be imposed for a period of one year. However, I
was informed by counsel for the
Respondent that those further conditions are no longer intended to be imposed.
Although I note that
information, nothing was said at the hearing of this matter
that prevents the Respondent from revisiting that decision or from seeking
impose other conditions if the statutory requirements are met.
Consideration of each condition in the Conditions Decision
properly urged by the Respondent’s counsel in oral submissions on the
hearing of the application, each of the conditions
within the Conditions
Decision has been regarded separately.
Condition One – a
stay is necessary to secure the effectiveness of the hearing, Applicant will
suffer irreparable loss or harm
Trades submitted that it would suffer irreparable harm if it were required to
meet Condition One. The basis for that submission
was the evidence that most of
its customers are obtained through its online advertising. I accept that a
statement of the kind to
be imposed by Condition One would have an immediate,
and, likely universally, negative effect on any person accessing the Australian
Trades website. The effect of the text of the warning is necessarily amplified
when it is considered in the context of being published
on the Australian
Trades’ own website. That placement is likely to create the impression
that Australian Trades accepts or
admits the allegations that form the basis of
the warning, or that Australian Trades is in so much trouble with the regulator
its reliability in carrying out plumbing works would be questionable.
considered the likely loss of immediate custom as being a lesser matter; it is
the damage to its reputation if Condition One were
to be imposed that would, in
my view, be irreparable.
Respondent acknowledged that it was conceivable that Australian Trades might
suffer some financial and reputational harm from
the imposition of Condition
One; but it submitted that the condition went “no further than necessary
to ensure that less sophisticated
and vulnerable customers who do not access the
public register and/or read the news are as informed of the risks of engaging
Trades as consumers who do”.
have countenanced that submission as I am required to do so under
Administrative Decisions Review Act
, and I give it
less weight than the irreparable harm consideration because the reality is that
non-reading and other vulnerable customers
(who I accept are unlikely to have
consulted the Respondent’s register or read the newspapers) are more
likely to use a telephone
to contact Australian Trades, which is a method of
communication that has no conditions attached to whatsoever.
the terms of the warning of Condition One require that the consumer read the
warning and then pursue inquiries with the
public register, which leads to some
circularity in the submission concerning the need to have this warning on the
website to assist
non-reading or vulnerable consumers. It rather suggests that
the real aim of Condition One is to deter consumers from dealing with
Trades altogether, rather than alert customers to the risk it considers exists
in dealing with the Applicant.
the hearing of the application for interim relief, counsel appearing for
Australian Trades informed me that he had been unable
to find any authorities
where the Respondent had sought to impose conditions on an authority in aid of a
public warning. Given the
pace of the application for relief, there may have
been other instances; however, it does appear to be an unprecedented action. As
I have noted elsewhere in these decisions, there are significant legal
considerations to be determined at the final hearing. It would
be antithetical
to securing the effectiveness of the determination if Australian Trades were to
go out of business or suffer from
irreparable financial and reputational harm
before the Tribunal has had a chance to hear the parties in full on such
public interest is a consideration that has significance where, here, the
is quintessentially consumer protection legislation:
McGuiffick v Commissioner for Fair Trading
[2022] NSWCATOD 176
Secretary Department of Customer Service v BOB Building Services Pty
[2025] NSWCATAP 48
. However, for the same reasons set out in my
consideration of the Respondent’s decision above, I am not satisfied that
would be sufficient detriment to the public in granting a temporary stay
to the imposition of Condition One on the Australian Trades’
licence. The detriment caused to Australian Trades by the imposition of
Condition One would also impact its ability to
maintain staff and continue to
provide work to its subcontractors – those people are also members of the
Condition Two – a stay is necessary to secure the
effectiveness of the hearing
Respondent submits that staying Condition Two “would inhibit the
Secretary’s ability to ensure that Australian Trades
is complying with the
requirements it is already subject to under
of the HBA and
Plumbing and Drainage Act 2011
(NSW).” Countering that submission,
Australian Trades submitted that quoting was not work that came within either of
the provisions
referred to by the Respondent. Accordingly, I gave the
Respondent’s submission on this issue less weight.
am satisfied from reviewing the terms of Condition Two that, to the extent it is
capable of being properly interpreted and carried
out, it is likely to
significantly impact the operations of Australian Trades, leading to a
detrimental impact upon its business
operations. I accept that Condition Two
would, in effect, require persons with particular qualifications to attend and
provide quotes,
where that is not otherwise required by the legislation.
Considering
the public interest in that regard, I note that in oral submissions, counsel for
Australian Trades informed the Tribunal
that before any attendance by an
Australian Trades representative at a consumer’s home, they are sent by
email the terms and
conditions and a guideline concerning the
Of the many consumers who have made complaints against it, only one,
did not receive that material.
balance, I am satisfied that it is desirable for Condition Two, also, to be
stayed pending further order of the Tribunal.
Condition Five
– consequential, possibly unworkable
consider that Condition Five, which requires the keeping of documentary records
to evidence compliance with, in particular, Condition
One and Condition Two,
should also be stayed. It has no other real purpose other than to aid those
other conditions.
that been the end of the matter, it may well have been unnecessary to grant a
stay; however, I also considered Condition Five
to be oppressive and unworkable
in relation to Condition One, where, in effect, Australian Trades would have to
provide cached versions
of its website on an almost continuous basis.
Conditions Three and Four – not stayed
Three and Four require that Australian Trades not alter its name, and it must
include the name Australian Trades Pty Ltd
next to any trading name or other
name identifying itself when it is advertising on websites or in other
electronic advertisements.
was no evidence that Conditions Three and Four remaining in place would have any
impact on Australian Trades in the way that
Conditions One and Two likely would
Trades’ submissions in relation to these conditions were that there was no
proper basis for their imposition under
particular,
Licensing and Registration (Uniform
Procedures) Act
, as modified by
section 19(3)(d)
Building Act
, makes it a condition of each contractor licence that the
licensee must notify the Respondent within seven days after the change,
change in the licensee’s name, address or other registered particulars.
There was also evidence tendered in the material
admitted on the hearing of the
stay to show that Australian Trades always identifies itself alongside its
trading names and contractor
underline the alleged necessity of these conditions, the Respondent tendered
evidence of a business name search that showed Australian
Trades had registered
two further business names of “Trusty Tradie” and “Truefix
Tradie” on 30 and 29 August,
respectively. However, I note that at the
date of the hearing, Australian Trades was not required to have notified the
of those additional business names as it was within the statutory
period; and there was no evidence that it was marketing itself
using those
more material failure was that the Australian Trades’ submissions did not
address whether it is desirable for the Tribunal
to make interim orders or stay
a decision in order to secure the effectiveness of the Tribunal’s
determination.
correctness of the Conditions Decision is a matter properly to be determined at
the final hearing. Australian Trades is not entitled,
because it dislikes being
constrained from changing its name, to a stay of those conditions.
Conclusion & Orders
process of granting interim relief is directed by the considerations set out in
Administrative Decisions Review Act
. On balance, having
considered the evidence and submissions of the parties, I made the following
orders and notation:
(1) The decision made on 27 August 2025 to impose conditions on the
Applicant’s licence is stayed pending further order of
the Tribunal to the
following extent:
(a) The decision to impose Condition 1 is stayed.
(b) The decision to impose Condition 2 is stayed.
(c) The decision to impose Condition 5 is stayed.
(2) The timetable set out in direction 4 by the Tribunal on 25 August 2025 is
amended as follows:
(a) time for compliance with 4(a) is extended to 12 September 2025.
(b) time for compliance with 4(b) is extended to 19 September 2025.
(c) time for compliance with 4(c) is extended to 24 September 2025.
The effect of order 1 above is that no stay has been granted with respect to the
decision to impose conditions 3 and 4, which concern
the requirement that the
Applicant not alter its name, and it must include the name Australian Trades Pty
Ltd next to any trading
name or other name identifying itself when it is
advertising on websites or in other electronic advertisements. The application,
as amended, remains listed for final hearing on 30 September 2025.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (289 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter