URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1343.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Austpipe Plumbing Services Pty Ltd v Doyle (No 3) [2025] NSWSC 1343 (14 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Austpipe Plumbing Services Pty Ltd v Doyle (No 3)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1343
Hearing Date(s):
14 November 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Equity - Applications List
Notice of motion dismissed
Catchwords:
EVIDENCE – Expert evidence – application for single expert to
be appointed pursuant to r 31.37 of the UCPR – complex
and contested
quantum issues – unclear scope of expert’s task – financial
prejudice to defendants – whether
appointment would advance the just,
quick and cheap resolution of the real issues – HELD – application
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Corporations Act 2001
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), rr 31.37,
Cases Cited:
Austpipe Plumbing Services Pty Ltd v Doyle
[2024] NSWSC 1464
Plumbing Services Pty Ltd v Doyle
[2025] NSWSC 573
Walker Group Constructions
v Bluescope Steel and QBE Insurance
[2017] NSWSC 678
Principal judgment
Austpipe Plumbing Services Pty Ltd (Plaintiff)
Craig Doyle (First
MKR Services (NSW) Pty Ltd atf the Doyle Family Trust (Second
SPE Services Pty Ltd (Third Defendant)
Doyle SMSF Investing Pty
Ltd (Fourth Defendant)
Lisa Doyle (Fifth Defendant)
CLD Espresso Pty Ltd
(Sixth Defendant)
Representation:
R Perla (Plaintiff)
(Defendants)
Solicitors:
Rose Litigation Lawyers
(Plaintiff)
McCullough Robertson Lawyers (Defendants)
File Number(s):
2022/00200067
Publication Restriction:
INTRODUCTION
Plumbing Services Pty Ltd, has applied by notice of
motion filed 17 September 2025 for an order pursuant to r 31.37 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
) appointing Anne
Dale as a single expert for the parties to prepare a report in relation to the
issue of the quantum of the damages
sought by Austpipe against the defendants in
these proceedings. Austpipe also seeks ancillary orders should the appointment
single expert be made, including in relation to the letter of instruction
and the costs be shared. The defendants oppose the appointment
of a single
the reasons set out below, I have determined that Austpipe’s application
for the appointment of a single expert should be
dismissed with
RELEVANT FACTS
Claims in these proceedings
8 July 2022, Austpipe
commenced these proceedings against six defendants
by filing the statement of claim. The first defendant, Craig Doyle, is a former
director, shareholder and employee of Austpipe. The fifth defendant, Lisa Doyle,
is Mr Doyle’s wife. The second defendant,
MKR Services (NSW) Pty Ltd as
trustee for the Doyle Family Trust, is in liquidation and has taken no active
part in the proceedings.
The third defendant is SPE Services Pty Ltd, the fourth
defendant is Doyle SMSF Investing Pty Ltd and the sixth defendant is CLD
Espresso Pty Ltd. I will refer to the first, third, fourth, fifth and sixth
defendants collectively as the
summary, Austpipe alleges that since around 2011, Mr Doyle, by himself or by the
second, third, fourth and/or sixth defendants
(1) provided mechanical plumbing and/or piping and/or refrigeration and/or
air-conditioning services in competition with Austpipe;
(2) diverted customers or potential customers of Austpipe (and associated
contracts) to the value or in excess of $5,293,307.71 to
the second, third,
fourth and/or sixth defendants;
(3) diverted labour that has been paid for by Austpipe to conduct jobs through
the second, third, fourth and/or sixth defendants;
(4) used Austpipe’s stock, materials and vehicles to perform work through
the second, third, fourth and/or sixth defendants;
(5) used Austpipe’s confidential information to contact and engage
suppliers and customers of Austpipe, provide quotes to Austpipe’s
customers that were lower than what had been previously quoted by Austpipe
and/or to divert customers to Austpipe to himself and
the second, third, fourth
and sixth defendants.
essence, Austpipe claims that Mr Doyle acted in breach of his fiduciary duties,
the implied terms in his employment contract, the
statutory duties he owed under
Corporations Act
(Cth) and his equitable duty of
confidence. The other defendants are alleged to be knowing assistants, knowing
recipients or knowingly
concerned in Mr Doyle’s conduct.
monetary relief sought by Austpipe in the statement of claim is as
(1) an account of profits, or in the alternative, equitable compensation (prayer
(2) damages for breach of contract (prayer 2);
(3) compensation pursuant to
Corporations Act
(prayer 3);
(4) damages for monies had and received (prayer 9).
also claims interest and costs.
6 September 2022, the defendants filed their defence baldly denying the
allegations made in the statement of claim.
27 September 2022, the plaintiff filed its reply.
has taken a regrettably inordinate time for these proceedings to be prepared for
trial, with continual delays by both sides in
complying with timetables ordered
by the court. The proceedings have now been running for more than three years. A
trial does not
appear to be imminent.
have been numerous directions hearings involving orders for pleadings, evidence
and disclosure, often arising where there has
been non-compliance with those
orders. There have also been multiple interlocutory skirmishes, including a
motion by the defendants
seeking security for their costs, a motion by the
defendants seeking delivery up orders, a motion by Austpipe seeking to set aside
various subpoenas issued at the request of the defendants, a motion by the
defendants seeking to challenge Austpipe’s claim
for privilege over
documents produced on subpoena issued at the request of the defendants and a
motion by Austpipe seeking the separate
determination of all questions of
liability in advance of the quantification of damages.
31 October 2023, Austpipe filed and served its evidence in chief.
31 May 2024, the defendants filed and served their evidence in response.
Austpipe says that it was only on receipt of this evidence
that it became aware
that Mr Doyle’s defence was that during a conversation that took place on
a golf course in 2006 (some
five years before Austpipe was registered), consent
was provided by Mr Chisholm on behalf of Austpipe for Mr Doyle to carry on a
business in competition. Mr Chisholm denies that such a conversation ever took
place or that consent was provided to Mr Doyle.
8 July 2024, Austpipe filed its evidence in reply.
19 July 2024, Austpipe sought disclosure by categories of documents from the
defendants. The categories sought were broad in description
and the time periods
covered by them. Verified lists of documents were provided by the defendants in
November and December 2024.
It appears that approximately 42,000 documents were
disclosed by the defendants, although only about 7,000 were physically produced,
with the remaining 35,000 or so documents being those which the defendants had
previously provided to Austpipe.
asserts that the disclosure by the defendants is incomplete but has not
identified any deficiencies and has not brought any
application seeking further
disclosure by the defendants.
19 November 2024, Austpipe’s objection to the inspection of documents
produced on subpoena was dismissed with costs by Elkaim
Austpipe Plumbing
Services Pty Ltd v Doyle
[2024] NSWSC 1464.
of the parties have prepared any expert evidence on the quantification of
Rose Litigation
Lawyers, the solicitors for Austpipe, has given
evidence that to adequately instruct a forensic accountant to prepare the
evidence and obtain a report addressing Austpipe’s claim for
damages could take as long as four to six months and that the
cost of such a
report could be as high as $50,000. Ms Inglis has also given evidence that if
the defendants retain an expert to prepare
a report in response, it could take
as long as two to three months and would also cost a “not insignificant
Christopher
McCullough Robertson
Lawyers, the solicitors for the
defendants, gave evidence that he agreed with Ms Inglis’ estimate that
$50,000 reflects a likely
cost for a quantum expert. Mr Nielsen also gave
evidence that the defendants have already engaged a quantum expert (Michael
of Ernst & Young) in anticipation of Austpipe serving quantum
evidence and have incurred costs of $11,000 in relation to that
appears that Mr Potter was engaged for the purpose of forensically reviewing
Austpipe’s financials as part of the
defendants’ consideration of
bringing a cross-claim. The retainer of Mr Potter is not in evidence so I am
unable to determine
the scope of the work he was requested to undertake.
recently as 30 May 2025, Austpipe’s application for orders that all
questions of liability be determined separately and in
advance of the
quantification of damages was dismissed with costs by Brereton J:
Plumbing Services Pty Ltd v Doyle
[2025] NSWSC 573.
7 August 2025, Rose Litigation sent a letter by email to McCullough Robertson
proposing that a single expert be engaged and nominating
three possible
appointees. On 19 August 2025, Rose Litigation sent an email to McCullough
Robertson indicating that Ms Dale had given
a typical cost estimate of between
$40,000–$50,000 (plus GST) to prepare an expert report. In an email dated
4 September 2025,
McCullough Robertson replied that the defendants were not
minded to proceed with joint quantum expert evidence because they considered
quantum case to be deficient and the defendants have limited means to defend the
proceedings.
Nielsen also gave evidence that the defendants have incurred fees and
disbursements for the proceedings to date of $380,432.05
(including GST), the
defendants are currently in arrears in the payment of those costs by $113,695.73
in respect of invoices dating
agreed a payment plan of $2,000 each week to reduce this amount progressively.
Nielsen did not give any evidence of the full financial position of the
defendants, although the inference arises from their failure
to pay the invoices
rendered by McCullough Robertson in a timely way that the defendants are
financially constrained.
17 September 2025, Austpipe filed this application for the appointment of a
single expert to prepare a report in relation to the
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
31.37 of the UCPR is contained within subdivision 4 of
of the UCPR,
which sets out the relevant rules concerning single experts. Rule 31.37 of the
UCPR states:
31.37 Selection and engagement
(1) If an issue for an expert arises in any proceedings, the
court may, at any stage of the proceedings, order that an expert be
jointly by the parties affected.
(2) A parties’ single expert is to be selected by
agreement between the parties affected or, failing agreement, by, or in
accordance with the directions of, the court.
(3) A person may not be engaged as a parties’ single
expert unless he or she consents to the engagement.
(4) If any party affected knows that a person is under
consideration for engagement as a parties’ single expert—
(a) the party affected must not, prior to the engagement,
communicate with the person for the purpose of eliciting the person’s
opinion as to the issue or issues concerned, and
(b) if the party affected has previously communicated with the
person for that purpose, he or she must notify the other parties
affected as to
the substance of those communications.
Relevantly,
r 31.45 of the UCPR deals with the remuneration of a single expert as
31.45 Remuneration of parties’ single expert
(1) The remuneration of a parties’ single expert is to be
fixed by agreement between the parties affected and the expert
or, failing
agreement, by, or in accordance with the directions of, the court.
(2) Subject to subrule (3), the parties affected are jointly
and severally liable to a parties’ single expert for his or
remuneration.
(3) The court may direct when and by whom a parties’
single expert is to be paid.
(4) Subrules (2) and (3) do not affect the powers of the court
as to costs.
parties agreed on the legal principles to be applied by me to determine whether
an order for a single expert should be made under
r 31.37 of the UCPR.
relevant principles are contained in
Walker Group
Constructions
v Bluescope Steel and QBE Insurance
[2017] NSWSC 678
, in which McDougall J
said at [10]–[11] and [18]–[21]:
[10] In the ordinary way, I would be the first to agree with
WGC's position that where there are detailed allegations of disputes
detailed allegations are denied, the appointment of a single expert is unlikely
to be productive of any real saving in
time or costs. It may readily be conceded
that the usual case where a single expert ought be appointed is the one where
the matters
calling for expert opinion are either essentially uncontentious or
relatively uncomplicated, or (in some cases at least) relate only
assessment of damages. Of course, the general discretion given by r 31.37 is not
to be read as being, in some way, constrained
by those typical situations where
it is engaged. Nor can it be suggested that the general discretion conveyed by
the rule can only
be exercised where those considerations are engaged.
[11] The exercise of the discretion conferred by r 31.37 is to
be undertaken bearing in mind the overriding purpose set out in
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW). That is to say, the court is to consider whether
exercising the discretion in the manner sought in this case by Bluescope
likely to facilitate the just, quick and cheap identification and resolution of
the real issues in dispute.
[18] It must also be remembered that if a single expert is
appointed and is instructed and prepares a report, that is not the end
matter. The parties may seek clarification of the report (r 31.41), and they may
cross-examine the expert (r 31.43).
[19] Finally, in this context, the court has a discretion to
permit a party to rely on other expert evidence (r 31.44). As Brereton
indicated in
In the matter of Optimisation Australia Pty Limited
, “the court should be relatively ready to grant leave to
adduce evidence from a separate expert lest trial by single expert
becomes substituted for trial by judge.” His Honour added that the court
“should be disposed to grant such
leave” in circumstances where some
arguable basis is shown for challenging the single expert report.
[20] None of the steps contemplated by rr 31.41, 31.43 and
31.44 will be foreclosed if I make the orders sought. On the contrary,
procedural steps remain available in the event that, despite the significant
expert investigation that has been undertaken
to date, WGC were to have any real
concern with the content of any single expert report that might be produced. Of
course, exactly
the same would apply if Bluescope were to have any real
[21] Further, there is nothing in subdivision 4 of
UCPR to prevent a party from engaging its own expert to advise it upon and to
direct cross-examination of the report of a
single expert. Of course, that would
be done at the party’s own risk as to costs; but the same may be said as
to every step
taken in preparation for litigation.
mentioned in
Walker Group
, in the exercise of the discretion under r
31.37 of the UCPR, I must also have regard to the requirements of
Civil Procedure Act 2005
overriding purpose of the CPA and the UCPR in their application to civil
proceedings in this court is to facilitate the just,
quick and cheap resolution
of the real issues in the proceedings:
of the CPA. I must seek to give
effect to that overriding purpose when I exercise any power in the CPA or the
of the CPA.
seeking to give effect to the overriding purpose, I must have regard to the
objects of the just determination of the proceedings,
the efficient disposal of
the business of the court, the efficient use of available judicial and
administrative resources, and the
timely disposal of the proceedings at a cost
affordable by the respective parties:
SUBMISSIONS
submits that it does not know and cannot ascertain from the documents discovered
by the defendants the amount of revenue
generated by the defendant since 2011
and where that revenue has been applied, including whether it has been used to
increase the
defendants’ equity in certain properties. Austpipe says that
the engagement of a single expert will:
(1) minimise the parties’ ongoing costs in preparing quantum evidence;
(2) reduce the time required to prepare the matter for trial;
(3) reduce the overall duration of the trial;
(4) assist the parties in engaging in mediation or other negotiations;
(5) expedite the progress of the matter in accordance with the overarching
obligations of the parties and avoid further unnecessary
(6) ensure the court is best assisted by expert evidence.
defendants submit that a single expert should not be ordered because:
(1) the assessment of damages in this case cannot be described as uncomplicated
and Austpipe’s case on quantum and how it will
run its quantum case
remains unclear having regard to the following:
(a) Austpipe has not made a formal election as to whether it seeks an account of
profits or equitable compensation;
(b) Austpipe’s evidence refers to a quantification exercise being
conducted to identify the revenue that was generated and
whether it increased
equity in certain properties, which does not appear to be supportive of an
account of profits or equitable compensation;
(c) Austpipe’s submissions refer to Austpipe wanting an expert to address
its claim for damages; and
(d) there is no explanation in the proposed letter of instruction to Ms Dale as
to what is proposed by Austpipe in terms of instructing
her on the methodology
that should be applied in assessing damages arising from breach of contract;
(2) the defendants have already engaged an expert to advise in respect of
quantum and have incurred $11,000 in fees for the work
performed by him; and
(3) the defendants have limited financial means and are paying their outstanding
legal fees on a payment plan, so they should not
be forced to bear 50% of the
cost of Austpipe deciding how to prepare its quantum case as proposed by
Austpipe, and they cannot commit
to sharing the costs of the single expert under
r 31.45(2) of the UCPR.
ameliorate any financial constraints of the defendants, Austpipe has offered to
meet two-thirds of the costs of the single expert
if one is appointed, with the
defendants left to pay the remaining one-third of those costs. Austpipe also
says that if the single
expert is appointed and the defendants are subsequently
unable to pay the expert’s costs, it would be open to the defendants
re-list the matter to obtain an order that they are not required to pay any of
those costs and leave open the possibility of Austpipe
paying those costs in
full to gain access to the report of the single
CONSIDERATION
my opinion, this is not a case in which the appointment of a single expert is
appropriate. There are five reasons for this conclusion,
which I have addressed
in turn below:
(1) Austpipe does not seem to have a clear idea of what precisely the single
expert should be asked to do. Austpipe has prepared
the proposed letter of
instruction to the single expert. On the one hand, Austpipe proposes that the
single expert should “assess
the quantum of damages that has allegedly
been suffered by Austpipe”. On the other hand, Austpipe is also seeking to
single expert conduct an “assessment of the damages for account
of profits and breach of contract”. Austpipe even seems
to be suggesting
in its submissions that the single expert should conduct a form of tracing of
proceeds into properties. It is an
elemental matter that an account of profits
is not damages and involves a completely different exercise. This confusion
different monetary remedies which are sought by Austpipe, each of
which do not appear to be straightforward. I am concerned that
the inability of
Austpipe to clearly articulate what the single expert is being asked to do in
the quantification of its own claims
will make that exercise more extensive,
complicated and costly than it is portrayed.
(2) The defendants should not be required to bear the cost of a single expert in
circumstances where they are not even able to pay
their own solicitors, who have
been waiting for in excess of 12 months for their fees and disbursements to be
paid under a payment
plan. In the circumstances, the defendants should have the
option of whether they wish to spend any money at all on expert evidence
responding to the any expert evidence prepared on behalf of Austpipe quantifying
its various claims. In essence, Austpipe should
pay the costs of preparing its
own expert evidence.
(3) Due to the ongoing interlocutory disputes which have bedevilled the progress
of these proceedings, I am not satisfied that Austpipe
and the defendants will
be able to readily agree on precisely what it is that the single expert will be
asked to do. This is particularly
the case where Austpipe has not yet made any
election as between its monetary remedies. In effect, Austpipe appears to want
the costs of a single expert determining the quantum under each of its
remedies before it chooses which one it wishes to proceed
with. I consider that
this is not a just outcome for the defendants.
(4) Beyond the assertions by Austpipe, I am not satisfied that I can conclude
that the appointment of a single expert will result
in a reduction of the costs
of the parties in relation to the issue of quantum, a reduction in the overall
duration of the trial
and the expedition of these proceedings. Given that the
appointment of a single expert would still enable the defendants to adduce
expert evidence from another expert by leave of the court pursuant to r 31.44 of
the UCPR, it may well be the case that the costs
of dealing with the expert
evidence issue are actually increased and the overall duration of the trial
materially lengthened despite
the appointment of a single expert.
(5) Austpipe appears to want to use the single expert to resolve questions of
whether the disclosure given by the defendants is deficient,
submitting that the
single expert will be able to obtain access to documents which have not been
disclosed by the defendants. I do
not think that using a single expert in this
way is appropriate. I consider that this course of action is very likely to draw
single expert into disputes between the parties over the alleged inadequacy
of the disclosure, resulting in additional costs in using
the single expert.
Although it will probably result in further interlocutory disputes and generate
yet more costs, I consider that
if Austpipe has complaints about the disclosure
given by the defendants then it should fully ventilate them and have them
without drawing a single expert into those disputes.
on these matters, applying the words of
Walker Group
at [10], the task
proposed for the single expert by Austpipe appears to me to be far from
“essentially uncontentious or relatively
uncomplicated”. In my view
it does not meet the overriding purpose of facilitating the just, quick and
cheap resolution of
the real issues in the proceedings. The parties should
proceed to deal with the preparation of expert evidence in the usual
the reasons stated above, I propose to make the following orders:
(1) The notice of motion filed 17 September 2025 by the plaintiff
) is dismissed.
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendants’ costs in relation to the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter