URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2016/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bridges [2016] NSWMHRT 1; (16 February 2016)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO BRIDGES AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE TRIBUNAL
ON 10 NOVEMBER 2016
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2016] NSWMHRT 1
S 65 Revocation of a Community
Treatment Order
Mental Health Act 2007
Ms Julie Hughes
Lawyer Member
Dr Sheila Metcalf
Psychiatrist Member
Mr Peter Bazzana
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
16 February 2016
Community Mental Health Facility
APPLICATION:
Revocation of CTO
DETERMINATION
1. The Tribunal was not satisfied on the evidence that
Mental Health Act 2007
(‘the Act’) had been
satisfied. There has not been a substantial or material change in the
circumstances surrounding
the making of the order, nor is there relevant
information before the Tribunal that was not available when the order was made
17 November 2015. As such, the CTO stands.
2. According to the
information before the Tribunal, Mr Bridges was admitted to a mental health
facility in April 2015 and was formally
discharged on 12 June 2015. The
admission was preceded by a first documented episode of mental illness. It would
seem that the incident
that resulted in Mr Bridges going to hospital was that he
was charged with an assault upon his brother. On admission to the mental
facility Mr Bridges was found to be suffering an acute psychosis (
and that in
the months prior to the admission there was the presence of auditory
hallucinations, persecutory and bizarre delusions,
thought alienation, and
disorganized thought and behaviour
). Mr Bridges reported having used
cannabis, amphetamines and LSD
3. Mr Bridges was discharged from the mental health facility on a six-month
Community Treatment Order (“CTO”) on 12 June
2015. A further
six-month CTO was made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal
(“MHRT”’) on 17 November 2015. The
present application is for
a revocation of that CTO.
4. Documents available for the hearing
to the Mental Health Review Tribunal dated 22 January 2016 from Mr Bridges
enclosing the following documents in support of
an application for revocation of
the Community Treatment Order:
Report dated 19
January 2016 of an independent psychiatrist, retained by Mr Bridges.
Letters by the
independent psychiatrist, to Mr Bridges’ treating team.
manager’s report dated 29 January 2016.
dated 15 February 2016 by the Consultant Psychiatrist
5. The Tribunal also had access to its file which contained documents from
previous Tribunal hearings, including those from the last
hearing on 17 November
2015, when the current CTO was made.
EVIDENCE OF MR BRIDGES
6. Mr Bridges’ letter to the MHRT was a frank request for the Tribunal
to revoke the order, with the claim that his rights under
section 68 (e) of the
Act, that is, that “people with a mental illness or mental disorder
should be provided with appropriate
information about treatment, treatment
alternatives and the effects of treatment and be supported to pursue their own
had “not been upheld”. For the most part the
letter detailed frustrated efforts by Mr Bridges to obtain his medical records.
(The letter concluded with statements that the medication has had horrendous
side effects that have prevented Mr Bridges return to
his studies and his
career, as well as living the life he, his family and friends have wanted for
7. At the hearing Mr Bridges stated that he understood the importance of
taking medication and that he wouldn’t stop it “cold
He expressed a preference for mental health management under a private
psychiatrists, (whom he had seen since August
2015) and the independent
psychiatrist whom he had consulted in recent months and from whom he had
obtained a medical report declaiming
his present treatment regime. He stated his
belief that he had experienced a “one-off manic episode” and that
the medication
had taken him to a point where he was now numb. He had, he
opined, suffered a mental illness, but he was now stabilised by the medication.
He expressed his desire to take responsibility for his own mental health and
future, and a general preference for the private mental
health system over the
public system.
EVIDENCE OF MR BRIDGES’ FATHER
8. Mr Bridges father stated that his views about the benefit of a CTO had
changed since the November 2015 hearing. He corroborated
accounts about side effects. Further, he stated that the treatment was
medication-based only, without intense psychological
counselling.
EVIDENCE OF THE INDEPENDENT PSYCHIATRIST RETAINED BY MR BRIDGES
9. The independent psychiatrist had not treated Mr Bridges but provided a
medical report that the prescribed medication was inappropriate
and dangerous
and that is should be ceased. The independent psychiatrist had written to Mr
Bridges’ doctor with a detailed
account of numerous side effects reported
by Mr Bridges.
EVIDENCE OF THE COMMUNITY CASE MANAGER
10. The report of the Case Manager, dated 29 January 2016, gave the rationale
for the application of the original CTO and for continuation
“Poor/superficial
insight into his mental health diagnosis, which is viewed by his preoccupation
with his medication, obsessions
with acquiring his clinical notes due to belief
that people have falsified information within and his ongoing need to challenge
diagnosis via alternative psychiatrist (three to date) opinions. As well as
his desire to acquire a trial off medications further
identifying his poor
insight to his diagnosis.
risk of disengagement with the treating team if not treated on a CTO resulting
in noncompliance of medication causing a strong
risk of relapse which in turn
could cause psychological harm to others due to his delusions of erotomania and
physical harm to others
as he assaulted his brother due to
delusions...
Having Mr Bridges under a CTO is the least restrictive form of safe and
effective care in order to ensure ongoing mental stability
and minimize physical
and psychological harm to others. Mr Bridges has no insight into the
incidents that led to his admission and
continues to exhibit psychotic
projection in the surrounding incidents...”
11. Further, the report detailed the seriousness of the symptoms that led to
the 2015 mental health admission, and the resultant police
charges that flowed
from acting upon the delusions present at the time.
12. In oral evidence, the case manager reported that nothing material had
changed in terms of the circumstances that were present
at the time of making
the CTO in November 2015. She reported a lack of willingness to engage in any
conversations about modifications
to medications, unless they involved cessation
of medication.
EVIDENCE OF THE CONSULTANT PSYCHIATRIST
13. The report of the Consultant Psychiatrist outlined the treating
team’s belief that Mr Bridges has poor insight into his
mental illness and
continuing condition, and the belief that without an order he would be
non-compliant with the medication regime.
14. Although Mr Bridges reported to the Consultant Psychiatrist that there
had been minimal illicit drug use leading up to his hospital
admission, this is
at odds with what Mr Bridges told the treating team at the time. the Consultant
Psychiatrist explained that medication
reduction was offered to Mr Bridges in
August 2015 because of the side effects he reported. Although the reduction was
made, it became
necessary to increase the dose in November 2015 because he was
exhibiting signs of relapse after the dose was reduced. A switch to
a different
medication had been offered in December 2015, but this was declined. The report
“...During follow up Mr Bridges has sought to delay his depot
injections and has showed little insight into his worsening of
symptoms when the
dose was reduced. He has also been seeking alternate opinions to support his
request to have his diagnosis reviewed
and medication stopped. The treating team
believes there is considerable risk of relapse if the CTO is discontinued due to
Mr Bridges’
poor insight. He has a continuing condition with high risk to
others when unwell.”
15. At the hearing, the Consultant Psychiatrist stated his concern about Mr
Bridges’ continuing condition and considered that
the same risks remained
as when the CTO was made. It was his view that Mr Bridges had an enduring mental
illness rather than a drug
induced psychosis or transient psychosis. It was also
his view that a depot medication was necessary given Mr Bridges’ professed
belief that he did not want to take the medication and given his lack of insight
into his condition. The Consultant Psychiatrist
stated that, although it was not
uncommon for psychiatrists to have different opinions, the independent
psychiatrist was forming
an opinion based on retrospective information given by
Mr Bridges. Medication changes had been offered to Mr Bridges, but he would
agree to them because he wanted to be off medication.
16. When asked by the legal representative whether the written evidence of
the independent psychiatrist or hearing from Mr Bridges
and his father indicated
a change of circumstances, the Consultant Psychiatrist replied that the thing
that had changed was the family’s
views on treatment.
FOR DECISION
17. The matter of a proposed revocation of a CTO is dealt with under
section65 of the Act.
18. Section 65(3) provides:
An application may be made only if:
has been a substantial or material change in the circumstances surrounding the
making of the order, or
information that was not available when the order was made has become
19. The matter before the Tribunal is not an appeal against the making of the
CTO. Such an appeal would be heard by a different mechanism
(section 67) and in
a different forum, namely, the Supreme Court of New South Wales. This is an
application for
20. The Tribunal may revoke an order on an application that is validly made
under section 65 of the Act or on its own motion (section
65 (1)). The question
arises as to standing to make the application, and the applicant, Mr Bridges,
has such standing in accordance
with section 65 (2) (a) as the “affected
21. When considering an application made by a person with standing to do so,
the focus of the enquiry is to determine the appropriateness
or otherwise of
revoking the CTO by considering whether there has been either:
substantial or material change in the circumstances surrounding the making
of the order; or where there is relevant information before
the Tribunal that
was not available when the order was made. (see section 65 (3) extracted
22. Therefore, the function of the Tribunal in determining such an
application is, to apply the law as laid out in section 65
It is not to
enquire as to the probity of the original order on a matter of law. It is to
consider whether there has been significant
or material change in circumstances,
or whether new, relevant information has come to light, such as would justify
revoking the order.
23. The written evidence of the independent psychiatrist was extensive and,
in addition to the commentary on Mr Bridges’ diagnosis
unsuitability of the prescribed medication, there was a great deal of literature
and comparisons between standards
applied between the United States of America and Australia.
24. The Tribunal considered and weighed all of the evidence and determined
that there was not such a change in circumstances or revelation
information, as contemplated by section 65
The Tribunal accepted
the evidence proffered by the case manager and the treating psychiatrist that
there has been no amelioration
of the risk (of rapid deterioration in mental
state without a CTO) that existed at the time the order was made on 17 November
25. Mr Bridges is clearly an intelligent man who does not believe he has an
enduring mental illness. He is also a young man, quite
rightly, desperate to
continue in his recovery journey to achieve a fulfilling and rewarding life and
career. He disputes any diagnosis
that accords with the existence of an ongoing
problem, preferring the view that he experienced a “one-off”
mania which has now resolved. He bitterly opposes ongoing treatment,
particularly within the public health system, and is very much
against the
coercive powers behind a CTO.
26. On the evidence, it is possible that modifications to the treatment
regime might cause a reduction or cessation of the many medication
side effects
reported by Mr Bridges. It would seem, however, that Mr Bridges is unwilling to
engage in the process of experimenting
with different medications under the
guidance of his treating psychiatrist. A reduction in the dose of the present
medication resulted,
in the view of the treating team, augmentation of worrying
symptoms of mental illness, such that the dose was returned to its original
27. These matters are significant, and it is clear that they need to be
resolved within the treatment regime. However, the specific
diagnosis or the
details of medication regime are not matters for the Tribunal. The job of the
Tribunal in making a CTO is, in essence,
to determine whether the CTO would be
beneficial to the person but benefit of itself is insufficient. The CTO must
represent the
least restrictive alternative that is consistent with safe and
effective care. The treatment plan proffered by the treating team,
then, must be
appropriate and capable of implementation. Further, it essentially considers
whether, subsequent to a diagnosis of
mental illness, the affected person has a
history of refusing to accept appropriate treatment and such refusal has caused
deterioration
in mental state that either required a hospital admission or could
have required such admission (section 53(3)
28. The role of the Tribunal in an application for revocation of a CTO, as
already outlined, is to assess whether there has been material
or significant
change in the circumstances surrounding the making of the order, or whether
there is now relevant information before
the Tribunal that was not available at
the time of the original hearing. The Tribunal must confine itself to these
29. Consideration of the evidence presented at the hearing does not convince
the Tribunal that these conditions of revocation have
been proved on the balance
of probabilities. The Tribunal prefers the evidence of the treating team over
that of the independent
psychiatrist. The Tribunal accepts that Mr Bridges is
very unhappy with his treatment, and the Tribunal sympathises with his position
and that of his family. Whether or not the pharmacological regime is optimal is
clearly a matter for earnest review and needs to
come about through the
collaborative efforts of the treating team, Mr Bridges, and his very supportive
family. The focus of a recovery-oriented
approach to mental health was been
embedded in the
Mental Health Act
(NSW) amendments of 2015. The
principles for care and treatment in the
(section 68) have been
sharpened to make plain the heightened clinician focus on the individual’s
recovery by taking into account
various considerations. In particular the
clinician is to support the person to pursue their own recovery, and to make
every effort
to obtain the person’s informed consent when developing
treatment and recovery plans, monitoring a person’s capacity
and supporting those who cannot.
30. Clearly, there is a tension between a treating team that persists in its
clinical view that ongoing treatment is necessary, and
a person who believes
that there is no need for ongoing treatment. It may be that it is possible for
the treating team to afford
Mr Bridges, at some time in the future, the dignity
of risk associated with the less restrictive form of treatment of accessing
sector health services. This will, undoubtedly, be part of the ongoing
therapeutic dialogue between Mr Bridges and the treating team.
Julie Hughes,
25 May 2016
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (363 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (49.9 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter