URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/837.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Patrick v Secretary, Department of Education [2025] NSWPICMP 837; (29 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Patrick v Secretary, Department of Education [2025] NSWPICMP
Nicola Patrick
RESPONDENT:
Secretary, Department of Education
APPEAL PANEL
John Wynyard
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
John Lam-Po-Tang
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Graham Blom
DATE OF DECISION:
29 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
appeal from 13% assessment for psychological injury; whether Medical Assessor
erred in categories of self-care and personal hygiene, travel and social
function; whether MA had failed to give adequate reasons
as he had not discussed
claimant’s statement vis-à-vis his assessments;
function of MA discussed;
Wingfoot v Kocak
considered and applied; MA
function not judicial;
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
discussed and
applied; observations about potentially misleading submissions; failure to lodge
fresh evidence denying statements noted;
MAC confirmed (save correction of
mathematical error).
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
18 July 2025 the appellant, Nicola Patrick, lodged an Application to Appeal
Against the Decision of a Medical Assessor. The medical
dispute was assessed by
Dr Himanshu Singh, a Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical Assessment
Certificate (MAC) on 20 June 2025.
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
1 March 2021 (the
Guidelines) and the
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
(AMA 5). “WPI” is
reference to whole person impairment. “Baseline WPI” is a reference
to the total WPI assessed
before deduction for the effect of pre-existing
injury, condition or abnormality pursuant to s 323 of the 1998 Act.
RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND
28 April 2025, this matter was referred to the Medical Assessor for a WPI
assessment of a psychological/psychiatric disorder which
occurred on a deemed
date of 22 August 2018.
Patrick was employed as a maths teacher for the respondent. She commenced with
the respondent’s Department in 1995.
suffered from a pre-existing bipolar disorder which was triggered by
interpersonal conflict when she was bullied and harassed
by a colleague.
had time off work in 2013 when she was bullied by a colleague. She was off work
between 2013 and 2017 and was transferred to Chifley
College where she started
work in term 2 in 2017. She worked until term 3 of 2018 and in February 2019 she
stopped working due to
her difficulties at work.
Patrick has been on medication since the age of 30. (She was born in 1969).
she was assessed by the Medical Assessor she was recovering from lung surgery.
She was four weeks post surgery, having been diagnosed
with lung cancer and
having one-fourth of her left lung and lymph nodes removed. She was told that
the lung cancer had not spread.
Patrick was assessed at 13% WPI.
PRELIMINARY REVIEW
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that it was not
necessary for the worker to undergo a further
medical examination because no
error was established by the appeal.
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
Medical Assessment Certificate
parts of the medical certificate given by the Medical Assessor that are relevant
to the appeal are set out, where relevant, in
the body of this decision.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions which have been considered below by the Appeal
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes
of fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
appellant submitted that the Medical Assessor had fallen into error in his
assessment of the psychiatric impairment rating scale
(PIRS) categories of
self-care and personal hygiene, travel, and social
functioning.
Medical Assessor said:
“...[Ms Patrick] currently lives with
her daughter, who is 16, and her two-year old sister who is her legal
to Ms Patrick’s social activities, the Medical Assessor
Patrick is currently not working. She is recovering from the surgery. She feels
pretty flat. She is not motivated and finding
it hard to carry out physical
tasks. However, she stated that before the surgery, she would often unpack the
dishwasher and wash
the clothes. The cleaning has been an effort. She will help
with the floor and moving the lawns. She may skip showers. She may shower
second day and wash her hair once a week. She showers when she goes out. She may
sometimes cook though she lacks motivation.
She stated that she is independent
with her self-care and personal hygiene.
Her sister mainly helps her with her daughter. Taking her around these days
especially as she cannot drive. She also helps her with
meals and organising
cleaning and finances.
Ms Patrick has one friend with whom she would catch up for coffee or lunch.
Most of the time is spent in driving her daughter to her
league football
matches. She does not go out for functions or social gatherings. She is not
motivated. She is not into her hobbies.
She may watch TV at home and sleep. She
used to be into music, but she is not listening to music and not playing the
his summary at [7] of the MAC, the Medical Assessor diagnosed that Ms Patrick
had sustained an aggravation of the underlying bipolar
affective disorder and
presented with symptoms of major depressive disorder on the background of
bipolar affective disorder
Medical Assessor assessed 15% WPI but deducted one tenth from that for her
pre-existing condition, leaving her with an entitlement of 13% combined
table value.
the Table 11.8 PIRS rating form, the Medical Assessor gave the following reasons
for a class 2 rating in the category of self-care
and personal
she stated that before the surgery, she would often unpack the dishwasher and
wash the clothes. The cleaning has been
an effort. She will help with the floor
and moving the lawns. She may skip showers. She may shower every second day and
hair once a week. She showers when she goes out. She may sometimes cook
though she lacks motivation. She stated that she is independent
self-care and personal hygiene. Her sister mainly helps her with her daughter.
Taking her around these days especially as
she cannot drive. She also helps her
with meals and organising cleaning and finances.
I have noted that Ms Patrick is independent in her personal care. She is able
to do the basic household chores and help her daughter
in visiting her games. In
my opinion, she would be able to look after herself adequately and able to live
independently.
the category of travel, the Medical Assessor gave the following reasons for
finding a class 1
Patrick did not report any issues in driving. She can drive by herself. She
drove to Melbourne last year to take her daughter
to play football. She would
drive her daughter often to Central Coast, Norah and to other places on her own.
She denied any anxiety
in driving and she can drive without a support person.
She stated that she can travel to new environment without
supervision.”
social functioning, in the certificate the Medical Assessor gave the following
reasons for finding a class 1
Patrick has a good relationship with her daughter and her sister and other
family members. She is married to her daughter's
father who lives in Kenya. She
cannot afford to travel, neither he. He is a Kenyan. She would catch up with him
every now and then.
Her father died in 1993, and she is regularly in contact
with her mother and helps her out. Her mother helps her out at home.”
SUBMISSIONS
Self-care and personal hygiene
Patrick referred to the reasons given in the Table 11.8 form for the class 2
rating herein.
Patrick kindly set out the relevant descriptors and submitted that the finding
Ms Patrick was independent with her self-care and personal hygiene was
“totally inconsistent” with the history taken by
the Medical
Patrick assumed that the reasons had originated in the passage in the body of
the report that noted that she was recovering from
lung surgery. It was
submitted that the finding that Ms Patrick was independent of self-care and
personal hygiene stood in isolation
amongst the other observations that
contradicted that conclusion.
was submitted that the Medical Assessor had found:
skipped showers;
that her sister
that Ms Patrick
may sometimes cook, although she lacked the motivation, and that the cleaning
had been an effort.
it was alleged, was contradicted by the finding that Ms Patrick was independent
in this area of behaviour.
were then referred to the applicant's statement of 22 January 2025 where Ms
Patrick had stated that her sister assisted with domestic
tasks, her sister and
her daughter prompted her to do things around the house and that she struggled
with personal hygiene and the
upkeep of her physical appearance.
Patrick submitted that the Medical Assessor did not give any explanation about
“these patent contradictions”. The preponderance
of evidence, Ms
Patrick submitted, was that she needed assistance with maintaining the household
and attending to her personal care
and that she could not live
independently.
Patrick referred to the documentation listed by the Medical Assessor at the
beginning of his report in which he considered all
the medical information
before him. Ms Patrick submitted that “conspicuously,” the Medical
Assessor did not note her
said statement.
alleged that the Medical Assessor “neglects” to engage with the
statement of evidence at all. This, it was argued,
was significant, as the
history recorded during the consultation was “flatly contradicted”
by her statement, as we understood
the submission.
it was submitted that it was “inherently unlikely” that Ms Patrick
would have said words to the effect that she
was independent with her self-care
and personal hygiene. Even if she had expressed herself that way, it was
submitted, that could
not form a basis on which to evaluate her in isolation
from the totality of the history obtained and the evidence before the Medical
Assessor. He had accordingly misapplied the guidelines and disclosed an
illogical and unsupportable reasoning process in “drawing
of a factual
conclusion from a form of words against a preponderance of evidence against that
factual conclusion”.
Patrick further submitted that the Medical Assessor had failed to provide
adequate reasons and that his conclusion was contradicted
both by the history
obtained and the statement evidence before him.
Patrick submitted that the Medical Assessor had contradicted himself in this
category as well, as the Medical Assessor himself
noted that Ms Patrick’s
ability to travel was only when she was taking her daughter somewhere.
were referred to in Ms Patrick's statement which was noted by the Medical
Assessor, in which she described the trip as a “negative
experience”, a “chore” and
“anxiety-provoking”.
Patrick submitted that by failing to engage with her statement and failing to
disclose a supportable reasoning process for his
finding (which contradicted her
statement, and indeed the history taken by him), the Medical Assessor had failed
to apply the relevant
criteria and in the alternative made a demonstrable error.
Social functioning
was submitted that the Medical Assessor had erred in his class 1 rating
assessment as the history he took during the consultation
was again contradicted
by what was contained in her statement. It was submitted that the Medical
Assessor had made a factual error
when he reported that her daughter's father
lived in Kenya with whom she would catch up every now and then.
Patrick's statement [64] expressly disavowed any motivation to keep in contact
with her husband and the effect of the statement
by the Medical Assessor that
she kept in contact with him “every now and then” failed to give any
further explanation
or engage with her statement.
it was submitted that the history the Medical Assessor took in the consultation
as to Ms Patrick’s having a good relationship
with her daughter was
contradicted by the description given by Ms Patrick in her statement.
Patrick submitted further that her statement spoke of a loss of friendship due
to her psychological injury, but that the Medical
Assessor had fallen into error
by failing to comment on that assertion - or indeed explaining why he did not
find the loss of friendships.
was submitted further that there was a contradiction in the Medical Assessor's
own findings that Ms Patrick had one friend with
whom she would catch up but
that Ms Patrick did not go out for social gatherings or functions.
Patrick concluded by submitting that the Medical Assessor had fallen into error
by failing to engage with her statement evidence
and failing to explain why the
history he took was contradicted by the evidence.
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
respondent referred to relevant authorities and guidelines which we will
consider below. It also conceded that the 13% WPI certified
by the Medical
Assessor was as a result of miscalculation, and should have been given as
Ground one: self-care and personal hygiene
respondent referred to the note by the Medical Assessor that Ms Patrick was
currently recovering from lung surgery, which she
had undergone four weeks
previously.
respondent referred to the factual finding by the Medical Assessor that prior to
the surgery, she performed a number of tasks
relevant to this category.
was submitted that, seen in the light of the Medical Assessor's general history,
there was no contradiction as alleged by the appellant.
respondent submitted further that the contents of the statement aligned with the
history taken by the Medical Assessor, in that
Ms Patrick's sister provided some
assistance with domestic tasks and indeed assisting with the care of Ms
Patrick's daughter when
she had episodes of
provides me with some assistance with domestic tasks, including cooking,
cleaning, washing and maintenance, and assists
me with the care of my daughter
when I have episodes of mania. This will include taking my daughter to and from
school and football
training, as she is in a Football NSW academy.”
respondent also referred to Ms Patrick's
sister and daughter prompt and motivate me to do small things around the house.
I struggle with personal hygiene. I try
to shower every day, but if I know I'm
not leaving the house, I won't shower for days.”
respondent relied on Ms Patrick's statement to corroborate that the prompting
she received related to “small things”
and that she would not shower
every day unless she was going out.
respondent submitted further that it was relevant that Ms Patrick had been
living with her sister and daughter since she returned
from overseas in 2007, as
she said in her statement. It followed that the living arrangement predated the
injury, the respondent
argued. There was a clearly documented history of
pre-existing bipolar affective disorder since Ms Patrick was in her
mid-thirties.
were referred to a report by psychologist Diane Randall who took a history on
30 June 2015,
that Ms Patrick
was dealing with a number of psycho- social stressors over a period of years
which included:
being a single
parent to a six-year old;
husband lived in Kenya;
for whom she had
to apply for a spouse visa, and
along with other
health and financial problems.
view of this evidence, the respondent submitted that the appellant did not point
to any evidence which contrasted her situation
before and after the work injury.
There was no support for her allegation that her sister was now required to
provide increased and
or advanced assistance as a result of the injury or its
effects the respondent said.
it was submitted there was no evidence to demonstrate that Ms Patrick was now
unable to live independently without regular
support because of the work injury.
respondent submitted that the Medical Assessor had acknowledged that Ms
Patrick's sister was assisting in some aspects of her
daily living, but there is
no history taken of
Ms Patrick having to rely on her sister following the
work injury that would warrant a class 3 assessment.
it was argued, the Medical Assessor used his clinical skills and judgement to
come to the conclusion that he did. [i.e.
and pre-eminence of
the Medical Assessor. He was aware of all the facts and the class 2 rating
acknowledged that Ms Patrick required
some assistance.]
involvement of Ms Patrick's sister and her assistance in some of the activities
did not, it was submitted, extinguish the fact
that Ms Patrick was able to
partake in her self-care and personal hygiene independently. Ms Patrick had
conflated the assistance
provided by her sister in an attempt to demonstrate
that Ms Patrick was therefore unable to live independently.
respondent also noted that the statement from Ms Patrick did not address her
cancer diagnosis, nor did it speak of the recent
surgical treatment and the
effect of both on her ability to complete self-care and personal hygiene tasks.
was an obvious inference, it was submitted, that if Ms Patrick required
additional assistance in this category, it was unrelated
to the work injury.
the other hand, the respondent submitted that the Medical Assessor correctly
took a history of Ms Patrick's functioning in this
category both prior and
post-surgery.
respondent noted the emphasis Ms Patrick laid on the contents of her statement,
but submitted that the Medical Assessor had comprehensively
canvassed the
history of functioning provided by the appellant, both on examination and in the
documentary evidence, and used his
clinical skills and judgment to form a valid
Ground 2: travel
respondent referred to the findings by the Medical Assessor and submitted that
this was evidently recorded by the Medical Assessor,
based on the appellant's
own self report. It was submitted that the Medical Assessor's reference to Ms
Patrick being unable to drive
was an acknowledgement that following the cancer
surgery, that she was indeed unable to drive.
did not, however, indicate that Ms Patrick’s impairment was caused by the
subject injury, the respondent said, and the Medical
Assessor had taken an
appropriate history of
Ms Patrick's post injury ability to travel.
submitted in any event Ms Patrick's present ability to drive her daughter to
various places on her own was indicative of a class
respondent repeated that Ms Patrick had placed excessive weight on the
subjective level of impairment described in her statement.
It said that while
the evidence was important, it was not conclusive as to the actual level, which
required the Medical Assessor
to consider many other evidentiary matters.
Ground three: social functioning
respondent submitted that the history taken indicated that the appropriate class
rating would be 1. We were referred to the Medical
Assessor’s finding that
Ms Patrick had a good relationship with her daughter and sister and other family
members, and that
her daughter's father lived in Kenya.
appellant's submissions regarding Ms Patrick's lack of involvement in social
functions or gatherings was irrelevant to the assessment
of social functioning,
the respondent said, and indeed the Medical Assessor had accounted for this
under the appropriate social and
recreational activities category. The Medical
Assessor acknowledged that Ms Patrick did not go out for functions and social
gatherings,
as she was not motivated, and accordingly awarded a class 3 rating.
respondent submitted that overall Ms Patrick's submissions relied on her
statement evidence to establish error, but in fact the
Medical Assessor had used
his clinical skills and judgement to form an opinion based on the history
obtained on the day of examination,
including a consideration of the available
CONSIDERATION
The psychiatric impairment rating scale (PIRS)
PIRS is established as the rating system for assessing psychiatric/psychological
impairment, by virtue of Chapter 11 of the Guides.
Chapter 11 sets out six
categories of behaviour to be considered, each being divided into five classes,
ranging in seriousness from
1 to 5. Class 1 relates to a situation where there
is no psychological deficit, or a minor deficit attributable to the normal
in the general population. Class 5 pertains to a person who is totally
“Impairment in each area is rated using class
descriptors. Classes range from 1 to 5, in accordance with severity. The
form must be used when scoring the PIRS. The examples of activities are
examples only. The assessing psychiatrist should take account
person’s cultural background. Consider activities that are usual for the
person’s age, sex and cultural norms.”
Medical Assessor is required to classify each category, and to apply the
resulting scores as set out in Chapter
assessment of psychiatric disorder has been considered in a number of cases. In
Ferguson v State of New South
Campbell J was
concerned the case where the Medical Appeal Panel had revoked the MAC on the
basis that the finding by the AMS had
been glaringly improbable. His Honour
found that the Panel had fallen into jurisdictional error. He said at
“By reference to
NSW Police Force v Daniel Wark
[2012] NSWWCCMA 36, the Appeal Panel directed itself that in questions of
classification under the PIRS:
‘... the pre-eminence of the clinical observations cannot be
underrated. The judgment as to the significance or otherwise of
the matters
raised in the consultation is very much a matter for assessment by the clinician
with the responsibility of conducting
his/her enquiries with the applicant face
Appeal Panel accepted that intervention was only justified: if the
categorisation was glaringly improbable; if it could be demonstrated
AMS was unaware of significant factual matters; if a clear misunderstanding
could be demonstrated; or if an unsupportable
reasoning process could be made
out. I understood that all of these matters were regarded by the Appeal
Panel as interpretations
of the statutory grounds of applying incorrect criteria
or demonstrable error. One takes from this that the Appeal Panel understood
more than a mere difference of opinion on a subject about which reasonable minds
may differ is required to establish error in
the statutory sense.
Appeal Panel also, with respect, correctly recorded that in accordance with
Chapter 11.12 of the Guides ‘the assessment
is to be made upon the
behavioural consequences of psychiatric disorder, and that each category within
the PIRS evaluates a particular
area of functional impairment’: Appeal
Panel reasons at [37]. The descriptors, or examples, describing each class of
in the various categories are ‘examples only’: see
Jenkins v Ambulance Service of New South
The Appeal Panel said
‘they provide a guide which can be consulted as a general indicator of the
level of behaviour that might
generally be expected’: Appeal Panel reasons
Glenn William Parker v Select Civil Pty
another case regarding
assessment of psychiatric disorder, Harrison AsJ cited [23] of
with approval at [65]. Her Honour said at [66]:
relation to Classes of PIRS there has to be more than a difference of opinion on
a subject about which reasonable minds
may differ to establish error in the
statutory sense. (
[24]).....”
Garling J said at [73]:
“It was a matter for the
clinical judgment of the AMS to determine whether the impairment with respect to
employability was
at the moderate level, as he did, or at some other level. But,
in seeking judicial review, a mere disagreement about the level of
impairment is
not sufficient to demonstrate error of a kind susceptible to judicial
is accordingly a useful approach for the Panel to enquire whether the assessment
by the AMS in this category involved one of the
following matters (to use the
reference by Campbell J in
(a) if the categorisation was glaringly improbable;
(b) if it could be demonstrated that the AMS was unaware of significant factual
(c) if a clear misunderstanding could be demonstrated, or
(d) if an unsupportable reasoning process could be made out.
Lancaster v Foxtel
Basten AJ noted
at [88-89] that these four considerations, although not inaccurate, were not a
statement of legal principles, and
that care should be taken in applying the
explanation in place of ss 327(3) and 328(2).
thrust of Ms Patrick’s submissions sought to establish a demonstrable
error on the basis that statements in the evidence
before the Medical Assessor
contradicted the reasons he gave for his assessment.
the argument went, the Medical Assessor had made findings in each of the
appealed categories that were contrary to and inconsistent
with the evidence
that had been before him. As will be seen shortly, it is not the function of a
Medical Assessor to act in a judicial
or quasi judicial manner. However, a
preliminary issue has arisen in this case that is not without significance, that
being the fact
that Ms Patrick had undergone lung surgery some four weeks prior
to the assessment. The assessment took place on 19 May 2025, so
that we may
assume the surgery occurred sometime in mid-April 2025. The referral was dated
28 April 2025 after the ARD was registered on 3 April 2025. Perusal of both
parties’ indices demonstrates that the evidence
being relied on was of
some vintage, the most recent document being Ms Patrick’s statement of 22
January 2025.
was no evidence put before the Medical Assessor that identified that Ms Patrick
had developed lung cancer, let alone that she
had undergone surgery in that
We noted with some interest that Ms Patrick’s case rather
turned a blind eye to this development, as no evidence was lodged
with this development. The Medical Assessor was thus left with the task of
assessing impairment caused by Ms Patrick’s
psychological injury of
August 2018 in the face of what appeared to be major lung surgery sometime in
mid-April 2025.
commend the Medical Assessor for continuing with the assessment when he was
advised of this development. We assume that it was
Ms Patrick herself that
advised him. Being fully trained when appointed to his position, the Medical
Assessor would have been aware
that he had the option under s 319 of the 1998
Act to find that maximum medical improvement had not been achieved, in view of
he was told by Ms Patrick. Rather than do so, he proceeded with the
assessment dealing with the evidence, as he was required to,
as Ms Patrick
presented on the date of examination, 19 May
As he had no evidence
advice about the potential
effect of her recent history had been obtained, he
proceeded to act in accordance with his function.
function of a Medical Assessor was discussed in the often-cited High Court case
reference to Medical Panel also applies to Medical
The plurality stated
“The function of a Medical Panel is to form and to
give its own opinion on the medical question referred for its opinion. In
performing that function, the Medical Panel is doubtless obliged to observe
procedural fairness, so as to give an opportunity for
parties to the underlying
question or matter who will be affected by the opinion to supply the Medical
Panel with material which
may be relevant to the formation of the opinion and to
make submissions to the Medical Panel on the basis of that material. The
supplied may include the opinions of other medical practitioners, and
submissions to the Medical Panel may seek to persuade the Medical
Panel to adopt
reasoning or conclusions expressed in those opinions. The Medical Panel may
choose in a particular case to place weight
on a medical opinion supplied to it
in forming and giving its own opinion. It goes too far, however, to conceive of
the function
of the Panel as being either to decide a dispute or to make up its
mind by reference to competing contentions or competing medical
The function of a Medical Panel is neither arbitral nor
adjudicative: it is neither to choose between competing arguments, nor to
on the correctness of other opinions on that medical question. The function is
in every case to form and to give its own opinion
on the medical question
referred to it by applying its own medical experience and its own medical
expertise.”
Medical Assessor is, however, required to give adequate reasons for his
assessment. At [48] of
, the plurality
“.....What is to be set out in the statement of
reasons is the actual path of reasoning by which the Medical Panel arrived at
the opinion the Medical Panel actually formed for itself.”
[55] the Court said:
“...The statement of reasons must explain
the actual path of reasoning by which the Medical Panel in fact arrived at the
the Medical Panel in fact formed on the medical question referred to it.
The statement of reasons must explain that actual path of
reasoning in
sufficient detail to enable a court to see whether the opinion does or does not
involve any error of law....”
[56] the Court considered the decision of the Court of Appeal and noted
“... the Court of Appeal analogised the function of
a Medical Panel forming its opinion on a medical question to the function
judge deciding the same medical question. Accordingly, it then equated the
standard of reasons required of a Medical Panel with
the standard of reasons
that would be required of a judge giving reasons for a final judgment after a
trial of an action in a court....:..A
Medical Panel explaining in a statement of
reasons the path of reasoning by which it arrived at the opinion it formed is
obligation to explain why it did not reach an opinion it did not form,
even if that different opinion is shown by material before
it to have been
formed by someone else.”
, Basten JA (Handley and McColl JJA agreeing) said at
“122 On the other hand, to fulfil a minimum legal
standard, the reasons need not be extensive or provide detailed explanation
the criteria applied by medical specialists in reaching a professional judgment:
(authority omitted). At least, that will be
so where the medical science is not
controversial: if it is, a more expansive explanation may be
now turn to consider the issues seriatim.
Self-care and personal
relevant descriptors are set out in Table 11.1 of the
“Class 2 Mild impairment: able to live independently;
looks after self adequately, although may look unkempt occasionally; sometimes
misses a meal or relies on take-away food.
Class 3 Moderate impairment: Can’t live independently without regular
support. Needs prompting to shower daily and wear clean
clothes. Does not
prepare own meals, frequently misses meals. Family member or community nurse
visits (or should visit) 2–3
times per week to ensure minimum level of
hygiene and nutrition.”
Medical Assessor noted that Ms Patrick was currently recovering from lung
surgery, and gave a class 2 rating, saying in the Table
11.8 PIRS Rating
“However, she stated that before the surgery, she would
often unpack the dishwasher and wash the clothes. The cleaning has been
effort. She will help with the floor and moving the lawns. She may skip showers.
She may shower every second day and wash her
hair once a week. She showers when
she goes out. She may sometimes cook though she lacks motivation. She stated
that she is independent
with her self-care and personal hygiene. Her sister
mainly helps her with her daughter. Taking her around these days especially as
she cannot drive. She also helps her with meals and organising cleaning and
finances. I have noted that Ms Patrick is independent
in her personal care. She
is able to do the basic household chores and help her daughter in visiting her
games. In my opinion, she
would be able to look after herself adequately and
able to live independently.”
Patrick’s first submission was that these findings should have resulted in
a class 3 rating. There was no challenge to the
factual findings made by the
Medical Assessor, Ms Patrick simply arguing that in the light of those findings
she was deserving of
a class 3 rating. There was, it was argued, an internal
contradiction because the Medical Assessor had found
Ms Patrick to be
“independent in her personal care.”
have earlier noted that Ms Patrick’s submissions did not address the
circumstances or the effect of her lung cancer diagnosis
and treatment, all of
which appears to have occurred subsequent to her statement of 22 January 2025.
Another area to which Ms Patrick
has given very little attention is the living
arrangements that she has with her sister and her daughter. In her statement, Ms
said from [47]:
“47. I have lived with my sister and
my daughter since returning from overseas in or around 2007.
sister provides me with some assistance with domestic tasks, including cooking,
cleaning, washing and maintenance, and assists
me with the care of my daughter
when I have episodes of mania. This will include taking my daughter to and from
school and football
training, as she is in a Football NSW academy.
My sister also assists me financially, as I am not able to work....”
“episodes of mania” are presumably a reference to Ms Patrick’s
bipolar affective disorder. Ms Patrick referred
to this disorder twice in
passing during her statement, in the context of her going off work due to an
aggravation - firstly in February
2016 and again on
[4] of the MAC, the Medical Assessor took a history that:
Patrick lives in Glenmore Park. She lives with her sister, who is a legal carer
for the last five years and her 16-year-old
daughter...”
history appears to be incorrect, compared to what appears at [47] of Ms
Patrick’s statement. Ms Patrick was assessed on
19 May 2025, as noted, and
her history was therefore capable of carrying an inference that her current
living arrangements had only
commenced since the subject injury of 22 August
2018 (deemed).
we note the emphasis by Ms Patrick at [11] of her submissions that emphasised
that history, namely:
“She lives with her sister,
legal carer
for the last five years and her 16-year old
daughter...”
Patrick referred again to the living arrangements as recorded by the Medical
Assessor later in the same paragraph:
“As to present symptoms,
the medical assessor noted: “She currently lives with her daughter who is
16 and a 2 year older
sister who is her legal carer.”
why Ms Patrick chose to emphasise the words “who is a legal carer”
was not explained. Paragraph [11] of her submissions
was concerned with the
development of the argument that the finding by the Medical Assessor that Ms
Patrick was “independent
with her self-care and personal hygiene”
had been contradictory. At [14] of her submissions, Ms Patrick further referred
the living arrangements by referring to [48] of her statement, (but not
[47]), both of which we have relevantly reproduced above.
Ms Patrick then
“...her sister and daughter prompt her to do things
around the house (paragraph 67), and that she struggles with personal hygiene
and the upkeep of her physical appearance (paragraph 68-71). The medical
assessor provides no explanation reconciling these patent
contradictions.”
is difficult to resist the inference raised by this argument, that somehow the
Ms Patrick has a legal carer was connected to the subject injury.
Ms Patrick’s medical expert, Dr David Kumagaya, did not mention
arrangements in any of the five reports that he supplied (which, as we have
already observed, were somewhat out of date
being issued between 9 February 2023
and 30 June 2023).
respondent’s expert, Dr Clayton Smith reported on 22 February 2020 that Ms
Patrick was living in Glenmore Park with her
daughter and sister “who Ms
Patrick said is her carer and is in receipt of the carers’
allowance.”
Smith took a comprehensive history of the onset of Ms Patrick’s bipolar
disorder, noting that it developed in 1998
Ms Patrick was studying in
Boston whilst she was undergoing a trial separation from her first husband. She
was studying at Berklee
College and had a manic episode in October 1998. He
noted that she had recurrent episodes and was admitted to St John of God
in Richmond in 2004. He noted further that every time she travelled
overseas, Ms Patrick became manic and there were several episodes
in 2005 whilst
teaching in New Zealand and episodes in Dubai in February
Ian Smith, injury management consultant, reported on 25 July
Patrick lives with her sister who assists with her care. She has had the support
since her daughter was born 10 years ago
to her second husband who lives
follows that Ms Patrick has had the services of a sister as her legal carer
since 2007, and we reject any inference that the subject
injury had been the
cause of her having a legal carer. Ms Patrick made no attempt to differentiate
between her needs prior to her
injury and those that have been a consequence of
are satisfied, however, that the Medical Assessor was cognisant of this
dichotomy. As we have indicated above, he noted that Ms
Patrick felt
“pretty flat” as she was recovering from lung surgery. However he
differentiated between that condition
and what she used to do prior to the
surgery. He noted that she would often unpack the dishwasher, wash the clothes,
floor and mow the lawns. She would shower every second day and
wash her hair once a week. She might sometimes cook.
Medical Assessor noted that Ms Patrick’s sister “mainly helps her
with her daughter.”
findings are consistent with a class 2 rating. There was no suggestion that Ms
Patrick could not live independently without
regular support, as the Medical
Assessor had specifically noted that Ms Patrick’s sister mainly helped
with her daughter.
crux of this challenge appeared to be that the Medical Assessor had stated that
he was told by Ms Patrick that “she stated
that she is independent with
her self-care and personal hygiene.”
note that no application was made for the admission of fresh evidence pursuant
to s 328 (3) from Ms Patrick denying that she had
made that statement, and the
Medical Assessor was assiduous in making the distinction between her limitations
after the surgery,
and those that existed prior.
repeat that the history that the Medical Assessor relied on was in all
probability the history that he was given by Ms Patrick
during the consultation,
given how out of date the documentation before him was. Ms Patrick did not tell
him that she was unable
to live independently without regular support, nor that
she needed prompting to shower daily and wear clean clothes. There was no
suggestion that a family member should ensure a minimum level of hygiene and
also note that Dr Kumagaya in his initial report of 9 February 2023, found that
a class 2 rating was appropriate for this category.
He reversed his opinion in
his report of
30 June 2023, and found a class 3 rating on the basis that Ms
Patrick’s sister was “now her formal carer.” This
was an error
of fact and Dr Kumagaya’s reasoning was accordingly compromised.
ground is rejected.
Table 11.3 of the Guides provides the relevant
descriptors:
“Class 1 No deficit, or minor deficit
attributable to the normal variation in the general population: Can travel to
new environments
without supervision.
Class 2 Mild impairment: can travel without support person, but only in a
familiar area such as local shops, visiting a neighbour.”
assessing a class 1 rating, the Medical Assessor said in the Rating
“Ms Patrick did not report any issues in driving. She
can drive by herself. She drove to Melbourne last year to take her daughter
play football. She would drive her daughter often to Central Coast, Norah (sic
probably Norah Head) and to other places on her
own. She denied any anxiety in
driving and she can drive without a support person. She stated that she can
travel to new environment
without supervision.”
have noted Ms Patrick’s submissions above. Inherent in them was an
admission that
Ms Patrick did in fact drive, but it was argued that the
Medical Assessor should have made allowances for the fact that she found
activity a negative experience. The purpose of the PIRS method of assessing
psychological injury is to evaluate the behavioural
consequences of a
psychiatric disorder, as provided by Chapter 11.11 of the Guides. It can be
noted that nowhere in the descriptors
in the six categories of the PIRS is there
any reference to the subjective responses of a claimant, except in class 3 of
the present
travel category, which is not applicable in the present situation,
as Ms Patrick clearly can travel away from her residence without
person. In evaluating the appropriate class, a Medical Assessor is concerned
with whether the particular activity can be
performed or not. If it can be,
albeit with some negativity, the descriptors describe the general level of
impairment.
the content of Ms Patrick’s statement is of little assistance and we
accept that what was reported by the Medical Assessor
was that which he had been
told during the assessment. Ms Patrick can drive by herself, she drove to
Melbourne to take her daughter
to play football, she drives often to the Central
Coast, Norah Head, and other places on her own, usually to transport her
and she can travel to new environments without supervision. These are
all class 1 indications.
ground is rejected.
Social functioning
11.4 of the Guides provide the following relevant
descriptors:
“Class 1 No deficit, or minor deficit
attributable to the normal variation in the general population: No difficulty in
and sustaining relationships (eg a partner, close friendships lasting
Class 2 Mild impairment: existing relationships strained. Tension and
arguments with partner or close family member, loss of some
friendships.”
the Rating Scale the Medical Assessor said in assessing a class 1
“Ms Patrick has a good relationship with her daughter
and her sister and other family members. She is married to her daughter's
who lives in Kenya. She cannot afford to travel, neither he. He is a Kenyan. She
would catch up with him every now and then.
Her father died in 1993, and she is
regularly in co--ntact with her mother and helps her out. Her mother helps her
out at home.”
have noted above the submissions that the Medical Assessor had fallen into error
by not explaining why he differed from Ms Patrick’s
statement. There was
no reason for him to do so, not only because the statement was so far out of
date in view of subsequent developments,
but for the reasons we considered in
above. We would observe that the submission that Ms
Patrick was in fact not in contact with her Kenyan husband, rather than that she
caught up with him every now and then, did not assist her case. Ms Patrick said
at [64] that she had no motivation to keep in contact
or engage with him in any
event. Again, we accept that the statements attributed to Ms Patrick were in
fact made to the Medical Assessor
during the consultation. He has used his
experience and expertise to formulate his assessment, and we find no error in
ground is rejected.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 20 June
2025 should be confirmed, save that the arithmetical
rounding error advised by
the respondent results in the issue of a fresh certificate.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Nicola Patrick
Respondent:
Secretary, Department of Education
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Ankur Gupta and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as to
the matters set out in the Table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in NSW workers compensation
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
Psychological
11.11,11.12
Table: 11.1,11.2,11.3,11.5,11.6
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers pages
Appeal papers page
Guides page
See 11.15-11.21 at Guides p
65 and Table 11.7 at Guides page
[2017] NSWSC
[2015] NSWSC
[2018] NSWSC
[2022] NSWSC
Chapter 1.6a of the
Australia Partners Pty Ltd v Kocak
Western Sydney Local
Health District v Chan
[2015] NSWSC 1968
Appeal papers pages 65
at [10] and 68 at [35]
respectively.
Appeal papers
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter