URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2012/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v DONNELLY [2012] NSWPST 3 (2 February 2012)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
JAMES FRANCIS DONNELLY
MATTER NUMBER: PS 003/2008
REGISTRATION NUMBER: PS
0065814 (NSW); PSY 0001158283
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE: PROTECTIVE ORDERS ONLY)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Donnelly
[2012] NSWPST 3
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Ms K Stern, of Counsel, instructed by Ms F Westwood,
Solicitor, of the Health Care Complaints Commission.
James Donnelly
(Respondent) self-represented.
FILE NUMBER: PST 003/2008
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Liz Tong (Psychologist Member)
Mr Chris Wilcox (Psychologist Member)
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: Initial Inquiry: 15 – 19 June (inclusive), 17
& 18 August 2009; Re Prohibition Orders: 13 and 14 April
2011; Remitted to
reconsider Protective Orders: 6 December 2011.
DATE OF ORDERS:
2 February 2012
CATCHWORDS: psychology - registered psychologist supervising provisionally
registered psychologist – finding of professional
misconduct - conduct
substantially relates to circumstances arising from information provided by a
client to provisionally registered
psychologist under the supervision of the
Respondent – information regarding abuse of child – failure
to/significant
delay in report to DoCS.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
- s 53 (3A);
Health Care Complaints Act
Psychologists Act 2001
clause 6 of schedule 5;
Public Health Act 1991
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
CASES CITED:
Ex parte Tziniolis (1966)
Bannister v Walton
(30 April 1992 – Court of Appeal –
unreported;
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and ors
[2005] NSWSC 614
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly
[2009] PSTNSW 7;
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
[2010] NSWPST 4
Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Re Protective Orders
Introduction
Tribunal initially convened on 15 June 2009 to conduct an Inquiry into
complaints made by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings,
Health Care
Complaints Commission (‘the HCCC’), regarding two psychologists. The
Complaint regarding Dr Donnelly (the
Respondent) was dated 26 June 2008. The
Inquiry continued over 7 hearing days. Written submissions were received
thereafter. The
Tribunal published a decision on 8 July 2010 reserving on the
question of a Prohibition Order with respect to the Respondent. When
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2) [2010]
NSWPST 4, dated
8 July 2010 was handed down a timetable for the submissions with respect to the
issue was agreed upon by the legal
representative for the Respondent and the
HCCC. The Tribunal received submissions and two further Inquiry days were held
14 April 2011. The Tribunal had not proceeded to determine the issue
when the Supreme Court published
Donnelly v Health Care Complaints Commission
on 8 July 2011.
Judgment/Order was subsequently issued by the Supreme Court on 24 August 2011 in
the following Terms:
matter be remitted to the Psychologists’ Tribunal of New South Wales for
determination of the appropriate protective order
in light of the
Tribunal’s findings of fact and misconduct and any further submissions or
evidence that may be tendered or
received by them.
plaintiff pay the Commission’s costs of the appeal up to and including 25
Commission pay the plaintiff’s costs of and incidental to the hearing on
10 June 2011.
party to pay the costs of proceedings in this Court thereafter.
is no variation to the costs order made by the Tribunal in the Tribunal in the
proceedings before them.
numerous Directions Hearings (including one when the Respondent requested that
he be represented by a friend, Jenny Grant, due
to his mental distress) the
parties agreed that the evidence relied upon by both parties on 13 and 14 April
2011 in addition to the
material put before the Tribunal on 6 December 2011
would be considered for the purpose of dealing with the matter as remitted by
the Supreme Court.
Tribunal relies upon the Reasons for Decision set out in
HCCC v Dene &
Donnelly (No 2)
[2010] NSWPST 4
apart from the Orders made therein relating
to the Respondent (except for the Order as to Costs – which in accordance
the determination of the Supreme Court stands as made).
the Tribunal ultimately proceeds to determine protective orders after the
introduction of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law) this part of the Inquiry should be considered as proceeding under
the National Law rather than the Psychology
Act 2001 (the Act). For the purpose
of the matters to be dealt with there is no significant difference between the
two pieces of
legislation and there is nothing in the outcome that is in any way
substantively determined by the change in applicable legislation.
Complaint as it came before the Tribunal is set out below. The findings made in
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
[2010] NSWPST 4
are summarised in bold
at the end of each Particular and Complaint for ease of reference.
HCCC alleged that the Respondent being a person registered as a psychologist
under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
s.25 of the Act, in that he has:
Demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or
in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or purported
practice of psychology.
Particulars of Complaint One
Between June 2003 and November 2004 the psychologist provided therapy to Mr A
and/or his daughter Miss B himself and/or through his
supervision of Ms Kerri
Dene, a provisionally registered psychologist providing treatment services under
his supervision. The psychologist:
October 2003, upon becoming aware that Mr A had disclosed to Ms Dene during a
therapy session that he had been touching his daughter
Miss B in an
inappropriate manner for the last few years:
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon him
in cases of potential child abuse;
Established
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
Established
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community Services;
Established
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
Established
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
Established
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of the Miss B and
Established
contrary to B5 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
Established
or permitted Ms Dene (a trainee under the psychologist’s supervision) to
continue to provide treatment services to Mr
A notwithstanding that this was
beyond her competence and experience.
Established
or permitted Ms Dene to continue to provide treatment services to Mr A
notwithstanding that she had disclosed her own past
history of sexual abuse to
Established
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C;
Established
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
Established
make a referral to the Department of Community Services.
Established
15 September 2004, encouraged and/or permitted Ms Dene to involve Miss B in the
therapeutic process she was undertaking with Mr
A notwithstanding that this
her competence;
Established
inappropriate
in the circumstances;
Established
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation
to this process.
Established
to exercise appropriate supervision of Ms Dene in her treatment of Mr A.
Established
to take steps to safeguard the welfare of Ms Dene in relation to her therapeutic
relationship with Mr A.
Established
around January 2005 - August 2005, delayed making a report to the Department of
Community Services.
Established
not keep any appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
Established
or permitted Ms Dene to provide 42 sessions of therapy to Mr A as an intern.
Established
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of s24 of the
Act, in that he has:
Demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or
in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or purported
practice of psychology.
Particulars of Complaint Two
As per Complaint One.
Summary of Findings in relation to the Complaints made by the Tribunal
on 8 July 2010
Complaint One
Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the conduct set out in each of the
Particulars of Complaint constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Complaint One is established.
Complaint Two
Tribunal found the conduct of Dr Donnelly as set out in Particular 4 constituted
professional misconduct. The Tribunal was also
of the view that when the balance
of the Particulars were considered together that the conduct amounted to
professional misconduct
in that the conduct was of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of his registration. These Findings
not disturbed in any way by the Supreme Court.
Appearances
per headnote.
Suppression Order
Tribunal initially made a Suppression Order, in accordance with Clause 6 of
Schedule 5 of the Psychology Act 2001, that the names
and any details that tend
to identify a number of people mentioned in the evidence in this matter are not
to be published. These
included Mr A, and his two daughters, Miss B and Miss C.
The Suppression Order was continued and confirmed in accordance with Clause
Schedule 5D of the National Law and refers to the names recorded in the schedule
marked ‘F’ attached to
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
[2010] NSWPST 4.
addition to the Respondent Ms Ruthnam (referee), Professor Atkinson (referee),
Mr Hill (referee), Professor Geffen, Professor Cartwritght
Documentation
documents initially before the Tribunal were set out in
HCCC v Dene &
Donnelly (No 2)
[2010] NSWPST 4.
The additional documents that were
considered by the Tribunal have included the submissions of the parties and
various documents
(mostly character references) provided by the Respondent.
Relevant Law
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege
trust placed in psychologists is analogous, to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal and sensitive information to the psychologist in the course of
treatment. In a passage cited with approval
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 53,
subsection (3A) (an amendment introduced into the Act
on 4 December 2006). This
sub-section states:
If the Tribunal makes an order under
subsection (2) in respect of a person and it is satisfied that the person poses
a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a
“prohibition order”) do any one or more of the following:
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently,
(b) place such conditions as the Tribunal thinks appropriate
on the provision of health services or specified health services by the
for the period specified in the order or permanently.
service is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
including the following services, whether provided as public or private
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in
its meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
matter in relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions
[1998] NSWSC 16
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Deane J observed that the word “substantial” was not only
susceptible of ambiguity, but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of
precision. In O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447 referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and
observed that, in selecting the word “substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of
(3A) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare risk but is less
stringent than
special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the penalty imposed
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a maximum fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months
imprisonment or both.
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
deregistered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is to
be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a
fine of up to $5,500.00.
the possession of the appropriate skills without the requisite character has
been found as a bar to continued registration (see
Bannister v Walton
April 1992 – Court of Appeal – unreported) the alternate position is
also the case. It cannot be that good character
remedies deficits in clinical
practice. The presence of good character may well assist a Tribunal in making a
decision as to whether
or not conditions are required, whether or not a
Respondent will comply with conditions placed upon registration or indeed
or not a Respondent poses a substantial risk to the public.
character is something more than good reputation. It relates to the quality of
the person (see
Ex parte Tziniolis (1966) 84 WN(NSW
Background material
Background of the Respondent
information was set out in
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
Background to the Complaint
information was set out in
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
Documentary Evidence
email from the Respondent to
‘Friends and Colleagues’
28 July 2010 came into evidence as exhibit RA-W. This email was sent to over 40
people. The subject line read ‘help
please’. The text of the email
Dear Friends and Colleagues,
Before making the following request, please know that if you choose to not
respond for any reason I will understand. I am in the
awkward position of
having to ask for your immediate help in responding to claims by a Registration
Board Tribunal that I am a significant
current danger to the public because of
how I managed a case at the [Regional University] between 2003-2005. They are
that I lack current insight into the problems with decisions I made
then. This could not be further from the truth and I believe
demonstrated that over the past 5 years in my clinical practice and supervision
while ruminating endlessly about what I might
have done differently. The
Tribunal has decided to de-register me for 3 years due to this concern. I am
still attempting to find
legal representation but in the interim I need to
provide evidence from those who know me or my work since 2003 that I do not pose
Unfortunately, I do need you all to consider the following points when
writing a letter of support. I have until 10 Sept to respond
but if you could
provide me with something by the 1
of Sept it would
allow me time to consult with my solicitor, once I find one.
Re letter content:
Please note that your letter will be used specifically in my submission
regarding the finding that I should not be prohibited from
delivering any
health-related services. The more specific the character references the better.
Many character references are disregarded
because the referee did not know the
circumstances in which a reference was being sought, nor did the referees
address the relevant
As well as the usual referee things (your position, relationship to me,
circumstances in which you have come to know me, dates etc)
it would be
appropriate for you include the following, so far as you are able:
understand and fully support:
imperative for the practice of psychology to be conducted with unimpeachable
ethical standards;
role of protective orders in deterring psychologists from acting other than with
the requisite high standard of skill, knowledge,
judgement and care;
role of Tribunal prohibition orders in protecting the public from
You are aware
of the findings of the Tribunal that in their view I failed to identify children
as at risk of significant harm from
2003 to 2005 and therefore did not notify
the relevant authorities of that risk, and failed to take appropriate action to
those children from harm as they did not believe that my referral of the
children to a paediatric clinical psychologist was adequate.
In addition,
because I allowed an intern to continue on the case to provide longterm therapy
despite her own history and because
I did not read all her notes of her
discharge summary while seeing her for face-to-face supervision, I was found not
to have diligently
supervised the intern. I believe the circumstances at
[Regional University] led me to deal less effectively clinically and my
supervision
judgments were based on a US model, but for the purposes of your
letter I ask that you accept that I made errors in clinical judgment
resulted in me not reporting what turned out to be, in hindsight, evidence of
abuse. When the intern did make a DOCs report
after she learned additional
facts while treating the patient in her private practice several months after
leaving [Regional University]
the patient/perpetrator was found to be a
paedophile.
observations/knowledge of me, that such conduct is totally out of character for
personal interactions with me, you know me to have done x,y,z (add what you can
regarding specific instances such as conscientiously
referring kids or
supporting your efforts to report kids at risk in complicated circumstances;
advocating for high professional standards
and competence in training settings;
effectively teaching in the field of psychology; effectively supporting my
staff/interns/colleagues;
resisting administration efforts to use generalist
psychologists for specialist care or asking specialists in one area to offer
in numerous teams without adequate training; always modelling
rigorously ethical behaviour; always attempting to be attentive to
the emotional
wellbeing of my staff; consistently demonstrating excellent knowledge, skill,
judgement and care in relation to my
patients/students/interns/staff/professional colleagues
believe I have valuable skills, knowledge & judgement and should not be
prohibited from providing health-related services
as to do so would be contrary
to the public interest.
skills and expertise (combined neuropsychology and clinical psychology, teaching
of psychology, group work, community capacity
building, consultation with
medical teams) are particularly rare in rural NSW and my commitment to community
service should not be
undermined.
If you have any questions
Tribunal’s findings is available
on the internet (just Google my name and
HCCC and you will see a press release with a link to the 350 page decision). I
appealing the findings with the NSW Supreme Court but I must first
address the prohibition orders recommended by the Tribunal.
Thank you for your help. I am truly in shock regarding the findings as I
believed that we (the intern, the paediatric psych and I)
made the correct
decision at the time. The thought that I may have missed something that left
children at risk will plague me forever
and certainly have focused my attention
on any matter that even hints at abuse. As most of you know, I have never had
any reluctance
to report cases to protective services and I will continue to do
Dr James Donnelly
School of Health and Human Sciences
Southern Cross University
Tribunal notes that there were 44 recipients of the Respondent’s email.
The Tribunal received 17 references from these recipients.
In addition to these
17 references that appear to be in response to this email the Tribunal also
received 5 other references (Mother
of a Client, Hellena Chaffe, Debra
O’Reilly & Christel Wecker, Jeff Rogers and Paul Martin). Details of
all of these references
are set out below.
Character Evidence
Reference of Gina Malke Geffen
character references were provided by Emeritus Professor G Geffen (exhibit R8
and RA-A). The first was dated 5 May 2009 (and was
provided with the initial
documents filed on behalf of the Respondent) and the second dated 9 September
2010. Emeritus Professor
Geffen is a former Chairperson of the Psychologists
Board of Queensland and is presently a member of the Psychologists Board of
first reference states that Em. Prof. Geffen has known Dr Donnelly since he
arrived in Australia in 2001 after Dr Donnelly contacted
her seeking
collaboration on a research project of joint interest. The reference continues
by detailing Dr Donnelly’s skills
as a lecturer, an academic and a
researcher.
Prof. Geffen then recounts of Dr Donnelly’s ability as a university
lecturer and as a researcher in extremely positive terms.
first reference continues as follows:
Regarding service to the University and Community, Dr Donnelly
broadened the base of the Department of Psychology’s at the [Regional
University] useful contacts, provided services where none existed before and
created the reassuring feeling of a reliable presence,
who would provide
valuable service in areas of need. These are words of high praise, but they have
been earned.
I have always been impressed by Dr Donnelley’s (sic) commitment to
his students and to his patients/clients. Moreover, I respect
the depth of his
knowledge of clinical standards and Code of Ethics.
to parts of the second reference (exhibit RA-A) of Em. Prof. Geffen were made by
the HCCC on the basis that those parts
were commenting upon the Tribunal’s
decision (considering the decision to be harsh) and on the basis that the
reference sought
to go behind the expert evidence relied upon by the Tribunal
and therefore not relevant to the task before the Tribunal. These objections
were accepted and deletions made to the report.
second reference contains the following statements:
I wish to point out mitigating factors that could have
contributed to Dr Donnelly not detecting that Mr A was deliberately misleading
the intern and therefore himself as her supervisor:
Psychology Clinic at the
University]
The functioning of the Psychology Clinic
at the [Regional University] where postgraduate students receive their
professional training
as substandard during 2003 – 2005. The Director of
the Clinic changed more than once, there was a change in Head of School,
understand that at one point the Head of School also served as a Director of the
Clinic despite not being qualified to do so.
The University Administration was
made aware of the difficulties facing individual staff members, such as Dr
Donnelly, in trying
to provide adequate education and training to students as
well as a service to clients of the Clinic. Since the postgraduate professional
training program did not adhere to well-defined standards, extra site visits
were necessitated by the accrediting body, the Australian
Accreditation Council. The turmoil in the School of Psychology had a
significant impact on Dr Donnelly, as he assumed
responsibility for maintenance
of commitments to teaching and service at a time when School support was not
forthcoming, and at times
his efforts were undermined.
to recognize warning signs and inadequate supervision are not characteristic of
Dr Donnelly’s performance as a psychologist
before the events that led to
the Tribunal hearing this case.
My previous character
reference documents that Dr Donnelly is an accomplished teacher and researcher.
He has served as a co-supervisor
of the applied clinical research of higher
degree students at the University of Queensland with me. My students reported
to the projects as worthwhile, helpful and supportive. His colleagues
speak highly of him as a good team member. He has served
as a good role model
of ethical behaviour.
Donnelly is genuinely remorseful.
Previous research has
shown that psychiatrists accused of unprofessional behaviour were good
candidates for “rehabilitation”
if they demonstrated insight as well
as being remorseful about the harm that could result from unprofessional
conduct. Dr Donnelly’s
service for the Health Department of NSW after
leaving the [Regional University] has demonstrated that he has been
conscientious
in referring children at risk and reporting appropriately. He has
applied high professional standards and been an exemplary role
service provider. He has discussed the case with me on several occasions and
pointed out what he should have done and
why he failed to recognize the warning
signs and how he is now extremely careful, in that he consistently adheres to
procedures in
order to prevent any recurrence of such events.
Donnelly is a skilful and knowledgeable practitioner whose patients rely on
Across Australia, there is a shortage of health
professionals. This shortage is acute in the field of psychology, and extreme
rural NSW. As a clinical neuropsychologist and clinical psychologist with a
commitment to community work and demonstrated expertise
in working with general
practitioners, being barred from practising for three years is not in the public
interest and would hamper
Dr Donnelly’s service to the community in the
Prof. Geffen gave evidence on 14 April 2011 by telephone. In examination in
chief she expressed the view that the Respondent did
not pose a substantial risk
to members of the public.
cross-examination Em. Prof. Geffen stated that she was a practicing clinical
psychologist and a clinical neuropsychologist although
she did not practice as a
clinical psychologist during the period 2003 to 2005. Later in her evidence she
clarified her membership
of the relevant colleges as follows (T19.44-20.15,
Q. Thank you for that. You mentioned in relation to an earlier
question that between 2003 and 2005 you were a clinical neuropsychologist
not a clinical psychologist but in your introduction you mentioned you were
indeed I am presuming members of both colleges.
Would that be right?
A. My membership of the clinical college from either 2008 or 2009 was
after my retirement.
Q. Can I just ask how you then became a clinical psychologist?
A. Yes. I applied to the college for recognition of my contribution. I
undertook supervision by one of my former students, Dr Mark
Horswill for a
period of six months.
Q. In terms of your experience as a clinical psychologist what would you
see as being your areas of competence?
A. My areas of competence relate to pain management.
Q. So really in terms of your clinical experience you've had two to three
years and primarily in the area of pain management?
A. That's correct.
Prof. Geffen gave the following evidence (T3.17-9.30, T14.47-17.17,
Q. What I wanted to ask you first is as to your professional
experience of Dr Donnelly. Can I ask you to turn to page 2 of your
A. Yes I will do so.
Q. On paragraph 2 or under heading 2?
Q. You said in the second sentence that Dr Donnelly served as a
co-supervisor of the Applied Clinical Research of Higher Degree Students
University of Queensland with you?
A. Correct.
Q. Firstly, when you describe applied clinical research does that involve
any contact between the supervisor and any client or patient?
A. Only remotely. Only through the student unless there is a problem
that has arisen.
Q. So it involved students having contact with clients or
A. It does yes.
Q. Then you and Dr Donnelly acted as supervisors of those
A. Correct.
Q. You did not yourselves have any direct contact with any patient or
client that the students were supervising - were attending?
A. Only a further follow up was requested the doctor of the patient. If
I can just explain that it was research into head injuries
in sport. What we
were involved with precises and measurements of people at risk of head injuries,
mild concussion and then waiting
for injuries to happen a natural experiment and
then repeating the measurements once the injuries had occurred. So that was
was involved. In the event of a more severe injury I would sometimes be
requested for my opinion in which I would act as a clinician
in that case as
opposed to a researcher.
Q. For what period of time did you work with Dr Donnelly as
co-supervisor on that project?
A. I'm having difficulty recalling that but there are two particular PhD
students who were involved. One has graduated; the other
one took intermission
and is - has now resumed her project but with different supervisors as
I am emeritus profession and while I
remain on her team I am a 50%
supervisor.
Q. So if I could--A. So--
Q. Sorry you go on Dr Geffen - Professor Geffen?
A. Yes. The two students involved I can name them are Ms Kylie
Kwapil K-W-A-P-I-L. She graduated I think early in 2010 or late
Dr Donnelly was an associate supervisor. Ms Kwapil took a long time
over her PhD but during her actual planning of the
project and gathering of data
when Dr Donnelly visited Brisbane she would meet with him. We would meet
jointly. And that's how
the joint supervision took place.
Q. So can I just ask you to pause. That's one PhD student you are
discussing?
Q. You were jointing supervising her with Dr Donnelly for a period
Q. You had how many joint supervision sessions with Dr Donnelly in
respect of that student?
A. He - from recall it's three or four.
Q. So there were three or four joint sessions?
A. Face to face.
Q. Were there any other joint supervision sessions that took place by
telephone or video link?
A. No neither by telephone nor video link but in email.
Q. So in terms of joint supervision sessions there were three or four.
Was that over a period of a couple of months or over a period
of a couple of
A. A couple of years.
Q. A couple of years?
Q. Then as regards the other PhD student again did you have any joint
supervision sessions with Dr Donnelly?
A. I can only recall one.
Q. Are they the only occasions upon which you have had a joint
supervision session with Dr Donnelly?
Q. Have you on any other occasion attended patients jointly with
Dr Donnelly?
Q. Have you ever provided clinical care for a patient jointly with
Dr Donnelly?
Q. Have you ever observed Dr Donnelly in a clinical interaction with
Q. Have you ever considered Dr Donnelly's clinical records in
respect of his own attendances of patients?
Q. Have you had any other direct professional engagement with
Dr Donnelly?
A. Yes I have.
Q. Could you please explain what that is?
A. Most certainly. These have all been related to joint research
projects but also meetings at - when we were attending joint
conferences.
In addition to this I have consulted Dr Donnelly about cases
I was having difficulty with about neuropsychological assessments,
protocols for head injuries healing and head injury follow up.
Q. Have you ever consulted Dr Donnelly professionally in respect of
a case involving a child at risk?
Q. Have you ever had occasion to review any referral that
Dr Donnelly has made as regards a child at risk?
A. No. I believe that there were referrals made but I haven't reviewed
those referrals.
Q. Where have you read that there were referrals made?
A. In all these materials and submissions to the Tribunal.
Q. So it's only in documents provided by Dr Donnelly
Q. Can I ask you on the second page of your letter then under the
heading, "Dr Donnelly is genuinely remorseful"?
Q. The second sentence in that paragraph reads, "Dr Donnelly's
service for the health department of New South Wales after leaving
the [Regional
University] has demonstrated that he has been conscientious in referring
children at risk and reporting appropriately."
Q. Does it follow from what you have just told the Tribunal that the only
basis for that statement has been Dr Donnelly's own account
of what he has
A. That's not his only - his own account. I have seen a
reference from the place that he was employed at the New South Wales Health
Department referring to these matters so it's on the information from another
referee of Dr Donnelly that I make that statement.
Q. When did Dr Donnelly show you this information from another
A. I do not recall when but I infer from what I have written here that I
read that before writing this report.
Q. Are you yourself as a clinical psychologist giving evidence to this
Tribunal in any position to give the Tribunal an opinion as
to whether or not
Dr Donnelly has reported appropriately?
A. On the opinion of a colleague who employed Dr Donnelly I would
respect that opinion.
Q. You have no basis--A. I have no other basis for that
Q. You have no basis yourself to offer any opinion to this Tribunal as to
whether or not his reporting has been appropriate have
A. Not that I have directly witnessed in papers myself that is
Q. Nor do you have any basis upon which to offer an opinion to this
Tribunal as to whether or not Dr Donnelly may or may not pose
members of the public?
A. I do have a basis for that.
Q. Could you explain what that basis is?
A. Yes I can. Firstly, I have heard and read and been told about
Dr Donnelly's good work at the university - the regional
referred to in the paper.
Q. Can I ask you to pause there Professor Geffen. There are you
referring to other references that Dr Donnelly has obtained for
purposes of these proceedings?
A. No. I'm referring to my knowledge of his work throughout the time I
have known him.
Q. So you're referring to opinions that have been expressed to you by
others as to the quality of Dr Donnelly's work? Is that correct?
A. My own knowledge of working together on the head minder project and
working out protocols with Dr Donnelly in the service and
standards of
service to be applied.
Q. But do you accept that you have no direct personal knowledge of
Dr Donnelly's interaction with patients?
A. I think that I have not observed Dr Donnelly interacting with
Q. Do you accept that you have only very limited knowledge of
Dr Donnelly's approach to supervision of clinical interns?
A. I accept that my knowledge is limited to the joint supervision
sessions that we've outlined and his reports of an associate supervisor
students on whom we conducted the joint supervision.
Q. Do you accept that you have no knowledge yourself of
Dr Donnelly's ability to identify when a child may be at risk of
A. I don't have direct evidence of that no. If I could I'll leave it at
that and for any further questions thank you.
Q. So Professor Geffen--A. I said I have no direct evidence
Q. Could I just ask you whether you have ever read a document which is
approximately 202 pages long which comprises this Tribunal's
findings on the
complaint in respect of Dr Donnelly?
A. Yes I have read the entire script. I have read it once. I am more
familiar with some parts than the others.
Q. Prior to preparing your letter dated 9 September you received an
email from Dr Donnelly on 28 July? Is that correct?
A. The 28 July 2009?
A. 2010. Yes I received that email. I don't have it in front of me but
I would have received it yes.
Q. I am in the position that I do have that email in front of me.
Q. So if I were just to say to you that it appears very much that in the
paragraph in your statement - that on the first page of
your letter I
should say where you say, "I am aware of the findings of the Tribunal
Q. Do you agree with me that you largely took that description of the
Tribunal's findings from Dr Donnelly's description that he
had sent to you
in that email?
A. Yes, I agree with that.
Q. Had you read the Tribunal's findings in their entirety at this point
A. I had read - I do not think that I had read the findings
from the Tribunal in their entirety. I in fact cannot recall that.
Q. But you thought it appropriate to offer this account to the Tribunal
with a--A. May I recap on that?
Q. Certainly.
A. I retract that. I had read the findings at that stage very
Q. Why in those circumstances did you not give your own summary of the
Tribunal's findings rather than relying primarily on Dr Donnelly's
in this letter?
A. I could not see that Dr Donnelly's summary differed from what I
had read in the findings.
Q. If you look on the third full paragraph on that page do you see
there's a paragraph that beings, "I accept that Dr Donnelly made
judgment?" Do you see that paragraph?
A. On page?
Q. It's on page 1 of your letter. It's the third paragraph in the
indented paragraph. Do you see that? It says, "I accept that
Dr Donnelly
made errors in judgment?"
Q. Do you see that paragraph?
A. Okay. Now, I'm just on page 1.
A. I'd like some time. Yes.
Q. Do you see the paragraph that begins, "I accept that Dr Donnelly
made errors?"
A. Yes I accept that Dr Donnelly made errors of judgment in clinical
supervision relating to possible evidence of child sexual abuse.
Q. Then if you see the second sentence that says, "When the intern whom
he was supervising finally did make a report to DOCS?"
Q. Then you've said, "After she learned additional facts while treating
the patient in her private practice."
Q. Could you please tell the Tribunal what the additional facts that this
intern learnt in her private practice were? So what are
these additional facts
that you are telling the Tribunal in this letter that this intern discovered
after she ceased to be supervised
by Dr Donnelly but before she made her
report to DOCS? What are those facts?
A. I do not have access to case notes and case material by the
psychologist in question of her treatment notes therefore the statement
have made cannot be supported and I accept that it can't be.
Q. In truth--A. The points - yes.
Q. It's really you just put that in because that's what Dr Donnelly
had said to you in his email? That's right isn't it?
A. That would be correct.
Q. I just wanted to ask you then about the next paragraph in your letter
which says, "I wish to point out mitigating factors that
could have contributed
to Dr Donnelly not detecting that Mr A was deliberating misleading the
intern and therefore himself as her
supervisor."
Q. The first factor that you have referred to as a mitigating factor
is - and I don't mean to belittle it in any way but if I just
summarise it as being the turmoil in the School of Psychology at the [Regional
University] at the relevant time.
Q. Professor Geffen I just have one final question and it arises from the
paragraph that I was asking you about just before we had
a break and it was the
mitigating factors. It was the last paragraph on page 1 of your
Q. You then refer to a number of mitigating factors that in your opinion
could have contributed to Dr Donnelly not detecting that
deliberating misleading the intern?
Q. I just want to ask you how it is that turmoil in the School of
Psychology could have led to Dr Donnelly not detecting that Mr
misleading the intern? It's just a very simple narrow question?
Q. I want to understand the basis of your statement that that is a factor
which could have contributed to him not detecting that
Mr A was misleading
the intern?
A. What happens when the clinical service at a school is not functioning
properly is that the individuals that are responsible for
providing that service
become overloaded with supervision and overloaded with clinical responsibilities
and overloaded with teaching
responsibilities. If there isn't the basic support
for a clinic running smoothly and one sees as was told to me by Dr Donnelly
that time totally unrelated to the case students have each to take far more
responsibility than they should then the supervisor themselves
in a state of
continual worry which can affect their judgment.
Q. Thank you. Now, I did say that was one last thing but I'm afraid I
have one more question and that relates to the
Dr Donnelly asked you a question at the start of your
evidence as to whether in your opinion he posed a substantial risk to the health
of members of the public?
Q. In the course of your evidence this morning you've accepted that you
have no direct personal experience of Dr Donnelly's clinical
practice only
limited experience of his supervision of two PhD students and no direct
experience of his response or ability to understand
or to report appropriately
and you have also told the Tribunal that you have read the Tribunal's findings
which involve a finding
of professional misconduct and findings as regards
Dr Donnelly's supervision and treatment in circumstances from 2003 to 2005.
want you to tell the Tribunal please how, given all of those matters, you feel
able as a clinical psychologist and a professional
to offer that opinion as a
reliable opinion to the Tribunal?
A. I offer that opinion as a reliable opinion based on facts that I
regard this as an isolated incident, an error of judgment on
the part of
Dr Donnelly. I base also upon my close questioning of him and his
responses to those questions indicating a full appreciation
of the errors that
occurred. He has documented to me and answered to me what procedures he
currently has in place. All the other
reports about Dr Donnelly come from
people who I respect - whose judgment I respect therefore on the basis
of them I stand by my
opinion that I believe he is not at risk of harm to the
Q. But you accept that that opinion is not in any way based upon your own
professional assessment of his interaction with patients
or his professional
clinical activities because you have no direct personal experience of
A. The clinical activities that I have worked with Dr Donnelly have
been honourable, sound, well based in the interests of patients
interests of students. I have outlined what they are and what their limited
field is. On the basis of that and of the judgments
of others I stand by my
opinion. I also stand by my opinion on the basis of my experience of making
judgments about colleagues continually
rightly or wrongly of a career in
academia, research and clinical.
Q. In the answer you just gave and it reflects something that you've said
on page 2 of your letter; what is your understanding of
the procedures
Dr Donnelly currently has in place to prevent any recurrence of the events
that form the subject of this complaint?
A. My understanding is that he has a more profound knowledge of caring
for his own health in the first instance and--...
Q. Thank you.
A. I believe from what I have seen and my interactions with
Dr Donnelly he has a profound understanding of the importance of his
health as the primary basis from which to proceed. So that he has a result not
only of the experience but also in his general
training about the importance of
practitioner health. He has a very good knowledge of the code of ethics. He
has had excellent
training in various fields. And he has explained to me how he
currently as recently as last night how he currently is operating
when someone
asks clinical opinion this is to say that he cannot provide a clinical opinion
because he is not a registered psychologist.
He has been open and frank with
his department in all his dealings with others. He has not tried to hide what
has taken place and
I see this as an honest rehabilitation on his part and
sincerity that I respect.
Q. That's what you're referring to by procedures in place is it?
A. Yes procedures in place. He knows that his own health is important.
He is careful to explain that he is not a registered psychologist
such questions to colleagues. He has openly declared what the problems are to
his head of department. He hasn't hidden
anything. He is not acting as if he
is going to put up a board as a psychotherapist.
Q. When did Dr Donnelly first tell you about this
complaint - the complaint that was before the Tribunal and the matters
rise to the complaint?
A. I do not know the exact time. It was at a conference in New South
Wales at the University of New South Wales and I recall that
it was winter and I
recall of the actual year. I recall that I was still in the employ of the
university at that stage so it preceded
2007. It was - perhaps the
estimated time bracket cannot be precise between 2005.
Q. Which university were you still in the employ of sorry?
A. The University of Queensland.
Q. But weren't you still in the employ of the University of Queensland in
September 2010 when you wrote your reference?
A. I retired from the university on July 4 2006. I am an Emeritus
answer to questions from the Tribunal it was clarified that the joint
supervision sessions with the students lasted about one hour
and there were a
maximum number of six sessions between the two students.
answer to questions from the Tribunal regarding the basis for opinions expressed
in her reference Em. Prof. Geffen gave the following
evidence (T23.17-24.36,
Q. You will recall that I asked you a question just before we
had a short break and I asked you about the - essentially I asked you;
where the information came from regarding reporting children at risk and I am
just wondering if you could help us with that now that
you've had an opportunity
to look at the references?
A. Yes it's looking at the references I thought about the matter as well;
I discussed with Dr Jim Donnelly - before the Tribunal
actually had its hearing we had a discussion because he was an employee by the
Health Department providing a service to children
then. I remember discussing
with him and going through with him how he detected whether the
parties - the tangled issue of a child
at risk now and what his
understanding of mandatory reporting was and also the reason that I was looking
for this information was
that psychologists are not on the mandatory
reporting - in a mandatory reporting position in Queensland and I
wanted to clarify what
his responsibilities were. It was then that he informed
me of the things that he did. Subsequently I wrote what I did write on
basis of that information that Dr Donnelly had sent me. And after that I
have read the reference of Drs Crawford, Clogauer,
Goodison-Farnsworth from
the Sydney Children's Hospital I think written about the same time as I wrote my
letters to the Tribunal
in August - September last. And that is where
it is confirmed that what I knew that Dr Donnelly had told me in
conversation was
confirmed by those doctors because those doctors point to the
fact that he provides ethically sound clinical intervention, that he
the patients safety utmost in mind and he did not fail to suggest calling in
other people to assist to provide optimal
care and due diligence in child
protection. He was very aware of child protection issues and working knowledge
at Sydney Children's
Hospital as a dedicated in child protection, I'm reading
directly from an excerpt of their reference. So that's the reference I
basis for me saying that he has put in place procedures was a casual questioning
of him and his answers to those questions.
Q. So that was the reference that came from Dr Mathew Crawford the
director of anaesthesia and pain management at the Sydney Children's
Dr Maline Clogauer psychologist chronic pain and palliative care Sydney
Children's Hospital and Dr Meg Goodison-Farnsworth
and she's a clinical
psychologist in the chronic pain Sydney Children's Hospital. So you had regard
to conversations with Dr Donnelly
and that reference which is page 36
of the bundle that was provided by Dr Donnelly. Is that the extent of
A. That is the extent of it.
Q. So in that reference that came from those three people; the two
clinical psychologists and the director of anaesthesia and pain
there's a reference there to a dedicated team for child protection.
Q. What would you understand that to mean within the structure of the
Sydney Children's Hospital?
A. My understanding is that a team would be separate from the services
provided by the admissions who were receiving patients on
an outpatient. So
that my understanding of that and I am thinking on my feet rather than any
direct knowledge would be that referrals
would be made. In the cases of
suspected abuse referrals would be made to them.
Q. You think it's sufficient for the opinion that you have expressed in
your reference to be relying upon Dr Donnelly's statements
to you and a
reference written by people who are not members of that particular child
protection - dedicated child protection team?
A. I think that I trust the judgment of Drs Crawford, Clogauer and
Goodison-Farnsworth and that these coincide with my knowledge
direct knowledge and questioning carefully on this issue of
Dr Donnelly.
Q. Would it be your expectation that the director of anaesthesia and pain
management and clinical psychologists involved in chronic
pain and palliative
care to have the best knowledge of the child protection - of a
person's child protection activities within an
organisation such as the Sydney
Children's Hospital?
A. I can't answer that question as I don't have those facts. I'm not
sufficiently familiar with the organisation.
respect to the Respondent current care for his own wellbeing Em. Prof. Geffen
gave the following evidence (T25.34-42, 14/4/11):
Q. Well, do you recall giving any evidence along the lines that
you thought that Dr Donnelly now had a profound understanding that
health was a primary basis upon which to proceed?
A. Yes I do. I think it's very important that a person is aware of their
own mental health in handling the mental health of others
and I feel that while
it is true that Dr Donnelly has always looked after himself very well I
think that then conspires to make him
depressed at that time that he recognises
that you are in a state of depression is not a good time to make decisions. I
he has learnt quite painfully from this period.
Professor Geffen stated that she had formed the view that the Respondent was
depressed at the time he was providing supervision
to the provisionally
registered psychologist (Ms Dene) as a result of conversations she had had with
the Respondent during the time
the events were occurring and confirmed from the
subsequent stress leave taken by the Respondent and their subsequent
conversations.
Em. Professor Geffen clarified that she did not consider that she
was ever in a position to make a clinical diagnosis of depression.
Em. Professor
Geffen also gave evidence that she had asked the Respondent if he was
‘seeing anybody’
affirmative. The Tribunal notes at this point that there was no substantive
evidence regarding
any treatment that the Respondent had received placed before
the Tribunal (only a brief report from Dr Bookallil dated 28 July 2010
WorkCover Certificate dated 5 August 2006 from Dr David Moddel).
Professor Geffen gave evidence that she had spoken to the Respondent the night
before she gave evidence and received assurances
from him that he did not intend
to provide services of a psychological nature (by way of example psychotherapy
or counselling) if
he is de-registered. She expressed the view that it was not
appropriate to provide such services once you were de-registered as a
psychologist (T27, 14/4/11).
to the procedures the Respondent had in place to guard against depression having
an impact upon his practice in the future Em.
Prof. Geffen gave the following
evidence (T29.3-32, 14/4/11):
Q. Are you aware of any procedures that Dr Donnelly has in
place to ensure that something like that might not impact upon his ability
provide professional services of any nature in the future?
A. Yes I am.
Q. Could you explain what those procedures are and I am really asking
that are in
A. Well, I'll describe his behaviour in relation to resigning from the
New South Wales Health Service where instead of trying to
cover all areas thinly
which is what he was trying to do at the regional university. He decided that
the support to provide the
services of the standard that's required wasn't there
so he resigned from that job. He had a procedure to carry out. He resigned
that job and sought another position. So I think that he was sensitised that
trying to apply a band aid and to do too much
he had this had had a bad outcome
in the past and he is acutely aware that that should be avoided.
Q. So that's your answer as to the only procedure that you are aware of
to prevent--A. There's a whole host of procedures that one
goes through to
reach a decision of that magnitude.
Q. I appreciate that but I am just asking whether that decision with all
of the personal deliberations that preceded is the only--A.
His knowledge of
the standards of service required and the failure to meet those standards and
then how one's own ethical position
is evaluation in relation to those
Q. I am grateful.
A. There are a number of procedures before that actual decision is made
and the resignation from that decision.
Reference of Beverley Lehr
Lehr provided a reference undated and unsigned reference which came into
evidence as exhibit RA-B. A signed copy of the reference
was ultimately signed
and faxed to the Tribunal.
reference reads:
I was Dr. James Donnelly’s caseload supervisor and a
clinical supervisor during his internship year at the Langley Porter Psychiatric
Institute, University of California, San Francisco from July, 1998 to June,
1999. During that year, I supervised his clinical training
in the Adult
Psychiatry Clinic. I was also one of his clinical supervisors during his
fellowship year at Langley Porter which was
from July, 1999 to June, 2000.
During that year, I supervised some of his clinical training in the
Psychological Assessment Clinic.
In the Adult Psychiatry Clinic, he was assigned individual outpatients for
therapy and also ran a therapy group. Individual outpatients
can be short term
therapy cases or long-term therapy cases (at least one year) and the hope was
that they would be able to have a
training experience with at least one
long-term therapy case. I feel that the internship year is to provide training
and supervision
so that the person is well-equipped to practice independently.
Consequently, long-term cases are assigned, if possible, to give
clinical experience while under our supervision. I practice cognitive behaviour
therapy but multiple therapy orientations
are taught at Langley Porter including
psychodynamic therapy models. The concepts of transference and counter
transference are discussed
in the Adult Psychiatry Clinic and trainees are
encouraged to be aware of these issues and to discuss them in supervision as
I reviewed my evaluation summaries of Dr. Donnelly and these comments are
from those summaries. I felt that Dr. Donnelly was an excellent
fellow. I felt that he showed maturity in his clinical work and professional
relationships. He did an excellent job
of assessing and treating difficult
patients. I felt that he managed crises well and demonstrated his ability to
stay in charge
while important treatment decisions were made. During his
training, he actively sought out education and supervision to enhance
clinical skills. I felt that he was open to feedback and very easy to
supervise. I found him to be enthusiastic and competent
in his clinical
I have remained periodically in communication with Dr. Donnelly since he
left our training program. I have talked with him about
some of the clinical
and research projects that he initiated after his move to Australia. I met with
him again when he returned
to UCSF to give a professional lecture.
I am aware of the findings of the Tribunal that in their view he failed to
identify children as at risk of significant harm from 2003
to 2005 and therefore
did not notify the relevant authorities of that risk, and failed to take
appropriate action to protect those
children from harm. I understand that the
Tribunal did not believe that his referral of the children to a pediatric
clinical psychologist
was adequate. In addition, I understand that because he
allowed an intern to continue on the case to provide long term therapy despite
her own history and because he did not read all of her notes or her discharge
summary while seeing her for face-to-face supervision,
he was found not to have
diligently supervised the intern.
Such behaviour is completely out of character given my observations and
supervision of him during his internship year and fellowship
year. I observed
him to be excellent in his ability to manage crises, to behave professionally
with colleagues, and to assess and
treat patients with great skill.
I understand and fully support the imperative for the practice of
psychology to be conducted with the highest ethical standards; the
protective orders in deterring psychologists from acting other than with the
necessary high standard of skill, knowledge,
judgment, and care; and that the
Tribunal’s prohibition orders are for the public’s protection from
However, because I believe that this behaviour is so out of character for
him given my knowledge of him, I would hope that his valuable
clinical skills
and knowledge could still be available to the public health services. My
experience of Dr. Donnelly has been that
he has a high commitment to patient
Reference of Elizabeth Ruthnam and Malcolm Hill
Ruthnam and Mr Hill provided a joint reference dated 29 July 2010 which came
into evidence as exhibit RA-C.
reference reads:
Dr Donnelly was engaged by Baringa Private Hospital to provide
consultant clinical psychology services to patient in our adult rehabilitation
programme. Dr Donnelly was instrumental in the establishment of our pain
management programme. It took us some months to recruit
a clinician of Dr
Donnelly’s skill due to workforce shortage in our regional area.
In his dealings with us Dr Donnelly has conducted himself in an ethical
and professional manner. His approach to our executive, management
rehabilitation team has been to educate us in the extended care of
rehabilitation patients. He has become an integral part of
our rehabilitation
team and is widely respected by all the staff and doctors he has worked with.
patients is positive and in a recent formal
patient evaluation a high percentage requested further input from Dr Donnelly as
deemed integral to their recovery and coping skills.
Clinically his patient assessments have predicted future outcomes
accurately and the improvements gained are indicative of his wide
experience and
advanced skills.
In our experience Dr Donnelly’s interaction with patients has been
appropriate, professional, therapeutic and efficacious.
We are aware of Dr Donnelly’s disciplinary hearing and are fully
aware of all the circumstances from the public record. Dr
Donnelly is
completely transparent in regard to his past error of judgement. As health
professionals we also accept that this error
occurred. We believe in
rehabilitation and redemption. If his suspension from the professional register
is purely punitive then
surely the damage to his esteem and reputation is
punitive enough. Such a suspension would be punishing our organisation and our
patients as some of our programmes depend on his expertise at their core. The
value our community places on hospital-based rehabilitation
is high. Many GPs
refer to the pain management programme which can not continue to its present
standard without Dr Donnelly’s
participation.
From our knowledge of Dr Donnelly’s professional practice we are
assured and certain that he conducts his practice with impeccable
ethical and
professional standards. The fact that Dr Donnelly made us aware of his past
error demonstrates his insight and understanding
of the original error of
judgement which he now acknowledges. For this admission to be made transparent
in a regional community
and to ourselves as health professionals is a
challenging proposition for Dr Donnelly. In doing so he has surely demonstrated
insight and extensive reflection. An action to cease his clinical practice
appears fruitless and serves no good as Dr Donnelly does
not represent a risk to
us or our patients. We therefore formally request a dispensation regarding his
suspension from the register.
In saying all of the above we do indeed respect the role of the Tribunal
in removing unsound practitioners from professional practice.
We believe in the
present circumstances that justice has been served and the direst of punishment
meted out in terms of reputation
damage and great personal distress. Dr
Donnelly’s character in our experience is impeccable and indeed his
current practice
is an entirely different field to that which his previous error
Lastly we would like to reiterate that Dr Donnelly’s clinical skills
are highly specialised in the areas of neuropsychology,
pain management and
group therapy and as such can not be replaced. We are the only regional
providers of the rehabilitation programmes
we currently offer.
At the very least we request that his current work with us may continue
and you reconsider the effects on all of us if Dr Donnelly’s
clinical practice were revoked. We adamantly believe that he poses no risk and
that the damage done by denial of clinical
practice will be harmful in itself
and serves no useful purpose.
If Dr Donnelly’s registration is reinstated we would have no
hesitation in re-engaging his services.
Ruthnam gave evidence by way of telephone on 13 April 2011. Mrs Ruthnam is the
Chief Executive Officer and Director of Ramsay
Health Care in Coffs Harbour
(which includes Baringa Private Hospital). She is a registered nurse, a
‘certified’ midwife,
holds an Advanced Diploma in Business
Management and another in Intensive Care in addition to a Master of Arts degree
(T11, 13/04.11).
She last practiced clinically about 10 years ago. She was one
of the two authors of a written character reference dated 29 July 2010.
oral evidence she confirmed that her opinion of the Respondent had not changed.
Mrs Ruthnam stated she was not a registered
psychologist but had read the New
South Wales Psychologists Board Code of Conduct and the entire Tribunal
determination. Later in
her evidence she gave evidence that indicated she was
not entirely familiar with the manner in which disciplinary matters proceeded
with respect to health professionals (T14 -15).
Ruthnam was not sure when she had first met the Respondent but thought it was
probably about two years ago when she contacted
the local university to find a
psychologist for the pain management program at the hospital. When she first
spoke to the Respondent
he did not disclose that he had a complaint lodged
regarding his conduct between 2003 and 2005. The Respondent disclosed the matter
sometime later and she was of the view that it wasn’t
materially relevant to the terms of his employment’
at the hospital.
She stated the reason for her view was that the Respondent had been practising
successfully without a complaint as
a clinical psychologist in the intervening
years. Later in her evidence Mrs Ruthnam stated that her actual professional
the Respondent while he was seeing patients in the hospital was for
a period of about six months and was not
‘an extensive
experience’
(T11) although his reputation had ‘preceded
him’. She was unable to provide details of the assessment of the patients
prior to their entry into the pain management program (T12).
had only been about eight patients on the pain management program and Mrs
Ruthnam had read some of the notes written by the
Respondent. She had never
observed him during a clinical intervention or supervising an intern
psychologist or an interaction with
a child (as the opportunity did not occur
given the nature of the program) (T7).
Ruthnam stated that she had had conversations with the Respondent regarding the
situation that brought him before the Tribunal.
She gave the following evidence
at T7.33 – 9.13 (13/4/11):
Q. So it's right that you then can't tell this Tribunal
anything about how you believe Dr Donnelly may react were he to come across
information which suggested that a child might be at risk?
A. Well, I mean, I discussed this with Dr Donnelly and I do have
some experience in this area being the train the trainer for the
legislation for
mandatory reporting commenced sometime in the 1980s. I managed the nursing
department here; so, we have had some
discussions about what happened and what
happened all those years ago and what his response was. Dr Donnelly is
very clear that
he made an error of judgment that had catastrophic consequences
for a child, and so, you know, he would obviously not make that error
judgment again. He's reflected extensively on what happened. It has in many
ways destroyed his life; his personal and his professional
life have both been
very damaged by this. His professional reputation now has been very badly
damaged by this, and Dr Donnelly is
very aware that he made an error of
judgment. Being a health professional, we really do - and I believe
Malcolm and I mentioned
in our letter that, you know, people can be
rehabilitated; people can be redeemed, and, look, there's no reason on earth to
that Dr Donnelly would in any circumstances contemplate making the
same error of judgment twice.
Q. But in saying that, you can rely only upon what Dr Donnelly has
told you, and there's no other material upon which you can rely
in saying what
you've just said.
A. Dr Donnelly is an extraordinarily intelligent and educated and
articulate man, and in the course of our conversations when, you
discuss what he had been through, what the matters are after reading extensively
what's available on the public record,
then why would I ever - is he
to be damned forever, is there to be no trust. I think we've all made
professional errors of judgment
in our professional life, and I think we've all
been called to account for them. I believe that, you know, we acknowledge, we
we educate ourselves or re-educate ourselves and we don't tend to make
the same errors of judgment twice. Why should I believe that
Dr Donnelly
Q. Ms Ruthnam, what I'm interested is what actual information or
evidence you can give this Tribunal that will assist them in their
assessment of risk. So, what I'm anxious to ascertain from you is what matters
in Dr Donnelly's professional behaviour or interaction
with patients you
have observed which could assist the Tribunal in their assessment of risk, and
from what you've said you have not
had the opportunity yourself to observe him
in any situation in which he may come across a child potentially at risk, and
for your assessment on that solely on what he's told you.
A. Well, I believe I'm a reasonable judge of character. I mean, I run
the private health service in Coffs Harbour, we employ lots
of people, and I've
come across and had to discipline many people in my professional life, and I
believe that professional - the
more professional and educated people
are, the more experienced they are, the more likely they are in general terms
not to repeat
errors of judgment. Why on earth would Dr Donnelly repeat
the same error of judgment, I ask. I find it uncanny that you believe
could possibly be a risk.
Q. You referred in your letter to your knowledge of Dr Donnelly's
professional practice. You've described in your evidence this
morning that that
is entirely a group interaction. Have you had the opportunity to observe
Dr Donnelly in any one on one interactions
with patients within the
A. No, that's not part of his employment.
Q. So, in the course of his employment with you, he has no one to one
interaction with patients?
A. No. It's entirely a group. The assessment process, I guess he would
have assessed each patient prior to the program individually
to assess their
suitability for participation, but, no, I didn't sit it on any of those things.
It wouldn't have been indicated
and it wouldn't have been appropriate.
Q. Does it also follow that you are not able to tell the Tribunal
anything about how, if at all, Dr Donnelly could interact or has
with child protection specialists?
A. No, that's not part of his job here. We don't treat children. People
are here to have their pain managed and not to enter into
a, you know,
therapeutic relationship about any other matter. However, if they were, I would
state my own reputation and I would
re-employ a contract with Dr Donnelly
if and when I had the opportunity. He was appointed here in a position of trust
acquitted well and why would he be responsible for making the same
mistake again. Of course, he wouldn't, no matter what the circumstances
He would report anything to do with child protection in a responsible way; we've
discussed it, and I would not state my professional
reputation and vehemently
support someone unless it was after a lot of consideration.
in her evidence Mrs Ruthnam was asked to clarify what the
was that she referred to as having been made by the
Respondent. Mrs Ruthnam stated (T12.47- 13.5, 13/4/11):
A. That there was an error and he didn't follow the mandatory
notification and identify there was as child at risk and also the situation
the psychologist that was working with him at the time.
Q. So, two errors of judgment?
A. If you like.
asked about receipt of an email from the Respondent seeking a reference Mrs
Ruthnam stated that the letter she provided were
her opinions and not anyone
else’s words. She recalled receiving an email about the matter from
someone she did not know
acting on behalf of the Respondent but could not
remember receiving an email dated the day before her reference.
Ruthnam clarified that she did not receive a verbal request from the Respondent
for a reference; rather she received more than
one email from a person (probably
a person called Jenny Grant). At some time she had ‘googled’ at the
request of the
Respondent who had told her it was publically available and she
had found and read a lengthy document that she described as a transcript
evidence before the Tribunal. She had done this at some time prior to receiving
the request for a reference on 28 July 2010.
The reference dated 29 July 2010
had been written by her in her office and then edited by both herself and Mr
Hill was also called to give evidence before the Tribunal by way of telephone.
Mr Hill is the Rehabilitation Manager at the Baringa
rehabilitation Service. He
is a qualified physiotherapist. Mr Hill expressed the view that he did not
consider the Respondent posed
a substantial risk to the health of any member of
the public.
cross-examination Mr Hill gave the following evidence (T53.1-36, T53.45-T56.14,
T56.28-57.30, 13/4/11):
Q. Are you working in clinical practice as a
physiotherapist?
Q. Is that the context in which you've come into contact with
Dr Donnelly?
A. Yes and no. I've come into contact with Dr Donnelly as a member
of the pain management team. My initial contact with Dr Donnelly
the capacity of preparing and formulating a pain management program, but
Dr Donnelly was involved in the set up of it and
guiding and development a
pain management program which is currently running.
Q. In terms of involvement or awareness of Dr Donnelly's clinical
practice, that is through your involvement in providing pain management
on a rehabilitation program?
A. My understanding - sorry, just repeat the question?
Q. Well, I'm trying to ascertain the extent of your experience of
Dr Donnelly's clinical practice, and I understand that that is
through your
joint involvement on the adult rehabilitation program; is that correct?
Q. Is it correct that you worked together with Dr Donnelly on that
A. On the program that ran in June 2010, yes.
Q. In June 2010, and how long did that program run for?
A. That was a three week program.
Q. Is that the only circumstance in which you have provided clinical
services together with Dr Donnelly?
A. Dr Donnelly was involve in pre-program assessment for that
particular program which was in May 2010.
Q. Were you also involved in those assessment?
A. Yes, they were multi-disciplinary assessments.
Q. So, they were joint assessments?
A. They were assessments but done individually.
Q. So, were you present with Dr Donnelly when he conducted his
assessments?
A. Not in the room with him.
Q. When Dr Donnelly has conducted attendances on patients during
that three week program, would you have been present in the room
A. Not for the entirety of the session. They were group therapy sessions
conducted by Dr Donnelly, by the psychologist. I wasn't
required to
attend. It wouldn't be normal practice for me to attend those sessions.
Q. Did you attend any of Dr Donnelly's group therapy
Q. Have you read through Dr Donnelly's psychology notes in respect
of any of those patients on the three week program?
Q. For what purpose did you do that?
A. Part of getting Dr Donnelly's input as well as verbal feedback
from Dr Donnelly regarding the patients, remembering that he's
group therapy for this program, not individual therapy; so for hand-over
services and inside services to the patients.
Q. Were there any intern or student psychologists involved in the
provision of this three week program?
Q. So, is it right that you have no experience of Dr Donnelly
supervising a student or intern?
A. That's correct.
Q. Now, you've written a letter dated 29 July 2010 and you wrote
that together with Elizabeth Ruthnam; is that correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Have you read over that letter before giving evidence today?
A. I have, yes, read over it.
Q. Are you satisfied that everything in that letter is true to the best
of your knowledge and belief?
A. To the best of my knowledge and belief, yes.
Q. That letter was prepared following receipt by you of an email dated
28 July 2010, wasn't it?
A. I did not receive that email. That may - look, that may
have come through my CEO. My interaction was through Dr Donnelly
support in this matter.
Q. Was that a verbal or a written request from Dr Donnelly?
A. I think Dr Donnelly sent me an email. I've gone through my past
emails and I can't locate it at the moment, probably because
it was of such a
sensitive nature that I read it and deleted it immediately, I'd say, and
Dr Donnelly the subsequently, to the best
of my knowledge, followed up with
a phone call.
Q. I have a copy of an email, and I appreciate you're on the telephone
and you've said that you deleted the email, but I have a copy
of an email dated
28 July 2010 sent from Dr Donnelly to a number of people and you are
one of those people. The name is given as:
Hill, Malcolm, and it's an email
making a request for a letter of support for Dr Donnelly for the purposes
of a hearing before this
Tribunal. Do you agree that you received an email from
Dr Donnelly around that time asking you to prepare a letter of
A. To the best of my knowledge, I recall that email being sent. As I
said, I must have subsequently deleted that email.
Q. And following that email, you did prepare a letter of support together
with Ms Ruthnam?A. That's correct.
Q. For the purposes of preparing that letter of support, did you read the
decision of the psychologists tribunal, and before you
answer that if I could
tell you that that is a document that's about 203 pages long and which contains
a detailed account of the
complaint, the evidence before the Tribunal and the
Tribunal's finding; is that a document that you read for the purposes of writing
this letter?
A. I did not read that document in entirety.
Q. Did you read that document at all?
A. I read on the web site with the - sorry, what's your
abbreviated term?
Q. I'm not sure what term you mean. I was asking you whether you'd read
the document which is the Tribunal's decision on a complaint
Dr Donnelly.
A. I did not read that document. I'm aware - I took in good
faith that my CEO, Ms Ruthnam, has perused that document and
me, I'm just gathering my thoughts. So, I took in took
faith that Elizabeth, my CEO, had scanned that document and was
appropriately
- advised me on its contents and our liability I
suppose, for want of a better word, in supporting Dr Donnelly's
Q. The first word you used is that she'd scanned the document; is that
what she said to you, that she had scanned the Tribunal's
A. Like, this is from an event from two months ago, approximately; I
can't remember the exact language that Elizabeth used, but she's
the CEO of this
organisation and she would not have taken it lightly.
Q. Do you have the letter in front of you that you wrote together with
Ms Ruthnam - Mrs Ruthnam, I should say?
A. I have the letter.
Q. If you look on the first page of that letter, the final paragraph on
that page begins, "We are aware of Dr Donnelly's disciplinary
hearing and
are fully aware of all the circumstances from the public record." Is it right
that you, yourself, were not aware of
any circumstances from the public record,
the only circumstances you were aware of were those that Mrs Ruthnam shared
A. Well, that was on the public record, wasn't it?
Q. You didn't read any public record?
A. I didn't read the public record, but Mrs Ruthnam read it.
Q. What did she tell you were the findings against
Dr Donnelly?
A. I do not recall specifically. I know the matter is in relation to a
student that Dr Donnelly was supervising and his
involvement
- one of the patients under that student's care.
Q. Now, you just said, I think, that you knew in general terms what you
just said but you also knew further details about the Tribunal's
against Dr Donnelly; is that correct?
A. Yeah, I - look, I certainly know - I was briefed
by Mrs Ruthnam, my CEO, and certainly knew the gravity of the event and
Dr Donnelly
had divulged those to me via the email at the time and verbally
as part of his defence, and I have also in preparation for this Tribunal
have subsequently scanned the documents because, as you say, there's 200 page
documents, or thereabouts.
Q. What do you mean by scanned the document?
A. Well, efficiently read, speed read.
Q. Can you explain to me why then you say in this letter on the second
page, towards the bottom of the second paragraph on that page,
you say that,
"Dr Donnelly's current practice is an entirely different field to that
which his previous error related." What was
the field in which his previous
error arose?
A. Excuse me, I'm just scanning our letter from
the - 25 July 2010. Can you repeat just the start of that
paragraph again
Q. The second paragraph on the second page of your letter and what you
have said in the last two lines of that paragraph is: indeed,
his current
practice is an entirely different field to that which his previous error
related. Do you see that phrase?
A. Yes, I've found it.
Q. What was your understanding of the field in which what you've
described as his previous error arose?
A. Well, my understanding of the previous error was that Dr Donnelly
was supervising a psychology student who was managing
- managing a child at risk.
Q. So, was your understanding that the field in which the error related
was an area where Dr Donnelly was directly providing psychology
through an intern to a child?
A. My understanding that Dr Donnelly was acting as a clinical
supervisor for a student psychologist in the area of paediatrics, children,
clinical psychologist.
Q. So is that why you said in this letter to the Tribunal that he was now
practising in an entirely different field?
A. Well, the area in which we engaged Dr Donnelly was adult group
therapy and pain management.
Q. Now, I just want to ask you a different question and that is: when
did Dr Donnelly first tell you about the complaint against
complaint in relation to him?
A. Again, the exact time frame I am unsure of, but it would have fitted
around that July 2010.
Q. Can you remember: was that before or after the Tribunal's
A. I don't recall.
questioned by the Tribunal Mr Hill gave evidence that prior to writing the
reference he had read a summary document on the internet
which had a link to the
full decision. He did not read the full decision, only the summary document. At
this point the Tribunal notes
that the HCCC website publishes a summary of
tribunal decisions which end with a hyperlink to the Reasons for Decision
document loaded
onto the Austlii site.
writing the reference Mr Hill had read part of the beginning of the Reasons for
Decision document and then had briefly scanned
the balance of the document over
Reasons for Decision document
was approximately 200 pages long and dealt with
the complaints relating to both the Respondent and Ms Dene.
Hill was asked what he had relied upon to make the statement
Donnelly does not represent a risk to us or our patients’
that he understood from Mrs Ruthnam that the Respondent had been recommended
through the Southern Cross University as well
as the interactions he had with
the Respondent in relation to the Pain Management program. Mr Hill maintained
this position even
though he was challenged about the fact that he had never
seen or observed the Respondent’s clinical interactions with the
in the group sessions nor was he fully aware of the nature of the assessments
carried out by the Respondent (T64).
Hill then gave the following evidence (T64.7-42, 13/4/11):
Q. Can I just ask you to pause there. You have never
seen/observed his clinical interactions with patients in his group sessions,
you were not fully aware of the nature of the assessments he carried out. So,
what professional interactions are you relying
upon in telling this Tribunal
that Dr Donnelly does not represent a risk to your patients?
A. Well, I'm relying on professional, I guess - just hang on
while I word my reply. I'm thinking it through. I am relying on the
recommendation of a senior colleague in this organisation as to
Dr Donnelly's conduct.
Q. Can you tell me what you know of Ms Ruthnam's
qualifications?
A. As far as - Mrs Ruthnam is the CEO here. She's a
registered nurse. I'm not sure of her other qualifications.
Q. So, the first thing is the recommendation. Is there anything else you
relied upon?
A. Okay. The time spent with Dr Donnelly in the preparation phase
for the program, that interaction we had. I had three or four
meetings with
Dr Donnelly in the establishment of the program and also time spent with
Dr Donnelly whilst the program was running.
Q. Can I ask you to pause there.
A. Through--
A. Through team meetings and the briefing with Dr Donnelly post his
sessions in my role as the pain program coordinator. Also from
verbal feedback
from the eight participants and also written feedback from the eight
participants in the program. The feedback was
full of praise for
Dr Donnelly and at no time was his conduct questioned by those
Q. How did that enable you to conclude that he was not a risk to your
patients, bearing in mind this Tribunal's findings?
A. At the time that Dr Donnelly undertook the program he was
registered.
Q. Is that your answer?
asked about the time delay in providing some of his answers Mr Hill stated that
he just need some time to gather his thoughts
‘to give the best
truthful answer’
because he wanted to assist the Respondent in the
best possible way as the Respondent was a valued member of the community and
matter as such an
‘enormous issue’
Respondent’s
‘professional, personal and social life’.
Mr Hill then gave the following evidence (T65.44-47, 13/4/11):
Q. But you didn't think it was necessary to read the entirety
of the Tribunal decision document?
A. It's 200 pages, I read the summary. I'd like to know how many people
in that room have read the entire 200 pages, and you can
quote that.
Reference of Jeff Nelson
Nelson provided a reference undated and unsigned reference which came into
evidence as exhibit RA-D. The reference was received
in the Registry on 8
September 2010.
reference reads:
I write this letter through my concern about the recent
de-registration of Dr. Donnelly and the inference that Dr. Donnelly’s
continued practice of clinical psychology presents a danger to the community. I
have known Dr. Donnelly for about 18 months and
consider him to be both a
trusted and knowledgeable colleague and a personal friend. I was employed by
Southern Cross University
in the role of Director of Research and Research
Training at their GNIBI College of Indigenous Australian Peoples. As a part of
that role I was required to consult widely and to develop multi-disciplinary
opportunities for research and program development.
I met Dr. Donnelly in the
process of these collaborations.
Dr. Donnelly struck me as a person who had a genuine concern about the
current and future welfare of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples, as
an individual who had a lot to offer to our community, and as a practitioner who
was eager to learn and to develop
his proficiency in working with our people. I
quickly formed the opinion that there was much that could be learnt from the
of Dr. Donnelly’s clinical experiences in Australia and overseas,
especially from his work with people from marginalised and
disadvantaged
communities. Our professional relationship has developed to the stage where we
now co-supervise two PhD students and
one Honours student and have just recently
completed an investigation into the safety of students enrolled in the Masters
of Indigenous
Studies program. The investigation was triggered by a number of
complaints about the emotional and psychological effects of the
facilitation practiced in this course.
Dr. Donnelly’s contribution to this investigation was admirable.
His focus on engineering a framework that ensured safety for
not only the
students but also the facilitators was not only educational for me but also for
all of the other members of the panel.
He argued that personal safety was not
only our highest priority but an ethical duty that was non-negotiable. The
outcomes of this
investigation are being currently considered by the
University’s executive and a substantial rewrite of the program’s
unit content, facilitation style, and support structure has begun. My
observations of Dr. Donnelly’s concern for safety have
not been limited to
our work with the investigation; it is also clearly evident in our work with our
higher-degree research students.
This is especially the case with one who is
displaying great interest in the effectiveness of clinical supervision in
organisations: the student is an Indigenous psychologist. Dr.
Donnelly is requiring this student to consider the potential negative
of her proposed study at every decision point, making her consider how her
participants would be supported, to consider
how she and her collaborators would
be supported, and to consider what an effective pathway would look like.
I was shocked when Dr. Donnelly told me of the action (HCCC v DENE &
DONNELLY (No:2)
[2010] NSWPST 4
(8 July 2010)) against him and of its outcome:
I was even more alarmed when I studied the details of the case. I am not in a
to question the decisions that were made and will not attempt to in
this document. I can only offer the following comments that
I request you take
into consideration if an appeal to the decision is lodged.
Donnelly has volunteered that he did make a number of unfortunate and erroneous
decisions in this case.
Donnelly has always, in my experience, advocated for developing systems and
frameworks to maximise safety in all facets of his
clinical and educational
Donnelly works very well with members of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander community and of other marginalised and disadvantaged
groups. His
opinions and advice are well accepted and his continued efforts are working to
reduce the impact of a long-held rejection
of mainstream psychological
Donnelly’s knowledge and experience of clinical neuropsychology is a rare
commodity on New South Wales’ north coast
and his inability to provide
this service will impact very strongly on the welfare of people in this
Donnelly has developed an effective professional relationship with members of
the NSW Department of Community Services (Human
Services) and was working in
close collaboration with them on matters of child safety.
Donnelly’s reduced capacity to supervise within the university system is
strongly impacting on the capacity of Southern
Cross University to fulfil its
obligations to the local community, especially in matters of mental health and
My confidence that Dr. Donnelly’s professional behaviour
is beyond ethical question may be evidence that the process of the
inquiry has
caused Dr. Donnelly to strongly reflect on his practices and to have become more
aware of the need for caution and safety.
I will be available to attend and discuss this matter if required.
Reference of Nigel Pain
Pain provided a reference dated 27 August 2010 which came into evidence as
exhibit RA-E.
reference reads:
I have known Dr James (Jim) Donnelly professionally since 2002
whilst he was working at [Regional University] in the Psychology
Department.
In 2002 Dr Donnelly was involved in the implementation phase for the
Division of General Practice’s Memory Assessment Program
and Support Services (MAPSS). This service was set up in collaboration
Hunter New England Health and the [Regional University]’s
Psychology Department.
As part of the program which commenced in February 2003, Dr Donnelly
provided Neuropsychological assessments for patients referred
to MAPSS. His
role involved:
liaising with
patients and their carers during the assessment process
supervising
Psychology interns whilst they conducted these comprehensive memory assessment
and then whilst completing the reports
case conferences and supervising the Psychology intern to deliver the findings
of the assessment
the management committee for the Memory Assessment Program (MAPSS)
community and professional education as organised through MAPSS
Dr Donnelly was professional in his dealings with patients
referred into MAPSS and showed great compassion and care towards both the
being assessed and their carers during what is often a very stressful time. Jim
was very supportive of MAPSS during his time
in Armidale and we never had reason
to question his ethical behaviour.
Dr Donnelly’s professional association with the New England Division
of General Practice ended in 2005, when he left [Regional
University].
I am aware of the current findings of the Tribunal against Dr Donnelly,
however, from my experience of having worked with Jim, consider
it would be a
great loss to have him prevented from working in his chosen and well suited
profession. In acknowledging that the
Tribunal has ruled he made errors in his
clinical judgement, I can only state that Dr Donnelly always had the best
interest of his
patient and their family in mind and would not intentionally
make poor professional decisions.
It would be a great loss to future Psychology students to not have Dr
Donnelly as a mentor and someone who can inspire them in their
chosen field.
Valerie Judith Atkinson
Atkinson provided a reference dated 3 September 2010. A signed copy of this
reference ultimately came into the file. Her
reference read:
I write to provide support in your appeal against the findings
of the NSW Psychologist Tribunal which found, that in their view:
you failed to
identify children as at risk of significant harm from 2003 to 2005, and
therefore did not notify the relevant authorities
of that risk; and
failed to take appropriate action to protect those children from harm because
they did not believe that your referral of
the children to a paediatric clinical
psychologist was adequate.
In addition, they found that because you allowed an intern to
continue on the case to provide long-term therapy, despite her own history;
because you did not read all her notes or her discharge summary while seeing her
for face-to-face supervision, you had not diligently
supervised the
I am aware that when the intern did make a Dept. Of Community Services
report, after she learned additional facts while treating the
patient in her
private practice several months after leaving [Regional University], the
patient/perpetrator was found to have initiated
a sexual relationship with his
Knowing this, I write to provide support for your appeal, because I have
known you in a working relationship since 2006, when we began
to work together
in your position as Lecturer/Senior Clinical and Neuropsychologist, Psychology,
School of Health and Human Sciences
at Southern Cross University; and myself, as
Professor of Indigenous Australian Studies, and Head of Gnibi College of
Australian Peoples.
From my observation and knowledge of you, I find such conduct totally out
of character, totally at odds with what I know and have
experienced in my
working relationship with you. I am also aware that you have been quite
distressed by learning that your patient
was a paedophile and have reflected
thoroughly on how to improve your practice to avoid similar
misjudgements.
Since 2009, we have developed a sound professional working relationship,
more particularly in our exploration of possible better therapeutic
services to
Aboriginal peoples. As you know, all my work for the last 25 years has focused
on the issues of violence trauma and
recovery within Aboriginal Australian
families and communities, as well as at the international level.
During the time I have worked with you, in all our personal and
professional interactions, I have observed and experienced a person
ethical integrity in all your work standards. We have discussed how we can
build better therapeutic services for Aboriginal
families – women children
and men, in the area of violence and in particular, sexual violence. I was
impressed with your advocacy
for high professional standards and cultural
competence in training settings. You demonstrated to me a clear understanding
complexity of many situations in which I work, as I debriefed with you,
and you provided me good counsel in building safeguards in
my work practice,
both in teaching practice and in community based work.
In particular I observed and appreciated your attention to safe ethical
practice in your teaching standards, in the field of psychology.
You advocated
to me the need for specialist care in psychology services, for specialist areas
(such as child sexual assault), and
we explored the possibilities of a focus on
the educational needs for more Aboriginal psychologists with specialist skills
area of sexual offending.
More particularly I would not have recently invited you to work with me on
a postgraduate degree qualification, for specialist skills
for working with
children and adolescents who are now sexually offending against smaller children
(a need defined in the report by
the Australian Crimes Commission:
Australia’s Response to Sexualised or Sexually Abusive Behaviours in
Children and Young People 2010 p39
) if I did not have complete faith in the
quality and ethics of your work, both as a specialist psychologist, and as a
I recognize your combined skills in neuropsychology and clinical
psychology, in teaching of psychology and group work, all of which
are rare in
NSW, and that they should be encouraged, not undermined. In particular, I was
excited to be able to work with you on
community capacity building, as we
discussed how we could increase the skill level of people working with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander clients.
I appreciate that you took the time to sit with my masters students, as we
reviewed the Masters of Indigenous Studies. These students
are working with
Aboriginal peoples in Juvenile Justice; prisons, on violence reduction programs;
in child protection; in programs
with women who have been subject to violence,
and with young people in high school. You earned their respect.
Please provide my name and contact details to whoever may need them in
further testimony from me could be used to support your appeal.
Atkinson gave evidence by telephone. She stated that she had retired from the
Southern Cross University where she had been
a Professor of Indigenous
Australian Studies. She holds a PhD from the Queensland University of technology
focussed on violence,
trauma and generational trauma. She is not a registered
psychologist and had not been in practice
‘under western terms of
. She was now working in business, was the Patron of the
Relay Trust and a faculty member of the Harvard Global Mental Health Trauma
Recovery Program.
asked if she had reflected upon the content of her reference dated 3 September
2010 she gave the following evidence (T19.3-18,
I guess in retrospect deepened my belief that Jim Donnelly is
not a threat to the general public. I don't think I made it clear enough
letter to you that Jim Donnelly and I had a relationship, working relationship
where we were attempting to develop some way
that we could address, work
together to address the issues of sexual violence in particular and violence to
both older children and
former children in Aboriginal communities. Now, I
should tell you that I am an Aboriginal woman. I have worked in this area now
for nearly 25 years and probably I was the first person in Australia to
draw attention to some of the concerns of violence generally
and sexual violence
in particular within Aboriginal communities across Australia. I don't think I
made that as clear in the letter
as I should have. I also make it clear that I
would not have been talking to another person about my concerns about a working
relationship
if he hadn't demonstrated to me previously that his integrity and
his very real concerns for doing it right, for tracing what I would
cultural faith here as the primary factor in all our work, and I haven't made
that clear in the letter as much as I should have.
Professor Atkinson also gave the following evidence (T21.23-22.40, 13/4/11):
Q. Yes. So, you've given evidence and your letter sets out
that you worked with Dr Donnelly in developing better therapeutic services
and developing teaching modules, but what I want to know is whether you've ever
worked with Dr Donnelly in circumstances where he
has been acting as a
psychologist to a particular patient or client?
A. No, I haven't because that was not our working relationship. Our
working relationship was developing better educational approaches,
a need that
Q. Next I just wanted to ask you whether you have ever observed
Dr Donnelly in his relationship or supervision of a psychology
A. No, I haven't but I have observed him in working relationships with my
students and how he engaged with them which is obviously
very different to
supervising an intern.
Q. Can I just ask you whether you have ever read the decision of this
psychology tribunal on the complaints which were before it
in relation to
Dr Donnelly, and just before you answer, if I tell you that that decision
is approximately 200 pages long and it's
in a document which has an official
header for the Tribunal and contains details of the complaint, the evidence and
the Tribunal's
A. No, I haven't read that. It's never been provided to me to
Q. So is it right that the letter you wrote was based upon your own
personal experience with Dr Donnelly together with the information
provided you in the email dated 28 July 2010?
A. The letter I wrote is based on my working relationship with
Dr Donnelly. It was based on my observation of the way he worked
students and with colleagues. It was based on long conversations that we had
around the particular issue that you're now -
the Tribunal is informed
letter that I wrote was not
informed by the email that he sent to me as opposed
to my own observations and my own desire to see justice.
Q. For example, if you look at the first two paragraphs of your
reference; do you see that?
Q. You see that you have reference to the findings of the New South Wales
Psychologists Tribunal which found that in their view you
failed to identify
children as at risk.
Q. So you see those two paragraphs where you've got the two--
A. But didn't you take appropriate action.
Q. Do you accept that that information there came directly from the email
that Dr Donnelly sent you, and just before you answer that
you might want
to look at the email and look in particular - do you have that in
front of you?
Q. Do you see the second bullet point, about three-quarters of the way
down that email, where it says: you are aware - he's setting
it might be - what it would be appropriate to include, and see how it
says: you are aware of the findings of the Tribunal
that in their view I failed
to identify children at risk of harm. Do you accept that what you put in your
letter is taken pretty
much word for word from what Dr Donnelly sent to you
in his email?
A. Yes. Because I believe that what he quoted out there and what I put
into that letter both are relative to what I was trying to
say. I accept the
findings of the Tribunal. I may not fully agree with every part of it.
Q. So, to the extent that you knew about the findings of the Tribunal,
your knowledge of those findings came from this email and
from any other
information Dr Donnelly gave you?
A. And other people.
Atkinson indicated that she had spoken to other people who were also concerned
She gave the following evidence about
people contacting her (T23.7-31, 13/4/11):
Q. Could you be more specific than that?
A. Not at this stage. I mean, I'm sure that you've had contact with
those others who are in support of Dr Donnelly in any way that
appropriate, but, no, I just know that I had developed a good working
relationship with a man who sat with me and we talked
working in what I think is one of the most difficult areas that there is, and
that is issues of sexual abuse
in children, and I developed a great deal of
trust in him, and he told me many times that he, himself, felt inadequate in
as well as he would like to and he described to me the circumstances
that the Tribunal are now looking for - looking at. I go back
saying that I wrote my letter in support of him because my belief still stands
firm on that but even more so.
Can I add a statement here or - and I know this Tribunal is like
a Court of law in a way, and I find these things really difficult
struggled for a long time, really 25 years of my life; try to understand
the levels of violence and sexual violence in Aboriginal
communities. Jim
Donnelly was one of the first academics who has worked with me in some way to
get people to look at the quality
of education that we could put together to
skill people up to working in what I think to be the most, most difficult field.
we have in Australia now is what I call an epidemic. We have children
abusing children in communities. There are still no services
that have been
developed to meet those needs. So, if I feel a little bit stressed and I'm
feeling strong about something, it's because
I think we are failing our children
tremendously. I think Australia and I think there are professions who are only
just waking up
to their own responsibilities to do this better. Okay, I'll be
quiet for a while.
Atkinson was unable to provide the Tribunal with the additional information the
Respondent received as referred to in her
reference as she had not kept a note
of it and the conversation had occurred some time ago.
she had not read the Tribunal’s Reasons for Decision document Professor
Atkinson stated she had had a number of conversations
with the Respondent
regarding his conduct. She gave the following evidence
(T30.26-31.8,13/4/11):
Q. But maybe if you could just give me an outline of what you
understood the situation to be.
A. I just need to go back to the original conversations when Jim and I
first met, and he - and we started to talk about how we could
together and he told me about a situation that he was in, and he said it's
probably the worst experience of his life because
he feels that he didn't do
everything he possibly could do, even under the exceptional circumstances. So,
what I understood is that
he was supervising an intern and neither of them had
picked up the behaviours of one of their clients, and the intern had gone on
counsel with this man until finally he had found out that he had a sexual
relationship - that he had initiated a sexual relationship
daughter. The main thing that I heard that Jim was beating himself up about it,
and this is well before I understood anything
that happened.
He said it's probably the most important lesson he's ever learnt in his
life, how we have to dot our I's and cross our T's on issues
like this; that he
hadn't understood the full extent of the intern's needs and that it went well
beyond any normal, in terms of supervision,
because of her recent history that
neither of them had picked up the man, the potential behaviours. I'm not sure
whether he was
at the time sexually assaulting or sexually involved with his
daughter or whether that happened later, with all the distress that
happening in the family. So, it was about that. Now I just need to make the
point that this conversation happened very early;
it was within the first month
or two months that - Jim and I were sitting together to explore how we
could work professionally within
the university together. He told me something
I guess that would in normal circumstances have somebody think, oh, maybe it's
good for him to work here and got it right. I actually thought it
privileged to hear, not just his distress about it, but also that
he had learnt
tremendously from it. I thought it was something that I could learn from as
well because, yes, so, that was the background
appears from the evidence in relation to this matter that the Respondent’s
skills as a psychologist assisted in dealing with
the stress suffered by the
students in the Indigenous studies course.
Reference of
Emily Hindman
Hindman provided a reference which appears to be dated 16 August 2010 came into
evidence as exhibit RA-G. Ms Hindman is a PhD candidate
at the Southern Cross
University.
reference read:
The purpose of this letter is to provide a character reference
for Dr James Donnelly whom I have known for over 12 months initially
Psychology lecturer, and currently as my PhD supervisor.
I am aware that the NSW Psychologist Tribunal has decided to de-register
Dr Donnelly for a period of 3 years due to errors in clinical
judgments made
while working at the [Regional University] from 2003 to 2005. I recognise that
these errors resulted in the failure
to take appropriate actions to protect
children from harm and a failure in his supervision responsibilities to the
intern psychologist
involving the case. I am further aware that there is an
additional decision pending regarding a prohibition order that would prevent
Donnelly from delivering any health related services.
I understand and support the necessity for psychologists to conduct
themselves with impeccable ethical standards. Similarly, I acknowledge
Tribunal’s important role of ensuring psychologists conduct themselves in
accordance with these high standards and that
protective orders are designed to
deter psychologists from behaving in ways that are less than optimal. I also
fully support the
need for the Tribunal’s prohibition orders to protect
the public from harm.
The errors in clinical judgement made by Dr Donnelly strike me as
completely uncharacteristic. Based on my experience and knowledge,
Donnelly’s behaviour and judgement are reflective of a high level of skill
and knowledge. He conducts himself with integrity
at all times, consistently
models high standards of ethical behaviour, and displays concern for the
emotional welfare of students
and colleagues. For example, in a recent
discussion with me about the number of deaths among the Indigenous community
assessing older adults, he ensured that I was comfortable with the
level of emotional support available within the Neuroscience Research
team responsible for the project and contacted the Chief Investigator on my
When informing me of the Tribunal’s decision Dr Donnelly expressed
regret for the errors he made in 2003. His reaction at that
time was consistent
with my previous observations of his character. He stated the importance of
complying with the Tribunal’s
decision and it was clear that his primary
concern was for the well being of the children involved in the case, and
minimising any
adverse consequences that his deregistration would have on his
current clients, colleagues and students. This is a testament to
Dr Donnelly
placing the needs of others over his own.
Dr Donnelly has consistently promoted the ethical practice of psychology
in both research and clinical settings. More specifically,
as a lecturer he
diligently advocated for students to not only conduct themselves with high
ethical standards, but to question and
challenge less than optimal ethical
standards in both current and future working environments.
As a supervisor, Dr Donnelly has always demonstrated high levels of
professionalism and commitment. He is passionate about conducting
research with the potential to provide benefits to society, whilst being
supportive and respectful of my personal abilities
and needs. Dr
Donnelly’s practical skills and expertise in clinical psychology and
neuropsychology, combined with his comprehensive
understanding of research
methodology, are invaluable in our regional university and the broader
Based on my knowledge of Dr Donnelly’s character, skills, expertise
and commitment to the practice of psychology, I believe
that he should not be
prohibited from providing health related services. To do so would be, in my
opinion, detrimental to the community’s
wellbeing, particularly in a
region drastically lacking in highly trained and skilled practitioners.
Reference of Joan K. Orrell-Valente
Valente provided an undated reference which came into evidence as exhibit RA-H).
This reference was received in the Registry on
1 September 2010. The HCCC
objected to those parts of this reference that sought to question the validity
of the Tribunal’s
Findings given the authors knowledge of the
Respondent’s
‘integrity and desire’.
The Tribunal noted
the objection and the reference read accordingly.
balance of her reference read:
I am a clinical psychologist and currently hold a joint
appointment as Assistant Professor in the Departments of Pediatrics and
at the University of California, San Francisco in the US.
I am writing in support of Dr James Donnelly. I am aware that a
psychologist tribunal has found that he should be de-registered because
have concluded that he intentionally ignored a report of child sexual abuse and
chose not to report the perpetrator to the proper
authorities. In addition, my
understanding is that the tribunal believes that Dr Donnelly failed in his
supervisory responsibilities
by allowing an intern to continue treating this
patient long-term although his intern voiced a negative reaction to the
disclosure that he massaged his daughter and it included
incidental contact with his child’s pubic area. It is also my
understanding
that the tribunal issued its ruling based on a perceived need to
protect the public because they concluded that Dr Donnelly lacked
insight into
the implications of his clinical judgment and is therefore at risk for
re-offending.
Respectfully, I find the validity of all these conclusions highly unlikely
given my knowledge of Dr Donnelly’s integrity and
desire to serve the
needs of his patients – he has in fact demonstrated his commitment to his
profession for over 20 years.
On its face, the conclusion that anyone would
intentionally ignore a report of child sexual abuse and choose to not report the
perpetrator
to the proper authorities is improbable. My question is what would
be his motivation? Further, I should think that Dr Donnelly’s
regarding supervision was most likely informed by what he knew of the case at
the time and his attempt to meet the needs
of the intern and the patient. Any
suggestion that he demonstrated callous disregard for the feelings or needs of
the intern, patient
or children involved is highly inconsistent with my
knowledge of Dr Donnelly’s behaviour in clinical or personal
I have known Dr Donnelly since we began training together in 1988 at
Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. We attended classes
were supervised by the same clinical staff for several placements and spent many
hours discussing the psychology literature,
including complex ethical cases. I
have also been his personal friend and professional colleague as we have both
developed as clinicians
and researchers since 1988. There has never been any
indication whatsoever in my interaction over the years with Dr Donnelly that
would even vaguely suggest that he would ever ignore evidence of abuse or that
he would not understand how errors in his clinical
judgment in this case could
be problematic. I have discussed this case with Dr Donnelly at length in recent
years and can attest
to his distress about the fact that he may have missed
important signs of abuse. I am also sure, based on my years of interactions
with Dr Donnelly about other clinical cases on which we have consulted each
other, that he consistently acts compassionately, insightfully,
and with the
highest professional integrity and skill.
Assuming that Dr Donnelly made errors in judgment on the case in question,
it would be highly anomalous given his conduct before and
after his experiences
at the [Regional University]. I am aware through multiple phone conversations
at the time that during 2004
and 2005 he became very distressed by conditions
created by the then Head of Clinical Training at [Regional University] and
conditions and that he eventually took medical leave. It is perhaps the
case that these conditions affected his judgment and should
be considered as a
mitigating factor.
I continue to value Dr. Donnelly as a skilled, ethical clinician and would
find his removal from the roles of clinical and neuropsychologists
community to be a great loss for his patients and colleagues.
Reference of Mathew Crawford, Maline Clogauer and Meg
Goodison-Farnsworth
Crawford, Clogauer and Goodison-Farnsworth provided an unsigned reference dated
30 August 2010 which came into evidence as exhibit
RA-I. A signed copy of the
reference was ultimately received by the Tribunal.
reference read:
We the undersigned have known Dr. James Donnelly in his capacity as head
of the Department of Psychology at the Sydney Children’s
Dr Donnelly was responsible for hiring one of us in a newly created
position. Due to Dr Donnelly’s keen clinical acumen and
insight he was
able to provide the collegial and departmental support that one of us had been
sorely lacking until his tenure at
Sydney Children’s Hospital. One of us
he worked with as a fellow member of the Sydney Children’s Hospital
medical faculty
and medical management department.
Dr. Donnelly was very instrumental in making the dream of a
multidisciplinary pain and palliative care team a reality at Sydney
Hospital. This was no small feat given the parameters of
public health and the amount of soft money that the Department of
Anaesthesiology
and Pain Medicine had received. Dr Donnelly worked tirelessly
to obtain monies to improve patient care through increasing of staff
and facilitating research in multiple areas of clinical psychology.
He was dedicated and enthusiastic in his contribution to bringing this
plan to fruition. He was directly responsible for hiring the
0.8 clinical
psychologist who is co-signing this letter of support.
The time Dr Donnelly was at Sydney Children’s Hospital his practice
of clinical psychology was conducted with unimpeachable
ethical standards, the
requisite high standard of skill knowledge, judgement and care, with full
understanding of protection from
harm for all those he came in contact
Whenever clinical issues came up, Dr Donnelly was always available and
made time to discuss patient issues and devise ethically sound
intervention.
Dr Donnelly always had the patient’s safety utmost in mind and did
not fail to suggest calling in other people to assist to
provide optimal patient
care and due diligence in child protection. Dr Donnelly was acutely aware of
child protection issues and
worked in the knowledge that Sydney Children’s
Hospital has a dedicated team for child protection. That Dr Donnelly has been
accused of negating responsibility around child protection is totally out of
character for him. His standards of patient interaction
were always modelled on
rigorous ethical guidelines and with a consistent demonstration of excellent
clinical knowledge, skill and
judgement in relation to care of all he came in
All interactions with Dr. Donnelly regarding patient safety were of a high
professional standard and he repeatedly demonstrated full
competence in a busy
tertiary referral hospital.
Dr Donnelly’s demonstrated the same high standard of professionalism
by dedicating significant time to education for all staff
at SCH around patient
assessment, diagnosis and intervention.
Dr Donnelly’s skills and expertise (combined neuropsychology and
clinical psychology, teaching of psychology, group work, community
building, consultation with medical teams) are particularly rare in rural NSW
and his commitment to community service should
not be underestimated.
Reference of Work Colleague Ms X
X provided an unsigned reference dated 29 July 2010 which came into evidence as
exhibit RA-J/K.
reference read:
I am aware of the Tribunal’s findings regarding Dr James
Donnelly, but I wish to express in writing my strongest support for
I have known Dr Donnelly in his capacity as an academic with Southern
Cross University (SCU) for over one year. I am also employed
as a casual
academic within the psychology discipline of SCU. During this period, I have
observed Dr Donnelly’s commitment
to upholding the highest professional
standards and competence in every situation. He has consistently resisted
administration efforts
to use generalist psychologists for specialist care and
has worked tirelessly to support and inform other employees of better options.
Dr Donnelly has also consistently demonstrated an admirable level of knowledge
and skill, whilst maintaining a caring attitude to
those around him.
Further to his collegial knowledge, Dr Donnelly has been seeing my teenage
daughter clinically for several months. I cannot commend
professionalism, skill and sensitivity during this time. He has been a
wonderful practitioner for her at a time when
she was particularly vulnerable.
She, and I, will be devastated if Dr Donnelly’s extensive skills and
knowledge are no longer
available to those who most need this kind of
professional service, especially in this, a regional centre, where finding
of the calibre of Dr Donnelly is both a delightful surprise and a
fabulous relief.
Please be assured that, both as a professional person and as a mother, I
value most highly the requirement for the practice of psychology
to be conducted
with unimpeachable ethical standards. It is my sincerest belief that Dr
Donnelly also values and upholds this tenet.
Equally, I fully appreciate and
commend the role of Tribunal prohibition orders in protecting the public from
harm, however, that
Dr Donnelly be prohibited from delivering health-related
services would be a tragic loss of unique talent, knowledge and experience.
respectfully ask the Tribunal to reconsider its decision.
Reference of Dr E K
E K provided an unsigned reference dated 2 August 2010 which came into evidence
as exhibit RA-L. A signed copy of the reference
was ultimately signed and
received by the Tribunal.
reference read:
I am writing to provide a character reference for Dr Donnelly.
I am a clinical
employed at Sydney Children’s Hospital
(SCH) as a Senior Staff Specialist am I am head of the
at SCH. During the period February 2006 to February 2009, when Dr Donnelly was
employed at SCH, he was responsible for providing
psychological services to
patients of the
service, so I had frequent professional contact
with him during the whole of that three year period. In 2008 one of my children
developed quite significant psychological problems and, at a time of crisis for
my family, I had no hesitation in turning to Dr Donnelly
for help. He was
successful in turning the situation around and the outcome has been excellent.
I thus have knowledge of Dr Donnelly’s
skills, attitude and approach to
families both from the perspective of a colleague and as the father of a
I would like to make it clear that I understand and fully support the need
for the highest ethical standards in the practice of psychology.
I am aware of
the role of Tribunal prohibition orders in protecting the public from harm, and
the use of such orders in deterring
psychologists from acting in a manner not
consistent with the high standards of skill, knowledge, judgement and care which
has a right to expect from them.
I have also been informed of the findings of the Tribunal that Dr Donnelly
failed to identify children as being at risk of significant
harm from 2003 to
2005. I’m aware of the finding that he failed to protect the children in
question from harm, and that the
referral of the children to a paediatric
clinical psychologist was not adequate. Further, I’m aware of the finding
Donnelly did not diligently supervise an intern who was involved in the
case, in that he did not read all of her notes or her discharge
summary, and did
not take consideration of her own history into account when allowing her to
provide longterm therapy. Overall my
understanding is that the Tribunal found
that Dr Donnelly made errors in clinical judgement in not reporting what turned
out subsequently
to be evidence of abuse, and that subsequently the patient was
found to be a paedophile.
Such conduct is inconsistent with my observations of Dr Donnelly’s
clinical ability and behaviour, and in my opinion is quite
out of character for
him. While child protection issues did not arise in any of the cases we were
both involved with, I was able
to make a number of related observations of his
approach to clinical practice and teaching which I think bear on these
Specifically, while Dr Donnelly was working at SCH, he was involved with
the care of many of my patients and their families. During
the three years we
had a number of joint consultations with families and I was able to directly
observe his clinical approach. I
formed the view that he is very thorough and
places a high value on the rights and wellbeing of the child. I was impressed
skills and asked him about his own training, which led to several
conversations about his own training and about the training of
psychologists and
medical trainees in general. Based on these discussions I can say with
confidence that Dr Donnelly advocates the
highest professional standards and
competence in training. In relation to some specific cases, he gave freely of
his time to teach
me and my junior staff the principles underlying his
management and provided practical guidance about our interactions with the
involved. This was useful for my own further education and very
Many of the disorders which affect the patients of the
service create a condition of uncertainty and suspense for the families of the
affected child. It isn’t always possible to
predict the long term
outcomes for children diagnosed in infancy, and in a number of disorders, minor
viral infections can cause
severe decompensations leading to the need for
frequent, unpredictable hospital admissions. Inevitably, this creates
considerable
psychological stresses on the family, and if there is any
underlying psychological problem such as anxiety in one of the parents,
cause major problems. Quite apart from the psychological impact on the family,
the medical management of the child can
be compromised. On more than one
occasion, Dr Donnelly’s contribution to the management of a family in this
situation was
the difference between the parents coping and not coping, with
profoundly positive effects on the child’s physical and mental
I mentioned above that Dr Donnelly provided teaching to junior staff
within my department. This was in the setting of very small
typically two to three people, often including myself. Dr Donnelly was always
attentive to the emotional wellbeing
of staff as well as patients. Although the
junior staff in question have generally had several years’ experience as
there are often situations – for example, involving the actual or
expected death of a young child – which even doctors
with many years of
experience may find stressful and difficult to cope with, and which can be very
challenging for a trainee. It
was evident that Dr Donnelly was alert to the
emotional impact that the work could have on my junior staff, and he provided
to them as well, where appropriate.
In summary, over a three year period I worked closely with Dr Donnelly.
He looked after the families of a number of my patients and
on some occasions he
and I saw families and children together. I think this places me in a strong
position to comment on his skills
and attitudes, of which I have a very high
opinion, as outlined above. I would like to reiterate that in my opinion the
events which
led to the Tribunal’s adverse finding against Dr Donnelly are
quite out of character for him and not consistent with my own
observations of
his professional behaviour.
I would be very happy to provide additional information if this would
Reference of Colleen Cartwright
Cartwright provided a reference dated 13 August 2010. The unsigned copy was
provided with the original bundle from the Respondent
(exhibit RA-M ) and the
signed reference was faxed to the Registry on 3 December 2010 (exhibit RA-M2).
The reference was provided
on the letter head of a research unit within the
Southern Cross University.
undated reference (exhibit RA-M) read:
I write in support of the Appeal by Dr James Donnelly in
relation to a finding that he should be deregistered as a Clinical Psychologist
and be prohibited from providing any health-related services.
Dr Donnelly has explained to me the circumstances of the case which has
precipitated the above decision, on which he worked during
the time in question,
i.e. 2003 – 2005. He totally acknowledged that he made a number of
mistakes relating to the case, and
by so doing put children at risk. He has
also stated that, having learnt many lessons from that experience, he has been
consistently
vigilant and conscientious in all aspects of his practice since
Although I have only known Dr Donnelly for approximately 18 months –
since he took up his current position at Southern Cross
University – I
have been extremely impressed with the care and consideration he has shown to
colleagues and to students. This
is also reflected in the respect accorded to Dr
Donnelly by students – one of my research staff, who is also a Psychology
discussed with me her hope that Dr Donnelly would supervise her Honours
year, as she found him an excellent and very professional
teacher, who inspired
her to achieve her best.
In addition, while I was Chair of the SCU Coffs Harbour Campus Human
Research Ethics Committee I had an opportunity to observe Dr
understanding of, and commitment to, ethical practice, as reflected in
submissions made to the Committee for ethics
approval for research which he was
preparing to undertake in conjunction with another colleague.
My observation of, and respect for, Dr Donnelly was further enhanced when
I worked with him in planning and conducting a workshop
on Capacity Assessment
on behalf of the North Coast Division of General Practice. Feedback indicated
that his component of that
workshop was highly regarded by participants.
Having someone of Dr Donnelly’s caliber in a rural/regional area
such as Coffs Harbour and the North Coast of NSW is a very
valuable resource for
the community, which is evidenced by the demand for his time not only as a
senior University lecturer by also
in his clinical practice and his role as a
consultant to medical professionals in the region. To prohibit him from
providing his
very valuable skills, knowledge & judgement to the people of
this region would, I believe, be contrary to the public interest.
I realise and fully support the imperative for the practice of psychology
to be conducted with unimpeachable ethical standards, and
the role of protective
orders to ensure that psychologists always act with the requisite high standard
of skill, knowledge, judgement
and care. I also understand and support the role
of the Tribunal in using prohibition orders to protect the public from harm.
given that in the intervening five years since the above problems
occurred, Dr Donnelly has been scrupulous in his professional behaviour,
strongly urge the Tribunal to reconsider his deregistration and to lift the
prohibition order from him.
I would be happy to personally endorse the above and can be contacted on
Cartwright gave evidence to the Tribunal by telephone. Professor Cartwright is
the Director of the Aged Care Service Unit
holding an academic position. She
does not provide any clinical services nor has she ever been in clinical
practice. Professor Cartwright
holds an associate diploma in Arts, an honours
degree in social work and a Master of Public Health in addition to her PhD.
to her contact with the Respondent she gave the following evidence (T35.8-36.42,
Q. So is it right that your contact with Dr Donnelly has
been solely in an academic setting?
A. That's right.
Q. Have you ever observed Dr Donnelly in providing clinical services
to clients or patients?
A. No I haven't observed him in a clinical setting only in an academic
setting and as part of the ethics committee.
Q. Do you accept that given your background as an academic and not a
clinician you would not be in a position to assess any aspect
Dr Donnelly's clinical performance or risks associated therewith?
A. That's right I wouldn't be able to assess his clinical performance.
The only thing I can assess is what I have observed as chair
of the ethics
committee and what I have observed as an academic colleague.
Q. To the extent that you have made observations as chair of an ethics
committee you have seen Dr Donnelly and heard Dr Donnelly
submissions for ethics approval for research?
A. Yes that's right.
Q. Is that the only contacts within which you have come into contact with
Dr Donnelly in your role on an ethics committee?
A. Dr Donnelly and I also co-presented in a seminar on capacity and
I have of course usual in a small university had discussions
in staff rooms and
so forth but the only professional relationship is from the ethics committee and
from my co-presentation on the
capacity seminar.
Q. In relation to your presentation on the capacity seminar did that
involve any work with individual clients or patients?
A. No, not at all.
Q. In respect of your experience of Dr Donnelly through your role on
the ethics committee is it just the one occasion that Dr Donnelly
submissions to the committee?
A. No there were several times that he put in applications for ethics
Q. In your statement or your letter I should say you said that you'd
known Dr Donnelly for approximately 18 months so does that mean
you first met Dr Donnelly in around - my maths isn't that
brilliant - but I think it probably takes us to about January
A. Yes it was somewhere around there when Dr Donnelly first came to
the university. That was my first contact with him. When he
first came to
Southern Cross University at Coffs Harbour.
Q. From that point your contact was as a colleague rather than any direct
professional interaction?
A. That's right.
Q. Around when was your contact with Dr Donnelly in terms of your
joint workshop on capacity assessment?
A. I can't give you the exact date but it was during 2010. I don't have
those documents with me at the moment.
Q. You have in your letter said that Dr Donnelly had explained to
you the circumstances of the case which precipitated the decision
Tribunal. Have you ever read the decision of this Tribunal?
A. No I haven't.
Q. So do you accept that you are in no position to assess what risks to
the public might arise by reason of the findings of this
Tribunal because you've
never read them?
A. I would agree with you that as I don't know the exact findings of the
Tribunal I can't comment on their validity or otherwise.
I can only say that my
conversations with Dr Donnelly were such that he impressed me as being very
concerned to ensure that he was
not a risk and that he had been very aware of
the fact that he'd made some serious errors of judgment previously.
Q. Do you accept that the only material you really have to assess what
risk Dr Donnelly might pose to the public are Dr Donnelly's
assertions and your general assessment of his character?
A. And the - yes I would've. I accept both of those just to
add that the ethics applications I was impressed by the quality of them
care that was expressed in them for participants in his research.
Q. But you accept don't you that if you had a detailed knowledge of the
findings of this Tribunal those findings may well be relevant
to an assessment
of the risk posed by Dr Donnelly to a member of the public or members of
the public generally?
A. I certainly would agree that that would've been the case at the time.
As I did not know Dr Donnelly at that time I can only comment
have known since then.
answer to a question from the Tribunal Professor Cartwright recalled that she
had received an email from the Respondent requesting
a reference and providing
details of his situation.
Cartwright gave the following evidence regarding her knowledge of the
supervision of students within the psychology faculty
at the Southern Cross
University (T38.11-39.4):
Q. Professor Cartwright, do you have any direct knowledge of
what's involved in supervising a psychology student within the psychology
A. I don't have any hands on experience of that but because we are a
small faculty of course I understand the course that the students
are doing and
because they're not - they're being trained not to be clinical
psychologist. Our university doesn't offer that so
it's not as if they're on
clinical placement.
Q. Do you have any knowledge as to whether or not a particular aspect of
a psychology course or supervision could cause trauma or
distress to any
A. I can't answer that definitively but I fail to see how.
Q. Do you know whether it would or not from your--
A. No, I don't.
Q. --own direct knowledge?
A. As I said I can't answer that definitively but because - I
can only say what I have seen in the psychology department and the
lectures and
I've given lectures to the psychology students on behalf of the psychology
department and I've attended students presentations
on their research but that's
all I can - I wouldn't consider that I had authority to speak outside
of that experience.
Q. Do you have any direct personal knowledge of procedures in place
within the psychology faculty should a student come across a
situation that
caused them distress or trauma?
A. I know that all students in the university are encouraged if they have
any distress or trauma to seek first help from their head
of school or head of
department then head of school and the student's services counselling unit.
That's all I know.
Q. Is it right then that the procedure is that they should first seek
from the head of school or is the procedure they should first
seek help or
consult their supervisor?
A. Well, if the problem is with the supervisor then they would go to the
head of the department. If the problem is not with the
supervisor then I
would - they would go to the supervisor - well, normally a
student - one of my students would yes.
Q. You say that's what your students would do. Is it right that you
actually have no knowledge of what procedure would be in place
as regards this
within the psychology faculty?
A. I haven't looked at their procedures in detail, no. You are quite
Reference of Father of a Client (identity supressed)
father of one of the Respondent’s clients provided an unsigned reference
dated 10 August 2010 which came into evidence as
exhibit RA-N. The Tribunal
notes that this referee has the same surname as a client named in conditions
that had been imposed upon
the Respondent’s registration restricting his
access to the client. It would be of obvious concern to a reader of the
below that the Respondent did not take action to report the children
at risk on the first occasion that they were left unattended
circumstances described below. Issues relating to the Respondent’s
relationship with the eldest child of this referee
had been the subject of
another complaint which has now not been proceeded with by the Council. This
matter is not taken into consideration
by this Tribunal with respect to this
matter in any way.
reference read:
I was surprised to read an article in our local paper on Friday
which covered the deregistering of Dr James
Donnelly as a practicing Psychologist for three years. I understood from this
that Dr Donnelly made a professional error or judgement during a case
some 7 years ago, which allowed children to remain in an abusive
environment.
I appreciate that the role of a Psychologist requires consistent high
ethical standards and judgement, they have a critical role to
play and must show
a high standard of knowledge and apply good judgement and care at all times.
For a Psychologist to operate to
low ethics or use poor judgement could have
major repercussions for those under their care, I understand that protective
designed to deter any such practice. I also understand that the
Psychologist Registration Tribunal has the responsibility of protecting
public from harm if they believe professional boundaries have been
I have known Dr Donnelly since mid 2008 when my daughter became a patient
of his. Because of this I took a keen interest in the newspaper
also read the extensive report of the tribunal findings on the internet. I had
no prior knowledge of the case behind
Dr Donnelly’s deregistration and I
am not a member of the medical profession. From reading the report I accept
that Dr Donnelly
has probably made some errors in judgement which have had
repercussions for some children at risk. It is so very easy to judge someone
with the benefit of hindsight! My personal opinion of Dr Donnelly is very
different to the one sided news paper article. I believe
he has been treated
badly and would like to point out another opinion of Dr Donnelly’s
professional standards.
Dr Donnelly began seeing my daughter in June 2008, he was recommended to
my wife by our General Practitioner in
where we live. My
daughter had suffered a head injury earlier that year and had not fully
recovered. Dr Donnelly specialised in
this sort of problem in teenagers. (a
combination of Clinical and Neuropsychology)
My daughter had many problems relating to this head injury including
learning and concentration issues; epilepsy and social problems.
Dr Donnelly
was able to quickly identify these issues and help my daughter deal with them.
As we lived in the country Dr Donnelly
suggested and referred us to a local
Psychologist for ongoing support for my daughter. This did not work out as my
daughter could
not establish rapport with the local person. On our request Dr
Donnelly agreed to continue seeing my daughter in Sydney (where he
until we found a suitable person nearer to where we lived. During 2009 Dr
Donnelly continued to have occasional sessions
with my daughter, on my request
he agreed to do this on a weekend so as to limit the disruption to my
daughter’s schooling.
During 2009 Dr Donnelly identified a major source
of stress to my daughter was coming from the emotional manipulation and abuse
my wife. He was also very clear with me and my wife about the effect of our
arguments on our children. After months of keeping
the stress of this abuse
inside, the long-term consistent and supportive contact with Dr Donnelly allowed
her to share things that
had been leading to stress-related seizures.
This was a tenuous situation to handle but Dr Donnelly again showed his
professionalism in his response. One time when I was away
Dr Donnelly had to
establish if my daughter was “safe” after she had communicated a
particularly stressful evening at
drove away leaving my daughter and her two younger siblings on our rural
with no way to reach her. Several occasions of this sort of erratic
behaviour from my wife lead to Dr Donnelly having to report
our family situation
to DOCS. Again this was handled professionally and carefully so as to avoid
inflaming the situation to which
my children were exposed but he was clear about
the fact that the behaviour was unacceptable and demanded reporting. My wife
her emotionally abusive behaviour despite Dr Donnelly pointing out
that her behaviour was making things worse for our daughter.
She began to
direct her anger at Dr Donnelly as he supported my daughter’s natural
attempts to speak her mind at home. Dr
Donnelly continued to encourage me to
become more proactive in resolving difficulties in my marriage and support my
daughter. Most
notable is the improvement in my daughter’s mood, the
decrease in her seizure frequency and her improved performance at school
social settings. For example, she is now feeling able to attend university next
I cannot speak too highly of the expertise Dr Donnelly displayed when
dealing with the ethical complications that arose whilst he
was treating my
daughter. To me the errors that he may have made in the case that led to his
deregistration are completely out of
character. In my opinion preventing Dr
Donnelly from practicing would be taking away a valuable resource from the
public. Dr Donnelly
has valuable skills and judgement and should not, in my
opinion be prevented from utilising them. This is particularly the case
rural NSW such as where we live. As I explained we were unable to find another
Psychologist that had an understanding of my daughter’s
difficulties.
As a professional from an unrelated and non-medical vocation (pilot for a
major airline), I know that when a professional error is
made, the greatest
punishment is the personal soul searching and sleepless nights one inflicts on
themselves. I have no doubt that
this has been the case for Dr Donnelly. I
cannot see the point in further retribution when there was never any intent to
and overwhelming evidence that the event is out of character.
Reference of the Mother of a Client (Identity supressed)
mother of one of the Respondent’s clients provided an email reference
dated 19 August 2010 which came into evidence as
exhibit RA-O.
email read:
I am so sorry to hear this, you must be going through hell. Thank you so
much for all the help you have given to T, myself and even
K. As you know, we
had been home from hospital for 6 months before I had anyone to talk to about T,
you have no idea how much it
meant to me to have you there and just to know you
were there if i needed.
I will really miss not knowing you are there. T has come along (sic) way
and is doing incredible thanks to your amazing help.
If there is anything i can do please let me know.
Will you be back in touch when this is all over and be able to work with
Good luck and thank you
Reference of Hellena Chaffe
Hellena Chaffe wrote an email on behalf of the ‘Fouth Year psychology
students’ in support of the Respondent on
21 July 2010 which came into
evidence as exhibit RA-P.
email read:
I am writing to you as the Fourth year representative. Several students
have spoken to me about the Registration Boards decision
regarding the case you
saw in 2003.
Thus far, all the students have received the news with shock and deep
regret that you are experiencing such difficulties. Many students
replied initially as they felt upset on your behalf, and did not know how to
express their support adequately. Most students
were going to turn up to the
meeting just to show you there (sic) support. The students and I want to thank
you for your kind offer,
but we feel completely confident in your integrity. We
feel you have explained the situation clearly and that no further explanation
necessary. We would like to spare you any further undue stress, time, and
effort. We wish you all the very best in your endeavours
to clear your
reputation. Please accept our support and best wishes in this matter; we look
forward our next class with you.
Our very best regards,
Hellena and the Fourth Year Students
Reference of Robert O’Shea
O’Shea wrote a letter to Dr Voudouris of the Australian Psychology
Accreditation Council on 24 August 2010 which came into
evidence as exhibit
letter read in part:
Thank you for your letter of 18 August 2010 in which you asked about the
status of Dr James Donnelly following the 8th July 2010 decision
Psychologists Tribunal of New South Wales. Indeed my Psychology colleagues and
I, and the Psychology students, were all very
surprised at the decision, given
that Dr Donnelly is a trusted, esteemed, and valuable colleague and teacher
whose probity is without
question. One of the first things I did on learning of
the decision, which Dr Donnelly is appealing, was to check whether it has
bearing on our being able to offer APAC-accredited courses at Southern Cross
University (SCU).
My understanding is that Dr Donnelly is qualified to teach into four-year
courses in Psychology as long as they do not involve any
supervision of
clinical-psychology students. At SCU, we do not offer any postgraduate courses
in clinical psychology.
Moreover, the Pro Vice Chancellor of the faculty in which Psychology
resides, Professor Jenny Graham, and the Vice Chancellor, Professor
also made their own enquiries about the suitability of Dr Donnelly to teach into
four-year courses in Psychology. This
included conferring with SCU’s
lawyers and with the Manager of SCU’s Student Health and Support Services,
Dr Jonathan
Munro, himself the NSW State Chair of the Australian Psychological
Society. The advice Professors Graham and Lee received what (sic)
were no legal or ethical impediments to Dr Donnelly’s continuing to teach
into courses that involve no clinical
supervision. Of course, Professors Graham
and Lee, and I, will be happy to change our view if you advise
Reference of Simon Ashfield-Smith
Ashfield-Smith provided two unsigned reference dated 12 June 2009 and 9
September 2010 which came into evidence as exhibit RA-S.
An email from Mr Simon
Ashfield-Smith was received by the Registry in which the dates
‘1994-6’ in his second report
were corrected to read
reference dated 12 June 2009 read:
I volunteered to write this letter after
learning that Dr James Donnelly was going before the court concerning his level
of professionalism
and supervisory ability. I thought, therefore, to offer
those with the judiciary duties in Dr Donnelly’s case with some
observations
that I made of his character around the time I was attending the
[Regional University]
I first met Dr Donnelly when attending an interview for entrance into the
post-graduate program in Clinical Psychology at the [Regional
University] at the
end of 2003. It has been six years since that interview but I can still recall
the effort Dr Donnelly went to
during the interview, to support me during that
stressful time. Despite Dr Donnelly having never personally met me I found him
be friendly, warm and caring. I think his approach and supportive manner was
what made him popular with many of his students at the
University].
I clearly recall during my studies at the [Regional University] that Dr
Donnelly was a well-respected Supervisor in the clinical program.
number of really interesting research projects on at the time including
measuring Mild Traumatic Brain Injury in the National
Rugby League players. I
also recall some of his latest research was being aired on a documentary at the
time I was studying at the
[Regional University]. My classmates, all
Distinction and High Distinction students, some with University awards from
their under-graduate
programs, explained it would be advantageous to be
supervised by Dr Donnelly. It was thought that his scholastic abilities, his
broad clinical experience, and his ability to relate to his students would make
for a positive learning experience. This was the
case for many of his
Both of the students in my class who were fortunate enough to be
supervised by Dr Donnelly had trouble free practicals at the [Regional
University] Psychology Clinic. I remember one of those students explaining that
Dr Donnelly paid very careful attention to the video
footage of her therap.
Viewing video footage of all sessions was a regular practice of Dr
Donnelly’s to ensure his students
were providing a professional service
and to safe guard clients from any malpractice.
Dr Donnelly also had very high standards as a lecturer while working at
the [Regional University]. He gave lots of readings to broaden
our knowledge as
students, he encouraged high performance in our assessments, and modelled high
ethical standards. I remember Dr
Donnelly speaking in class about the ethical
difficulties when a therapist and client engage in ‘dual role
He also heavily underscored the importance to work within
one’s level of competency and to always seek advice from one’s
supervisor. Dr Donnelly also encouraged his class to avoid burnout by keeping a
balanced life, to find adequate rest, and to debrief
with another therapist as
It was because of Dr Donnelly’s commitment to professional standards
and to uncompromising ethics that I chose to remain in
graduation. Since becoming a Psychologist I have really appreciated the advice
he has given to me. He
has provided me with some really sound guidance in a
number of areas including: assessment, diagnosis, suicide risk assessment,
confidentiality
and mandatory reporting. There have been times when Dr Donnelly
has exhorted me to gather further information on some cases, to
safety of my clients, and to make mandatory reporting where appropriate.
Thank you for providing me with the opportunity to share some of my
observations of Dr Donnelly. If I can be of any further assistance
not hesitate to contact me. My contact details are listed below.
reference dated 9 September 2010 read:
I understand that the Tribunal has questioned Dr James
Donnelly’s ethical behaviour in regard to a child abuse case while working
at the [Regional University]
in 1994. I also understand that
Dr Donnelly was the supervisor in this case and that the Tribunal was concerned
of support that he provided to the clinical intern.
I was an undergraduate student in psychology at the [Regional University]
at time in which Dr Donnelly was supervising the case in
question. I was also
later a post-graduate student in the clinical program at the [Regional
University] and taught by Dr Donnelly.
I thought, therefore, it might be
beneficial to provide some brief observations about Dr Donnelly, around 2004
– 2006, particularly
in relation to his ethics and support of
I noticed that Dr Donnelly was a popular lecturer at the [Regional
University]. He was friendly, approachable and appeared to care
students. He was enthusiastic and energetic about his profession. Moreover, I
clearly recall occasions during class when
Dr Donnelly promoted ethical practice
in relation to avoiding ‘dual role conflict’, the maintaining of
client fidelity,
and being cognizant of the clients’ best
I recall that Dr Donnelly had a number of research projects that were
gathering particular interest amongst the University and media
during my time at
the [Regional University]. One of these projects was the measurement of mild
traumatic brain damage in Rugby League
players, which was promoted by
, a former captain of the Newcastle Nights.
Dr Donnelly was also well received by the students in my post-graduate
class. I clearly remember a discussion amongst my peers when
we were being
allocated a supervisor from the clinical staff for our first practical
placement. Dr Donnelly was considered the better
pick. It was the general idea
that he was friendly, supportive and very knowledgeable.
In summary, from my observations, it would have been out of Dr
Donnelly’s character to operate outside of mandated ethics and
unappreciative of an intern’s personal needs. On the contrary, I
considered Dr Donnelly to have been a friendly and
approachable lecturer who
made an effort to care for his students and interns. He was well received by
his students and from my
experience he exhorted high professional and ethical
Reference of Sophie Jacobs
reference from Ms Jacobs dated 27 August 2010 was received into evidence as
exhibit RA-Z. The reference is on the letterhead of
the Sydney Children’s
Hospital. Ms Jacobs is the Administrative Assistant to the Director of Research
in the School of Women’s
and Children’s Health at the Sydney
Children’s Hospital. In this role she provided administrative support for
the Clinical
Research Scientific Sub-Committee (Paediatrics) of which the
Respondent was an ‘active member’.
reference states that it is in response from the Respondent for his case before
the Tribunal. Ms Jacobs first met the Respondent
in 2008 and notes that he left
the Hospital in early 2009.
her reference she stated:
My experience with Dr Donnelly revealed him to be reliable,
conscientious, courteous and cooperative. He always submitted his reviews
within the allocated deadline. I found him to be a very pleasant and
professional person.
Reference of Adam Jaffẻ
A reference dated 22 September 2010 was received into evidence as exhibit RA
– AA. This reference is also on the letterhead
of the Sydney
Children’s Hospital. Dr Jaffẻ is an Associate Professor in
Respiratory Medicine at the University of NSW
and Head of Department of
Respiratory Medicine at the Hospital.
reference read:
I am writing with regard to Dr Donnelly. I worked with Dr
Donnelly in my capacity as Head of Respiratory Medicine at Sydney
Hospital and he was Head of the Psychology Department. We have
a lot of involvement with the Psychology Department due to the nature
children with chronic respiratory diseases we look after. During that time I
found his approach to be very professional and helpful.
He contributed very
positively to the clinical care of the children we look after. I believe he
demonstrated ethical and professional
behaviour, in keeping with his senior
position, in the care of the children we both managed during this time at this
hospital. If
you would like any further information please do not hesitate to
Reference of Debra O’Reilly and Christel Wecker
A reference co-authored by Debra O’Reilly and Christel Wecker dated 22
September 2010 was received into evidence as exhibit
RA–AB. The reference
is on NSW Government letterhead for the Human Services – Community
Services Department. Ms O’Reilly
is the Manager Casework and Ms Wecker a
Child Protection Caseworker in the Coffs Habour Community Services Centre.
reference read:
I am aware that this letter will be used for the purpose of
appeal as the Psychologist Tribunal has found that Doctor Donnelly should
de-registered because of failure to properly document the details of treatment
of a case, read the discharge summary and supervise
the intern on the case
leading to a failure to report evidence of sexual abuse of a child in
Community Services made a referral to Doctor James Donnelly in May 2010
for a Neuro Psychological assessment for the father and sole
parent of a child
in the care of Community Services.
Doctor Donnelly has conducted a holistic and comprehensive Neuro
Psychological assessment that has provided the father and Community
with specific diagnosis and clear recommendations for case management of this
In a recent meeting Doctor Donnelly transmitted his diagnosis and clinical
findings to the client in highly respectful, client focused,
and strengths based
manner; by simplifying complex brain functioning themes using a language that
our client could understand and
Doctor Donnelly’s assessment and diagnosis provided Community
Services with a profound level of insight into the mental and
functioning of our clients acquired brain injury.
This assessment now allows Community Services to formulate a comprehensive
future case plan, transitioning our client and his daughter
into the community
with the required resources and supports for the long term stability, safety and
wellbeing of the child and family.
We have found Doctor Donnelly’s conduct in this matter highly
compassionate and his neuro psychological assessment thorough,
professional and
of high standard.
Reference of Jeff Rogers
A reference written by Mr Jeff Rogers date stamped 22 November 2010 was received
into evidence as exhibit RA–AC. The reference
is on the letterhead of the
Older Adult Mental Health Service at the St George Hospital and Community
Health Service. Mr Rogers
is a psychologist.
reference reads:
This letter comes in response to the Psychologist
Tribunal’s decision to de-register Dr James Donnelly. From May 2008 to
2009 I was employed as the Clinical Neuropsychologist on the Brain Injury
Rehabilitation Program at the Sydney Children’s Hospital,
Randwick, New
South Wales. Over that period Dr Donnelly was the Head of Psychology at the
Hospital. In all my dealings with Dr
Donnelly, I found him to be professional,
conscientious, knowledgeable, and thorough. My professional experiences with Dr
suggested it would be very out of character of him to overlook,
disregard, or fail to appreciate core issues regarding a client’s
circumstances or care needs.
Reference of Paul Martin
reference written by Professor Martin dated 17 August 2011 was received into
evidence as exhibit RA–AA. The reference is
on the letterhead of Griffith
University where Professor Martin is the Head of the School of Applied
Psychology. The Reference
is addressed to Ms Reg Graycar, Barrister. The
Tribunal notes that Ms Graycar acted for the Respondent in relation to the
Court appeal.
reference reads:
Dr James (Jim) Donnelly has asked me to forward a reference for
him to you.
I was Head of the School Psychology at the [Regional University] from 1996
to 2002. In this capacity, I was a member of the Selection
Committee (Chaired
by the Dean) that appointed Jim in 2001. When we offered positions at [Regional
University] we advertised in
North America and Europe as well as Australia,
because we always wanted to appoint the best person available from around the
Jim was therefore appointed from a field of applicants that was both
large and of high quality. He came to [Regional University]
highly recommended
by his referees, and we were very pleased he accepted our offer.
During the time that I knew Jim at [Regional University] he was an
excellent member of staff and good colleague. His approach to
teaching and
research was commendable. I do not recall any negatives about the way he
performed any of his duties.
I remember once incident with Jim that I would like to recount. [Regional
University] is located in
[regional city]
, a small city of 23,000
inhabitants. As is common in rural Australia, the psychologists working in the
area were all practising
without the benefit of a postgraduate training in
professional psychology. Jim walked into my office shortly after his arrival
a little concerned, following some interactions with the local
psychologists. I think he was trying to find out from me whether
individuals represented psychology in Australia or psychology in a rural area.
He seemed reassured by me reacting to his stories
by saying that his experiences
did not surprise me but were not reflective of psychologists with postgraduate
qualifications. In
summary, his standards were way above those of lesser
trained psychologists in Australia.
Reference of Peter Carter
undated reference written by Mr Carter headed
‘In confidence Without
was received into evidence as exhibit RA–BB. The
reference appears to have been written to Professor Iain Graham and relates
support for a promotion the Respondent had applied for. Mr Carter is the
Manager of Investigations; Reviews; and Special Projects
in the Faculty of Arts
and Science at the Southern Cross University.
reference reads:
Dr Jim Donnelly has asked me to support an application for
promotion he has made or he proposes to make. My reference would be based
the work he and I undertook together (with other members of the WP) in 2010 on
an Executive Dean’s Working Party to review
apparently problematic aspects
of the Master of Indigenous Studies (Wellbeing), Jim as Chair and me as
Secretary. I have indicated
to Dr Donnelly that I am prepared to do so.
The WP was established following complaints by students made to me as
Nominated Complaints Officer, Faculty of Arts and Sciences in
2006 and 2009
which referred to experiences in the MIndigS, inter alia, as affecting students
emotionally and putting them at risk
in terms of their mental health and
personal safety and of ‘group processing’ and facilitation skills of
staff involved
being poor.
Dr Donnelly led the Working Party skilfully and, as a result, the outcome
of the review was positive. Dr Donnelly acted without fear
or favour in at
times testing circumstances but at the same time he managed sensitive cultural
and political issues skilfully. He
spent time with Gnibi staff and students in
order to gain first hand knowledge of the course and its delivery and impact and
collaboratively and effectively with his working party members and the
Executive Dean.
Some of the more challenging discussions of the review were:
seeming depth and breadth of the units offered in one year and the intensity and
clinical nature of some of the experiential
aspects of the course, it is
important to ensure staff are appropriately qualified not just in relation to
cultural issues but also
academic competence and student and staff safety
significant concern is the current practice of having students start each day by
discussing their emotional experiences.
This and other practices seem highly
consistent with what most reasonable people might consider group therapy. It
would be difficult
for a clinically untrained professional to defend these
practices on behalf of the university. Even a registered clinician would
significant difficulty defending the described practices given the clinical
literature and guidelines, and lack of any outcome
data other than anecdotal
reports. This practice and others seem to communicate clearly, yet informally,
to students that they are
expected to work on their own emotional, trauma, and
interpersonal conflict issues as part of the program.”
Other less challenging but equally important recommendations
went to preparing proper documentation including a review of printed
based material for the course, especially statements about:
career opportunities;
selection criteria;
informed consent;
teaching methodologies;
assessment criteria;
anticipated outcomes (including graduate attributes); and
risk management.
As I understand it a number of changes have been made to the course as a
result of the WP’s review and the implementation of
its recommendations,
with which Dr Donnelly was involved, and the course has improved as a result of
these changes.
I would be pleased to discuss my reference with you.
Oral evidence – the Respondent
Respondent gave evidence that he was currently employed by the Southern Cross
University in the discipline of psychology within
the School of Health and
Human Sciences.
Respondent gave evidence that he had received the assistance of a psychologist
through his general practitioner and also taken
advantage of counseling
services available to him (T48, 14/4/11)
The Tribunal notes it does not
have a report in this regard. The Respondent also gave evidence of a serious
accident he was involved
in in 2009 in which he suffered from a number of
broken bones and was knocked out.
Respondent gave evidence of two recent profession related seminars he had
attended. He further stated that he had emailed the
Psychology Board of
Australia seeking information on how to
‘translate’
‘new regulations to the classroom’
being a reference to the
‘regulations regarding mandatory reporting of peers’.
Respondent also stated that he wanted to make sure that he was able to provide
‘newest information’
in his classroom.
T 49.13-24 (14/4/11) the Respondent gave the following evidence:
The other reality that was reiterated again by the chair of the
Board of Psychology is that training standards are actually
- required by ministers and then Board of Psychology and
the APS and training programs have to accommodate that so for example workforce
issues have led ministers to specifically require that a four plus two training
be continued. The value of that or not is not what
I am talking about. But
just this idea that there were forces that affect how psychologists practice and
how they train psychologists
that's just a response to Ms Muller's question
and that's literally just came in March where the Board of Psychology has
that some of the decisions about how things are done are directly
related to ministers making requirements - the government making
requirements as opposed to professionals making their own decisions.
cross-examination the Respondent was asked about the content of the email dated
27 July 2010 that he sent to prospective referees
(see the text of this email
set out above). The Respondent gave the following evidence (T50.10-27,
Q. You say, "I am truly in shock regarding the findings. I
believe that we, the intern paediatric psych and I made the correct decision
the time." Now, I just want to ask you and I really just want a yes or a no; I
am not asking for reasons but as at July 2010
was it your belief that you had
made the correct decisions as regards the matters that were the subject of the
A. Actually I believed at that time that we were making the correct
decision but at the following sentence that I may have missed
something that
left children will plague me forever and certainly has focussed my attention on
any matters because obviously in hindsight
we did miss something and
there - obviously to the evidence given and just me reviewing the case
there are things that I definitely
should have done differently. There's no
question in my mind about that.
Q. So you weren't trying to suggest that you had made the correct
A. No, no. What I meant to say is that at the time, given those
circumstances there, given my state of mind at the time, given discussions
with colleagues and with the intern it felt at the time we were making the
correct decision and obviously that's not the case.
around T 50 – 52 (14/4/11) the Respondent was cross-examined about the
content of the email, specifically the comment:
When the intern did make a DOCS report after she learned
additional facts while treating the patient in her private practice several
months after leaving UNE the patient perpetrator was found to be a
paedophile.
Respondent stated that this was his understanding of Ms Dene’s evidence
i.e. that her report to DoCS was triggered by Mr
A changing his story regarding
the massage behavior when she saw him in her private practice. The Respondent
gave the following
evidence as to the reason why he included this information
in the email (T52.41-53.2, 14/4/11):
Q. Why did you include that information that the report was
made to DOCS after Ms Dene learned additional facts? What reason was
for including the after she learned additional facts in this letter two people
you were asking to provide a reference to support
A. Because that actually made it more clear that Ms Dene did the
right thing. When she learned - got more information in her sense
what was going on, changed from what I believed it was when I stopped working
with her on the case that she actually did the right
thing. That was the
function of that statement.
respect to the administration of a PAI test to students in his course (BH20001)
the Respondent gave the following evidence (T53.23-40,
Q. Could you please explain the circumstances in which the
students in this program are given the chance to administer a range of
report on information from tests, behavioural observations and
interviews?
A. In the tutorial sessions they get a lecture on the test contents. I
can talk about the specific test if you like. And then during
the tutorial
sessions they break off into groups and they administer the test to each other
as a learning experience.
Q. Now, they conduct tests on each other?
A. They actually practice administering the test with each other. There
is absolutely no illusion that the data is valid. That's
made very, very clear
by me. It's made by very clear by the tutors and the circumstances are so
distracting and the students obviously
in their own reports of what's going on
uniformly note that it's very clear that the results are invalid for a long list
and that's actually part of the assignment is for them to note the
problems associated with administering these kinds of tests in
that format with
colleagues for an assignment. It's all kinds of reasons why it's very clear
that this is not any indication of
anybody's abilities.
were then several attempts made by counsel for the HCCC (recorded over pages 54
to 57 of the transcript) to illicit from the
Respondent whether or not it was
possible for potentially highly personal information to be disclosed to the
students. The Transcript
reads in part:
Q. Do you accept that it's possible that through the
administration of those tests or behavioural observations and interviews that
potentially highly personal information could be disclosed by students?
A. Well, in psychology units in general students do sometimes put their
hand up in lecture and talk about things that are highly
personal and if that
happens I have a description of things at the front end. I talk about the scope
of what we're able to discuss
here. There are things I specifically say of
things that they read about are distressing, that there is - I refer
them immediately
to the counselling service. I cannot provide any support to
that. They have opportunities to seek support of the other services
university. The content in psychology units it does talk about mental illness.
It does talk about things that some students
resonate with. And even if you're
talking about the research literature or looking at things from a scientific
perspective - people
read books about this kind of stuff sometimes and
it is distressing.
Q. Could you just answer my question which was; do you accept there's a
possibility that in the administration of these tests or
behavioural
observations and interviews student on student that there is a possibility that
highly personal information could be
disclosed? If you could just answer that
A. I think these are adult students and they're told that this is an
exercise. There are some students. There are individual differences
much people are willing to reveal about themselves and that is their decision.
There is no requirement. They've even had
to be themselves in the interview.
Most of the students pose as someone else - someone of a different
age, someone that they say
on TV. It's a question of using this exercise as a
way of practicing asking questions and understanding how to respond when someone
gives you an answer.
Q. Dr Donnelly just please do you accept that it's possible that in
administering these tests, behavioural observations and
- just do you accept it's possible that highly personal
information could be disclosed? Yes or no?
A. Yes. I don't believe the risk any greater than people talking about
their personal life over coffee.
Q. But is the aim of these tests to formulate an assessment of
psychological characteristics of particular individuals?
Q. What is the aim of the psychology test that they are being taught to
administer?
A. To be aware of how the test is administered.
Q. What is the aim of the test? Not the aim of the exercise in carrying
out; what are the aims of the test? What are they designed
A. Okay. It's a very important distinction because the aim of the test
when appropriately applied is very different than the aim
exercise - this training exercise where they get to have some
experience with the test. If I was to use some of the tests
in clinical
practice or if someone was to use these tests in clinical practice they might
provide one window on someone's intellectual
abilities. Right. In some cases
they might reflect someone's personality. But the fact is in this context they
really reflect
nothing. They reflect someone's ability to go through and tick
off some things, add things, use the templates for scoring and then
manual and say, "Okay, scores in this range are indicative of," and to say that
in language that doesn't infer anything
beyond specifically what they get from
those scores. There's no clinical interpretation because they start
out - there has to be
a disclaimer at the beginning of the report that
says the results of this measure are completely invalid and unreliable because
the context in which they - they cannot say anything
the psych assessment
unit the scores are actually a composite of six to eight
people generating the subscales. So, for example, you have six to eight
in a small group and the Wechsler intelligence scale for adults is administered
where one person administers block design
so person A administers the block
design subtest to person B.
Person B administers picture completion to person C. And throughout that
process you end up getting a composite of people and they
make up a name, a
pseudonym because it's very clear that the data is absolutely useless. It's an
exercise in understanding standard
instructions. What's the problem with using
standard instructions? The experience of just sitting there with someone and
asking you to do a puzzle. Even if the data is meaningless they get to
experience, "Oh, wow, I am getting a little nervous about
how I'm going to go,"
but they can choose to just goof up. In fact we tell them to not go through all
of the subtest because it
takes too long. Finding out exactly how many they can
get right is irrelevant. So you have a profile of scores where
you know the score suggests someone is at the second
percentile in one thing and 20 percentile or 50 percentile in something else
it's just - it's useless because it doesn't reflect any one person's
performance or any one student's ability to administer the
The other part of it is that they actually have to cooperate with each
other on the use of the test and that's the other part of this.
actually communicate with each other and coordinate six to eight people getting
together on a classroom project in the
time allotted.
Q. The second unit that you've given information in respect of is the
abnormal psychology unit?
A. Correct.
Q. CHS30002 the exhibit RAAE.
Q. Does that unit include any work where students may practice testing,
behavioural observations or interviews on each other?
A. The only one that includes would be the PAI which I talked about the
other day. Initially in here we were going to have people
fill it out as
whoever they wanted to be and again it's a scoring exercise. It's trying to
understand the psychometrics of the measure.
What are the things that affect
reliability and validity? It's tied to a discussion in class of problems with
self-reported personality
measures in general as well as other ways of finding
out - and actually - you know I start out by talking about
any formal measures
of personality and that's part of what - that's
the context to say, "So how are we making these judgments? Any formal judgments
on a day to day basis."
Q. Is there any assessment that carries out - I still would
like you to answer the question?
A. I am sorry.
Q. Whether within that unit there is any involvement of students in
either conducting tests of each other, reviewing tests of each
participating in any testing procedures?
A. There is no opportunity for them to test anyone else. The only thing
that they do is they fill out the PAI as a fictitious person.
There is no,
again, no assumption on the reliability or validity of that measure. They write
a 500 word essay about what the scores
- where the scores fall and the
conditions under which it was tested to make sure they understand the
limitations of using that kind
Q. Are they required to fill that out as a fictitious person or are they
permitted to fill it out themselves if they so choose?
A. They can fill it out as themselves if they like but the fact is
they're told there will be no interpretation. They will not get
any information
. The assumption has to be that
no matter - that there will be some
kind of process that goes on for them that invalidates it. They're doing it for
a class. It's
going to be computer scored and they're going to get co-file back
and it will be - in my experience of teaching this unit I have
had anyone that has said, "Oh my gosh this is a really valid profile. This is
Q. Have you ever had the situation where any - where the
results of an assessment carried out by a student indicates that that student
may have some psychological issues?
A. I'm more likely to get that from questions in class.
Q. Can I just ask you to answer the question.
A. I am sorry.
Q. Have you ever had that situation arise?
A. No. I've had situations where the tutor on this unit is one of
Australian - I call her an expert but she's doing her PhD on the
and if there is - and she does the computer scoring so if there's any
elevations on there the one thing we do is to send an email
and say, "We notice
there's elevations on here; please let us know immediately if this is not a
fictitious person. If you are experiencing
any distress here is the number of
the counselling centre."
Q. So--A. Just in case someone who fills out a
bunch - endorses a bunch of items that suggests that they're severely
psychotic then
they are told immediately and this is a very, very careful
process that we engage in so they can see what one of the best personality
measures looks like but make sure they know very early on and repeatedly that
the data is invalid.
Q. The procedure you've described which involves an immediate email
following an abnormal test result; is that a written procedure
or is that an
informal procedure that is in place?
A. That's a procedure that's established between me and I have emails
that I have sent to the tutor and I have - and she ccs me so
there's no difficulty in case someone misunderstands or they've forgotten that
the data is useless or whatever. And again I
do not offer any clinical advice
on any of this nor do any of my tutors - none. And the goal is for
them to understand the psychometrics
of the tool.
Q. That is a procedure in place that you say you have put in place
through email correspondence with the tutor to ensure that an
elevated score is
responded to?
Q. Does the email that goes back to the student come from the tutor or
A. It probably goes from the tutor unless - if
the - it could come from either one of us but we're absolutely sure
that there's a
response and these are students that we see continuously and
again there is no mistake among the students. Whenever I have done
this I have
been very, very careful to make sure there's no mistake amongst students that
this is invalid data.
around T 66 69 and 72 the Respondent gave further evidence regarding the PAI
exercise in answer to questions from members of the
Other documentary evidence
course outline documents were received into evidence as exhibits RA-AD, RA-AE
and RA-AF. An updated version of RA-AD came into
evidence as RA-CC. An updated
version of RA-AE came into evidence as RA-DD.
undated letter of resignation tendered by the Respondent to the Sydney
Children’s Hospital came into evidence as exhibit
APAC (Australian Psychology Accreditation Council) report for the 2007 site
visit of the regional university came into evidence
as exhibit RA-T.
quality assurance course review of the Regional University from August 2003
formed exhibit RA-U.
WorkCover Medical Certificate dated 5 August 2006 for the Respondent regarding
‘work related stress’ at the Regional
University with a Date of
Injury recorded as December 2004 came into evidence as exhibit RA-V (as noted
elsewhere in this document).
Misconduct Committee report of the Regional University dated 24 February 2006
came into evidence as exhibit RA-X.
brief treatment report regarding the Respondent from Dr Phillip Bookallil dated
28 July 2010 came into evidence as exhibit RA-Y.
The report makes reference to
anti- depressant medication and psychiatric care.
article titled Eye Movement Desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR): A
Meta- Analysis came into evidence as exhibit RA-EE.
Respondent provided the Tribunal with a copy of an email dated 5 December 2011
from Associate Professor Shirley Morrissey, the
Deputy Head of the School of
Applied Psychology, Griffith University which read as follows (exhibit
I hope that the hearing goes well, and I would like to confirm
that I am very willing to provide peer supervision and consultation
for you for
the Psychology Board of Australia in order for you to continue to practice as a
psychologist. I am willing to provide
this supervision by Skype, telephone and
for us to have a couple of face to face meetings which we can arrange once the
Board makes
its final determination as to what is required.
Please do provide this email as evidence of my agreement to provide such
supervision.
Protective Orders – Generally
primary function of the Tribunal is to protect the public. Other matters to be
considered by the Tribunal as relevant considerations
are the maintaining of
standards within the profession, a general deterrent effect and the maintaining
of public confidence in
the profession. The Tribunal therefore must consider
orders that fulfil these roles. Whilst it is an established principle of law
that the Tribunal should impose the least restrictive Orders possible in the
circumstances, the protection of the public is paramount
and outweighs
consideration of the onerous burdens that Orders may place upon a practitioner.
In this matter the maintenance of
confidence that the public is entitled to
expect in the profession of psychology, the maintenance of proper standards
profession and the general deterrent effect are prominent
considerations.
Tribunal does not consider the actual harm that results from a health care
professional’s action when determining the
appropriate orders to be made
once a finding of professional misconduct (or unsatisfactory professional
conduct) is made. It is
the potential for harm of the subject conduct that is
relevant to the Tribunals consideration. The Tribunal also has a role in
providing guidance to the profession and for the protective orders made to
provide a deterrent effect to other members of the profession.
Orders of a
Tribunal should also allow the public to repose confidence in members of the
profession in the knowledge that the Registration
of those that engage in
misconduct is appropriately addressed. Given the current subject matter, the
Tribunal notes that with respect
to the abuse of children, harm accrues over
time. It has been well understood and accepted for many years by health
professional
such as psychologists that more harm will result from longer
exposure to abuse. It is imperative that all registered psychologists
consider reporting obligations. At this point the Tribunal specifically makes
reference to legislation such as the
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
Submissions
submissions made by each party are annexed hereto.
Submissions - HCCC
respect to the extent of the Prohibition Order the HCCC submitted that it should
extend to various areas listed in
Health Care Complaints Act
and specifically the clinical supervision of psychology students (T21,
Submissions – the Respondent
submissions were received from the Respondent under cover of an email dated 31
October 2011 which was not accepted by the
electronic server for the Registry
and were therefore not received by the Tribunal until the Inquiry on 6 December
2011. These
submissions are reproduced as an annexure hereto.
additional document in the nature of a submission came into evidence as exhibit
RA-GG. This document is reproduced below.
Further Submissions from the Respondent
further submission dated 5 December 2011 was received from the Respondent and
is reproduced as an annexure hereto.
Considerations relevant to Orders
Tribunal relies upon the general observations made commencing at paragraph 641
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY (No
regarding the conduct of
the Respondent. There is little in the evidence now before the Tribunal that
alters the light in which
the Respondent’s conduct (being the conduct
set out in the established Particulars of the Complaint) can be viewed. A
of paragraphs 641 to 662 should be considered in conjunction with this
Reasons document. These paragraphs are not repeated in
this document
regard to the defects identified by the Tribunal in the Findings with respect to
the Particulars the Tribunal notes that with
respect to the assertion that it
was acceptable to allow Ms Dene to continue working with Mr A after the
disclosure on 21 October
2003 the Respondent has not provided an account of
where the views of
he relied upon during the
Inquiry or any reading list, supervisors report or other material that would
allow the Tribunal to be
reasonably satisfied that the Respondent has remedied
this significant and serious flaw in his knowledge, judgment and skill.
the Tribunal does not have a supervisors report or the like that indicates the
Respondent has considered with professional
assistance his involvement in the
session on 27 October 2003 so that he has sufficient understanding of his
conduct to assist
in avoiding it in the future.
the Tribunal accepts that the Respondent has had limited clinical practice in
recent years, the Tribunal does not have material
before it that demonstrates
the Respondent has worked through the issue of failure to read Ms Dene’s
clinical notes and his
stated failure to read the discharge summary prior to
signing same. Statements of the Respondent that he would not do so in the
future are not sufficient, in the view of the Tribunal to allow comfortable
satisfaction that this issue has been appropriately
addressed. The gravity of
the consequence of the Respondent’s failure in this regard is evident
from the whole disciplinary
Respondent put evidence before the Tribunal that he had completed training
around the issue of relevant child protection legislation
when he commenced
working at Sydney Children’s Hospital. There is also a reference from
persons working in the child protection
area. While the Tribunal accepts the
content of this reference (see above) the authors of the reference have
limited contact with
the Respondent. The Tribunal also notes, as set out
elsewhere, that it was the evidence of the Respondent before the Tribunal at
the conclusion of the Inquiry that
‘My tendency is now to consult with
DOCS on all cases even in making judgments about risk’
. This is not
indicative of the Respondent having developed knowledge, skill and judgment
around the issue of reporting (mandated
or otherwise). Once again there is
nothing formal consideration with other professionals. The Tribunal notes it
set out reasons
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY (No 2)
concerns regarding
the Respondent’s understanding of the nature of mandatoryreporting
obligations.
is nothing in the material that has been put before the Tribunal since the
handing down of
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY (No 2)
That changes the
views expressed in paragraph 657 of that document. Indeed, as can be seen from
the extracts of the Respondent’s
evidence under cross-examination the
Triubnal is of the view that he continues to attempt to minimise his conduct
and to put before
the Tribunal evidence that best suits his purposes rather
than giving a frank account.
Tribunal notes that there are significant differences between the account
initially provided to the HCCC by the Respondent and
the information provided
by the Respondent regarding the Complaint to those referees that received the
email dated 27 July 2010.
The differences in these accounts support the
development of some insight on the part of the Respondent. However, when a
is made between the information contained in the email dated 28
July 2010 and the Findings of this Tribunal there can be no satisfaction
the Respondent has truly appreciated the nature and gravity of his conduct.
This is the inevitable conclusion of a comparison
between the Findings made by
this Tribunal, the email sent to the referees and the references. The email
sent by the Respondent
provided specific guidance for the referees as to
matters the Respondent suggested
‘it would be appropriate for you to
include the following’
. At the particular point in time the
Respondent made this request he was appealing the Findings made by this
Tribunal to the Supreme
Court of New South Wales and he informed the potential
referees of this fact. The Respondent’s position had changed in this
regard by the end of this Inquiry after the Supreme Court did not disturb the
misconduct findings and the Respondent stated that
he accepted the
Tribunal’s findings.
Tribunal also notes the submission made at paragraph 24 of the
Respondent’s submission dated 5 December 2011. It is difficult
that the evidence of the referees provide substantive support for the
submission that the Respondent’s serious
misjudgments/misconduct was
isolated, out of character, and due in part to the context of his teaching and
supervision at the
time. The Tribunal’s conclusion results from the fact
that the references are so closely aligned to the wording provided
Respondent’s email requesting the reference which factually is removed
from the Findings of this Tribunal.
Tribunal notes that the referees that did not receive the email dated 28 July
2010 were quite distinctive in their format and
content from those references
received in response to the email.
a number of the referees expressed the view that the Respondent did not pose a
substantial risk to members of public this
is a question for the Tribunal to
determine. Further, it is only a question that can be determined with full
knowledge of the
misconduct (and other relevant circumstances).
Ultimately,
the Tribunal was not persuaded that the referees in general had a full
appreciation of the Findings made against the
Respondent, nor an understanding
of the evidence as it came before this Tribunal. Further, the references
substantially deal with
reputation rather than character.
information provided to the 44 potential referees (in the email request dated 28
July 2010) only serves to reinforce the Tribunals
view that the Respondent
does not possess sufficient insight or genuine remorse for his misconduct for
the Tribunal to have confidence
that conditions on the Respondent’s
registration would be sufficient for the Tribunal to fulfill its statutory
obligations.
Tribunal now turns to address the submissions made by the Respondent. In the
first paragraph of the submission dated 5 December
2011 the Respondent makes
reference to status as an unrepresented ’defendant’. The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent
had the benefit of legal representation up until the
time this matter was remitted by the Supreme Court. As can be seen from the
document (as reproduced in the annexure hereto) the Respondent was able to
provide comprehensive submissions addressing the relevant
issues. As noted
above the Respondent was afforded the opportunity of several Directions
Hearings where assistance was provided
to him regarding relevant matters such
as to the processes of the Tribunal.
Tribunal notes the content of paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 15, 17, 23, 25, 27,
28, 31, 34, 35, 38 and 39 of the Respondent’s
submissions dated 5
December 2010. The Tribunal notes and accepts the content of paragraphs 3, 8
and 14 of the Respondent’s
submissions dated 5 December 2010.
Notwithstanding
the Respondent’s submission regarding the Respondent’s good
previous professional standing and reputation
and previously unblemished record
the Tribunal is not of the view that these are matters that can remedy the
defects revealed
by the conduct found established by this Tribunal. As noted
above the Tribunal is of the view that the contrived version of the
Tribunal’s Findings provided to the referees by way of the email dated 27
July 2010 diminishes the weight that may be accorded
to them. As to the
submission regarding whether or not the Respondent is likely to reoffend, the
Tribunal notes that there is no
evidence regarding any supervision that the
Respondent may have received to deal with the issues around the matters nor is
any report from a treating practitioner that addresses the issue of the
risk of re- offending. As noted above, concern could arise
from the content of
the reference from the Father of a Client of the Respondent regarding the
timing of the notification to the
relevant child protection authority. The
Tribunal is not able to form the view that the Respondent will not re-offend in
the areas identified in the Findings.
respect to paragraph 10 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accepts that from time to time when determining
Orders the issue of whether
the public interest is best served by not depriving the public of the benefit
of the special/unique
skills of a professional person may arise. This is not
the case in the current matter as the Respondent has not demonstrated to
Tribunal that he has special/unique skills. The Tribunal has had regard to the
issue of whether or not the Orders made herein
are protective and not
punitive. .
Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 12 of the Respondent’s
submissions dated 5 December 2011. On 7 July 2010 the Tribunal
handed down a
Reasons for Decision that cancelled the Registration of the Respondent from 6
August 2010.
to the submission made in paragraph 16 while the Psychology Board of Australia
now mandates peer consultation, it has always been
a strongly recommended
element of good practice and is not a new concept in the profession. The
Tribunal does not have to consider
whether or not the supervision by Associate
Professor Morrissey would be satisfactory as the Tribunal has reached the
that the appropriate Order to make in the circumstances of this
matter is one of cancelling the Respondent’s registration (and
of a Prohibition Order).
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s submissions made at paragraph 18. The
issue of costs have, up until the remittance of this
matter, determined by the
Order made by the Tribunal on 8 July 2010 and the Supreme Court Order dated 24
August 2011. The matter
of the Respondent’s impecuniosity is not a
relevant consideration to the determination of costs. There is nothing in the
submissions
before the Tribunal to indicate that there should be a departure
from an Order that costs should follow the event.
to the submission made in paragraph 19, the Tribunal notes that it was not open
to it to make such an order when the parties had
not had an opportunity to make
submissions in that regard. Further, the issue as to whether or not a witness is
required for cross-examination
is a matter for the other party and/or the
Tribunal to determine. The Respondent was advised in a Directions Hearing that
open for him to withdraw the references and not rely upon them to avoid
the calling of the authors for cross-examination.
to the submission made in paragraph 20, the Tribunal is of the view that this is
a matter for the Tribunal to determine.
to the submission made in paragraphs 21 and 22, the Tribunal is satisfied that
the Respondent poses a substantial risk to the health
of members of the public
based on the findings made in the previous Reasons for Decision and as set out
above. Essentially the Tribunal
has no substantial evidence that the Respondent
has addressed any of the defects in his practice identified by the conduct in
he engaged. A Tribunal would need evidence such as supervisor’s
reports and treating practitioner’s reports before considering
Tribunal has dealt with the references provided by the Respondent above (see
paragraph 24 of the Respondent’s submissions).
respect to the submission made by the Respondent in paragraph 26, the Tribunal
notes the Respondent was asked questions in this
regard on 6 December 2011. The
Respondent followed up on these questions by way of an email dated 16 December
2011 that elaborated
on his earlier submission to broaden the jurisdictions in
which publication of decisions occurs and to list the previous state/territory
Boards that did not publish decisions of hearings on their websites. Further,
decisions in other jurisdictions may not be on the
particular state/territory
Board websites, rather, they are on the website of the relevant tribunal. The
Tribunal notes that in publishing
the decision it is merely complying with the
legislative requirements that have been in place in New South Wales for many
There is nothing in the legislation that would allow the Tribunal to take
into consideration the impact of publication on the internet
as a factor
relevant to Orders.
Tribunal does not accept the submissions made in paragraph 30 of the
Respondent’s submissions. Although the Respondent has
now stated to the
Tribunal that he made serious errors of judgment, this is not the message that
he was sending to potential referees
in his email of 27 July 2010. There is
nothing that underpins the recent statement and submissions of the Respondent to
the Tribunal.
The Tribunal does not have evidence of the outcome of the
Respondent’s personal reflection or remediation. The Tribunal has
commented upon concerns regarding the Respondent’s reporting of child
protection matters. Indeed his submission that
he reported cases
any risk was even suggested’
is of concern as it does not demonstrate
an understanding of the mandated reporting requirements. The evidence before the
indicates that the Respondent did conceptualise the ‘case in
question’ correctly. As found by the Tribunal, the Respondent
then did not
act appropriately (see in particular paragraphs 61 and 77 of
HCCC v Donnelly
to the submission made at paragraph 32 the Tribunal remains concerned that the
Respondent does not have in place mechanisms that
would guard against such
unintentional or out of character behaviour.
the Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent at paragraph 33 the
Tribunal is of the view that such an exercise can
only be undertaken with
professional supervision, peer co-consultation and advice. Given the indications
of depression therapeutic
intervention should also have formed part of this
respect to the submission made by the Respondent at paragraph 36 the Tribunal
cannot find evidence to support the Respondent’s
view of the 27 July 2010
email. The Tribunal is of the view that there are many matters in the email that
are misleading or plainly
incorrect (e.g. the intern learning of additional
facts when Mr A consulted her in private practice).
respect to the submission made in paragraph 40 of the Respondent’s
submissions the Tribunal has a paucity of evidence to
support the
Respondent’s assertion that he had taken courses to remediate and educate
himself over the last six years or that
they had resulted in improvement in his
clinical, supervisory or managerial skills.
Tribunal has also considered all of the matters set out in the document headed
Submissions regarding a re-determination of protective
dated 31 October 2011 (see annexed).
the Respondent’s current employment as a lecturer in psychology he will
need to guard against the possibility of any misrepresentation
that he is a
registered psychologist or the practise of any aspect of psychology however
inadvertent. It appears from the oral evidence
of the Respondent that he is very
well informed of the new standards, guidelines and policies of the Psychology
Board of Australia
and is integrated these into the lecturers he delivers to the
students in his classes at the Southern Cross University. The Respondent
in his evidence to the Tribunal that he was aware of the limitations the lack of
registration placed upon his ability to provide
only advice to students on
academic matters and not to provide any form of counselling.
Tribunal is body to decide any review of orders herein or any application for
reregistration. As to the submission made by the
Respondent at paragraph 13 of
his submissions dated 5 December 2011 the Tribunal notes that the question of
review of the order cancelling
his registration will fall to a tribunal.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC dated 24 November 2011 in
their entirety.
Respondent presented three course outlines as illustrating the nature of his
teaching work. After initially giving evidence as
to the manner in which he used
the Personality Assessment Instrument (PAI) in the course BHS20001 (see in the
summary of the Respondent’s
oral evidence above) the Respondent later
stated that he had never conducted this unit, although his evidence in this
equivocal and ambiguous. A review of the answers provided by the
Respondent as recorded in the transcript around pages 54 to 57
wherein counsel
for the HCCC attempted to clarify the potential risks to students is
illustrative of the general lack of frankness
on the part of the Respondent. The
lack of frankness is also apparent from the answers provided by the Respondent
to counsel’s
questions regarding how he made the decision to refer a
student on for counseling and to which service he referred them (see around
58-60, 14/4/11).
When questioned on one of these relating to the administration of the
Personality Assessment Instrument (PAI) to students he said
he had never
conducted this unit, although his evidence in this regard was equivocal and
ambiguous. The tutorials and computer generated
report appear to have been run
under his supervision. Later in his evidence he stated that he had not used the
PAI with students,
rather it was an ‘essay’ that the students were
required to write in this topic. As the PAI and its computer-generated
can generate provisional diagnoses this is an area of teaching that would be
inappropriate for a person not registered as
a psychologist to teach,
administer, score, report and interpret. The Tribunal further notes that these
tests are not designed to
be administered in a group setting and the information
resulting from the test has the potential to cause students distress. At this
point the Tribunal also notes the submission made in paragraph 37 of the
Respondent’s Submissions dated 5 December 2011.
Tribunal has considered Orders that do not include an Order cancelling the
Respondent’s registration. The make such Orders
the Tribunal would need to
be satisfied that the conditions imposed on the Respondent’s Registration
by those Orders would
be sufficient to achieve the purposes of the Tribunal
– to protect public safety, to maintain the reputation of the profession,
to ensure the public may repose trust in members of the profession and to act as
a deterrent from other practitioners who may consider
similar conduct.
Tribunal has not been persuaded by any of the evidence placed before it with
respect to Orders that there are any set of conditions
that are appropriate in
the circumstances of this matter and it is an Order of cancellation of
Registration that will fulfil the
obligations of this Tribunal to protect the
safety of the public, to maintain the reputation of the profession and to ensure
public can repose confidence in members of the profession.
acknowledging that the subject conduct occurred a number of years ago, the
Tribunal observes that the mere effluxion of time
does not in itself remedy
defects in practice. Indeed, such a period of time should proof sufficient to
allow a practitioner to remediate
all issues that are remediable, no matter what
their other personal circumstances and commitments may be.
now indicated that the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent may well take
some time to undertake formal supervision,
counselling or such like, the
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent will require a period of at least 18
months to commence
this process. It is for this reason that the Tribunal fixes a
period of 18 months before which the Respondent may apply for a review
Order cancelling his registration. When such application is made it would be
appropriate for reports regarding the Respondent’s
issues with depression
and any formal supervision etc to be considered.
made an Order cancelling the Registration of the Respondent the Tribunal
considers the question of making a Prohibition Order
in accordance with section
149C(5) of the National Law. The conduct of the Respondent set out in the
Particulars of the Complaint
found to be established by the Tribunal falls into
more than one type of misconduct. The potential for harm to Mr A’s
and to Ms Dene was great (and it is the potential for harm that is
considered relevant to decisions of this Tribunal). There is little
evidence currently before the Tribunal to indicate that the lack of knowledge,
skill, judgment and care has been addressed
in a meaningful manner or that his
understanding of ethical principles has reached an appropriate level for a safe
practice at this
time. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent poses a
substantial risk to the health of members of the public and will proceed
a Prohibition Order.
Tribunal does not have any submissions regarding costs that would allow a
conclusion other than an Order should be made in favour
of the HCCC, noting the
Orders set out in
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY (No 2)
and made by the
Supreme Court on 24 August 2011.
Respondent’s Registration status
Confirmation of Registration Status issued by AHPRA dated 2 December 2011
provided a number of challenges to the Tribunal and the
parties. First, the
document stated that next to the heading
eligibility’
that the Respondent was ‘Registered until 2
February 2012’ but next to the entry ‘Registration History’
the Respondent was recorded as being registered from various periods including
23 July 2008 until 30 June 2011. The Respondent
informed the Tribunal that he
had not taken any steps to have his name restored to the Register since the
Decision of the Supreme
Court made on 8 July 2011 to set aside the Order of
the Tribunal made on 8 July 2010 to cancel the Respondent’s
Registration.
The Respondent also produced to the Tribunal a letter from the
Psychology Council of NSW dated 13 October 2011 advising the Respondent
he was eligible to be reinstated to the National Register (exhibit RA-II).
second matter that arose from the Confirmation of Registration Status document
was the fact that conditions had been placed upon
his registration restricting
his contact with a client. The Tribunal notes that this client has the same
surname as the Father
of a client that provided the reference RA-N.
first issue was resolved after communication occurred between the Registry and
AHPRA. An email dated 8 December 2011 (1.55pm)
was received by the Registry
from the Director Registration NSW stating that the
‘...administrative steps for the Supreme Court orders to be actioned
were taken on 2 December 2012
(sic)’. The email further stated that
‘These steps provide a period of two months registration until 2
February 2012 and generate an application for renewal notice’.
Respondent undertook not to renew his registration until such time as the
Tribunal handed down its Orders in this matter.
second issue was clarified as conditions that no longer applied to his
registration that related to another complaint relating
to professional
boundary issues that the Psychology Council of NSW had recently resolved not to
pursue. This was confirmed by a
letter to the Respondent dated 14 November 2011
which came into evidence as exhibit RA-JJ. This letter noted the
Respondent’s
advice that he had ceased his therapeutic relationship with
the particular client. These are matters that the Tribunal therefore
regard to with respect to the consideration of the redetermination of Orders.
other aspect of the Respondent’s Registration status that was revealed by
the document from AHPRA dated 2 December 2011
was that on 6 December 2005 the
Respondent was granted retrospective registration for the period 1 July 2003 to
30 June 2006. The
Respondent gave evidence to the Tribunal that he had allowed
his registration to lapse during this period.
Tribunal has proceeded to make Orders on the basis of the advice of AHPRA that
the name of the Respondent is on the Register
as at 2 February 2012.
Protective Orders
The Tribunal orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter as the
Practitioner):
Practitioner registration is cancelled.
the Practitioner is prohibited from providing the following health service as
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(i) therapy
(ii) counselling
(iii) psychotherapy
(iv) hypnotherapy
(v) welfare
services (as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
(vi) any other
mental health service
(vii) clinical
supervision of psychology students and/ or
other alternative/healing health care/therapies.
18 months after the date of the Reasons for Decision in
HCCC v Donnelly
the Practitioner is permitted to provide
these health services on the condition that he gains registration as a health
professional,
at which time the relevant registration authority should consider
the further continuation of the Prohibition Order and/or conditions
registration.
Practitioner is not entitled to apply for review of the Order cancelling his
registration or the Prohibition Order until 18 months
after the date of the
Reasons for Decision in
HCCC v Donnelly
to the costs with respect to the Tribunal Inquiry post 8 July 2010 the
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or
assessed. If the
parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted for an application to apply to
have the matter re-listed before
the Tribunal to determine costs. The Tribunal
confirms the costs order made in
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
that the Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC with respect to
the preparation of his matter for hearing and half of the HCCC
respect to the joint hearing
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:
1) The Respondent
2) The HCCC,
3) The Psychology Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The Psychology Council of New South Wales,
6) The Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor of The Southern Cross
University,
7) The Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor of The Regional University
8) as the Board and Council sees fit.
Dated: 2 February 2012
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Frances Taylor
___________________
Lizabeth Tong
___________________
Chris Wilcox
Annexure A – Submissions as to Protective Orders dated 24 November
Annexure B – Submissions regarding a Re-determination of
Protective Orders from the Respondent
Annexure C - Submissions in
Response to the HCCC Submissions as to Protective Orders from Respondent dated 5
December 2011
Annexure D – Schedule of names supressed
HCCC v DONNELLY
Submissions as to Protective Orders dated 24 November
Introduction
Health Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) seeks orders in this matter
Donnelly be deregistered for a further six months from the date of this hearing
(as Dr Donnelly is not currently on the register
the order may need to be framed
as an order that he not be permitted to apply for re-registration during this
period); and
Donnelly be prohibited from providing any of the following health services,
whether by himself or through supervision of another
person for a further six
months from the date of this hearing:
Psychotherapy;
Counselling;
other mental health service; and/or
supervision of psychology students.
Commission also seeks its costs. These costs include the costs of the
prohibition order hearing and the costs of this hearing.
According to Dr
Donnelly’s submissions in the Supreme Court, there should have been an
order to determine protective orders
after the Tribunal made its findings on the
complaint. Thus, the costs of this hearing are, on Dr Donnelly’s
submission, an
essential part of the hearing and determination of the complaint.
In those circumstances, they should be born by Dr Donnelly.
costs of the prohibition order hearing on 13-14 April 2011 are also, clearly
costs which were required by reason of Dr Donnelly’s
conduct which lead to
the findings of professional misconduct. Dr Donnelly seeks to rely in this
hearing upon the evidence he tendered
for the purposes of the hearing on 13-14
April 2011. That hearing was necessary in order that those witnesses be
cross-examined.
The transcript of that hearing is evidence before the Tribunal
for the purposes of this hearing. Thus, those again are an essential
part of the
hearing and determination of the complaint, and should be born by Dr
Commission repeats and relies upon its submissions:
the hearing of the Complaint, dated 16 September 2009, at paragraphs 78-82.
a prohibition order, dated 17 July 2010;
reply, as to a prohibition order, dated 1 October 2010;
orally at the conclusion of the hearing on 14 April 2011 (at pp 88-91 of the
transcript).
Commission also relies upon:
findings of the Tribunal;
transcript of the hearing on 13-14 April 2011; and
findings of the Supreme Court as set out in the Decision dated 8 July 2011 and
the orders of the Supreme Court dated 24 August
Outline of the Commission’s Submissions
Commission’s submission is, in summary, that the findings against Dr
Donnelly are so serious that they should be reflected
in an order of
deregistration and a prohibition order in the terms sought. Dr Donnelly was
found, by his conduct, to have exposed
a number of people to a real risk of
harm, including a vulnerable child and his intern, in circumstances where the
Tribunal made
significant adverse findings as regards Dr Donnelly’s
conceptualization of the case, his understanding of his reporting obligations,
and his frankness before the Tribunal. Given that the Tribunal hearing occurred
some years after the events the subject of the complaint,
the persistent lack of
insight and candour is troubling.
Tribunal’s findings in relation to the conduct of the supervision of Ms
Dene by Dr Donnelly are of particular concern as
regards risk to the public for
the future. The Tribunal has found, in the face of Dr Donnelly’s denial,
that he had acted in
a way which was inherently hazardous and with a high
potential for harm (paragraph 634). The Tribunal described him as displaying
“a callous disregard for her psychological welfare and well-being”
(paragraph 643). That is a serious finding against
a registered
psychologist.
of greatest concern, however, was Dr Donnelly’s evidence to the Tribunal
as to the nature of the obligations of psychologists
as regards children at
risk. The Tribunal found, at paragraph 650, that Dr Donnelly’s approach
misconceived the nature of mandatory
reporting obligations and of ethical
obligations to ensure safety and of the moral obligation to protect the
vulnerable. That evidence
reflected Dr Donnelly’s thinking as at the date
of the Tribunal hearing (at a time after he had completed training in child
protection). It cannot therefore in any way be dismissed as historical. This
would give rise to significant risk were Dr Donnelly
in a position where he was
being relied upon in this regard, for example, in providing a health service or
in supervising another
person providing such a service.
Donnelly’s willingness to rely, at the hearing, of his conceptualization
of the case is also of concern as it demonstrates
a continuing willingness to
seek to rationalize his conduct before a professional disciplinary
the Commission does not seek to undermine Dr Donnelly’s account of his own
distress, and his willingness to communicate
to others as to both his distress
and the link between this and the Tribunal’s findings, those matters do
not diminish the
importance of the Tribunal’s protective orders serving a
deterrent function. The protective orders mark the significance with
Tribunal views its findings, and are a particular feature of the process that
serves the public interest in deterring similar
of significance are:
Donnelly’s continuing efforts to persuade the Supreme Court that he was
not delivering a health care service to Ms A and
was thus not a mandatory
reporter under
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
. This shows a continuing failure to accept his role and responsibility in
the circumstances;
terms of Dr Donnelly’s email to potential referees at p 74 of MFI 2 which
indicates a continuing lack of acceptance of his
errors of judgment and a less
than fully accurate representation of what brought Ms Dene to make a report to
DOCS. That email can
only be construed as an attempt to minimize the
Tribunal’s findings;
manner in which, at the hearing on 14 April 2011, Dr Donnelly sought to justify
the terms in which he wrote that email (tx 51-52
Donnelly’s explanation of the PAI, at the hearing on 14 April 2011, when
he sought to suggest that the PAI would be completed
as a fictitious person when
he later accepted that that was not necessarily the case (tx 56). Dr Donnelly
later accepted that on
five or six occasions an email had had to be sent on
account of elevated PAI scores (tx 81:43); and
Donnelly’s evidence before the Tribunal on 14 April 2011, as to what he
had done that was wrong, did not include that he
should have made a mandatory
report to DOCS. Rather, he said that he should have contacted DOCS for a ruling
regarding the reported
massage behaviour (at tx 82:21-39). This is consistent
with a continuing failure to accept the true character of the disclosure and
understand his mandatory reporting obligations.
character evidence in support of Dr Donnelly should be treated with some caution
given that it comes from persons with little
or no direct clinical experience of
Dr Donnelly in the period since the Tribunal hearing. Equally, any courses which
Dr Donnelly
has undertaken which pre-date the Tribunal hearing must be regarded
with caution given the Tribunal’s findings as at the date
of the hearing.
These matters cannot mitigate any risk which the Tribunal may find on the basis
of the evidence given by Dr Donnelly
at the hearing of the complaint.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.982 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter