URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/438.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fraser v Gorilla Rush Pty Ltd ACN 659612012 [2025] NSWDC 438 (29 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Fraser v Gorilla Rush Pty Ltd ACN 659612012
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 438
Hearing Date(s):
19 and 26 September 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
The subpoena issued to the Australian Communications and Media Authority
filed on 29 July 2025 is set aside.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – application to set aside subpoena issued to third
party – where subpoena for production of documents
held by regulator
– whether subpoena amounts to a “fishing expedition” –
whether subpoena lacks a legitimate
forensic purpose – subpoena set
Legislation Cited:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Schedule 2 – Australian
Consumer Law,
Interactive Gambling Act 2001
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 33.4
Cases Cited:
Secretary of the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment v
Blacktown City Council
[2021] NSWCA 145
Thomas v SMP (International) Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 870
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
Mr Paul Fraser (Plaintiff)
Gorilla Rush Pty Ltd ACN 659612012 (First
Mr Samuel Oliver Johnson (Second Defendant)
Representation:
Mr O Fagir (First and Second
Defendants)
Solicitors:
My General Counsel (Plaintiff)
Redlich (First and Second Defendants)
File Number(s):
2024/00272199
Publication Restriction:
statement of claim which initiated these proceedings was filed on 24 July 2024.
The notice of motion the subject of this decision
was filed on 26 August 2025 by
the first and second defendants, Gorilla Rush Pty Ltd (“Gorilla
Rush”) and Mr Samuel Johnson.
action is a claim for damages by Mr Fraser against Gorilla Rush for payments
allegedly due under a document referred to in the
statement of claim as
“GR Employment Agreement”, which was entered into by Mr Fraser and
Gorilla Rush on or about 10
October 2022. Alternatively, Mr Fraser claims
payment for services performed on a
quantum meruit
basis. Mr Fraser also
claims damages from Mr Johnson, who was the sole director and secretary of
Gorilla Rush, on the basis of allegations
that a collateral contract came into
existence between Mr Fraser and Mr Johnson in which Mr Johnson undertook to
ensure that Mr Fraser
was paid pursuant to the GR Employment Contract. Further,
Mr Fraser alleges, in the statement of claim, that Mr Johnson made a misleading
and deceptive representation to him in or about December 2022 that the GR
Employment Agreement was not valid and binding because
Mr Fraser was a UK
national and that a “replacement agreement” would need to be entered
into by Mr Fraser and another
entity, causing Mr Fraser to enter into a further
agreement with Picaterre Limited (“Picaterre”) called, in the
of claim, “the Picaterre Agreement”. Other allegations of
misleading and deceptive conduct are made against Mr Johnson,
and Mr Fraser
claims damages under s 18 and/or s 31 of the Australian Consumer Law in respect
of all of the representations alleged.
all material times, Mr Fraser has been a resident of the United Kingdom. Gorilla
Rush is incorporated in Queensland, Australia.
Mr Johnson resides in Queensland.
There is no allegation in the statement of claim of any event in relation to the
claims occurring
in the state of New South Wales.
notice of motion filed by the defendants on 26 August 2025 seeks the following
1. Pursuant to rule 33.4 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure
(UCPR) the Subpoena to Australian Communications and Media
Authority filed on 29 July 2025 be set aside in whole or in the alternative,
documents have been produced in answer to the Subpoena, that access to those
documents produced be refused.
2. The Plaintiff to pay the Defendants’ costs.
3. Such further or other order as the Court sees fit.
plaintiff opposes the application in the notice of
subpoena issued to the Australian Communications and Media Authority (“the
ACMA”) sought the following documents:
1. Formal warnings under
section 64A
Interactive
Gambling Act 2001
issued by the Australian Communications and Media
Authority (
) to the Digibrite Entities (defined below) in the period
from 1 September 2022 to 30 June 2025.
2. Correspondence between ACMA and the Digibrite Entities (or
anyone on their behalf) in the period from 1 September 2022 to 30
3. In this subpoena the Digibrite Entities means:
(a) Digibrite SRL;
(b) Green Tree Marketing S.R.L;
(c) Yellow Birch Infomatics S.R.L;
(d) Any other entity associated with any of the following urls;
(i) luckiest.com;
(ii) royalreels,com;
(iii) reefeels.com; and/or
(iv) rocknreels.com.
Evidence and submissions for Mr Fraser
plaintiff, Mr Fraser, relied upon his affidavit sworn on 21 September 2025.
his affidavit, Mr Fraser says that one of his claims is that Gorilla Rush owes
him wages pursuant to the GR Employment Agreement.
Fraser refers to a proposed amended statement of claim which is annexed to his
affidavit. This proposed amended statement of claim
has not yet been the subject
of any application in this Court. Mr Fraser says, in his affidavit:
However an application will shortly be filed to transfer these proceedings to
the Federal Court of Australia and for leave to file
the proposed Amended
Statement of Claim substantially in the form referred to ...
proposed amended statement of claim includes an allegation that Gorilla Rush
breached the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) by its failure to pay Mr Fraser the
salary to which he was entitled, and that Mr Johnson was an accessory to that
contravention
by Gorilla Rush.
his affidavit, Mr Fraser notes that, in its defence, Gorilla Rush says that an
Independent Contractor Agreement (“the Picaterre
Agreement”) was
entered into between Mr Fraser and Picaterre on about 8 November 2023. The
defence further pleads that the
Picaterre Agreement “memorialised a verbal
agreement for [Mr Fraser] to provide services as an independent contractor which
[Mr Fraser] requested on or about 21 November 2022” and “made
Picaterre (an Alderney company, controlled by Johnson that
has been voluntarily
wound up) responsible for my all of wages from 10 October 2022 instead of
Gorilla Rush.” [sic]. I take
judicial notice that Alderney is one of the
Channel Islands, located between Great Britain and France close to the coast of
and part of the Bailiwick of Guernsey, a self-governing British Crown
Dependency.
Fraser says that he denies the existence of any such verbal agreement, and he
relies on an email of 14 March 2024 to him from Mr
Johnson, in which Mr Johnson
...we are unable to replace the employment agreement entered into between
Gorilla Rush and yourself, in October 2022. Despite any
discussions or
considerations to the contrary, we cannot enter into a new agreement that would
supersede the original. ...
Fraser notes that, in the defence, it is pleaded that the email of 14 March 2024
refers to the employment agreement by mistake
and should, instead, have referred
to the Picaterre Agreement.
Fraser says that two of the issues in these proceedings are whether:
(a) the Picaterre Agreement was entered into to memorialise a
verbal agreement I requested November 2022 and;
(b) Johnson mistakenly referred to the GR Employment Agreement
instead of the Picaterre Agreement in the Email.
relation to the subpoena the subject of the application, Mr Fraser
12 The ACMA subpoena was issued to obtain material to
investigate whether Johnson had other reasons to:
(a) enter into the Picaterre Agreement, for
example that he wanted to enter into the Picaterre Agreement to show that my
on luckiest.com was not being undertaken by an employee of an Australian
company because of an investigation by the Australian Communications
Authority at a later date (“ACMA”); and/or
(b) refer to the GR Employment Agreement in
the Email, for example that he no longer wished to rely upon the Picaterre
due to developments in the investigation ACMA.
If documents answering the ACMA Subpoea support the above,
then they could be put to Johnson in cross examination to test the
claims made
in the Defences of Gorilla Rush and Johnson, as set out in 6(a) and 8 above.
Fraser refers, in his affidavit, to a Business Plan for Picaterre which refers
to luckiest.com as evidence that Mr Johnson was
associated with luckiest.com. Mr
Fraser believes that this association is uncontested.
Fraser refers to a conversation he had with Mr Johnson “toward the end of
my work with Gorilla Rush and Johnson” in
which Mr Fraser asked Mr Johnson
“about his affiliates and whether they could refer traffic to
luckiest.com”. Mr Fraser
says that Mr Johnson mentioned numerous affiliate
sites, including the sites named in the subpoena at paragraph 3(d)(ii), (iii)
Fraser also relied upon a screenshot as at 16 April 2023 from royalreels.com in
which the Privacy Policy and a page entitled “Security,
Software and
royalreels1.org taken on about 25 July
2025 which says “At Digibrite SRL,
we are committed to safeguarding our customers’ personal data”. The
same statement
appears on a screenshot of the Privacy Policy from
royalreels,online. Further, Mr Fraser relies upon a screenshot taken on 13
2024 of the Terms and Conditions on the website reefspins1.com which
says “This site is owned by Digibrite SRL...”. Mr
Fraser relied upon
these documents in support of his assertion that Mr Johnson is associated with
the “Digibrite entities”
referred to in the ACMA Subpoena.
Fraser further relied upon documents downloaded from the ACMA website on or
redacted copies of
warnings issued by ACMA to Digibrite SRL, Green Tea Marketing SRL and Yellow
Birch Infomatics SRL.”
plaintiff’s argument in relation to the material the subject of the
subpoena was summarised in the following way (T 19 September
2025 p 4 line
The plaintiff’s position is that if the defendants - and in particular the
second defendant - were subject through perhaps
related entities or sites
subject to investigations by ACMA, that that provides an alternative reason for
them to, first, enter into
the independent contractor agreement - ie, not
because it was to memorialise a verbal agreement - and second, that again, the
of such an investigation may provide a basis for the second defendant
to indeed seek to revert to the employment agreement.
You can imagine, your Honour, that if there are investigations about breaches of
online gambling provisions, then whether certain
entities employ people that
work on online gambling sites are employed in Australia or out of Australia
might be something that the
defendants weren’t interested in. [sic]
was conceded that the proposed amended statement of claim does not plead the
email of 14 March 2024 as part of a positive cause
of action. It was further
conceded that the proposed amended statement of claim does not plead the
allegation that Mr Fraser was
told that the employment agreement was invalid.
However, it was submitted, the proposed amended statement of claim has not yet
filed (T 26 September 2025 p 11). The intended inference from this
submission is that the proposed amended statement of claim may
amended. There was also a suggestion that the content of the email of 14 March
2024 and the allegation that Mr Fraser
was told that the employment agreement
was invalid might be raised in a reply.
the resumed hearing on 26 September 2025, Mr Fraser’s position in relation
to the subpoenaed material was put in the following
way (T 13 line
So effectively to summarise, we have a significant dispute about why the second
agreement was entered into in November 2023 and we
have a dispute about whether
or not the second defendant mistakenly referred to the employment agreement in
his email of 14 March.
The purpose of the subpoena is to seek documents that may
go to alternative reasons for the defendants to want to enter into the
agreement in November 2023 and in respect of the email of 14 March whether there
were other motivations or reasons to actually
refer to the employment agreement
as he did essentially to undermine his position that he did that mistakenly.
We do not go so far as to say as a hypothesis that Mr Johnson the
second defendant wanted to show that certain employees related
luckiest.com were in or not in Australia. We do say that the existence of an
investigation by ACMA is something that can be put
to Mr Johnson in
cross‑examination to test both of the claims I’ve referred to. We do
say that if there is an investigation
then again because that investigation in
some way relates to the substratum of the facts in this case, that is a relevant
that can be put to Mr Johnson to test his credit generally.
I make one other observation. My learned friend explained why we were here and
he referred to a letter from my firm alluding to the
possibility of a further
subpoena. Whilst I accept that’s one explanation I note that the
controversy with respect to this
subpoena started before that letter. There are
two other explanations for why we’re here. The first is that the
had something to hide. The second is that the defendants are taking
this opportunity to deplete the plaintiff’s resources.
It could be both. I
of course have no evidence. I can’t point to anything that suggests one or
more of those possibilities
more than the other.
was submitted that caution should be exercised in circumstances where the
defendants have not identified any substantive prejudice
to them arising from
the subpoena.
was further submitted that the ACMA notices refer to
Interactive Gambling Act 2001
(Cth), which provides:
(2A) A person must not provide a prohibited
interactive gambling service that has an Australian - customer link
section 8).
Civil penalty: 7,500 penalty units.
A gambling service has an Australian – customer link only if any or all
of the customers of the service are physically present
in Australia (see
Interactive Gambling Act 2001
value of a penalty unit in Commonwealth legislation is $330 and has been $330
since 7 November 2024. The present maximum fine
would therefore be 7,550 x $330
= $2.49m. The value of the penalty unit at the time of the notices issued by the
ACMA in August 2022
and June 2023 was $222 and $275 respectively. The point made
in the plaintiff’s case with respect to
Interactive
Gambling Act 2001
was that it provided for severe financial penalties in the
event of a breach.
Evidence and submissions for Gorilla Rush and
support of the motion, the defendants relied upon two affidavits of Mr Stephen
Trew dated 26 August 2025 (“Mr Trew’s
first affidavit”) and 25
September 2025 (“Mr Trew’s second affidavit”). Mr Trew is a
partner of Holding Redlich
and the solicitor on record for the first and second
defendants.
Mr Trew’s first affidavit, he says:
13. I am informed by the Second Respondent and believe:
a. luckiest.com utilises a software solution platform created
by Digibrite S.R.L; and
b. the Second Respondent is not a director of, or otherwise
involved in:
Digibrite S.R.L
than as described in 13(a) above;
ii. “Green Tree Marketing
Yellow Birch Infomatics
royalreels.com
reefeels.com
rocknreels.com
14. From my review of the ACMA Subpoena, it appears that the
categories lack any legitimate forensic purpose, will capture documents
are not relevant to the facts in issue in the proceedings, and which amount to a
fishing expedition.
to Mr Trew’s second affidavit was a bundle of documents referred to as
contains an exchange of emails concerning Mr Fraser’s contractual
arrangements with Gorilla Rush and Picaterre. An email
from Mr Johnson to Ms
Cook, Business Manager of Gorilla Rush, is entitled “Draft agreement Paul
for review” and says,
He is in the process of setting up a company so he can split income with his
wife/reduce taxes etc.
I think we need to look at a contractor agreement for him. It makes no
difference to me, except it saves me some money.
contains an email dated 8 September 2023 entitled “Updates to Paul’s
contract” in which Mr Fraser provides
Ms Cook with his new company name.
The company address is in the Isle of Man, which is in the Irish sea between
Great Britain and
Ireland. Emails earlier on 8 September 2023 between Ms Cook
and Mr Fraser, with the same heading, refer to Picaterre and the contract
changed to “reference” Picaterre.
also contains screenshots of “a Gorilla Rush headcount” which shows
that there are “workers engaged by the
First Defendant” in Brendale,
Queensland.
includes the Services Agreement between Picaterre and Gorilla Rush dated 16
December 2022.
further includes an exchange of emails between Mr Fraser and Ms Cook dated 14
February 2024 which refer to a contract and a resignation
for further
discussion. It also includes a screenshot, said to be from the public website
duplichecker.com/domain-age-checker.php,
which apparently indicates that the
website “royalreelsreviews.com” was created on 9 June 2025.
their written submissions, the defendants say that the principal issues arising
in this matter are:
(a) whether the written employment agreement between the
plaintiff and Gorilla Rush was discharged and replaced by the written
independent contractor agreement between the plaintiff’s corporate vehicle
and Picaterre;
(b) whether a representation made by Gorilla Rush or Mr Johnson
was misleading or deceptive and whether it caused loss; and
(c) whether the plaintiff performed work in accordance with the
employment contract.
is submitted, in the defendants’ case, that it is difficult to discern a
connection between the subpoena and the matters
in issue in the
proceedings.
defendants understand that the plaintiff seeks to establish some relevance on
the basis that the defendants are involved in the
operation of the website
“luckiest.com”, that contraventions of the
Interactive Gambling
would adversely reflect on Mr Johnson’s character and that Mr
Johnson’s character is relevant to the credibility of his
evidence in this
defendants further understand the plaintiff to allege that the ACMA may have
investigated the operation of certain websites, including
luckiest.com, in
Australia, that it follows that Mr Johnson may have had an incentive to seek to
disassociate Gorilla Rush, and Australian
company, from luckiest.com, that by
asserting that Mr Fraser was party to an agreement with Picaterre rather than
Gorilla Rush, Mr
Johnson would disassociate Gorilla Rush from the operation of
luckiest.com and that Mr Johnson’s incentive to achieve that
disassociation may be relevant to the Courts assessment of evidence which may be
led in connection with the email of 14 March 2024.
defendants submitted that the plaintiff bears the onus of demonstrating that the
subpoena has a legitimate forensic purpose.
A legitimate forensic purpose has
been explained in the following way:
It is sufficient, in my view, to justify a subpoena as having been
issued for a legitimate forensic purpose if the documents sought
are “apparently relevant” or, to use the words of Nicholas
at first instance, it can be seen that the documents
sought to be produced by way of subpoena will
materially assist on
an identified issue
or there is a reasonable basis beyond speculation
that it is likely the documents subpoenaed will so assist.
Secretary of the Department of Planning v Blacktown City Council
“Blacktown City Council case” at [65] per Bell P)
It will generally be sufficient and prima facie evidence of a
legitimate forensic purpose if the documents sought to be produced
on subpoena
have an apparent relevance to the issues in the case and or bear upon the cross
examination of witnesses expected to
be called in the proceedings.
(Blacktown City Council case at [80] per Bell P)
... the essential question is whether the documents called for are apparently
relevant, or capable of providing a legitimate basis
for cross-examination,
in which case there is a legitimate forensic purpose for the issue of the
(Blacktown City Council case at [89] per Brereton JA)
was submitted, on behalf of the defendants,
10. Documents will add “in some way” to the
relevant evidence and be sought for a legitimate forensic purpose if they
capable of providing a legitimate basis for cross-examination or go to credit.
However, it is impermissible for a subpoena to
trawl for documents that may be
used to impugn the credit of a particular witness. The principles in this regard
were summarised
by Pembroke J in
Thomas v SMP (International) Pty Ltd (No
[2010] NSWSC 870
terms of which have been repeatedly approved:
(a) As a general principle, the production of documents
intended to be used solely to impeach the credit of a witness may be a
legitimate forensic purpose... It is not therefore an objection, by itself,
that the subpoena seeks documents relating only to credit...
On the other hand,
in order to support the subpoena, it is not sufficient, by itself, merely to say
that the documents relate to
the credit of a witness;
(b) In all cases, there must be some actual identifiable basis
- reasonably precise and tolerably clear - that indicates what the
forensic purpose really is. The forensic purpose requires realistic
consideration of the potential strategic and evidentiary
use of the documents in
the context of the legal and factual issues that are required to be
determined;
(c) If the subpoena is legitimate, two features of its intended
forensic purpose will usually demonstrate its legitimacy. First,
the particular
credit issue will be capable of reasonable articulation, making due allowance
for the necessity for some generalisation
depending on the stage that the
hearing has reached. Second, the probable connection between the documents
sought to be produced
and that credit issue, will be apparent;
(d) A credit issue of doubtful plausibility is unlikely to be
sufficient to justify the subpoena. The same result will follow if
the supposed
connection between the credit issue and the documents sought, is strained,
opaque or speculative;
(e) The court will exercise particular caution when a subpoena
is sought to be justified solely on the credit basis ... The judge
satisfied about the utility of the production of the documents, and the fairness
to the witness, having regard to the potential
for abuse and the need to control
and confine cross examination within manageable limits;
(f) A subpoena that does little more than speculatively trawl
for documents that may possibly be used to impugn a witness’s
never been justifiable ....
Thomas v SMP (International) Pty Ltd (No 2)
(“SMP”), Pembroke
J set aside the subpoena, concluding:
21. In this case, there is, in fact, no sound evidentiary basis
for me to infer that the transcript of Mr Willett’s evidence
Commission contains any statements by him that might be capable of being
deployed to impeach his credit. The propensity of
the transcript to achieve that
result is utterly speculative. The mere fact that the subject matter is Mr
Barkl’s alleged money
laundering activities does not advance the analysis
beyond guesswork and innuendo.
defendants submitted that, to the extent that the subpoena was sought to be
justified on the basis that a breach of the
Interactive Gamblin Act 2001
by an entity with which Mr Johnson is associate has some bearing on his credit,
the subpoena cannot stand. A breach of legislation
by an entity does not bear
upon the credibility as a witness of every person associated with that entity.
Obviously, there can be
no argument that such a breach bears upon the
credibility of a person who has no relationship with that entity. It was
that there is no reasonable basis beyond speculation that the
documents might bear on the credibility of Mr Johnson’s evidence
proceedings.
is accepted, by the defendants, that Gorilla Rush and Mr Johnson are involved in
the operation of luckiest.com. However, it is
submitted, there is no basis for a
conclusion that Mr Johnson has any connection to the other six entities named in
the subpoena.
was submitted that the plaintiff must be aware that there are no ACMA warnings
in relation to luckiest.com. Such warnings are public,
and the searches
undertaken by the plaintiff have been produced. None relate to
luckiest.com.
is understood that the plaintiff argues that the documents produced by the ACMA
in response to the subpoena might be relevant to
the view taken of the email of
14 March 2024 because it might provide a reason why Mr Johnson might wish to
disassociate the plaintiff’s
work from Australia and thus disassociate the
plaintiff’s work from Gorilla Rush, an Australian company. The defendants
that this argument amounted to “not just speculation but
multi-layered speculation”. The defendants submitted that the
plaintiff’s argument involves the following successive
conjectures:
(1) the operation of luckiest.com may have been the subject of some
investigation by ACMA (which there is no evidence to support),
(2) the location of people providing services to Gorilla Rush was, in some way
which is not specified, relevant to the compliance
of that operating entity with
Interactive Gambling Act 2001
(3) it would be significant in some way to ACMA whether the plaintiff was
providing services to Gorilla Rush as an employee or as
an independent
contractor through Picaterre as an intermediary,
(4) ACMA’s investigation would be effective to identify the location of
Gorilla Rush employees, but ineffective to identify
cases where services were
being supplied to Gorilla Rush by contractors through Picaterre, and
(5) Mr Johnson would therefore have an incentive to deny, falsely, in an email
to the plaintiff sent after the provision of services,
that the plaintiff was an
employee of Gorilla Rush.
defendants submitted that it should be borne in mind that there is evidence that
the independent contractor arrangement was entered
into at the request of the
plaintiff (see [
] above). Further, Gorilla Rush employed a group of
workers in Australia in connection with luckiest.com, so that Mr Fraser’s
employment status could not affect any perception of the connection of Gorilla
Rush with Australia, even if that were relevant. Further,
any investigation
would disclose the services agreement between Gorilla Rush and Picaterre, so
that any independent contractor engaged
by Picaterre to perform services for
Gorilla Rush could readily be discovered.
defendants characterised the plaintiff’s argument that the change in
arrangements for Mr Fraser in his work for Gorilla
Rush may have been part of a
scheme to create a perception for ACMA as “fanciful”.
defendants submitted that there is no basis beyond speculation upon which the
Court could be satisfied that the documents sought
by the subpoena might
materially assist on an identified issue or add in some way to the relevant
evidence in the case.
Consideration
defendants apply to have the subpoena issued to the ACMA set aside.
has been conceded that the defendants are associated with luckiest.com. There is
insufficient evidence to conclude that either
Gorilla Rush or Mr Johnson are
associated with the other urls named in the subpoena in any way, let alone in
such a way as to have
anything investigated in relation to those urls have an
impact upon Mr Johnson’s credit.
is insufficient evidence to link either of the defendants with the entities
named in paragraph 3 of the subpoena.
if a link had been established between the entities or the urls named in the
subpoena, and even if there were a sufficient basis
to believe that there was an
investigation at some time by ACMA in relation to those entities or urls, there
is no basis to think
that any such investigation would impact upon the
credibility of the evidence of Mr Johnson generally or in this matter, which
presently, to Mr Fraser’s entitlements under his contract with
Gorilla Rush. It follows that there is no reason to think that
investigation in relation to luckiest.com would impact upon the credibility of
the evidence of Mr Johnson in this matter.
that Gorilla Rush has a group of employees or service providers working in
Queensland, Australia, and that any investigation
of Gorilla Rush would disclose
that fact, there is no reason to think that there would be any advantage to Mr
Johnson or Gorilla
Rush in concealing Mr Fraser’s true status as either an
employee of Gorilla Rush or an independent contractor providing services
Picaterre and his work on luckiest.com from the ACMA.
accept the defendants’ submission that the plaintiff’s argument that
the ACMA documents could be relevant to Mr Johnson’s
motivation to change
Mr Fraser’s work status is based upon a series of conjectures and is
utterly speculative. The subpoena
is contrary to the principles set out in the
judgment in SMP.
documents sought by the subpoena are not apparently relevant in the sense that
they will materially assist on an identified issue.
There is no reasonable basis
beyond speculation that it is likely that the documents sought by the subpoena
will assist the Court
in this case.
the course of the hearing, I expressed my reservation as to whether this Court
had jurisdiction in this matter. It is not apparent,
on the material before me,
that the issues in the case have any nexus with the State of New South Wales.
The plaintiff indicated
that he intended to pursue the matter in the Federal
Court of Australia.
Conclusion and orders
the reasons set out above, the subpoena issued to the Australian Communications
and Media Authority filed on 29 July 2025 should
be set aside.
following order will issue:
(1) The subpoena issued to the Australian Communications and Media Authority
filed on 29 July 2025 is set aside.
will hear the parties as to costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter