URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lombard Farms Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue [2013] NSWADTAP 42 (6 September 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Lombard Farms Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 42
Hearing Date(s):
26 June and 12 August 2013
Decision Date:
06 September 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
RL Seiden, Deputy President
J Block, Judicial Member
C Bennett, Non
Judicial Member
The appeal is allowed. The Decision is set aside and remitted to the
Tribunal as originally constituted, to be determined in accordance
Catchwords:
Payroll tax - grouping provisions - de-grouping of company - discretion of
Chief Commissioner to de-group - nature of discretion under
Payroll Tax Act 2007
- independent and not connected - ability to influence management -
ability to control - inter-company loans - carrying on of business
- statutory
interpretation - question of law or fact - task of Appeal Panel where error of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Taxation Administration Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Limited
[2002] HCA 59
(2002) 212 CLR 411
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
AT v Commissioner of Police, NSW
[2010] NSWCA 131
B&L Linings
Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2008] NSWCA 187
Commissioner of State Revenue v Tasty Chicks Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 181
Collector of Customs v Agfa-Gevaert
[1996] HCA 36
(1996) 186 CLR 389
Collector of
Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd (1993) 43 FCR 280
Commissioner of
Taxation v Crown Insurance Services Limited
[2012] FCAFC 153
(2012) 207 FCR 247
Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 147 CLR
GTS Industries Pty Limited v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2004] VCAT
Lloyd v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWADTAP 3
Lombard Farms Pty
Ltd v The Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWADT 17
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWCA 180
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Neat Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277
Network Clothing Company v Commissioner of State
[2007] VCAT 2492
Newcastle City Council v GIO General Ltd
[1997] HCA 53
Norrie v NSW Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages
[2013] NSWCA
[1999] NSWCCA 166
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681
Screen Australia v EME Productions No
[2012] FCAFC 19
(2012) 200 FCR 282
Sharp Corporation of Australia Pty Ltd v
Collector of Customs
(1995) 59 FCR 6
The Australian Gas Light Company v
Valuer-General
[1940] NSWStRp 9
(1940) 40 SR (NSW) 126
Triline Homes Pty Ltd v Commissioner
of State Revenue (Vic) (1994) unreported AAT Vic 3.3.95
Principal judgment
Lombard Farms Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
(Respondent)
Representation
A Tsekouras (Appellant)
I Latham (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Barraket Stanton Lawyers (Appellant)
Crown Solicitor's Office
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
A Verick, Judicial Member
- Date of Decision:
24 January 2013
- Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 17
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Farms Pty Ltd (the Appellant) sought review of payroll tax assessments for the
2008 to 2010 tax years. The substantive issue
is whether the Appellant should be
grouped with the following entities:
(1) Con-Tec Pty
Limited (Con-Tec);
Operations Pty Limited (Albem Operations);
(3) Albem Pty
Limited (Albem); and
(4) Alpine Pty
Limited (Alpine).
was common ground that the entities were properly grouped under the provisions
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(NSW) (the Act). The real issue is whether
the Commissioner ought to have exercised his discretion under
to determine that the Appellant is not a member of the group.
of the Act relevantly provides as follows:
79 Exclusion of
persons from groups
(1) The Chief Commissioner may, by order in writing, determine that a person
who would, but for the determination, be a member of
a group is not a member of
(2) The Chief Commissioner may only make such a determination if satisfied,
having regard to the nature and degree of ownership and
control of the
businesses, the nature of the businesses and any other matters the Chief
Commissioner considers relevant, that
a business carried on by the person, is
carried on independently of, and is not connected with the carrying on of, a
business carried
on by any other member of that group
[emphasis added].
Judicial Member held that the prerequisites for the exercise of the discretion
of the Act had not been met and accordingly the Appellant was not
entitled to be de-grouped:
Lombard Farms Pty Ltd v The Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue
[2013] NSWADT 17
(the Decision). The appeal is brought solely
on questions of law.
Questions of law
significant amount of time at the hearing of the appeal was devoted to examining
whether the grounds of appeal articulated questions
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
(the ADT Act) provides that an appeal against an appealable decision of the
Tribunal (the Decision is an appealable decision)
may be made on any question of
law: s 113(2)(a) ADT Act. Leave was not sought from the Appeal Panel to extend
the appeal to a review
of the merits of the appealable decision: s 113(2)(b) ADT
Act. Accordingly, it is necessary for the Appellant to identify with some
precision the questions of law that are said to arise.
Respondent submits that the questions raised in the notice of appeal are
questions of fact. In the alternative, he submits that
if a question of law
arises, no error is detected and therefore the appeal should be dismissed in any
79(2) of the Act is, as the extract above demonstrates, a collection of ordinary
English words. The Respondent relies heavily
The Australian Gas Light
Company v Valuer-General
[1940] NSWStRp 9
(1940) 40 SR (NSW) 126
Australian Gas
Light Company
) for the proposition that the meaning of an ordinary English
phrase in a statute is a question of fact.
Federal Court in
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd
(1993) 43 FCR 280 at 287 (
) identified five general
propositions in relation to the distinction between questions of law and fact.
These were extracted by the
High Court in
Collector of Customs v
Agfa-Gevaert
[1996] HCA 36
(1996) 186 CLR 389
at 395 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ) (
Agfa-Gevaert)
1. The question whether a word
or phrase in a statute is to be given its ordinary meaning or some technical or
other meaning is a
question of law. (22)
Jedko Game Co Pty Ltd v Collector or
Customs (NSW)
(1987) 12 ALD 491
Brutus v Cozens
[1972] UKHL 6
[1973] AC 854.
2. The ordinary meaning of a word or its non-legal technical meaning is a
question of fact. (23)
Life Insurance Co or Australia Ltd v Phillips
[1925] HCA 18
(1925) 36 CLR 60
NSW Associated Blue-Metal Quarries Ltd v Federal
Commissioner or Taxation
[1956] HCA 80
Neal v Department or
[1980] FCA 45
(1980) 3 ALD 97
(1987) 12 ALD 491.
3. The meaning of a technical legal term is a question of law. (24)
Australian Gas Light Co v Valuer-General
[1940] NSWStRp 9
(1940) 40 SR (NSW) 126
Lombardo v Federal Commissioner or Taxation
[1979] FCA 66
(1979) 40 FLR 208
4. The effect or construction of a term whose meaning or interpretation is
established is a question of law. (25)
Life Insurance Co of Australia
[1925] HCA 18
(1925) 36 CLR 60
5. The question whether facts fully found fall within the provision of a
statutory enactment properly construed is generally a question
of law." (26)
Hope v Bathurst City Council
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
at 7, per Mason J with whom
Gibbs, Stephen, Murphy and Aickin JJ agreed;
Australian National Railways
Commission v Collector of Customs (SA)
[1985] FCA 312
(1985) 8 FCR 264
at 277, per Sheppard
and Burchett JJ.
Pozzolanic,
the Full Court qualified the fifth proposition.
The Court said that, when a statute uses words according to their ordinary
and it is reasonably open to hold that the facts of the case fall within
those words, the question as to whether they do or do not
is one of fact. (27)
(1993) 43 FCR 280 at 288, citing
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
debate between the parties centred on the distinction between the second and
fourth propositions, but there was also some debate
relation to the fifth proposition, in
Sharp Corporation of Australia Pty Ltd
v Collector of Customs
(1995) 59 FCR 6
Hill J noted at 16 as
The rule that a question of fact is involved in determining
whether facts fall within the meaning of a word once that meaning is
ascertained,
may cause confusion. The confusion comes about because there are
actually two related rules, the distinction between which is not
always readily
apparent. The first of these rules is generally expressed as being that where
the facts have been fully found or there
is no dispute as to the facts and the
question is whether those facts
necessarily
fall within the description
of a word or phrase in a statute, that will be a question of law. This is the
sixth proposition enunciated
by [Jordan] CJ in the
Australian Gas Light Co
case. The rationale for this principle is clear enough. If only one meaning
is open but a tribunal arrives at a different meaning,
underlying the Tribunal's
conclusion must be an error of principle, that is to say, an error of law.
The second related principle is that where the facts found are capable of
falling within or without the description used in the statute,
the decision
which side of the line they fall on will be a decision of fact and not law. Such
a decision will generally involve weight
being given to one or other element of
the facts and so involve matters of degree.
the Full Federal Court in
Commissioner of Taxation v Crown Insurance Services
[2012] FCAFC 153
(2012) 207 FCR 247
said at [39]:
When the statute under
consideration has no technical meaning, but is understood in its plain ordinary
meaning, a question of law
will arise if the facts found must necessarily have
come within the statutory description, but only a question of fact will arise
the facts found are capable of coming within the statutory description. In that
second case, no question of law arises because,
as Hill J said at 16 in Sharp
Corporation of Australia Pty Ltd v Collector of Customs, the decision "will
generally involve weight
being given to one or other element of the facts and so
involve matters of degree". To put it another way, a choice between two
conclusions
open on a consideration of the facts is a question of fact.
relation to the distinction between the second and fourth propositions in
Pozzolanic,
the High Court, in
Agfa-Gevaert,
highlighted a problem
(at 396-397). The second proposition concerns the "meaning" of a word and the
fourth proposition concerns the
"effect or construction" of a term. Their
Honours emphasised that notions of meaning and construction are interdependent.
their Honours to remark that:
it is difficult to see how
meaning is a question of fact while construction is a question of law without
insisting on some qualification
concerning construction that is currently absent
from the law.
inter-relationship between "meaning" and "construction" was accepted in
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Limited
[2002] HCA 59
(2002) 212 CLR 411
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ and at [138] per Kirby J; see also
Norrie v NSW Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages
[2013] NSWCA 145
per Beazley ACJ at [59] to [61].
the Appeal Panel, this means that we ought not be too quick to dismiss a ground
as a mere question of fact simply because it relates
to an ordinary English
phrase. Beazley ACJ said in
The High Court's
obiter remarks in
Agfa-Gevaert
and their approval in
Aktiebolaget
Hassle v Alphapharm
indicates that it cannot be said that the ordinary
meaning of a word or its non-technical meaning is a question of fact, at least
as a stand alone proposition. Rather, when the Court is engaged in a task of
statutory construction, it is required to have regard
to the language used by
Parliament and the context in which it is used. That task involves a question of
noted by Preston CJ of LEC in
But the Appeal
Panel's error ... was associated with its error in construction of the effect of
the statutory provision ... and accordingly
Hope v Bathurst City
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
an Act uses an expression in its ordinary sense is a question of law but so too
is the process of construction. In
Agfa-Gevaert
their Honours said at
... the determination of whether an "Act uses [an] expression
... in any other sense than that which they have in ordinary speech"
is always a
question of law. (32)
NSW Associated Blue-Metal Quarries
[1956] HCA 80
(1956) 94 CLR
at 511-512.
Screen Australia v EME Productions No 1 Pty Ltd
[2012] FCAFC 19
(2012) 200 FCR 282
Screen Australia
) their Honours noted at [42]:
Where there
is uncertainty as to the meaning of a statutory word or expression, as here, the
process of construction raises a question
Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd v
Comptroller-General of Customs
[1997] FCA 131
(1997) 72 FCR 467
at 473-474.
[49] their Honours said:
The process of construction which it [the
Tribunal] in fact employed was a process of law and was not directed to a
question of fact.
other words, where a phrase is identified as being used in a sense different
from ordinary speech, or there is uncertainty, a question
of law arises as to
the process of construction.
noted by Allsop P in
B&L Linings Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue
[2008] NSWCA 187
interpretation of the relevant statutory provision is most certainly a question
such as whether the wrong question was asked, the statute construed too
narrowly, or too widely, have always been questions
of law. It has long been
appreciated that questions of statutory construction raise questions of law.
the authorities we have just cited we distil the following propositions
particularly relevant to this matter:
question whether a word or phrase is to be given its ordinary meaning is a
question of law;
question whether a word is used in a sense other than that in which it is used
in ordinary speech is a question of law;
objectively, there is uncertainty as to the meaning of a word, the process of
construction raises a question of law;
(4) The process
of construing and the construction of an expression raise questions of law;
(5) Whether
facts as found are capable of falling within a statutory provision, must
necessarily fall within the statutory provision
or must necessarily fall outside
the statutory provision are questions of law.
light of the foregoing, in order to determine whether the notice of appeal
raises questions of law, it is necessary to first consider
the issue confronting
the Tribunal below.
Tribunal was concerned with whether the Commissioner ought to have exercised his
discretion to determine that the Appellant not
be a member of the group. The
Tribunal was required to form a decision about whether or not the Appellant's
business was "independent"
and "not connected with" the other businesses within
the group. However, first the Tribunal had to construe those expressions in
Appellant urged the Tribunal not to confine the operation of the discretion to
cases of total independence. The Tribunal was invited
to adopt the approach of
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal in
GTS Industries Pty Limited
v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2004] VCAT 21
GTS Industries
it was accepted that the de-grouping discretion does not require there to be a
"complete absence of connection" and "what
is required is a finding of
substantial independence and substantial absence of connection": at [37]. We
pause here to note that
there is no reference to "substantial" in the Victorian
the other hand, the Respondent highlighted that the section, as presently
enacted, differs significantly from its predecessor in
that it no longer employs
a test of "substantial independence" and that to adopt the contention of the
Appellant would not pay due
regard to the legislative change. The Respondent
however accepted that some de minimus inter-dependence between group businesses
would not prohibit the exercise of the discretion.
referring to the Explanatory Note to the
Payroll Tax Bill
which introduced s 79 and noting that it made no reference to the earlier test
of "substantial independence" the Judicial
Member accepted the Respondent's
submission: see at [30] of the Decision. The Tribunal considered the case
and another case
Triline Homes Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State
Revenue (Vic)
(1994) unreported AAT Vic 3.3.95 (
). However,
the Judicial Member held that in those cases, the Victorian Tribunal had fallen
into error by adopting a test of "substantial
connection" and accordingly
declined to follow them. The Judicial Member said at [35]:
view, the absence of the additional requirement is quite significant because the
discretion in its present form can only be
exercised where there is complete
independence of, and complete absence of any connection between the person
seeking de-grouping
and the other member or members of the group. The additional
question of determining whether the independence or connection is substantial
not, therefore, an issue in its current application. The exercise will, of
course, depend on all relevant matters on an objective
Tribunal then turned to the question of whether or not the businesses were in
fact carried on independently. The Judicial Member
Whether the discretion found in s 79(2) of the Act should be
exercised in this matter depends entirely on whether the Applicant conducts
business activities quite independently from any of the other companies in the
group and without any connection or the influence
of any of the other companies
or their principals.
is apparent from the foregoing that the Tribunal undertook a process of
statutory construction. That process required the Tribunal
to have regard to the
language used by Parliament, the context of the Act as a whole and the
historical changes. Adopting the words
of Beazley ACJ in
that task involved a question of law.
Furthermore,
the parties both accept that the expressions "independent" and "not connected"
in s 79(2) of the Act are somewhat elastic
and seem to agree that the terms are
not to be interpreted strictly (though they disagree on how loosely they are to
be interpreted).
This raises a question about whether the expressions have their
ordinary meaning. For example, the Respondent says that "not connected"
encompasses de minimus connections and the Appellant contends "not connected"
encompasses insubstantial connections. Objectively,
there is uncertainty about
the meaning or ambit of the statutory words and therefore a question of law
Screen Australia
at [42]. As stated by the Full Court of the
Federal Court in
at 288-289:
The words "connected
with" are capable of describing a spectrum of relationships ...What is left is a
value judgment about the range
of the Act and that is a question of law.
Appellant contends, in effect, that the Tribunal construed the test too
narrowly. This raises a question of law. As Meagher JA
Commissioner of State Revenue v Tasty Chicks Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 181
Tasty Chicks
... the primary judge applied the
test too narrowly and as a result did not take into account matters which he was
bound to consider
with respect to the "nature" or activities of the various
businesses.
is a live issue about whether the expressions "not connected" and "independent"
have their ordinary meanings. There is a contest
words. There is a contest about the ambit of the expressions in the context of
the Act and in light of
the historical changes. These contests raise questions
Respondent also contends that the grounds of appeal are not adequately framed to
articulate questions of law. However, it is apparent
that the Appellant contends
that in undertaking the process of statutory construction the Tribunal fell into
error. It is contended
that the Judicial Member erroneously construed the
statutory test:
narrowly by requiring the businesses to be carried on "quite independently" and
"without any connection or influence" from
other group members (grounds 1 and
(2) by taking
irrelevant considerations into account: the theoretical ability to control the
businesses (grounds 3 and 4); and
(3) by giving
the mere fact that there was an inter-group loan conclusive force, which was
either having regard to an irrelevant consideration
or disclosed (by putting too
much weight on a relevant factor) that the wrong statutory test had been
employed (ground 5).
6 to 9 were not pressed and grounds 10 and 11 are in furtherance of grounds 1 to
appeal is accordingly an appeal on questions of law.
Grounds 1 and 2: independent and not connected
1 and 2 of the Notice of Appeal state as follows:
1. The Tribunal
erred when it concluded (at [35] and [40]) that the absence of the word
substantially
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Act"), following its enactment, now means that the relevant inquiry as to
whether the Chief Commissioner can exercise his discretion
to de-group is
whether there is complete independence of and complete absence of any connection
between the entity seeking to be
de-grouped and the other members of the group
(emphasis added) and that
"the provision has ...not been considered in its
present form by the Tribunal or the courts".
2. The Tribunal erred when it concluded (at [45]) that
"Whether the
discretion found in
of the Act should be exercised in this matter
depends entirely on whether the Applicant conducts its business activities quite
independently
from any of the other companies in the group and without any
connection or the influence of any of the other companies or their
principals."
(emphasis added)
grounds raise squarely the question of whether, construed in its statutory
context and with regard to legislative history,
requires a determination
that there is complete independence and complete absence of any connection
between the Appellant's business
and the businesses run by the rest of the
Harmonisation of legislation
Immediately
prior to the introduction of the Act, it was necessary only to demonstrate that
there was substantial independence between
group businesses: s 16C(3) of the
Taxation Administration Act 1996
(NSW) (TAA). Prior to that, it was
necessary to demonstrate that group businesses were substantially independent
and "not substantially
connected": s 16H(1) of the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
(NSW) (the 1971 Act). The fact that the word "substantial" has been omitted from
the section suggests, absent some other explanation,
that the current provision
has a narrower ambit than its earlier versions.
Appellant however, raised for consideration the possibility that there was an
explanation for the omission of the word "substantial"
that does not have a
narrowing effect on the discretion. The enactment of the Act stemmed from a
harmonisation of payroll tax legislation
amongst various participating
"Overview of Bill", that
the object of the Bill was to "repeal and re-enact the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
(the 1971 Act) with various changes to harmonise the Act
with the equivalent payroll tax legislation of Victoria". The relevant Victorian
provision at the time was s 9A(1J) of the
Pay-roll Tax Act 1971
(1J) If the Commissioner is satisfied, having regard to the
nature and degree of ownership and control of the businesses, the nature
businesses and any other matters the Commissioner considers relevant, that a
business carried on by a member of a group, including
a group constituted by
reason of section 9A(2), is carried on independently of, and is not connected
with the carrying on of, a business
carried on by any other member of that
group, the Commissioner may exclude the member from that group.
demonstrated by
GTS Industries
at [37] and
at [20] and
[25] the Victorian provision had been interpreted consistently with the earlier
New South Wales provision which posed
a test of "substantial independence",
despite the fact that the Victorian counterpart did not contain the word
"substantial". It
is reasonable therefore to infer that the word "substantial"
was, in those circumstances, otiose and omitted for that reason. Even
not correct, there is much force to the submission that the Victorian provision
and the current New South Wales provisions
are to be interpreted harmoniously
and this means the Appeal Panel would follow
GTS Industries
unless we were of the view they were clearly wrong. For the
reasons we explain below, we agree with the Victorian authorities.
Absurd result
Appellant also contended that the construction arrived at by the Judicial Member
leads to an absurd result because s 79(2) will
have no work to do. In order for
entities to be grouped in the first place there must be some connection between
them and if any
connection disentitles an entity from de-grouping, then s 79(2)
could never be activated.
s 79(2) of the Act must anticipate and tolerate some connection between the
group members because otherwise they would not
be grouped in the first place. If
a complete absence of connection was required by s 79(2) of the Act, it could
never be applied.
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 147 CLR 297
it was said that a construction
which leads to an absurd, extraordinary, capricious, irrational or obscure
operation of the statute
supports the conclusion that the legislature could not
have intended such an operation and the alternative interpretation must be
preferred: per Mason and Wilson JJ at 320-1.
order to analyse this submission it is necessary to have close regard to the
terms of s 79(2). The focus, in s 79(2) of the Act,
is on the connection between
the carrying on of the businesses and not merely the connection between the
different entities (see
the underlined passage in the section extracted above at
is not any connection that will disentitle the Appellant from being de-grouped.
It must be a connection in relation to the carrying
on of the business.
the Judicial Member said at [4] of the Decision:
speaking, grouping of employers can occur where:
(1) one or more employees of an employer are employed solely or mainly to
perform duties for or in connection with one or more business
carried on by one
or more other persons (groups arising from the use of common employees - s 71);
(2) a person or set of persons has a controlling interest in each of 2
businesses (groups of commonly controlled businesses - s 72(1));
(3) the two corporations are related bodies corporate within the meaning of
Corporations Act 2001
of the Commonwealth (related corporations - s
(4) an entity has a controlling interest in a corporation arising from
tracing of interests in corporations (groups arising from tracing
of interests
in corporations - s 73).
than with respect to related bodies corporate (for which there is an express
carve out in
of the Act), the entities might be de-grouped if the
connection (the reason they were grouped in the first place) is not a connection
in respect of the "carrying on" of the various businesses within the group.
one focuses on the fact that the test in
directs an enquiry to the
carrying on of the businesses and not simply any connection between group
members, one can see that there
may be work for
to do. However, if the
most casual connection in the carrying on of businesses is sufficient to
disentitle an applicant from de-grouping,
then the scope of
is extremely
reject the submission that the construction adopted by the Judicial Member led
to an absurd result.
Question of judgment and degree
requires the trier of fact to determine whether, having regard to the
nature of the connections between group businesses, it can
nevertheless be said
that the businesses are independent and not connected. Ultimately, this will be
a question of judgment based
on facts objectively determined. It is not the case
that any connection between businesses will disentitle an applicant from
de-grouping.
The connection must be material and not insignificant or
inconsequential. This is the approach that was adopted in the Victorian
authorities referred to above: see
at [19], [22] and [30] and
GTS Industries
at [38]. We agree with this approach because it directs
the focus to the "carrying on" of the business: to be relevant, the connection
must affect the business in some real or practical sense.
say that there can be absolutely no connection between the businesses sets the
bar too high. The question is one of fact and degree:
Network Clothing
Company v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2007] VCAT 2492
disentitle an applicant to de-grouping, the connection must be meaningful in a
commercial sense and not immaterial or inconsequential
to the carrying on of the
businesses. Adopting the words of GT Pagone, Presiding Member (as his Honour
then was) in
at [25] there must be a finding of substantial
absence of connection and substantial independence between the businesses, to
the exercise of the discretion.
Reading in words
is not a case where the omission of the word "substantial" effected a change to
the discretion to de-group entities. So much
may be seen from the fact that the
legislative change was to harmonise the Act with Victorian legislation, which
had been interpreted
consistently with the NSW provision even though it did not
employ the word substantial.
the process of construction we have adopted is one of "supplying omitted words"
(adopting the words of Spigelman CJ in
[1999] NSWCCA 166
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681
) then it is necessary to demonstrate that the omission of the word
"substantial" from the legislation was inadvertent and that to
"read the word
in", achieves the legislative purpose: see for instance
Newcastle City
Council v GIO General Ltd
[1997] HCA 53
(1997) 191 CLR 85
at 113-16. Furthermore, as this
is a matter of construction, the words which actually appear in the legislation
must be "open to
such a construction":
per Spigelman CJ at [12]
the "inadvertence" may be gleaned from the legislative harmonisation project. In
order to achieve that legislative goal, the
construction we have adopted is to
be favoured. Furthermore, as the words used in the statute describe a spectrum
of relationships
at 288-289) we are satisfied that the
construction we have adopted is open.
not binding on the Tribunal, it is relevant that the Respondent's ruling Revenue
Ruling No. PTA031 (the Ruling) supports the
position we have just outlined.
Despite articulating the test in terms of a business being carried on
independently and not connected
with another business with the group, the Ruling
indicates that the test is one of fact and degree. It states:
purpose of this Revenue Ruling is to explain the exclusion discretion available
, including the matters the Chief Commissioner takes into
account in exercising the discretion.
The Chief Commissioner must be satisfied that:
· there is not a continuous course of active and significant
relationship, in a business or commercial sense, between the carrying
applicant's business and the carrying on of businesses conducted by every other
member of the group, and
· the connections which do exist are no more than casual, irregular or
occasional occurrences.
relation to matters to be taken into account, the Ruling identifies several
factors, each prefaced with the words "the nature and
extent" or "the degree" or
"the extent".
the Ruling concludes:
None of the matters listed above are
determinative in isolation from the other matters listed, nor are they an
exhaustive list of
the relevant issues. Each case will be considered on the
basis of all of the relevant facts and circumstances.
Conclusion on grounds 1 and 2
Judicial Member construed the statutory test as requiring no connection and a
complete independence between group businesses:
at [35] and [45] of the
Decision. As we have concluded that we should follow the Victorian authorities
and that the test is a matter
of judgment, or degree, the Tribunal fell into
error. For reasons discussed below, the matter will be remitted to the Tribunal
reconsideration.
Grounds 3 and 4: ability to
3 and 4 of the Notice of Appeal state as follows:
3. The Tribunal
erred when it concluded (at [46]) that the enquiry for the purposes of making a
determination under
is not whether the business of the entity seeking to
be de-grouped is actually carried on independently from the other members of
group and is not connected with the [actual] carrying on of a business carried
on by any other member of that group in accordance
Commissioner of State
Revenue (WA) v Scotford Cameron and Middleton Pty Ltd
(1981) 81 ATC 4576 at
4. The Tribunal erred when at [46] it described the enquiry under
requiring a consideration of the "ability", that is the theoretical ability, of
a principal of one business to influence the management
and decision-making of
Appellant contends that the Judicial Member read too much into the word
"ability" as it appears at [57] of
Tasty Chicks
. That paragraph states as
follows [our emphasis]:
John French Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Pay-roll Tax (Qld)
, McPherson J (with whom Campbell CJ and Matthews J
agreed) considered (at 141-142) that an inquiry as to whether a business was
on substantially independently, and was not substantially connected with
another business, made it necessary to consider the inter-relation
activities of the businesses and the
of a principal of one
business to influence the management and decision-making of the other. The
provision there under consideration
was in the same terms as s 16H(1) of the
Pay-roll Tax Act
as it applied in the first period. Notwithstanding the
of the "substantially connected" consideration in s 16H(1),
the matters referred to were said to be relevant to each part of s 16H(1)
prevent a conclusion that the relevant business was carried on substantially
independently of the other business. The same
approach was adopted by Doyle CJ
Garrett F Hunter
(at 285). He concluded that the corporate trustee
providing the secretarial and other services to the three medical practice
could not be said to be carried on "substantially independently of"
the business of each medical practice company. That was because
each was one of
only two or three clients of the corporate trustee and because its business was
so closely connected with that of
each practice that decisions by the practice
company as to the manner in which its business would be conducted necessarily
the conduct of the trustee's business of providing services to the
practice (at 285-286).
Appellant contends that the focus of s 79(2) of the Act is on the actual
carrying out of the business and not the theoretical
possibility of how the
businesses might be carried on. The Appellant contends that the Tribunal erred
in taking into account theoretical
ability to influence the conduct of the
business, which is an irrelevant consideration.
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Peko-Wallsend)
. Mason J (at 39) refers to an irrelevant consideration as
one which is prohibited from being taken into account, having regard to
subject matter, scope and purpose of the legislation. Taking into account such
an irrelevant consideration reflects an extraneous
or improper purpose or
renders a decision arbitrary or capricious.
attention on s 79(2) of the Act, it is clear that one of the factors that can be
taken into account is the nature and degree
and ownership and control of the
businesses. This indicates that the ownership and therefore inherent (or
theoretical) ability to
control the businesses is not an irrelevant
consideration, in the sense contemplated in
Tribunal did not make an error of law in taking into account theoretical ability
to control a business. It is one factor that
is to be weighed up in forming a
conclusion as to whether the business is carried on independently. The question
of weight is generally
a matter for the Tribunal.
Conclusion on grounds 3 and 4
ability of a principal of one business to influence the management and
decision-making of another is not an irrelevant consideration.
Questions of
weight are to be addressed by the Tribunal on the remittal.
Ground 5: the loan from Alpine
5 of the Notice of Appeal states as follows:
5. The Tribunal erred
when it concluded (at [50]) that the
"substantial connection of Alpine
[and the Appellant in the form of a loan]
alone prevents a finding necessary
for both limbs of s 79(2).
" (emphasis added)
Tribunal held at [50] that the fact that Alpine had provided a loan to the
Appellant and had taken a decision not to enforce the
debt, had effectively
allowed for the continued existence of the Appellant. The Tribunal held this to
be a substantial connection
between Alpine and the Appellant.
"carrying on" of a business in the context of s 79(2) of the Act extends to the
very existence of a business.
Tasty Chicks
it was said:
A business may not be
carried on independently of another business if
its existence or continued
depends upon the existence or custom of that other business. [our
Appellant submits that there were sound commercial reasons for Alpine to make
the decision and consequently the connection between
Alpine and the Appellant is
no different from the connection between Westpac and the Appellant, had Westpac
granted the loan and
decided not to enforce the debt for commercial reasons.
However, the Tribunal did not make a finding about the commerciality of the
and referred (at [50]) to the lack of evidence that the commercial value of the
then applicant's assets would be sufficient
to satisfy the outstanding loan.
Appellant's contention in relation to ground 5 raises two issues: first, whether
the loan from Alpine was an irrelevant consideration;
and second, if it was not
an irrelevant consideration, whether by placing undue weight on it, an error of
law is nonetheless disclosed.
As to the first issue, the fact that an entity is
provided a loan from a group member is not an irrelevant consideration: see for
at [25] that the role of one entity as an internal
banker precluded the exercise of the discretion to de-group; see too
at [39]. However, the mere fact that there is an inter-group loan
will not necessitate the conclusion that there is no entitlement
to de-grouping:
see for instance,
GTS Industries
at [32] and [38].
to the second issue, generally, weight is a matter for the trier of fact and
errors of weight are not errors of law: see for instance
extracted above at [11]. However, giving undue weight to factors, which are
not alleged to be irrelevant factors, may disclose a misapplication
statutory test. Failure to "give adequate weight to a relevant matter" or
"giving excessive weight to a relevant factor of no
great importance" may also
disclose that a decision is "manifestly unreasonable" in the sense contemplated
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223
Lo v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
the loan was sufficient to disentitle the Appellant from de-grouping, is a
factor to be weighed up in the balancing exercise.
We have already expressed our
view that the Tribunal set the bar too high. Whether the loan from Alpine is
sufficient to disentitle
the Appellant from de-grouping is a matter to be
weighed by the Tribunal employing the test outlined in answer to grounds 1 and
at [50] and [51] above. It is a matter for the Tribunal on the remittal.
relation to Ground 10, the allegation is that the Tribunal misapplied the
relevant statute and that this can be seen from the fact
that the Tribunal took
into account irrelevant considerations. Taking into account irrelevant
considerations is an error of law:
Peko-Wallsend
when one looks at the particular considerations in Ground 10, they are not
"irrelevant" in the
Wallsend sense. They are not prohibited from
being taken into account: paragraph (a) refers to the taking into account of
that the ultimate owners and controllers of the various businesses are
closely connected members of the Panizza family ...". Sub-section
expressly directs attention to the nature and degree of ownership and control of
the business, the nature of the businesses
and "any other matters the Chief
Commissioner considers relevant". Having regard to the subject matter, scope and
purpose of s 79(2),
it cannot be discerned that it is prohibited to consider the
fact that the ultimate owners are members of a particular family.
(b) relates to the factors found by the Tribunal at [52] that there are not
individual meetings of the directors of the
individual entities and shareholders
and there are not "meetings on an independent basis to set future directions or
make independent
business decisions". This is not a matter that is prohibited by
the statute from being considered. It speaks to the way in which
the businesses
in the group are supervised.
(c), relates to the Tribunal's finding at [53] that the siblings "have the
ability to decide and provide directions to the
Applicant". This relates to the
Appellant's argument that the ability to control ought not be taken into account
when it is the fact
of control that is relevant. For the reasons we have
expressed above, the ability to provide directions and control is not an
consideration.
are all factors for the Tribunal to consider on the
relation to Ground 11, the Appellant contends that the Tribunal placed undue
weight on certain enumerated factors and failed to
give due weight to other
factors and that this discloses that the Tribunal misapplied the statutory test,
as alleged in Grounds 1
to 5. As described above at [72] giving incorrect weight
to factors may disclose an error of law.
Appellant contends that on the one hand, the Tribunal placed undue weight on the
role of Alpine as financier and the role of Albem
as service provider and the
theoretical capacity of the Panizza siblings to influence the business of the
Appellant. On the other
hand, it is contended that the Judicial Member failed to
properly take into account or give due weight to the following: the degree
control of Albert Panizza over the Appellant's business; that the
operating/holding structure was devised for reasons unconnected
carrying on of the Appellant's business; the diverse nature of the group
businesses; the diverse locations of the group
businesses; the lack of common
employees, customers and resources; the commercial basis for the loan and that
it was substantially
amortised recently; that Alpine is controlled by Mary
Panizza; and finally that the Appellant is commercially viable.
have already concluded that the Tribunal erred in construing the statutory test.
The Tribunal did not clearly have in mind that
the test of independence and
absence of connections is one of substance and degree. The factors pointed to by
the Appellant will
need to be weighed with this in mind.
have concluded that there was an error in construction of the statute. As the
appeal is restricted to questions of law, we are
bound by s 114 of the ADT Act
which provides as follows:
(1) If an appeal under this Part is
restricted to questions of law, the Appeal Panel is to determine the appeal and
may make such
orders as it thinks appropriate in light of its decision.
(2) The orders that may be made by the Appeal Panel on any such appeal
include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
(a) an order affirming or setting aside the decision of the Tribunal (as
originally constituted),
(b) an order remitting the whole or any part of the case to be heard and
decided again by the Tribunal (as originally or similarly
constituted), either
with or without the hearing of further evidence, in accordance with the
directions of the Appeal Panel,
(c) an order made in substitution for an order made by the Tribunal.
is notable that there is no reference in s 114 to the Appeal Panel having any of
the powers conferred on the Tribunal at first
instance, as would be the case if
the appeal had been extended to the merits, where the task of the Appeal Panel
would be to make
the "correct and preferable decision".
task therefore of the Appeal Panel is to make the "correct" decision. It is not
the task of the Appeal Panel to make an evaluative
judgment. It would only be in
a case where a particular outcome was required, as a matter of law, that the
Appeal Panel would not
remit the matter, having concluded there was an error of
Lloyd v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWADTAP 3
AT v Commissioner of Police, NSW
[2010] NSWCA 131
[12] (Beazley, Basten and Macfarlan JJA):
There are cases where, on
the facts as found by the original decision-maker,
the only conclusion
was that reached at first instance, though on a legally erroneous
basis. In that case, the Appeal Panel could properly decline to
reverse the
decision of the Tribunal:
Tribunal Act
, s 114(2)(c); cf
Chen Shi Hai v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2000] HCA 19
Li Shi Ping v Minister of Immigration, Local Government and
[1994] FCA 1275
(Drummond J), see also
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
161 CLR 141
at 145. There are several reasons why that course was not open in the present
case. [emphasis added]
as here, there is a requirement to exercise judgment, there is not one
conclusion open in the circumstances:
the reason that the primary question - whether the Appellant's business is
independent and not connected to group businesses -
is a question of judgment
and degree, this is a matter that should be remitted to the Tribunal as
originally constituted:
statutory test to be employed is as we have described it at [50] and [51] above.
The nature of the discretion
Appellant contends that there is not a true discretion. It is submitted that
once a decision is objectively made as to whether
the businesses are independent
and not connected, de-grouping follows. Support for this approach is found in
at [19] and [39] (although there is a contrary indication at
at [19] and [22] (although the remarks were obiter).
Respondent, on the other hand, submits that even if there is a conclusion
reached that the businesses are independent and not
connected, the Respondent
retains a discretion to not de-group. This is the position that was adopted by
the Court of Appeal in
Tasty Chicks
(at [64]), albeit in respect of a
previous version of s 79 of the Act.
structure of s 79 gives some support to the Respondent's contention: the
discretion is found in s 79(1), but may only be exercised
if not precluded by s
79(2). In this sense, the structure of the discretion under consideration in
Tasty Chicks
(which required a similar two-step approach: s 16C(3) and s
16B(1) of the TAA) is more similar to s 79 than the Victorian counterpart
considered in
where the Commissioner could
de-group if satisfied that the businesses were independent and not connected.
is not necessary for us to decide whether the Commissioner retains a discretion
to not de-group, if objectively the businesses
are independent and not
connected, as we have decided to remit the matter for reconsideration. The
question of whether s 79 is a
true discretion, or whether de-grouping follows
the result of the s 79(2) analysis may arise when the Tribunal re-hears the
If so, we indicate that for the reasons that the remarks in
were obiter and that there are apparently contradictory
observations in
and that, on this aspect, there are structural
differences between the Victorian and NSW provisions, we would follow the
of the Court of Appeal in
Tasty Chicks
in relation to s 16C and
s 16B of the TAA, by analogy. At [64] Meagher JA (Barrett JA and Sackville AJA
Assuming s 16C(3) did not prevent the exercise of the
discretion to exclude under s 16B(1), in my view the primary judge did not err
in either of the respects relied upon. He did not overlook the need to exercise
the discretion provided by s 16B(1):
[2009] NSWSC 1007
. His Honour did
not proceed upon the basis that if the prohibition did not apply the discretion
"must" be exercised: see
Interpretation Act
[1955] HCA 4
at 505-506;
Samad v District Court
of New South Wales
[2002] HCA 24
209 CLR 140
reasons, albeit very short, for his determination that the discretion should be
exercised. They were that "on the facts
set out" in the judgment the discretion
ought to have been exercised:
[2009] NSWSC 1007
. The reference to "the
facts" is to be understood as a reference to the facts found or discussed at
[127]-[142]. In so doing the
primary judge also sufficiently identified the
basis on which he considered that the discretion should be exercised.
of the Act appears to provide the Respondent with a true discretion,
subject to there being the necessary finding in relation to
independence of
group businesses. The exercise of the discretion is to be exercised within the
limits delineated by the subject matter,
scope and purpose of the provision:
Neat Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB Ltd
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277
Grounds not pressed and costs
Appellant withdrew reliance upon grounds 6 to 9 during the hearing. The
Respondent seeks his costs thrown away. There is jurisdiction
to award costs.
Section 88 of the ADT Act provides that generally parties before the proceedings
are to bear their own costs, however
costs may be awarded against a party if the
Tribunal is satisfied that it is fair to do so having regard to several
enumerated factors.
Of most relevance are (b) and (c):
(1) Each party to proceedings before the Tribunal is to bear the party's own
costs in the proceedings, except as provided by this
(1A) Subject to the rules of the Tribunal and any other Act or law, the
Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before
it, but only if it is
satisfied that it is fair to do so having regard to the following:
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the time
taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or
of the abandoned grounds refers to a finding of fact made by the Tribunal "that
is not supported by the evidence". Expressed
in that way, the grounds raised
questions of law. By not pressing those grounds at the hearing, the Appellant
saved time at the hearing.
It was not submitted that those particular grounds
were wholly untenable (other than for reasons that they did not raise questions
of law, which we have rejected). In the context of an Appeal that raised complex
questions of law we are not satisfied it is in the
interests of justice to
depart from the usual rule. There will be no order as to costs.
appeal is allowed. The Decision is set aside and remitted to the Tribunal as
originally constituted, to be determined in accordance
with these Reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (173 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter