URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bunnings Group Limited v Harrison [2025] NSWPICPD 74; (21 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Bunnings Group Limited v Harrison [2025] NSWPICPD 74
Bunnings Group Limited
RESPONDENT:
Kayley Jane Harrison
Wesfarmers Retail Holdings Pty Ltd
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W29565/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
21 October 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
name of the appellant (the respondent below) is amended wherever it appears to
“Bunnings Group Limited”.
to appeal the interlocutory decision dated 15 April 2025 pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation
is granted.
Determination
[3] of the Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 15 April 2025 is
amended to read:
“3. For the purpose of assessment and
quantification of the applicant’s entitlement to payment of permanent
compensation pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act, the date of the
applicant’s primary psychological injury is 6 April 2022.”
[6] of the Member’s Certificate of Determination is amended to
“6. The matter is remitted to the President for
referral to a Medical Assessor for assessment as follows:
Date of injury: 6 April 2022 (deemed).
Body parts: psychological.
Method: whole person impairment.”
Member’s Certificate of Determination is otherwise
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – approach to be taken in considering alleged
errors of fact –
State of New South Wales v Culhana
[2025] NSWCA
Workers Compensation Act 1987
deemed date of injury –
Haddad v The GEO Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 135
applied – s 261(6) of the
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) –
s 261(6) of the 1998 Act – awareness of injury not relevant when
awareness of injury pre-dates the deemed
date of injury – s 261(4) of the
1998 Act – whether delay in making the claim for compensation was
occasioned by ignorance,
mistake or other reasonable cause
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr T Ainsworth, solicitor
Hall & Wilcox Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr A Parker, counsel
Nikolovski Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Harrison v Bunnings Warehouse
[2025] NSWPIC 152
Ms K Garner
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
15 April 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Kayley Harrison (the respondent) (the applicant below) commenced proceedings in
the Personal Injury Commission (the Commission)
claiming lump sum compensation
pursuant to s 66 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act) in
respect of a primary psychological injury alleged to have been a
“disease” injury in accordance with
s 4(b)(i) of the 1987 Act, with
a deemed date of injury pleaded as 21 July 2021. The date the respondent claimed
compensation for
her primary psychological injury was 8 November 2023.
appellant disputed the respondent’s entitlement to compensation on the
basis that:
(a) the respondent did not sustain a psychological injury arising out of or in
the course of her employment in accordance with s
4 of the 1987 Act;
(b) the respondent’s employment was not a substantial contributing factor
to any psychological or psychiatric disease injury
or the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of the disease as required by s
4(b)(i) and (ii) of the 1987 Act;
(c) the respondent did not suffer from a permanent impairment;
(d) the respondent’s psychological condition was secondary to her physical
injury and not a primary psychological injury, and
(e) the respondent failed to provide notice of her injury and make a claim for
compensation within the time frames set out in s 254
and s 261 of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
dispute proceeded to conciliation and arbitration. The issues identified as
remaining in dispute were:
(a) whether the respondent sustained a primary psychological injury in the
nature of a disease, arising out of or in the course of
the employment and
whether the employment was the main contributing factor to the injury;
(b) whether the respondent sustained a primary psychological injury in the
nature of an aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of a
disease in the course of the employment, and whether the employment was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease;
(c) the identification of the date of injury for the purpose of assessment and
quantification of the respondent’s entitlement
to payment of permanent
impairment compensation;
(d) whether the claim was precluded by operation of s 254 of the 1998 Act;
(e) whether the claim was precluded by operation of s 261 of the 1998 Act,
(f) the extent and quantification of the respondent’s entitlements to
payment of permanent impairment compensation, pursuant
to s 66 of the
Member determined that:
(a) the respondent suffered a primary psychological injury in the form of a
(b) the respondent’s employment was the main contributing factor to the
(c) the injury was not an aggravation of a disease;
(d) for the purpose of the assessment and quantification of the
respondent’s entitlement, the date of the primary psychological
15 October 2023, and
(e) the respondent’s claim and entitlement to compensation was not
precluded by operation of ss 254(1) and 261(1) of the 1998
appellant appealed the Member’s decision, asserting that the Member erred
in fact, law or discretion in her findings that:
(a) the deemed date of injury was 15 October 2023;
(b) the time that the respondent first became aware that she had received an
injury was 1 September 2022 (s 261(6) of the 1998 Act);
(c) the failure to give notice of injury and make a claim for compensation was
occasioned by ignorance, mistake or other reasonable
cause (s 261(4) of the 1998
(d) the operation of s 261 to preclude compensation would result in an
respondent lodged a Notice of Opposition to the appeal and also a Notice of
Contention in the event that the Member was found
to be in error, asserting that
the Member’s conclusions were correct, but for different reasons.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content for the appeal to be determined on
the basis of the documents and written submissions.
the appeal was lodged, the New South Wales Court of Appeal (Bell CJ, Leeming,
Kirk, McHugh and Free JJA) issued a decision in
State of New South Wales v
in which prior
authorities dealing with the function of a Presidential Member in determining
errors of fact pursuant to s 352(5)
of the 1998 Act were considered.
The Court determined that the approach taken in those previous authorities (such
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v
Northern New South
Wales Local Health Network v
and particularly
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
parties to this appeal were provided with the opportunity to lodge further
submissions in respect of the effect, if any, of that
decision on this appeal.
The appellant lodged its submissions on 6 August 2025, and the respondent lodged
her submissions on 13 August
have had regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties, including
the submission that the
appeal can proceed to be determined on the basis of these documents. I am
satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed ‘on the
papers’ without holding any conference or formal hearing and that this is
the appropriate
course in the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
appellant asserts that the Member’s decision was not interlocutory in
nature. The respondent submits that it is an interlocutory
decision because the
proceedings have not been finalised, but she does not object to leave to appeal
being granted.
352(3A) of the 1998 Act provides:
“There is no appeal under
this section against an interlocutory decision except with the leave of the
Commission. The Commission
is not to grant leave unless of the opinion that
determining the appeal is necessary or desirable for the proper and effective
determination
of the dispute.”
“decision” is defined in subs 352(8) of the 1998 Act to include
“an award, interim award, order, determination,
direction”. The meaning of “interlocutory” in subs 352(3A) is
proceedings remain on foot and the respondent’s claim for lump sum
compensation is yet to be determined. The decision, therefore,
does not truly
finally determine the rights of the
It is thus an
interlocutory decision.
leave is not granted, the matter will require assessment by a Medical Assessor.
A Medical Assessment Certificate and subsequently
a Certificate of Determination
will be issued, before the appellant can appeal the decision. This would involve
significant delay
in the resolution of the proceedings, and, if the appeal was
successful, the expenses and other resources utilised in conducting
assessment would have been wasted. I therefore grant leave pursuant to s 352(3A)
of the 1998 Act for the appellant to appeal
the interlocutory
The name of the appellant
name of the appellant was identified as “Bunnings Warehouse”. The
appellant advises that the correct description of
the appellant is
“Bunnings Group Limited”. I therefore amend the name of the
appellant (the respondent below) wherever
it appears to “Bunnings Group
THE EVIDENCE
The respondent’s statements
respondent provided a statement dated 20 March
She advised that she suffered
work related physical injuries as a result of the repetitive nature of her work
with the appellant
and also suffered a psychological injury. She said that she
began to experience psychological problems in about August 2020 when
restless and irritable and would go home after work and cry. She added that the
onset of physical injuries was in about
August 2021.
respondent described her work duties as a team leader in the appellant’s
paint section, which was a busy department, especially
during the COVID-19
period. She said that she was subject to the directions of her managers in
respect of budgets, staffing and stock
acquisition, but that most of the time
she was providing customer service and advice, tinting paint and stocking
shelves with various
stock items, including 20 litre cans of paint.
respondent indicated that during the COVID-19 period, most businesses were
closed but the appellant remained open. She advised
that customers suddenly went
into a do-it-yourself frenzy because they wanted to do work around the home
while they were in lockdown.
She said that during that period, the appellant
tripled its profits. The respondent indicated that the department was so busy
her workload and the pressure under which she worked dramatically
increased, but management did not make any additional staff available,
fell upon her to get the work done. She said that she made complaints to
management about the lack of staff and the excessive
workload, but management
was unresponsive.
respondent stated that she first experienced psychological symptoms in about
July 2020, manifesting in feelings of being overwhelmed,
crying at home and
difficulty sleeping, as well as feelings of anxiety when she was on her way to
work. She said that she became
irritable and intolerant to her family, felt sad
and felt as though she was failing in her duties. The respondent said that she
her manager “Greg” that she was feeling overwhelmed. The
respondent indicated that despite her difficulties she continued
to work. She
said she began to experience physical symptoms in her right elbow and then
developed pain in her feet.
respondent stated that she complained about her right elbow to her general
practitioner on 21 July 2021 and ceased work on that
day, with Certificates of
Capacity issued by her doctor in respect of her right elbow and feet and the
general practitioner later
added her psychological issues. She added that she
had complained to her general practitioner about her psychological state on 21
October 2020, which was long before the onset of her physical issues.
respondent advised that her doctor referred her to Ms Ailsa Graham,
psychologist, and Dr Sriram Thazhathaveetil, psychiatrist,
and said that those
practitioners explained to her that her psychological condition was due to work
pressures and was not a consequence
of her physical complaints.
respondent described in detail the physical requirements of her work in the
paint section and the development of her physical
symptoms. She listed her
ongoing psychological symptoms and the effect of her symptoms on her activities
of daily living.
respondent provided a supplementary statement dated 14 February
She gave details of the shift
and staffing arrangements and the typical working day prior to the onset of the
COVID-19 epidemic.
She confirmed her evidence provided in the previous statement
as to the significant increase in workload, the difficult customers
and the lack
of sufficient support during the COVID-19 period, and described the onset of
symptoms of anxiety and depression.
respondent asserted that she did not receive any assistance from the appellant
in respect of her psychological symptoms. She stated
that she consulted Dr
Murali Nagaraj, general practitioner, in respect of her psychological symptoms
on 21 October 2020, who prescribed
medication to assist with her sleep. She said
that she persisted at work until she ceased because of her physical (elbow)
respondent indicated that she was referred to the STEPP pain management program
and during her sessions with the psychologist,
she realised that her
psychological symptoms were a result of her feelings about how she was treated
by the appellant and the significant
stress she was under during the COVID-19
period. She said that she was then referred to Dr Thazhathaveetil.
respondent stated that she had been showing signs of depression and anxiety from
as early as 2020, well before her physical injuries.
She said that at that time
she felt overworked and had a sense of abandonment, which she reported to her
doctor in October 2020.
respondent observed that the appellant appeared to say that it was not aware of
her psychological injury. She referred to Certificates
of Capacity that were
provided, which she said did not indicate that her psychological injury was an
injury in itself. She attributed
that omission to her doctor not understanding
the significance of her psychological condition, which worsened over time. She
that the significance and the cause of the psychological injury was not
obvious until she was advised by her psychologist and psychiatrist.
The medical evidence
Dr Murali Nagaraj, general practitioner
Nagaraj’s clinical records were in evidence. On 21 October 2020, the
respondent consulted Dr Nagaraj and complained of being
stressed, anxious and
depressed and experiencing poor sleep over the previous few months. Dr Nagaraj
recorded that the main trigger
appeared to be the introduction of a late shift
once per week when the respondent was required to work until 11 pm and then
her shift the following day at 9 am. Dr Nagaraj prescribed medication
and recommended the respondent take time off work. He recorded
respondent indicated that she would speak to her manager about how her mental
health was being impacted. He noted that the
respondent may need a medical
certificate.
respondent attended Dr Nagaraj for review on 26 October 2020. The respondent
reported that she was feeling a little better and
advised Dr Nagaraj that she
would talk to her managers at
respondent consulted Dr Nagaraj again on 17 November 2020. Dr Nagaraj
“Feeling very well.
Work has made some changes to the shifts and every one is rostered in to work
and [not] just her. she has done a shift and it is not
as bad. has got some
extra help too
- no neck pains or headaches she used to get
at times has taken 1.5 tabs
- adv to stick to one tab
smiling a lot. spontaneous.
continue on one for at least 3/12 and then rev
Reason for visit:
Anxiety/Depression
Dose of Escitalopram 20mg Tablet changed from ½ In the morning with
meals to 1 Tablet In the morning with meals. Prescription
Escitalopram 20mg Tablet 1 Tablet In the morning with
22 February 2021, the respondent reported to Dr Nagaraj that she wished to
continue on Escitalopram (an antidepressant), work was
“ok” and she
was not under stress.
respondent continued to consult Dr Nagaraj throughout 2021 and up to 31 January
2022 in respect of the onset of right elbow pain
and pain in her feet. During
that period, Dr Nagaraj prescribed Escitalopram at three monthly intervals on 27
May 2021, 16 August
2021 and 5 November 2021, and then again on 28 February
2022. Referral for pain management was
6 April 2022, Dr Nagaraj recorded that the respondent’s mental health was
the main barrier to the respondent returning to
On 24 May 2022 Dr Nagaraj
noted that:
“– MH diagnosis of exacerbation of anxiety
and depression added - long chat about antidepressants - is on max
escitalopram”.
Ms Ailsa Graham, psychologist
respondent first consulted Ms Graham on 20 February 2022 for psychological
assistance. Ms Graham recorded a history of the respondent’s
right elbow
pain, which developed due to the increase in work pressure in 2020 during the
COVID-19 period which she said was “disabling
and affecting her mental
health adversely”. Ms Graham noted that the respondent ceased work on 12
August 2021 because of the
right arm/elbow pain. Ms Graham did not provide
a history of psychological stressors in the
Graham lodged an Allied Health Recovery Request dated 27 May 2022 bearing the
workers compensation claim number 2022200540 and
describing the
respondent’s psychological condition as a “Major depressive
episode.” She noted that the respondent’s
level of depression and
anxiety was extremely
1 September 2022, Ms Graham recorded that the respondent blamed the appellant
for her injury because her requests for help were
ignored, she was pressured to
work extra shifts, and the appellant did not provide additional staff support
during COVID-19.
Dr Sriram Thazhathaveetil, psychiatrist
Thazhathaveetil reported to Dr Nagaraj on 18 May
He took a history of the
respondent having an elbow injury in the course of her employment with the
appellant and suffering a deterioration
of her mental health since then. He
noted a prior history of depression seven years ago, which remitted without
medication. He recorded
that the respondent’s mood worsened as a result of
work stress during the COVID-19 period and her mental health declined after
elbow injury.
Thazhathaveetil diagnosed the respondent’s symptoms as major depression.
He described the respondent’s ongoing symptoms
of depression and anxiety
and considered that the respondent was not fit for work in employment for which
she was qualified in terms
of experience and training for the following six
28 November 2023, Dr Thazhathaveetil reported to Dr Nagaraj following a review
of the respondent. He noted that the respondent
was feeling anxious about
receiving calls from her manager which she did not answer because they triggered
memories of past bullying.
He briefly noted the respondent’s symptoms and
confirmed a diagnosis of major
depression.
Thazhathaveetil provided a report dated 26 October 2024 directed to, and at the
request of the respondent’s legal
representative.
He confirmed the
diagnosis of major depressive disorder. He indicated that the respondent’s
psychological injury commenced
during the COVID-19 period and it was a result of
increased workload and insufficient staff. He described her ongoing symptoms and
said that the onset of symptoms commenced from 21 July 2020, and she
consulted her general practitioner about those symptoms again
in October 2020.
He considered that the respondent’s employment was the main contributing
factor to her injury.
Ms Tamsin Lewthwaite, psychologist
Lewthwaite wrote a report dated 22 August 2024 at the request of the
respondent’s legal representatives directed to “To
Whom It May
She provided a
diagnosis of recurrent severe major depressive disorder and generalised anxiety
disorder. She confirmed that the respondent
first attended her on 7 August 2023
and complained of ongoing psychological distress and anxiety which was closely
connected to her
experiences in the workplace. She indicated that the
respondent’s wellbeing had been impacted by chronic pain, anxiety,
and social isolation, with anxiety in public places, feelings of
failure and difficulty completing tasks.
Lewthwaite was of the view that the respondent’s psychological injury was
related to the events in the respondent’s
workplace and impacted the
respondent’s self-care, social functioning, and concentration. She advised
that the respondent’s
capacity for work was significantly
Dr John McMahon, psychologist
McMahon was asked to assess the respondent on behalf of the appellant. He
provided a report dated 9 August
He took a detailed history
of the respondent’s right elbow injury and the treatment provided to her
in respect of that injury,
including that the respondent was referred to a pain
specialist and that the respondent complained of constant pain in the elbow.
noted the respondent’s ongoing symptoms.
McMahon diagnosed the respondent as suffering from an aggravation of a
persistent depressive disorder secondary to the pain associated
with her elbow
injury and aggravated by opiate medications which developed into a major
depressive disorder secondary to the pain.
In his opinion, the respondent was
unfit for work because of her depressive condition.
3 June 2024, Dr McMahon provided an additional report in which he addressed
further questions posed by the
He confirmed that the
persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes was a
“secondary psychological injury”,
consequent upon her pain.
Dr Naresh Verma, psychiatrist and occupational
Verma assessed the respondent on 4 April 2024 and provided a report at the
request of the appellant.
recorded a history that the respondent’s mental health issues occurred at
the time of the onset COVID-19 epidemic, and her
initial concern was that she
might contract the virus but she was also concerned in the context of the
increased demand for purchasing
paint. He said that she complained of increased
pressure at work, increased hours, shortage of sufficient staff numbers and
sales three to four times greater than the usual number so she was
required to load and unload large additional quantities of stock
on and off the
pallets. Dr Verma noted that the respondent developed right arm symptoms and
ceased work a few months later. He further
noted that the respondent attributed
her mental health issues to the stress associated with COVID-19, and being
overworked with no
assistance.
Verma recorded the respondent’s ongoing symptoms and treatment. He
referred to the respondent having experienced anxiety
eight years previously in
relation to having to move house from Brisbane to Wollongong, which resolved
when she recommenced work.
Verma reiterated the history that the respondent’s mental health issues
commenced during the COVID-19 period when she was
extremely busy and overloaded
at work without any support. He considered that she suffered from a major
depressive disorder. He reviewed
the referral by Dr Nagaraj to Ms Natali
Lazaroski, psychologist, in which Dr Nagaraj solely referred to the
respondent’s right
elbow pain as the cause of the respondent’s
mental health issues. He reviewed the report of Ms Felicity Slevin dated 10
2022, which also referred only to the right elbow pain as the source of
the respondent’s mental health issues. He further noted
that in the
initial report of Dr Thazhathaveetil dated 18 May 2023, Dr Thazhathaveetil
reported a sharp decline in the respondent’s
mental health following the
right elbow injury. Dr Verma also reviewed the letter of instruction from the
respondent’s legal
representatives to Dr Thazhathaveetil.
Verma formed the view that:
“Based on all the available
information including the history provided in the referral and her subjective
account, it appears
that major depressive disorder has been caused by the elbow
injury which causes significant ongoing pain with functional limitation.
increased work pressure as a result of a very heavy workload during COVID caused
stress rather than a psychiatric disorder. The
heavy workload was a systemic
issue affecting all staff rather than just her. There was no specific evidence
provided of bullying.”
Verma said that he did not diagnose a primary psychological injury, and the
respondent had not reached maximum medical improvement,
so that an assessment of
the respondent’s whole person impairment was not applicable.
Dr Frank (Kai Tai) Chow, psychiatrist
respondent’s legal representatives arranged for the respondent to be
medically examined by Dr Chow, an independent medical
examiner, on 11 September
2023. Dr Chow provided a report dated 15 October
in which he assessed the
respondent as having 24% whole person impairment as a result of a primary
psychological injury.
Chow noted the history of the respondent’s increased heavy workload during
the COVID‑19 period, including the lack
of support staff and extended late
night hours, abusive customers and the onset of symptoms in her elbow resulting
from her work
duties. Dr Chow took the history of continuing anxiety and
depressive symptoms persisting after the respondent ceased work, recurrent
nightmares, poor sleep, dreams of self-harm, significant weight loss and social
Chow took a history of a previous onset of psychological symptoms requiring
antidepressant medication some seven years beforehand,
which remitted after a
few months. He advised that antidepressant medication was prescribed in October
2022 because of the stressful
events at work. He diagnosed the respondent as
suffering from a major depressive disorder that resulted from excessive and
workload and lack of support. He considered that she was totally unfit
THE LEGISLATION
15(1) of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
Diseases of gradual process—employer liable, date of injury etc
(cf former ss 7 (4), (4C), (5), 16 (1A))
(1) If an injury is a disease which is of such a nature as to be
contracted by a gradual process—
(a) the injury shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have
(i) at the time of the worker’s death or incapacity, or
(ii) if death or incapacity has not resulted from the injury—at
the time the worker makes a claim for compensation with respect
to the injury,
(b) compensation is payable by the employer who last employed the
worker in employment to the nature of which the disease was due.”
254 of the 1998 Act requires an injured worker to give notice of injury to the
employer, (relevantly) as follows:
of injury must be given to employer
(1) Neither compensation nor work injury damages are recoverable by an
injured worker unless notice of the injury is given to the
employer as soon as
possible after the injury happened and before the worker has voluntarily left
the employment in which the worker
was at the time of the injury.
(2) The failure to give notice of injury as required by this section
(or any defect or inaccuracy in a notice of injury) is not a
bar to the recovery
of compensation or work injury damages if in proceedings to recover the
compensation or damages it is found that
there are special circumstances as
provided by this section.
(3) Each of the following constitutes special circumstances—
(a) the person against whom the proceedings are taken has not been
prejudiced in respect of the proceedings by the failure to give
notice of injury
or by the defect or inaccuracy in the notice,
(b) the failure to give notice of injury, or the defect or inaccuracy
in the notice, was occasioned by ignorance, mistake, absence
from the State or
other reasonable cause,
(c) the person against whom the proceedings are taken had knowledge of
the injury from any source at or about the time when the injury
(d) the injury has been reported by the employer to the Nominal Insurer
in accordance with this Act,
261 of the 1998 Act provides time limits in which a claim for workers
compensation is to be made. Relevantly, the section
Time within which claim for
compensation must be made
(1) Compensation cannot be recovered unless a claim for the
compensation has been made within 6 months after the injury or accident
or, in the case of death, within 6 months after the date of death.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person is considered to have
made a claim for compensation when the person makes any claim
for compensation
in respect of the injury or death concerned, even if the person’s claim
did not relate to the particular compensation
in question.
(4) The failure to make a claim within the period required by this
section is not a bar to the recovery of compensation if it is
found that the
failure was occasioned by ignorance, mistake, absence from the State or other
reasonable cause, and either—
(a) the claim is made within 3 years after the injury or accident
happened or, in the case of death, within 3 years after the date
(b) the claim is not made within that 3 years but the claim is in
respect of an injury resulting in the death or serious and permanent
disablement
of a worker.
(5) The failure to make a claim within the period required by this
section is not a bar to the recovery of compensation if the insurer
determines to accept the claim outside that period. An insurer cannot determine
to accept a claim made more than 3 years
after the injury or accident happened
or after the date of death (as appropriate) except with the approval of the
(6) If an injured worker first becomes aware that he or she has
received an injury after the injury was received, the injury is for
the purposes
of this section taken to have been received when the worker first became so
(9) When particulars of any injury received by a worker are entered in
a register of injuries kept by the employer under this Act,
the making of that
entry suffices for the purposes of this section as the making of a claim for
compensation in respect of the injury.”
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member identified the issues requiring determination and the applicable
provisions in the legislation. She confirmed that no application
cross-examination was made and there was no oral evidence given. She summarised
the respondent’s evidence and the statements
made by the various other
employees of the appellant, as well as the factual investigation report provided
by Clarity Workplace Solutions
dated 4 March 2024. She further summarised the
clinical records provided by Albion Park Rail Medical Centre recorded by Dr
Nagaraj. She noted the evidence provided by the treating practitioners
and the medico-legal experts, Dr Chow, Dr Verma and Dr McMahon.
Member recorded a summary of the submissions made by the parties.
Member turned to the question of whether the respondent suffered a primary
psychological injury in the nature of a disease, or
an aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of a disease, pursuant to s 4(b)(i)
or s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act. She
reproduced s 66(1), s 4, and s 65A of the
1987 Act and reviewed various authorities as to the test of “main
contributing factor”,
expression “aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration of a
and what is
required in order to establish a causal chain of connection between the
employment and the injury.
Member was satisfied that the respondent suffered a disease injury in the form
of a primary psychological injury pursuant to
s 4(b)(i) of the 1987 Act as a
result of the additional workload and her perceived lack of support. As there is
no challenge in this
appeal to those findings it is not necessary to review the
Member’s reasons for reaching those conclusions.
Member proceeded to determine the question of fixing a date of injury in
accordance with s 15 of the 1987 Act. She reproduced
the relevant provisions in
that section and quoted passages from the Court of Appeal authorities of
Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
v Thoroughgood
Haddad v The GEO Group Australia Pty
noting that Snell DP
applied those authorities in
Razmovski v NIB Health Funds
She observed that on
the basis of those authorities, she was required to determine whether the
respondent’s primary psychological
injury resulted in incapacity and if
so, the date of the occurrence of that incapacity and, in doing so, she was
required to give
regard to the particular facts of this case. She remarked on
the complexity of the medical evidence in respect of the respondent’s
various injuries and the incapacity flowing from those injuries.
Member referred to the entry in the treating doctor’s records dated 21
October 2020 in which it was noted that the respondent
was experiencing
psychological symptoms as a result of work pressure. She observed that that
entry was consistent with the respondent
having a primary psychological injury,
but did not provide clear evidence of an incapacity at that time. She said no
medical certificate
or Certificate of Capacity was issued then, and it was
evident that the respondent continued to work until 21 July 2021, when she
an incapacity for work referable to the elbow injury, and that was the date upon
which she last worked. The Member noted that
after that date, the respondent was
certified as having an incapacity for work because of the elbow injury and
subsequently because
of psychological symptoms, which had been accepted by the
appellant as a secondary psychological condition caused by the pain associated
with her elbow injury.
Member said that the first record of the respondent having psychological
symptoms referable to the work pressures was in about
August 2022, when the
respondent underwent psychological treatment in the STEPP pain management
program, and the psychologist recorded
that the respondent suffered
psychological symptoms caused by pressures at work during the COVID-19 period.
The Member said that
on 1 September 2022, Ms Graham recorded details of pressure
at work and lack of support, about which the respondent was ruminating
excessively, but Ms Graham did not comment upon the respondent’s capacity
for work. The Member said that, at that time, there
was medical evidence that
the respondent had an incapacity for work because of a secondary psychological
condition resulting from
the elbow injury, rather than a primary psychological
Member referred to the report of Dr Thazhathaveetil dated 18 May 2023, who
reported that the respondent was not fit for work for
which she was suitably
qualified and that, although he recorded a deterioration in the
respondent’s mood due to stress at work
during the COVID-19 period, he
concluded that the respondent’s psychological symptoms emanated from the
pain attributable to
the elbow injury. The Member noted that from 4 August
2024, Dr Thazhathaveetil diagnosed the respondent as suffering from a major
depression and the respondent was permanently incapacitated for work, but did
not clearly identify that the primary psychological
injury was the cause of that
incapacity.
Member observed that Ms Lewthwaite reported on 22 August 2024 that the
respondent suffered from severe major depression related
to the work pressures
complained of by the respondent.
Member said that the first clear evidence from a treatment provider of
incapacity arising from a primary psychological injury
was in the report of Dr
Thazhathaveetil dated 26 October 2024, where Dr Thazhathaveetil attributed the
major depressive disorder
to the work pressures during COVID-19 with an onset of
symptoms on about 21 July 2020. The Member noted that Dr Thazhathaveetil
that the respondent sought medical assistance for her depressive
disorder from her general practitioner in October 2020 and that
the respondent
had no capacity for work, but did not offer a view of when the incapacity for
work first arose.
Member observed, however, that Dr Chow, who was qualified by the respondent to
provide an independent opinion, reported on 15
October 2023 that the respondent
had an incapacity for work as a result of a primary psychological injury. She
said that Dr Chow
did not identify the date upon which the incapacity arose. The
Member considered that, on the basis of that evidence, and in the
circumstances
where there was no compelling evidence of incapacity for work resulting from the
primary psychological injury prior
to Dr Chow’s report, the
respondent’s incapacity for work occurred on 15 October 2023. The Member
determined in accordance
with s 15(1) of the 1987 Act that the date of the
primary psychological injury was 15 October 2023.
Member turned to the question of whether the respondent’s claim for
compensation was precluded by s 254 of the 1998 Act
because of a failure by the
respondent to give notice of her primary psychological injury. The Member noted
that on 8 November 2023,
the respondent served on the appellant a claim for
permanent impairment pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act in respect of a primary
psychological injury, citing a deemed date of 21 July 2021 and attaching the
report of Dr Chow dated 15 October 2023. The Member
said that, on the basis of
that evidence, she was satisfied that the respondent had complied with s 254(1)
of the 1998 Act by giving
notice of her injury as soon as possible after the
injury and before she had voluntarily left the appellant’s employ. The
concluded that the respondent was not precluded from claiming
compensation by s 254(1) of the 1998 Act.
Member said that if that conclusion was erroneous, in any event she was
satisfied that special circumstances existed in accordance
with subss 254(2) and
254(3)(b) of the 1998 Act. She formed the view that the respondent’s
failure to give notice of her injury
was occasioned by ignorance, mistake or
other reasonable cause. The Member observed that the respondent did give notice
of a psychological
injury which was accepted by the appellant as a secondary
condition caused by pain arising from her elbow. The Member said that it
until the respondent attended for pain management under the STEPP program that
it became readily apparent that she suffered
a primary psychological injury, and
that it was some time later that an incapacity for work as a result of that
injury became evident.
Member concluded that she was satisfied that the respondent’s failure to
give notice was occasioned by ignorance and mistake
and that she was further
satisfied that there was a reasonable cause for the respondent not having given
notice at an earlier time.
She added that the “somewhat unusual
circumstances make it unjust for s 254(1) of the 1998 Act to preclude the
[respondent’s]
Member proceeded to determine whether the respondent was precluded from claiming
compensation because of the operation of s 261
of the 1998 Act. She referred to
the earlier finding that the deemed date of injury pursuant to s 15(1) was 15
October 2023. She
added that s 261(6) of the 1998 Act provided that, for the
purpose of s 261, if an injured worker first becomes aware that he or
received an injury after the injury was received, the injury is taken to have
been received when the worker first became
aware of the injury.
Member noted that the respondent first reported her symptoms to her general
practitioner on 21 October 2020 and complained of
feeling overworked and
unsupported at work. The Member further noted that, at that consultation, the
general practitioner prescribed
antidepressants and recorded that the main
trigger for the symptoms was the directive to work until 11 pm, that there had
stress recently and that the respondent may need a medical
certificate.
Member referred to the respondent’s evidence that she first realised her
psychological symptoms were attributable to the
stressors and pressure at work
during the COVID-19 period when she attended the STEPP pain management program
in 2022. The Member
pointed to the evidence of Ms Graham recorded on 1 September
2022, that the respondent attributed her symptoms to the way she was
work and the respondent was ruminating excessively about the work issues. The
Member observed that it was apparent that
the respondent at that time was made
aware of her primary psychological injury. The Member accordingly made a finding
that, pursuant
to s 261(6) of the 1998 Act, and for the purposes of s 261 of the
1998 Act, the primary psychological injury occurred on 1 September
Member turned to consider ss 261(1) and 261(3) of the 1998 Act. She noted that
in accordance with those sections, if the injury
occurred on 1 September 2022,
then the respondent was required to make a claim for compensation for the injury
by 1 March 2023, that
being six months from the date of injury. The Member said
that the first claim for compensation for that injury was made on 8 November
2023 which meant that the respondent was precluded from claiming compensation
unless she satisfied s 261(4) of the 1998 Act. She
said that pursuant to s
261(4), a failure to make a claim within six months is not a bar to recovery of
compensation if the failure
was occasioned by ignorance, mistake, absence from
the State or other reasonable cause, and the claim is made within three years
after the injury happened.
Member observed that as the date of injury was 1 September 2022 and the claim
for compensation was made on 8 November 2023, the
claim was clearly made within
three years. The Member concluded that she was satisfied that the failure to
make the claim was occasioned
by ignorance, mistake, and other reasonable cause.
The Member referred to the complexity of the medical evidence in respect of the
primary psychological injury and incapacity arising from that injury, and the
evidence that the respondent had made a claim for her
psychological condition
that was accepted by the appellant as a secondary condition. The Member said
that it was not until the respondent
commenced the STEPP pain management program
that it became apparent that the respondent had a primary psychological injury
time later an incapacity for work attributable to the primary
psychological injury was identified.
Member concluded that:
“I am satisfied on the balance of
probability that the [respondent’s] failure to make the claim as required
was occasioned
by ignorance and mistake. Further, I am satisfied there is
reasonable cause that the claim was not made at an earlier time and, that
particular and somewhat unusual circumstances make it unjust for s 261(1) of the
1998 Act to preclude the [respondent’s]
Accordingly, I find that the exemption in s 261(4) of the 1998 Act is engaged
and the [respondent] is not precluded from recovery
of compensation by the
operation of s 261(1) of the 1998
The Certificate of Determination issued on 15 April 2025
“The Commission determines:
[respondent] sustained a primary psychological injury in the course of her
employment with the [appellant], in the nature of
a disease, to which her
employment was the main contributing factor, pursuant to s 4(b)(i) of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act).
[respondent] did not sustain a primary psychological injury in the course of her
employment with the [appellant], in the nature
of the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration of any disease, to which her employment was the
main contributing
factor, pursuant to s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act.
the purpose of assessment and quantification of the [respondent’s]
entitlement to payment of permanent impairment compensation
pursuant to s 66 of
the 1987 Act, the date of the [respondent’s] primary psychological injury
is 15 October 2023.
[respondent’s] claim is not precluded by operation of s 254(1) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
[respondent] is not precluded from recovery of compensation by the operation of
s 261(1) of the 1998 Act.
The Commission orders:
matter is remitted to the President for referral to a Medical Assessor for
assessment as follows:
Date of injury: 15 October 2023 (deemed).
Body parts: psychological.
Method: whole person impairment.
materials to be referred to the Medical Assessor are to include:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute and attached documents;
(b) Reply and attached documents;
(c) [respondent’s] Application to Lodge Additional Documents (ALAD) and
attached documents dated 14 February 2025, and
(d) [appellant’s] ALAD and attached documents dated 5 March 2025.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal, alleging that the Member
erred in fact, law and/or discretion in finding
(a) Ground A: the deemed date of injury was 15 October 2023 for the purposes of
section 15 of the 1987 Act;
(b) Ground B: the respondent first became aware that she had received an injury
on 1 September 2022 for the purposes of section 261(6)
of the 1998 Act;
(c) Ground C: the respondent’s failure to give notice of her injury, or
make a claim in relation to it, within time was due
to ignorance and mistake for
the purposes of section 261(4) of the 1998 Act, and
(d) Ground D: the operation of section 261 of the 1998 Act would be
SUBMISSIONS
The appellant’s submissions
As to Ground A
appellant refers to the Member’s conclusions that the respondent suffered
a disease injury to which her employment was the
main contributing factor
resulting from the respondent’s perception that she was given an excessive
workload and was not provided
with sufficient support, particularly during the
COVID-19 period. The appellant says that the Member applied s 15 of the 1987
which meant that the respondent had suffered a disease of gradual process.
The appellant submits that the Member did not provide
any reasoning as to what
that process was, but on the basis of her factual finding that the relevant
disease was contracted by gradual
process during the COVID-19 pandemic, the
process contemplated by the Member appears to have been a series of traumatic
appellant refers to
and submits that the Member was required to
consider when the respondent’s first incapacity occurred, which it says
right approach. The appellant contends, however, that the Member then
accepted that date to be 15 October 2023, which was the date
Dr Chow completed
his medical report. The appellant asserts that the correct date should have been
11 September 2023, when Dr Chow
actually examined the respondent and formed his
view in relation to the respondent’s incapacity.
appellant points out that the history recorded by Dr Chow was that the
respondent experienced workload difficulties including
dealing with difficult
customers with no assistance from her managers, causing her to become emotional
and ultimately ceasing work.
The appellant further points out that Dr Chow did
not consider that the respondent became depressed or anxious because of her
injury, but rather was overworked and burnt out. The appellant refers
to Dr Chow’s observation that the respondent “remains”
unfit for work, which the appellant says must mean that the respondent was unfit
for work prior to the examination on 11
September 2023. The appellant adds that
Dr Chow in fact provided a date of injury of 21 July 2021. The appellant asserts
the Member was reliant upon the opinion of Dr Chow in respect of the
first date of incapacity, that date must be 21 July 2021. The
appellant further
points to the respondent’s own evidence that she first began to experience
psychological symptoms in about
July 2020, and that she considered that her
incapacity from 21 July 2021 was at least partly attributable to a primary
psychological
appellant indicates that the evidence discloses that the respondent was
certified as having incapacity for work due to a secondary
psychological
condition for a period of time prior to making a claim for a primary
psychological injury. The appellant refers to
the evidence provided by Dr
McMahon on 9 August 2022, where Dr McMahon noted that the respondent was not fit
for work due to her
depressive symptoms. The appellant asserts that, in the
context of the Member determining that the respondent did not suffer from
secondary psychological condition, the Member erred by failing to take into
account that evidence of the respondent’s incapacity.
appellant refers to the Member having afforded weight to the clinical record of
Dr Nagaraj dated 21 October 2020, in which it
was noted that the respondent
had taken a “few days” off and potentially needed a certificate. The
appellant asserts
that the Member failed to address that evidence and failed to
consider whether it constituted evidence of incapacity, which, if it
be the first date of incapacity arising from the injury.
appellant concludes that, in respect of fixing a deemed date of injury, it is
illogical that a disease contracted in the course
of employment in 2020 would
not have caused any incapacity until September or October 2023, which was more
than two years after the
respondent ceased work. The appellant cites
as authority to say that the question of incapacity is a question
of fact, which is to be determined on the basis of the evidence.
The appellant
submits that the Member erred in law by approaching the issue on the basis that
expert opinion as to incapacity was
required instead of conducting an assessment
of the facts. The appellant contends that the facts establish that the
respondent’s
incapacity must have commenced in July 2021.
As to Ground B
appellant refers to the Member’s finding in respect of s 261(6) of the
1998 Act that the respondent first became aware of
her injury on 1 September
2022, which was the date of a discussion between the respondent and her
psychologist, Ms Graham. The appellant
says that Ms Graham recorded that the
respondent was dreaming about work and complained that the appellant ignored her
requests for
refers to the note recorded by Dr Nagaraj on 21 October 2020 in respect
respondent’s mental health and her complaints about stress at work. The
appellant asserts that this clinical record
more clearly demonstrates the
respondent’s awareness of injury than the report of Ms Graham.
appellant submits that the Member found that the respondent’s awareness of
her injury arose two years after she experienced
dreams about the workplace
stressors, yet the respondent clearly attributed her mental health problems to
her employment with the
appellant on 21 October 2020. The appellant refers to
the complaint made by the respondent to Dr Nagaraj about staffing issues and
notation that the respondent had commenced using antidepressant medication, that
she was to take time off work and intended to
raise with the appellant the
effect of her shift work on her mental health. The appellant submits that that
evidence clearly establishes
that the respondent was aware of her injury at that
time, and that, while the respondent may have remembered it some time later,
that might be relevant to the question of whether the respondent had a
“reasonable excuse”, but it could not be relevant
to the question of
when the respondent became aware of her injury.
appellant indicates that the respondent said in her statement that she
experienced psychological symptoms from July 2020, and
she considered that those
symptoms were attributable to “heightened pressures” at work.
appellant asserts that at the latest, the respondent was aware of her injury
from July 2020 when she reported her problems to
her general practitioner, and
submits that it is illogical to place reliance on the entry made on 21 October
2020 as the date the
disease was contracted, but then make a finding that the
respondent was not aware of her injury at that time. The appellant submits
the Member thus erred in fact and in the exercise of her discretion.
As to Ground C
appellant refers to the Member’s finding in respect of s 261 that the
respondent’s failure to make a claim was occasioned
by ignorance or
mistake. The appellant asserts that there was no evidence that the
respondent’s failure to make a claim was
a result of ignorance or that she
had made a mistake. The appellant submits that the respondent’s own
evidence was that she
considered that she had suffered a psychological injury as
a consequence of her employment from the time she first experienced symptoms
mid-2020 and that her treatment providers had explained to her the nature of
that injury. The appellant adds that the respondent
did not claim to have been
ignorant of her right to claim compensation and did not suggest that she made a
mistake in respect of
her claim and did not make submissions to that
appellant asserts that, in the absence of any reasonable excuse for making a
claim being put forward by the respondent and in
the absence of any other
evidence of reasonable excuse, the Member erred in finding that the failure to
make the claim within the
prescribed time was due to ignorance or
As to Ground D
appellant refers to the Member’s conclusion that it would be unjust for
the respondent to be excluded from claiming compensation
and submits that s 261
is a statutory bar to the recovery of compensation and does not provide for any
discretion on the part of
the Member to take into account the interests of
justice. The appellant asserts that, to the extent that the Member took that
into account, she was not permitted to do so and thus erred at
The respondent’s submissions
As to Ground A
respondent submits that the Member was correct to find a deemed date of injury
of 15 October 2023, consistent with the approach
Thoroughgood
respondent points out that the Member noted the complex nature of the task of
ascertaining when (if at all) the respondent suffered
an incapacity referrable
to a primary psychological injury and provided a detailed summary of the
conflicting opinions in relation
to the respondent’s primary psychological
injury, and its cause. The respondent says that the conflict was brought about
the interplay between the respondent’s accepted right elbow injury, her
secondary psychological condition and her primary psychological
condition when
the respondent ceased work in July 2021.
respondent submits that the Member adopted the date of Dr Chow’s report as
it was the first date upon which the respondent’s
incapacity was
attributed to the primary psychological injury. The respondent submits that was
an evaluative exercise that could
only be disturbed pursuant to the principles
enunciated in
respondent asserts that this ground of appeal should be rejected
(a) the term “incapacity” as it appears in s 15(1)(a)(i) of the 1987
Act is dependent upon there being a satisfaction
that there is an entitlement to
claim economic loss, consistent with
Thoroughgood
a psychological symptom does not always amount to an incapacity;
(b) the Member determined that the medical evidence from the treating
practitioners, including that of Dr Nagaraj, did not deal with
the extent or
cause of the respondent’s incapacity from 21 October 2020, noting that the
respondent did in fact work after
(c) it was not until Dr Chow’s report was available that an incapacity
resulting from a primary psychological condition that
established an entitlement
to claim for economic loss was positively identified;
(d) the Member did not consider that the question of fact posed by s 15(1)(a)(i)
required expert medical opinion and in fact provided
a reasoned pathway showing
how the treating medical evidence was unhelpful in determining when the
respondent’s incapacity
resulting from her primary psychological condition
(e) it was in that context that the Member formed the view that Dr Chow’s
report was the most reliable evidence;
(f) the inference that Dr McMahon’s report dated 9 August 2022 established
an incapacity arising from a primary psychological
condition could not be drawn
because Dr McMahon’s opinion was that the psychological condition was
secondary to the physical
injury, and
(g) contrary to the appellant’s submission that the Member failed to
address the medical records of Dr Nagaraj and Dr McMahon’s
report, the
Member clearly addressed that
respondent submits that for all of those reasons, the Member was entitled to
conclude as she did and the evaluative exercise perfumed
by her cannot be
impugned merely because opinions may differ, citing
As to Grounds B, C and D
respondent submits that these grounds assert error on the part of the Member in
relation to the application of s 261 of the 1998
Act and involve the issues of
when the respondent first became aware of having suffered a primary
psychological injury, and whether
any failure to make a claim was occasioned by
ignorance, mistake or other reasonable cause and considerations of
respondent contends that she does not concede that the Member erred in
determining that, for the purposes of s 261(6), she did
not become aware of her
primary psychological injury until 1 September 2022. She expresses reliance on
her Notice of Contention filed
in this appeal and submits that s 261(6) does not
apply in this case because it only applies where the awareness of injury occurs
after the injury was “received.”
respondent refers to the Member’s determination that the date of injury in
accordance with s 15(1)(a)(i) was 15 October
2023, and submits, for the purpose
of s 261, the focus had to be from that date and whether the claim was made
within six months
of that date. The respondent cites
Gow v Patrick
as authority to
say that in those circumstances, there was no requirement to give consideration
to the factors in s 261(4) because
the claim was made on 8 November 2023 which
was within the requisite six months.
respondent submits that, even if s 261(6) was found to be relevant and the
respondent’s claim made on 8 November 2023 was
out of time, the Member
correctly applied s 261(4) of the 1998 Act.
respondent refers to the appellant’s complaint in relation to
“ignorance” and “mistake” and asserts
that the complaint
concentrates only on the absence of evidence to support those matters. The
respondent contends that she did demonstrate
evidence of “ignorance”
and “mistake.”
respondent adds that the appellant’s complaint is factually wrong and
wrong at law. The respondent indicates that s 261(4)
has wider application than
that put forward by the appellant because any “other reasonable
cause” provides an additional
opportunity to overcome a delay in making a
claim for compensation. The respondent refers to the Member’s finding that
case involved complexity in the medical evidence and there was confusion in
relation to the appellant having decided that the respondent
suffered from a
secondary psychological condition. The respondent points out that the Member
also found that the nature of the respondent’s
condition was clarified
when the respondent commenced the pain management program and that the Member
considered that an unjust outcome
would result if the respondent was precluded
from receiving compensation. The respondent contends that these were all valid
that justified the delay being excused. The respondent adds that each of
the Member’s findings were capable of amounting to
ignorance, mistake and
other reasonable cause and merely urging that a different conclusion should be
reached was not sufficient,
Northern NSW Local Health Network v
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant points to its grounds of appeal and asserts that the respondent has
failed to address each of the errors of fact, law
and discretion identified by
it in the appeal. The appellant asserts that the respondent has misinterpreted
the appeal and has construed
it as an attempt to substitute an alternate
interpretation of the evidence to that of the Member’s assessment. The
contends that, on a proper reading of its submissions, the
respondent’s allegation has no basis.
appellant refers to the respondent’s submissions that the appellant has
not identified any foundation for the assertion
that the Member failed to
consider the evidence of Dr Nagaraj and Dr McMahon and that the Member did
not require that s 15 (1)(a)(i)
be addressed by expert evidence. The appellant
submits that the Member determined that there was a primary rather than a
psychological injury and so evidence of incapacity as a result of a
psychological injury, however opined, must be accepted by the
Member as being
evidence of incapacity as a result of a primary psychological injury.
appellant refers to the respondent’s assertion that there was evidence of
ignorance and mistake and submits that the respondent
does not point to any such
evidence, nor address that evidence.
appellant further refers to the respondent’s submission that the inclusion
of “other reasonable cause” provides
for further excuses under s
261(4). The appellant submits that the word “or” before “other
reasonable cause”
means that it is in the alternative, and is thus, a
separate basis upon which to determine that there was not a bar to recovery of
compensation. The appellant contends that the Member did not rely on
“other reasonable cause” but determined the matter
on the basis of
“ignorance” and “mistake”.
The submissions in respect of the effect of Culhana
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to paragraph [91] of the decision in
Leeming JA said:
“Future appeals under s 352 should apply the
approach in
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
. Appropriate
deference is to be given to members where their findings are based on evidence
in respect of which they have an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it
is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference
was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member were a jury and there was
some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential member, after making
appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a
different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink from
giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
appellant indicates that the Court emphasised the breadth of the phrases
“any error of fact, law or discretion” and
“the correction of
such error” found in s 352(5) of the 1998 Act.
appellant submits that in accordance with
, the arbitration was
conducted on the basis of the papers and the Member had no advantage in her
consideration of the evidence over
that the Presidential Member would have. The
appellant adds that in the consideration of this appeal and given the broad
of “any error”, the Presidential Member will be satisfied
that the errors identified by the appellant have been made
out and will reach a
different conclusion to that of the Member below on questions of fact and
discretion and will also correct the
identified errors of law.
appellant refers to the respondent’s submissions in which she relied upon
House v King
and asserts that that
approach was expressly rejected by the Court in
. The appellant
further refers to the respondent’s request that, in the event error is
found, the matter should be “sent
back for re-determination” and
asserts that that would be contrary to
, in that the Presidential
Member “should give effect to reaching any different
conclusion”.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent concedes that the Court of Appeal in
rejected the approach taken in
and says that she withdraws that
submission. The respondent submits, however, that
does not alter
the position that error must be established and that
says that if
a Presidential Member formed the opinion that the Member below erred in a
material way, and a different inference was
preferred by the Presidential
Member, the Presidential Member should intervene.
respondent submits that
supports the proposition that deference
should be afforded to the position of the decision-maker below in circumstances
decision-maker below had some advantage, such as from seeing a witness
give oral evidence. The respondent asserts that
does not alter
the result in this case and
and s 352 of the 1998 Act are not
engaged because the Member’s findings were correct and there were no other
inferences open
for the Presidential Member to prefer.
respondent asserts that the appellant has misunderstood the effect of
and contends that there remains the requirement that error has to be
established in order to disturb the Member’s decision,
and it is not
enough that the Member’s finding was open to her.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that sending the matter
back for re-determination was contrary to
. The respondent submits
that the appellant does not identify where in
the Court made that
finding and such a finding would be inconsistent with s 352 of the 1998 Act. The
respondent asserts that
affects the manner in which matters will
be presented because the parties will need to give specific thought as to
whether oral evidence
is required. The respondent describes how this case would
proceed in the event that error is established on the appeal.
respondent contends that, if the appeal succeeds, then the matter should be
remitted for a re-hearing so that the respondent could
be given the opportunity
to give oral evidence and/or cross-examine the appellant’s witnesses. The
respondent says that she
otherwise relies upon her substantive submissions
already made.
The respondent’s Notice of Contention
respondent indicates that the Notice of Contention is only pressed if the
appellant’s appeal is successful. Given my conclusion
reached in respect
of the appeal, it is not necessary to deal with the respondent’s Notice of
Contention.
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the appealed allowed and an award made in its favour.
The respondent submits that the appeal should be
dismissed, or, in the
alternative, the Notice of Contention should be upheld. The respondent adds
that, in the event that any of
the appellant’s grounds of appeal are made
out, then the matter should be remitted for re‑determination.
CONSIDERATION
Ground A: error of fact, law and/or discretion in finding that
the deemed date of injury was 15 October 2023 for the purposes of section
the 1987 Act
is no challenge to the Member’s determination that the respondent suffered
an injury in the form of a disease of gradual
process in accordance with s
4(b)(i) of the 1987 Act. Section 15(1) of the 1987 Act provides that, in disease
cases, the worker’s
date of injury is deemed to be either the date of the
worker’s death, or the date of the worker’s incapacity, or where
there is no incapacity, the date upon which the worker makes the claim. The
Member determined that the date of injury was 15 October
2023, which was the
date upon which Dr Chow issued his report and provided an opinion as to the
respondent’s incapacity resulting
from her primary psychological
the appellant and the Member referred to the recent decision of the Court of
in which the Court (Kirk JA, Stern JA and Griffiths AJA)
made the following very relevant observations as to establishing the date
injury in a disease case:
“Putting to one side a claim
relating to death, the operation of the two limbs of the deeming provision in ss
15 and 16 turns
on whether or not there is an incapacity resulting from the
“In applying s 15 it may be accepted that there are multiple scenarios
which reveal whether or not a particular worker may have
an incapacity as
defined in s 4(1) of the 1998 Act. ... [A] possible scenario is where incapacity
for work may be apparent from objective
facts which are independent of any
formal claim or entitlement to claim compensation, such as the worker’s
unauthorised absence
“As explained in
Thoroughgood
, the correct position is that
where a disease injury causes an incapacity (in the sense of a reduction in
earning capacity) and at
the same time gives rise to an entitlement to
compensation under the 1987 Act (whether for permanent impairment or treatment
or otherwise), s 15(1)(a)(i) operates to deem the date of injury
relevant to any such claim to be the time when the worker suffered
incapacity.
This does not turn on the framing of the claim by the claimant but rather on the
entitlement to claim, as illustrated
most clearly in
Thoroughgood
as to which see especially at [124] below. It means that since, in this case, on
20 January 2017, the appellant suffered a disease
injury that caused both an
incapacity giving rise to an entitlement to claim weekly compensation and also,
at the same time, an entitlement
to claim treatment expenses, that was the
deemed date of injury relevant to both
“It is only if an entitlement to compensation is unrelated to any
incapacity, as was the case in
, that the deemed date of
injury is the date of the
the disease does not result in death, the determination of which limb in s 15(1)
applies turns on whether or not the worker
has an incapacity, which is a
question of fact, to be determined by the relevant
In determining whether
the Member erred in concluding that the date of injury was 15 October 2023, I
must follow the approach set
. That is, the proper approach
to take in respect of s 352(5) of the 1998 Act and the identification of error
in the fact-finding
process is that set out in
and that it is not
sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed because it was “open” to
the Member to reach that conclusion.
Thus, where the relevant fact is an
inference to be drawn from the established facts, a Presidential Member is
required to determine
the correct outcome in respect of the relevant issue,
while giving due allowance for any advantage the Member at first instance may
the present case, there was no oral evidence given and the dispute was decided
on the basis of the submissions of the parties at
arbitration. In those
circumstances, I do not consider that the Member had any advantage over a
Presidential Member in terms of evaluating
the evidence of the witnesses and
reaching factual conclusions. I therefore need to determine whether the
Member’s finding
of the deemed date of injury was correct.
appellant asserts that the date identified by the Member was wrong and the
correct deemed date should have at least been 11 September
2023, which was the
date that Dr Chow’s examination of the respondent took place. I note
that if that date is accepted, then
the date upon which the claim was made,
which was 8 November 2023, was within the six months period provided for in s
the defence mounted by the appellant that the claim was not made
within the prescribed time falls away.
the alternative the appellant refers to Dr Chow’s evidence that the
respondent “remains” unfit for work and submits
that Dr Chow in fact
provided a date of injury of 21 July 2021, which was the date the respondent
herself indicated was the date
of incapacity that was attributable to her
primary psychological injury (as well as her physical injury). The appellant
submits that
that date should be accepted.
Chow took the history that the respondent last worked on 21 July 2021. He did
not opine as to whether the incapacity from that
date was referable to the
respondent’s psychological condition or her physical injury or both. He
noted the date of injury
as 21 July 2021. It is unclear why he recorded that
date and it may have been information taken from the respondent’s legal
representative’s letter of instruction. It was not explained by Dr Chow
and in any event, he did not offer that date as a date
of incapacity for the
psychological condition.
appellant suggests that it is relevant that the respondent acknowledged that she
experienced psychological symptoms in July 2020.
In a disease case where the
respondent worked on until July 2021, the experience of those symptoms at that
time is not determinative
of the date of injury.
appellant submits that the Member erred by approaching the issue on the basis
that expert opinion as to incapacity was required
instead of conducting an
assessment of the facts. The question of whether a worker has an incapacity is a
factual determination and
can be determined on the basis of lay evidence in
certain circumstances but in this case, the respondent herself does not identify
an incapacity arising from her psychological condition at the time she ceased
work on 21 July 2021 and no other evidence points to
the date of incapacity
other than the medical evidence. The Member was not in error in taking that
respondent submits that the Member was correct to adopt the date of Dr
Chow’s report as the date of incapacity as it was
the first date upon
which the respondent’s incapacity was attributed to the primary
psychological injury. The respondent further
submits that the inference that Dr
McMahon’s report dated 9 August 2022 established an incapacity arising
from a primary psychological
condition could not be drawn because Dr
McMahon’s opinion was that the psychological condition was secondary to
the physical
appellant refers to the evidence of Dr McMahon provided in his report dated 9
August 2022 that the respondent was unfit for work
because of her psychological
condition and asserts that the Member did not take that evidence into account
because Dr McMahon considered
that the condition was secondary to the physical
injury. I accept the submission by the appellant that the Member ought to have
that evidence into account because it was evidence of incapacity flowing
from the respondent’s psychological condition, which
had been diagnosed by
Dr McMahon as secondary to the physical injury but was found by the Member to be
a primary psychological injury.
The Member determined that the
respondent’s psychological condition was a primary injury and not
consequent upon the elbow
Approaching
the issue on the basis of the principles enunciated in
the view that the evidence of Dr McMahon is sufficient evidence of an incapacity
resulting from the respondent’s psychological
injury, as was the earlier
evidence provided by Dr Nagaraj recorded in the clinical notes on 6 April 2022
that the main barrier to
the respondent returning to work was the
respondent’s “MH”, which I infer is a reference to the
respondent’s
mental health.
is evident that the Member erred in determining that the date of injury was 15
October 2023. In my view, the evidence from Dr Nagaraj
dated 6 April 2022 is
sufficient to show that the respondent had an incapacity flowing from her
psychological injury on that date.
If I am wrong by inferring that
“MH” is a reference to Mental Health, I am also of the view that
despite Dr McMahon considering
that the respondent’s psychological
condition was secondary to the physical injuries, his evidence that the
respondent had
an incapacity flowing from the psychological condition is
sufficient to establish that by 9 August 2022, the respondent had an incapacity
within the meaning of s 15(1) of the 1987 Act. Whether it was the first or
second of those dates, it will not affect the outcome
in this case because both
fall within the requisite three years within which to make the claim, which was
made on 8 November 2023.
In the context of the Member’s finding that
the psychological condition was a primary psychological injury and not secondary
to the physical injury, the incapacity was a result of her primary psychological
injury. Thus, the date of injury for the purpose
of the respondent’s claim
pursuant to s 66 is 6 April 2022.
Ground B: error of fact, law and/or discretion in finding that
the respondent first became aware that she had received an injury on
1 September
2022 for the purposes of section 261(6) of the 1998 Act
ground of appeal is awkwardly expressed, but I take it that the appellant
asserts that the Member erred in determining that it
was on 1 September 2022
that the respondent became aware of her primary psychological injury.
determination of when the respondent first became aware that she had suffered an
injury is also a factual determination and the
principles set out in
concept of “awareness” was discussed in
Unilever Australia Ltd v
authority, Tobias AJA observed:
“Awareness in s
261(6) requires the worker to be aware or to have knowledge of the fact
that he or she has received the injury
and that that injury arose out of or in
the course of their employment. There are therefore two matters of which the
worker must
have actual knowledge.
Frank injuries do not cause a problem. The ones that do are those of gradual
onset such as gradual loss of hearing (as distinct from
instantaneous loss due,
for instance, to an explosion next to one’s ear) and injuries such as
mesothelioma or, possibly, a
psychiatric injury depending upon its symptoms.
Knowledge of symptoms is insufficient as the sub-section requires awareness
of the injury and its cause as matters of fact.
Of course, each case must depend upon its own facts and, in particular, on
the type of injury alleged to have been received by the
worker. What is clear is
that in the case of injuries of gradual onset more than a mere belief or a
suspicion is necessary for there
to be relevant awareness. Mere awareness of
symptoms is generally insufficient in such
Member in the present case found that the respondent was not aware of her
primary psychological injury until 1 September 2022.
261(6) of the 1998 Act provides that “If an injured worker first becomes
aware that he or she has received an injury
after the injury was received
...”. I accept, as the respondent submits, that s 261(6) applies where the
awareness of injury
occurs “after the injury was received.” If the
Member’s finding in respect of the date of injury 15 October 2023
correct, then the respondent’s submission that s 261(6) would not apply
would be dispositive of this ground.
have determined under Ground A that the Member’s finding in relation to
the deemed date of injury was incorrect and that the
deemed date of injury was 6
April 2022, when the respondent attended Dr Nagaraj and complained of issues in
the workplace and Dr
Nagaraj noted that the respondent’s mental health was
impacting her capacity to work.
appellant asserts that the respondent first became aware of her injury in the
consultation with Dr Nagaraj on 21 October 2020.
On that date, the respondent
complained to Dr Nagaraj of psychological symptoms and attributed those symptoms
to her employment.
I accept that that was the date upon which the respondent
became aware of her injury and attributed her symptoms to her employment.
subs 261(6) provides for circumstances where the worker first became aware of
her injury “after the injury was received”,
then the awareness
asserted by the appellant pre-dates the deemed date of injury and the subsection
does not apply in this case.
In any event, even if I am wrong in relation to the
date of 21 October 2020, the respondent was aware at the consultation with Dr
Nagaraj on 6 April 2022 that her symptoms were referable to her employment,
which is the deemed date of her injury and once again,
the awareness did not
come after the date of injury.
those reasons, the Member’s finding that the respondent became aware of
her injury on 1 September 2022 was erroneous but
in any event the finding is
otiose. Section 261(1) does not apply because the respondent was aware of her
injury before the deemed
date of injury.
Ground C: error of fact, law and/or discretion in finding the
respondent’s failure to give notice of her injury, or make a claim
relation to it, within time was due to ignorance and mistake for the purposes of
section 261(4) of the 1998 Act
“ignorance” and “mistake” referred to in s 261 is
ignorance of a requirement to make a claim, not ignorance
or mistake about the
requirement to report an injury. The requirement to give notice of an injury is
set out in s 254 of the 1998
Act, which is not the subject of a ground in this
appellant submits that there was no evidence to support the Member’s
finding that the respondent’s failure to make
a claim was a result of
ignorance or that she had made a mistake and there was an absence of evidence of
any other reasonable cause.
appellant asserts that the respondent did not say that she was ignorant of her
rights to claim compensation or that the failure
to make a claim was as a result
of a mistake.
this case, the respondent lodged a claim for payment of her psychological
treatment on an unspecified date, likely to have been
as early as 2022. The
claim was met by the appellant. On 27 May 2022, Ms Graham made an Allied Health
Recovery Request. The appellant
indicated in its declinature notice issued
pursuant to s 78 of the 1998 Act dated 19 December 2023
“You alleged a consequential psychological condition
resulting from the right elbow injuries deemed to have been sustained on
2021. Liability for the consequential psychological condition was conceded under
claim number
2022200540.”
claim number was the same claim number recorded by Ms Graham in her health
request and was a different claim number to that provided
for the physical
injury (2024206433). It is abundantly clear that the respondent made a claim for
payment of her treatment expenses
associated with her major depression and
anxiety at some stage before 27 May 2022. On one view, that evidence may be
indicative that
the respondent made a claim for compensation within the time
prescribed by s 261, however, that was not argued at arbitration, and
permissible for me to take that into consideration.
is apparent that the appellant mistakenly attributed the respondent’s
psychological condition to a consequence of the physical
injury. It is not at
all surprising that the respondent did not make a claim for a primary
psychological injury until her claim pursuant
to s 66 of the 1987 Act
crystallised. Up until then, her treatment expenses and weekly payments had been
met by the appellant. The
failure to make a claim for compensation in respect of
the primary psychological injury was occasioned by the appellant’s
belief that the condition was secondary to the respondent’s
physical injury.
respondent points out that s 261(4) is not limited to “ignorance” or
respondent submits that the Member’s finding that this case involved a
consideration of the complexity in the medical evidence
and the confusion in
relation to the appellant having accepted the claim on the basis that it was a
secondary psychological condition
were valid reasons for excusing the delay. The
respondent says that the Member also found that the nature of the
respondent’s
condition was clarified when the respondent commenced the
pain management program. The respondent contends that these were all valid
reasons for the Member’s conclusion that there was a reasonable cause for
delay in making a claim for a primary psychological
accept the respondent’s submission. There was indeed confusion in relation
to the causation of the respondent’s condition
and a complexity in the
medical opinions that contributed to the confusion.
Member was not in error to conclude that the respondent’s claim was not
barred by operation of s 261 because s 261(4) provided
a reasonable cause for
the delay in making the claim. This ground of appeal fails.
Ground D: error of fact, law and/or discretion in finding that
the operation of section 261 of the 1998 Act would be
appellant asserts that s 261 is a statutory bar and does not allow for
discretion on the part of the Member. The appellant says
that the Member was not
permitted to conclude that it would be unjust to preclude the respondent from
compensation.
appellant concedes that the word “or” used in s 261(4), which
provides that it is not a bar to recovery of compensation
where the failure was
occasioned by ignorance, mistake,
other reasonable cause is
disjunctive. It is sufficient therefore to establish one of those conditions.
The term “other reasonable
cause” is not limited or defined.
indicated in Ground C of the appeal, the appellant, mistakenly as it transpires,
attributed the respondent’s psychological
condition to a consequence of
the physical injury. The respondent’s treatment expenses for her
psychological condition were
met by the appellant up to and beyond the
declinature notice issued in December 2023 responding to her lump sum claim. In
those circumstances,
it is not surprising that the respondent acquiesced to
being compensated on the basis that her psychological injury was secondary
her elbow injury. That, in my view, supports the Member’s conclusion that
the delay in making the claim was occasioned by
“ignorance.”
circumstance in which the appellant accepted the claim is sufficient to satisfy
the requirement that the delay was occasioned
by (primarily the
appellant’s) “mistake”.
conceded by the appellant, the word “or” in the phrase “or
other reasonable cause” is disjunctive. The
evidence as to the above
circumstances is sufficient evidence to support the Member’s conclusion
that the delay in making the
claim was occasioned by ignorance and mistake. Even
if those conclusions were wrong, which they were not, it was sufficient for the
Member to determine “other reasonable cause” in favour of the
respondent. She considered that the result would be unjust
if the respondent was
precluded from claiming compensation because of the circumstances surrounding
her claim in respect of her psychological
condition. Thus, the “other
reasonable cause” was the unusual circumstances surrounding the claim that
the respondent
did make, for which she was compensated and for which the
respondent was not accountable. In the context of the appellant having
identified any prejudice to it if the claim was accepted, that cause for the
delay, if it was not considered reasonable, would
indeed work a demonstrable
injustice on the respondent.
follows that the Member did not err in determining that there were reasonable
causes for the respondent’s delay in making
her claim for a primary
psychological injury in accordance with s 261(4) of the 1998 Act.
The Notice of Contention
have concluded below that the respondent is not barred from claiming
compensation in respect of her primary psychological injury.
It is therefore not
necessary to consider the respondent’s Notice of Contention.
the reason set out in [158] above, I decline to determine the respondent’s
Notice of Contenion. The Member erred in determining
that the deemed date of the
respondent’s primary psychological injury for the purpose of s 15 of the
1987 Act was 15 October
2023. For the reasons set out in my consideration of
Ground A of the appeal, the deemed date of injury pursuant to s 15 of the 1987
Act is 6 April 2022.
my consideration of Ground B, I determined that the date the respondent became
aware of her injury, as provided for in s 261(6)
of the 1998 Act, preceded the
date of when she “received” her injury, therefore a consideration of
when the respondent
became aware of her injury was not relevant. I note that the
Member did not make any determination or orders in her Certificate of
Determination in respect of s 261(6).
the reasons set out under Ground C and D of the appeal, the Member did not err
in determining that there were reasonable causes
for the respondent’s
delay in making her claim for a primary psychological injury as provided for in
s 261(4) of the 1998 Act.
261(4) of the 1998 Act provides that:
“(4) The failure
to make a claim within the period required by this section is not a bar to the
recovery of compensation if
it is found that the failure was occasioned by
ignorance, mistake, absence from the State or other reasonable cause, and
(a) the claim is made within 3 years after the injury or accident
happened ...”.
respondent’s deemed date of injury is 6 April 2022. The respondent did not
make her claim within the six months prescribed
by s 261(1) of the 1998 Act. The
respondent made her claim for a primary psychological injury on 8 November 2023,
which was within
three years of her injury and there was a reasonable cause for
the respondent’s delay in making the claim.
respondent is therefore not barred from claiming compensation in respect of her
primary psychological injury.
Determination
[3] of the Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 15 April 2025 is
amended to read:
“3. For the purpose of assessment and
quantification of the applicant’s entitlement to payment of permanent
compensation pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act, the date of the
applicant’s primary psychological injury is 6 April 2022.”
6 of the Member’s Certificate of Determination is amended to
“6. The matter is remitted to the President for
referral to a Medical Assessor for assessment as follows:
Date of injury: 6 April 2022 (deemed).
Body parts: psychological.
Method: whole person impairment.”
Member’s Certificate of Determination is otherwise
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
21 October 2025
[2025] NSWCA 157
[2020] NSWCA
[2013] NSWCA 255
NSWWCCPD 25
Licul v Corney
[1976] HCA 6
P & O Ports Ltd v Hawkins
[2007] NSWWCCPD 87.
Application
to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), pp
Respondent’s
Application to Lodge Additional Documents (ALAD) dated 17 February, pp
Reply, p 90.
Application to Resolve a Dispute (reply), pp
[2020] NSWWCCPD 9.
Federal Broom Co Pty Ltd v Semlitch
[1964] HCA 34
Cook v Midpart Pty
Ltd trading as McDonalds Forster
[2008] NSWCA 151.
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
Attorney General’s Department v K
[2010] NSWWCCPD
[2014] NSWCA 166
Thoroughgood
[2024] NSWCA 135
NSWPICPD 9.
Harrison v Bunnings
[2025] NSWPIC 152
[171]–[172].
[20]–[65]; [74]–[76];
[134]–[135].
Appellant’s submissions dated 6 August 2025, [3(d)].
[1979] HCA 9
Warren v Coombes
[2003] HCA 22
[2013] NSWCA 373
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.82 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter