URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/289.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ibrahim v Kia Australia Pty Ltd and Ryde Automotive Group trading as Ryde Kia [2025] NSWCATAP 289; (12 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Ibrahim v Kia Australia Pty Ltd and Ryde Automotive Group trading as Ryde
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 289
Hearing Date(s):
8 July 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Appeal Panel
G Burton SC, Senior Member
M Tyson, Senior Member
(1) The application for an extension of time in which to appeal is
(2) The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
APPEAL – extension of time in which to appeal – exercise of
discretion – length of delay – adequacy of explanation
for the delay
– whether significant new evidence has arisen
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Australian Consumer Law
Fair Trading Act 1987
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Regulation 2022
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Cases Cited:
Aon Risk Services Australia Limited v Australian National University
(2009) 239 CLR 175
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
(1986) 162 CLR 1
Dranichnikov v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(2003) 197 ALR 389
[2003] HCA 26
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
Jackson v Land and Housing
Corporation
[2014] NSWCATAP 22
Nanschild v Pratt
[2011] NSWCA 85
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
(1965) 1 WLR 8
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 39
Simjanovska v Dogan
[2023] NSWCATAP 69
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 369
(2007) 71 NSWLR 61
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Dr James Ibrahim (Appellant)
Kia Australia Pty Ltd (First
Respondent)
Ryde Automotive Group trading as Ryde Kia (Second
Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Self-represented)
T Tustas (First Respondent)
(Second Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00104910
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
[2025] CATCD
Date of Decision:
19 July 2024
K Mortensen, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2024/00112820
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is an internal appeal under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
”) against a decision made in the
Consumer and Commercial Division of the Tribunal on 19 July 2024.
the hearing of the appeal, the appellant appeared by audio-visual link as he was
residing in Queensland at the time of the appeal
hearing. The first respondent
was represented by Mr. Tustas, national manager, and the second respondent by
Mr. Groz, general services
application to the Tribunal was brought by the appellant, whom we shall refer
to as the consumer, against the respondents.
appeal was not brought within the time normally permitted by the relevant
legislation. For the reasons set out below, we have
decided that no extension of
time should be ordered for the bringing of the appeal and therefore that the
appeal should be dismissed.
Initial factual background and the
commencement of Tribunal proceedings
or about 1 December 2023, the consumer purchased a Kia MV EV9 Earth Long Range
AWD Auto Wagon (“
the vehicle
”), with model year 2024, from
the second respondent. The first respondent is the manufacturer of the vehicle.
The consumer
paid $117,370.00 for the vehicle and took delivery of it on 13
December 2023.
or about 29 January 2024, the consumer received a call from his father-in- law
who had used the vehicle that day. The consumer
was told that the vehicle was
unresponsive and unable to be unlocked using the electronic key for it. Some
days later, a road side
assistance mechanic from Kia Support inspected the
vehicle and replaced the 12 volt battery in the vehicle.
or about 19 March 2024, the vehicle had an identical failure to the one
mentioned above. On this occasion, a different mechanic
from Kia Support
attended the vehicle and jump started it.
next day, the vehicle experienced the same failure again. A third mechanic from
Kia Support attended to the vehicle, jump started
it, and then delivered the
vehicle to the first respondent for diagnosis and repair.
26 March 2024, the consumer commenced proceedings in the Tribunal seeking orders
for the vehicle to be returned to the first respondent
and for a refund of the
purchase price he had paid for the vehicle.
or about 5 April 2024, the first respondent contacted the consumer. The consumer
was told that, while no specific fault was able
to be identified, an upgrade to
software for the vehicle’s computer system had been installed which had
rectified the issue
and that the vehicle was ready for collection.
consumer refused to collect the vehicle.
11 April 2024, the Tribunal made directions, in the proceedings that had been
filed by the consumer, for the parties to file and
serve their evidence that
they would rely upon in the hearing.
The hearing, the evidence,
the application for miscellaneous matters and the Tribunal’s
hearing at first instance took place on 11 April 2024 and 7 June 2024.
consumer’s case at the hearing was that the second respondent had failed
to comply with
Australian Consumer Law NSW
(ACL), as the
vehicle was not of acceptable quality (ACL
, and further, that the
failure was a major failure within the meaning of s. 260 of the ACL. The
respondents disputed the claim and
sought for the application to be dismissed.
the hearing at first instance, the consumer relied upon his own affidavit
himself which recorded his history with the vehicle.
He also included posts from
social media from other owners of vehicles of the same model as that purchased
by the consumer. The Tribunal,
in its reasons for decision, gave the social
media posts little weight.
consumer relied on a report from Mr. Gregory Organ. In its reasons for decision,
the Tribunal said of the report that it was “
to say the least, unusual
for an expert report in that it does not report upon the inspection of the
vehicle nor the resulting identification
of any fault. Rather, the report is a
treatise of media reporting of the faults of the vehicle type, intermixed with
the writer’s
opinions on the application of the ACL to the vehicle. There
is nothing however, to indicate that Organ is legally qualified. Accordingly,
the report was of very little utility to the Tribunal in determining the
application
behalf of the second respondent, oral evidence was given about initial testing
showing that the vehicle’
volt battery system did have very low
voltage. When the fault was reported to the first respondent, it acknowledged
that the fault
was a known fault with the type of vehicle that the consumer had
purchased and the fault was corrected in most cases by the application
software update to the vehicle’s computerised control system.
software upgrade was downloaded to the vehicle’s computerised control
system. Over the next four to five weeks (because
the consumer did not collect
the vehicle and it remained in the possession of the second respondent), the
second respondent tried
to replicate the power drain fault in the vehicle and
its oral evidence was that the fault could not be replicated.
Tribunal reserved its decision.
18 July 2024, the consumer filed an application for miscellaneous matters. We
shall return to this application further below.
19 July 2024, the Tribunal made final orders and published its reasons for
its decision, the Tribunal explained that it was satisfied that the consumer was
making a consumer claim
(Fair Trading Act
1987 (NSW) s. 79E) and that the
first respondent was a supplier and the second respondent a manufacturer. The
Tribunal was satisfied
that it had jurisdiction to determine the claim and had
that jurisdiction notwithstanding that the value of the claim was over
$100,000.00
Fair Trading Act
s. 79S(6)(a)).
Tribunal set out in its decision the legal principles to be applied when
considering a claim under
of the ACL.
applying the relevant legal principles to the evidence before it, the Tribunal
accepted that the vehicle had suffered from a defect
pertaining to its 12 volt
battery causing it, occasionally and intermittently, to discharge to levels
where the remaining current
was inadequate to power even the vehicle’s
unlocking system. The Tribunal found (at [38]) that the applicant’s
did not establish that the repairs done to the vehicle were inadequate
or that the defect would recur following the software update.
Tribunal’s decision recorded at [38]:
“The applicant has
not provided evidence establishing that the repairs done to the vehicle have
been inadequate, or to support
the applicant’s subjective assertions that
the problems will continued [sic] to occur following the software upgrade. Based
upon the evidence of Ryde Kia that persistent attempts made over four to five
weeks following the installation of the software upgrade
could not rectify [sic]
the 12 volt electrical system defect, I consider it entirely possible that Ryde
Kia’s one and only
attempt to rectify the defect was successful.”
first use of the word “rectify” in that passage appears to us to be
a typographical error; the reasons for decision
at [26] suggest that
“replicate” was the word the Member intended rather than
Tribunal stated (at [39]) “...
it is impossible for me to find, on the
balance of probabilities, that the teething problems within the vehicle
complained of have
not been addressed under warranty
.” The Tribunal
found that the consumer’s subjective dissatisfaction with the vehicle was
insufficient to establish his
claim under
of the ACL. The Tribunal was not
satisfied that a reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state and
condition of the vehicle,
would regard it as not acceptable, having regard to
the matters set out in
of the ACL.
Tribunal found that no breach of
of the ACL was established and there was
therefore no entitlement to remedies under ss. 259 – 263 of the ACL or
Fair Trading Act
. The Tribunal made an order on 19 July 2024
dismissing the application.
now to the application for miscellaneous matters that had been filed on 18 July
2024, in that application, the consumer
sought for the Tribunal member
to consider the additional submission
.” The submission was
that, at 8.45 a.m. on the morning of 18 July 2024, the vehicle did not start
again. The consumer called
Kia Roadside Assistance. That service diagnosed a
flat 12 volt battery and the roadside assistance technician jumpstarted the
The submission stated that this was now the fourth time that battery
had gone flat and “
The fault is relevant as it demonstrates that it is
an ongoing fault
1.46 p.m. on 19 July 2024, the consumer sent an email transmission to the
registry of the Tribunal, asking for his 18 July 2024
submission to be brought
to the attention of Member Mortensen as it “
does not appear to be
considered when the member made their order
25 July 2025, Member Mortensen made an order “
The application to set
aside or vary the orders made in this matter 19 July 2024 in consideration of
additional submissions now made
.” The Member gave written
reasons for the refusal, stating that a final decision had been reached, that it
had discharged its
statutory power or duty, and that the limited statutory power
under s. 63 of the Act to amend a decision after it was made did not
the circumstances of the miscellaneous matters application. The Tribunal also
decided that its power under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW) was not applicable to the circumstances of the
miscellaneous matters application.
decision on the miscellaneous application was not, so far as we are aware, the
subject of any appeal by the consumer.
The appeal documents and
submissions
18 March 2025, the consumer filed a Notice of Appeal against the decision dated
19 July 2024 and stated to have been received on
22 July 2024.
grounds of appeal relied upon by the consumer were as
“At the time of the hearing the 12v system failure
occurred 3x. It has since occurred 5x. The 4th time it occurred was between
hearing date and the date of decision, however, as it occurred one day before
the member made the decision I suspect there was
insufficient administrative
time for NCAT to provide the member with the evidence of the 4th occurrence. The
5th occurrence occurred
on the 28/2/25.”
Notice of Appeal sought an order that “the respondent” provide a
full refund of the purchase price of the car, compensation
for direct and
indirect costs incurred by the consumer “secondary to the vehicle
faults” and a written apology.
Notice of Appeal identifies that the consumer is seeking leave to appeal and
advances two matters in support of the application
for leave to appeal; the
first being the alleged recurrence of the 12 volt failure on 18 July 2024 which
the consumer had brought
to the attention of the Member through the application
for miscellaneous matters and the second being another alleged recurrence
12 volt battery failure on 28 February 2025.
p. 3 in the Notice of Appeal the consumer states that, following the 28 February
2025 12 volt battery system failure, he received
legal advice to appeal
the decision
Notice of Appeal then indicates that in seeking leave to appeal, there is
“significant new evidence that was not reasonable
available at the time of
the hearing.” The “new evidence” consists of three documents
relevant to “
occurrence number 4
” on 18 July 2024 and three
documents relevant to “
occurrence number 5
evidence was stated in the Notice of Appeal not to have been available at the
time of hearing because “
the ongoing nature of the problem with this
car is unpredictable and erratic
Notice of Appeal acknowledges that the consumer needs an extension of time to
bring the appeal. The reason given for why the extension
is sought is because
the issue with the car is infrequent and unpredictable. The 4th
occurrence of 12v system fault occurred one day before the decision
was made ...
The fifth occurrence of 12v system fault occurred on 28 February 2025, this
occurred after the hearing, yet is significant
supplementary evidence to prove
that the issue has not been resolved
from the Notice of Appeal, the consumer filed a bundle of documents on 18 March
2025, as part of the appeal proceedings. The
bundle includes the
Tribunal’s decision dated 19 July 2024, an email transmission chain
between the consumer and the registry
relating to the consumer’s
application for miscellaneous matters dated 18 July 2024, a Kia service report
number 4”, a Kia service report for “event number
5”, photographic evidence of the dead battery during roadside
testing on “event number 5” and “contemporaneous notes of
event number 5.”
the hearing before the Appeal Panel, the Appeal Panel granted the consumer leave
to rely upon a bundle of documents filed on 1
July 2025 with the appeals
registry. This bundle included documents outlining “
a further failure
of the vehicle’s 12V battery system which occurred on 27 June
his oral submissions at the Appeal Panel hearing, the consumer submitted that
the Tribunal’s website was confusing and it
was not clear to him whether
he should lodge an appeal or apply to vary the Tribunal’s orders. When
questioned by the Appeal
Panel about his delay in filing his Notice of Appeal,
the consumer stated that it was “only after the fifth event” that
sought legal advice about lodging an appeal. The consumer submitted that the new
evidence he sought to rely upon showed that the
Tribunal had “made an
assumption” that the electrical problem with the vehicle was fixed, when
it was not fixed. The
consumer submitted that the reasoning of the Tribunal was
not adequate.
respondents did not file any reply to the Notice of Appeal or any submissions.
In their oral submissions at the Appeal Panel
hearing, the respondents submitted
that there was no error in the Tribunal’s decision, complained that the
consumer was relying
on events alleged to have taken place after the hearing had
concluded and submitted that there was “lots of information”
NCAT’s website about how to lodged an appeal.
transcript of the Tribunal proceedings on 11 April and 7 June 2024 has been
provided to us.
Notice of Appeal – extension of
cl 25(4)(c) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules
”) the Notice of Appeal should have been lodged
ordinarily within 28 days of the consumer receiving the Tribunal’s
Notice of Appeal states the consumer received the decision on 22 July 2024 but
the material the consumer put before the Appeal
Panel shows that the consumer
received the Tribunal’s decision on 19 July 2024: see in the
consumer’s bundle lodged on
18 March 2025 the email transmission dated 19
July 2024 at 1.46 p.m. from the consumer stating that the order and the written
do not refer to the consumer’
“submission.”
Notice of Appeal was lodged on 18 March 2025.
consumer properly applied for an extension of time in
of the Notice of
Appeal form.
41 of the Act provides:
“(1) The Tribunal may, of its own
motion or on application by any person, extend the period of time for the
doing of anything
under any legislation in respect of which the
Tribunal has jurisdiction despite anything to the contrary under that
legislation.
(2) Such an application may be made even though the relevant period of
time has expired.”
principles by which the power provided for in s. 41 of the Act should be
exercised are well-established, and are recorded in authorities
Jackson v Land and Housing Corporation
[2014] NSWCATAP 22
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
Nanschild v
[2011] NSWCA 85
starting point is that procedural rules of the Tribunal, such as Rule 25(4)(c),
should be obeyed, just as the procedural rules
of a court should be obeyed:
Ratnam v Cumarasamy
(1965) 1 WLR 8
at p. 12 cited with implicit approval
Gallo v Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
per McHugh J.
burden of proof lies on the applicant for the extension of time to establish
that there are proper grounds to grant the application
for the extension of
Tomko v Palasty (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 369
(2007) 71 NSWLR 61
per Basten JA.
explained in
at [22], generally, in an application
for an extension of time to appeal, the Appeal Panel will be required to
(1) The length of the delay;
(2) The reason for the delay;
(3) The appellant’s prospects of success, that is usually whether the
applicant has a fairly arguable case; and
(4) The extent of any prejudice suffered by the respondent to the appeal.
Extension of time to appeal - Consideration
length of delay in bringing the application for an extension of time in which to
appeal here is significant. The application has
been brought nearly eight months
out of time. That time is significant when measured against the 28 days provided
for in cl 25(4)(c)
of the Rules. The Tribunal is being asked to enlarge, by many
months, the 28 day period provided for in cl 25(4)(c) of the Rules.
length of delay tells substantially against granting the extension of time
next to the reasons of the delay in lodging the Notice of Appeal, as noted
above, in the Notice of Appeal, when setting the
reasons that he sought an
extension of time, the consumer submitted that “
the issue with the car
is infrequent and unpredictable
” and then cited an occurrence of the
12 volt system alleged defect one day before the Tribunal’s orders were
reasons published and an occurrence of the same fault alleged on 28
February 2025.
occurrence of the 12 volt system alleged defect, alleged to have taken place one
day before the Tribunal’s orders were made
and reasons published, does not
and cannot, as a matter of logic, explain why the consumer did not lodge his
Notice of Appeal against
the 19 July 2024 decision in the time identified in cl
25(4)(c) of the Rules.
further occurrence of the vehicle’s 12 volt system alleged defect, alleged
to have taken place on 28 February 2025, does not
and cannot explain why the
consumer did not lodge this Notice of Appeal against the 19 July 2024 decision
in the time identified
in cl 25(4)(c) of the Rules. An event taking place on 28
February 2025 is a fresh event taking place: (a) long after the consumer
his application on 26 March 2024, (b) long after the time allowed by the
Tribunal for the parties to have filed and served
their evidence to be relied
upon at the hearing, (c) long after the hearing itself (11 April 2024 and 7 June
2024), and (d) long
after the orders and decision of 19 July 2024. A fresh event
taking place on 28 February 2025 does not seem to us to explain, in
any relevant
way, why the consumer did not, for example, investigate the prospects for
bringing an appeal, prepare or lodge, or perhaps
mistakenly decide not to lodge,
a notice of appeal against the 19 July 2024 decision, in the time identified in
cl 25(4)(c) of the
was no evidence before the Appeal Panel showing that NCAT’s website
contained material about lodging appeals that was
not clear, but in any event
the consumer accepted, as we understood his submissions, that he only turned his
mind to the question
of an appeal after 28 February 2025.
for the explanation for the delay, there is no material put forward by the
consumer suggesting he was under some impediment that
prevented him from lodging
his Notice of Appeal within the time provided for in cl 25(4)(c) of the
in oral argument during the Appeal, the consumer said, in answer to a question
as to why he didn’t appeal within time
if unhappy with the findings on the
evidence in [38]-[39] of the original decision, that he didn’t think about
it and was unhappy
with his expert’s report which he said was gobbledegook
and showed diagnostic uncertainty like in medicine (we understood,
the consumer
to be a medical practitioner). He also said that he had not reviewed [38] in the
Tribunal’s decision at first
instance “with a fine tooth comb”
and only undertook such a review “after the fifth occurrence.”
is also the material before us from the consumer (see p. 3 in the Notice of
Appeal) which suggests that the circumstance that
prompted the appeal was the 28
February 2025 alleged recurrence of the 12 volt system alleged defect, which led
to the consumer obtaining
legal advice and a recommendation that the consumer
lodge an appeal.
the further occurrence of the 12 volt system alleged defect on 28 February 2025
did lead to the consumer to obtain legal advice
and then a recommendation from
lawyers that he appeal against the 19 July 2024 decision, which recommendation
the consumer then acted
on three weeks later, but it says little about the
reason, or reasons, for the consumer not instituting the appeal within 28 days
of his receipt of the Tribunal’s reasons, let alone filing the notice of
appeal, say, a few weeks or so after the time identified
in cl 25(4)(c) of the
Rules had expired.
do not therefore regard the reasons given by the consumer in his Notice of
Appeal or in his oral submissions, for why he requires
an extension of time, to
be pertinent, for the purposes of the question before us as to how we should
exercise the discretion afforded
by s. 41 of the Act in the circumstances of
our view, the consumer has not provided any adequate explanation of his delay in
lodging the Notice of Appeal. The lack of material
providing an adequate
explanation of the delay weighs substantially against granting an extension of
Aon Risk Services Australia Limited v Australian National
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
to the extent of any prejudice suffered by the respondent, there is some
prejudice to the respondents that goes beyond the inconvenience
of having to
prepare for and appear at the appeal. The second respondent is a supplier of
motor vehicles and the first respondent
is the manufacturer of motor vehicles.
If it were the case that the second respondent had failed to comply with the ACL
guarantees in the case of the vehicle, and the failure is a major
failure (ACL ss. 259 and 262), the interests of justice are in
favour of the
consumer having the opportunity to have the merits of his claim determined at a
final hearing, in circumstances where
both parties have an opportunity to tender
evidence. But there is prejudice to the supplier and manufacturer of such a
vehicle having
to face a succession of claims by the consumer based on the same
alleged underlying defect in relation to the one particular vehicle.
prejudice weighs against granting an extension of time to file the Notice of
turn next to consider the consumer’s prospects on the appeal.
basis upon which appeals from decisions of the Tribunal may be brought are
identified in s. 80 of the Act. Section 80 of the
Act states that an appeal may
be made ‘as of right on any question of law, or with leave of the Appeal
Panel, on any other
grounds’ (s. 80(2)(b) of the Act). Where an appeal is
not available as of right, the Appeal Panel must be satisfied that the
requirements set out in cl 12 sch 4 of the Act are established before granting
leave to appeal.
meaning of a “question of law” was discussed in detail by the Appeal
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
) at [25]-[40]. Examples of questions of law include the
matters set out in
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
NSWCATAP 69
t [32]. However, the categories of
question of law are not closed. As was stated at
“What constitutes a question of law is vexed and
context dependent in the sense that the distinction between matters of fact
of law may turn on the circumstances in which the question
Targeted Property Investments Pty Ltd v Look Up Technologies Pty
[2023] NSWSC 416
Thomas and Naaz
[2023] NSWCA 40
Da Costa v The Queen
[1968] HCA 51
(1968) 118 CLR 186
For instance, a ground of appeal that raises the question whether there were
adequate reasons may constitute an attack on the merits
which would not raise a
pure question of law. On the other hand, it may be a contention that the
decision is unreasonable in the
requisite sense or that the Tribunal failed to
exercise the jurisdiction, which would likely raise a question of law: see the
of this issue in
Wollondilly
Shire Council v
[2024] NSWCATAP 104]
–[32]. Care must in any event be
taken. As has been clarified by amendment to the NCAT Act
Prendergast
was decided, the Tribunal is not required to
give reasons for all decisions it makes: NCAT Act, s 62(2A; see
New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation v Orr
–[54], [109]–[114].
Therefore, discernment and care must be taken to ensure
the grounds relied upon by the appellant, properly
understood, raise questions
of law and arise in the
proceedings; or whether leave is required.”
12 of Sch 4 of the Act provides that the Appeal Panel may grant leave
to appeal a decision from the Consumer and Commercial
Division (CCD) pursuant to
s. 80(2)(b) of the Act, only if it is satisfied that the appellant may
have suffered a substantial miscarriage
of justice because:
(1) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and
equitable; or
(2) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against the weight of
evidence; or
(3) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was not reasonably
available at the time the proceedings under appeal
were being dealt with).
Appeal Panel considered the meaning of a substantial miscarriage of justice for
the purposes of cl 12 of sch 4 of the Act in
Collins v Urban
NSWCATAP 17
, stating that a substantial miscarriage of justice may have
been suffered:
... where there was a "
significant
possibility
chance which was fairly open
different and more favourable result would have been achieved for the appellant
had the relevant circumstance in para (a)
or (b) not occurred or if the fresh
evidence under para (c) had been before the Tribunal at first instance.
principles to be applied by an Appeal Panel in determining whether leave to
appeal should be granted are well settled. In
the Appeal Panel concluded at [84] that:
(1) In order
to be granted leave to appeal, the applicant must demonstrate something more
than that the primary decision maker was
arguably wrong in the conclusion
arrived at or that there was a bona fide challenge to an issue of
BHP Billiton Ltd v Dunning
[2013] NSWCA 421
the authorities cited there,
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
(2) Ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal, only in matters
that involve:
(a) Issues of principle; or
(b) questions of public importance or matters of
administration or policy which might have general application; or
(c) an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of
going beyond merely what is arguable, or an error that is plain and
apparent which is central to the Tribunal's decision and not merely peripheral,
so that it would be unjust to allow the finding
to stand; or
(d) a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and
clearly mistaken; or
(e) the Tribunal having gone about the fact-finding process
in such an unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to
unfair result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
consumer’s Notice of Appeal did not identify any errors of law in the
Tribunal’s decision under Appeal. During the
oral argument in the Appeal,
the consumer challenged [38] in the Tribunal’s decision at first instance
and developed a submission,
as we understood it, that the Tribunal’s
reasons there were not adequate.
a party is a self-represented non-legally trained appellant, the grounds of
appeal may be considered generally by the Appeal
Panel (subject to
procedural fairness considerations) to determine whether a question of law has
been raised: Simjanovska v Dogan
[2023] NSWCATAP 69
Prendergast
the Tribunal’s reasons are inadequate, that may provide a basis for an
error of law to be discerned in the Tribunal’s
reasons: see for example
NSW Land and Housing Corporation v Orr
[2019] NSWCA 231
, by Bell P
(as the Chief Justice of NSW then was), with whom Ward JA (as the President of
the Court of Appeal then was) agreed. However,
[38] in the Tribunal’s
reasons at first instance show that the Tribunal engaged with the evidence
before it, evaluated that
evidence and articulated the reason that the Tribunal
reached its finding. We do not view the reasons expressed at [38] in the
reasons at first instance as reasons lacking in adequacy. Nor
do we regard it as accurate to characterise the Tribunal as simply
assumption that the 12 volt battery system problem in the vehicle had been
fixed. The Tribunal’s reasons show that
it reached its finding on the
basis of its evaluating the consumer’s and the respondents’ evidence
that the parties had
placed before the Tribunal, and not simply on the basis of
assumption. We do not regard the consumer as establishing an error of
Tribunal’s decision.
consumer’s Notice of Appeal, and his oral submissions during the Appeal
hearing, did not suggest that the decision of the
Tribunal under appeal was not
fair and equitable or was against the weight of evidence.
the consumer’s Notice of Appeal, and his oral submissions during the
Appeal hearing, did suggest that there was significant
new evidence that had
arisen, being evidence that was not reasonably available at the time the
proceedings under appeal were dealt
with. The consumer pointed to three alleged
failures of the vehicle’s 12 volt battery system on 18 July 2024, 28
February 2025
and 27 June 2025, as the “significant new evidence that had
the circumstances of this case, evidence relating to the performance of the
vehicle’s 12 volt battery system on 18 July 2024,
28 February 2025 and 27
June 2025 is not the “significant” new evidence that Clause 12(1)(c)
of Sch 4 contemplates. Our
interpretation of clause 12 is that it applies to
evidence concerning the matters the subject of the hearing at first instance
that evidence was not reasonably available at that time.. The last day of
the hearing at first instance took place on 7 June 2024.
Evidence relating to
the performance of the vehicle’s 12 volt battery system on 28 February
2025 and 27 June 2025 is therefore
evidence relating to fresh events which
occurred after the final orders were made and reasons for the orders were
published. As to
evidence relating to the performance of the vehicle’s 12
volt battery system on 18 July 2024, from the documents placed before
satisfied that the application for miscellaneous matters came to the attention
of the member only after the orders and
reason for decision were published on 19
was nothing in the further evidence which connected it probatively to the
matters determined in the hearing at first instance,
such as evidence (expert or
other) that the further events were a continuation of the same defect for the
same reasons. Arguably
such evidence may have brought the later events within cl
12(1)(c) if (for example) it was not possible for an expert report at the
of the hearing to say with certainty that there would be future recurrences.
That is not the case here.
the event that we are in error in that interpretation of Clause 12(1)(c) of Sch
4, in our view the consumer has not established
that he may have suffered a
substantial miscarriage of justice. The consumer had the opportunity at the
hearing at first instance
to tender expert or other evidence establishing the
defect in the vehicle’s 12 volt battery system. The consumer had the onus
of proving the breach of the consumer guarantee provided for by ACL s. 54. The
consumer relied principally upon Mr. Organ’s
report, which he then
described in critical terms during the hearing before us, as we have already
mentioned. For the reasons given
by the Tribunal in its decision, that report
was not persuasive. The consumer did not adduce any evidence that contradicted
the respondents’
evidence about their diagnosis of the battery
system’s issue, the new software that was downloaded to the vehicle and
the testing
process that then ensued which on the respondents’ evidence
resolved the alleged defect.
the conclusion of the proceedings at first instance, the consumer now wants to
bring evidence of further alleged instances
of the vehicle’s 12 volt
battery system malfunctioning before the Appeal Panel so as to seek (without
more than that evidence
of malfunctioning) to demonstrate, as we understand it,
that the “teething problems” suffered by the vehicle were not
successfully addressed by the respondents as was contended in the
respondents’ evidence. The problem with that approach is,
explained, that the evidence is insufficient for the task and it is not
established that the further evidence required
to make it sufficient was not
reasonably available at the original hearing.. As was explained in
[1986] HCA 33
(1986) 162 CLR 1
at 7 per Gibbs CJ, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson
“It is fundamental to the due administration of justice
that the substantial issues between the parties are ordinarily settled
If it were not so the main arena for the settlement of disputes would move from
the court at first instance to the appellate
court tending to reduce the
proceedings in the former court to little more than a preliminary
appeal is not an opportunity for the losing party to rerun the case with better
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
further evidence of alleged battery malfunctioning, with expert or other
evidence, may or may not establish a new claim for breach
of consumer guarantees
(such as a defective battery system for a different reason). That is not for
this appeal.
Accordingly,
it appears to the Appeal Panel that the consumer had little if any prospect of
establishing either an error of law in
the Tribunal’s decision or any
proper basis for leave to appeal to be granted. The limited prospect of success
weighs substantially
against granting an extension of time to file the Notice of
our view, the consumer has not established a persuasive basis for the Appeal
Panel to exercise its discretion under s. 41 of the
Act to allow an extension of
the period of time for the Notice of Appeal to be filed.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel is not prepared to grant the consumer an
extension of time to appeal. Consequently, the question
of leave to appeal does
not arise. The appeal itself should be dismissed, being brought out of time and
where no extension of time
to bring the appeal has been granted by us.
Appeal Panel makes the following orders:
(1) The application for an extension of time in which to appeal is dismissed.
(2) The appeal is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter