URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/183.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lawlis v R [2025] NSWCCA 183 (3 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 183
Hearing Date(s):
03 November 2025
Date of Orders:
03 November 2025
Decision Date:
3 November 2025
Orders made on 3 November 2025:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
the appeal.
(3) Quash the sentence imposed in the District Court on 12
September 2024.
(4) Taking into account the time served in custody, sentence
Joel Lawlis to 15 months imprisonment, commencing today 3 November 2025
expiring 2 February 2027.
(5) Pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
, the sentence imposed is to be served by way of an Intensive
Corrections Order.
(6) The standard conditions of the order apply,
(1) the offender must not commit any offence;
(2) the offender must submit to supervision by a
Community Corrections Officer.
(7) The following additional conditions
(1) the offender must participate and maintain his
participation in any programs and treatment facilitated by the Community
Corrections
Service, for psychological therapy and/or other treatment
appropriate for trauma and substance abuse issues, as your treating doctors
consider appropriate, for so long as the doctors consider appropriate, within
the term of the Order.
(2) for the term of the Order, the
offender must not take any illicit drugs or drugs not prescribed for you by a
(8) Within 48 hours of his release from custody, the offender must
report to the Community Corrections Office nearest to his residence.
Catchwords:
CRIME – Appeals – Appeal against sentence – whether
sentencing judge erred by finding that general deterrence weighed
heavily on the
sentence – appeal allowed – resentence
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Cases Cited:
Abdulrahman v R
[2016] NSWCCA 192
[2021] NSWCCA 30
The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
[2023] NSW CCA
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa (2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Kentwell v The Queen (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
Miller v R [
2015] NSWCCA 86
Parente v R
[2017] NSWCCA
Potts v R [2017] NSWCCA
[2004] NSWCCA 177
Robertson v R
[2017] NSWCCA 205
[2022] NSWCCA 75
Principal judgment
Joel Lawlis (Applicant)
Crown (Respondent)
Representation:
D Roff / J Razi (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Blaxland Law (Applicant)
Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
File Number(s):
2022/189292
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales
[2024] NSWDC 418
Date of Decision:
12 September 2024
File Number(s):
2022/189292
After the hearing of this appeal, on 3 November 2025, the Court made
orders allowing the appeal, quashing the sentence imposed in
the District Court
and in lieu thereof and taking into account time served in custody, imposed a
sentence of 15 months imprisonment.
The sentence commenced that day and the
Court ordered that Mr Lawlis serve the new sentence by way of an Intensive
Corrections Order
(ICO). These are the reasons for the orders made.
Lawlis appealed against the aggregate sentence of 3 years and 4 months
imprisonment with a non-parole period of 1 year and 8
months imposed upon him by
Judge Abadee in the District Court. The sentence commenced on the day it was
imposed, 12 September 2024.
The non-parole period was to expire on 11 May 2026.
Lawlis was sentenced for two offences of breaking and entering a dwelling house
and stealing a motor vehicle, in circumstances
of aggravation, being that he
knew there were people present inside. Those offences occurred on 10 November
2020 and 18 January 2021.
Each offence had a maximum penalty of 20 years
imprisonment and a standard non-parole period prescribed of 5 years
imprisonment.
He was also sentenced for four offences on a certificate pursuant
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). There were three
offences of stealing a motor vehicle, being two motorcycles and a Volkswagen
Golf, and one of taking and driving
a motor vehicle without the consent of its
owner. The car stealing offences had a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment
take and drive offence a maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment,
although they were all subject to the jurisdictional limit of the
Local Court of
2 years imprisonment. Those offences, as the sentencing judge observed,
represented “the fruits of the break
and entering offences”.
Grounds of Appeal
Lawlis sought leave to rely on three grounds of appeal:
“Ground 1 – The sentencing judge erred by finding that general
deterrence weighed heavily on the sentence.
Ground 2 – The sentencing judge erred by approaching community protection
as a matter that weighed against the applicant.
Ground 3 – The sentence imposed was manifestly excessive.”
Remarks on Sentence
Abadee sentenced Mr Lawlis on the day he heard the sentence proceedings.
Honour applied a 5% discount to the sentence he indicated for each offence for
Mr Lawlis’s guilty pleas to the offences
10 days before his trial was due
to commence.
Honour summarised the agreed facts, which are further summarised as
first break and enter offence occurred on 10 November 2020 at a home in
Illawong. The occupant of the home owned three motorcycles
which were parked in
the garage. The two which were stolen were valued at $15,000 and $6000. On 8
November 2020 the victim advertised
a car and motorcycle for sale. In the course
of people responding to the advertisement he supplied his home address.
Beginning in
the early morning of 9 November 2020 three co-offenders
communicated by telephone calls and text messages, discussing break and
and who would participate. Mr Lawlis’s name was mentioned. In the early
hours of 10 November, Mr Lawlis and four other
young men went to the home, in a
car owned by one of the co-offenders' mothers. The garage door was damaged,
locks securing the motorcycles
were broken and the motorcycles wheeled outside.
One of the stolen motorcycles was put in the car and the other was ridden away
two members of the group.
second break and enter offence occurred on 18 January 2021 at a home in West
Hoxton. The occupant of the home owned a Volkswagen
Golf motor vehicle valued at
$48,000, which was parked in the driveway. At about 2:30AM on 18 January 2021 Mr
Lawlis and three co-offenders
arrived at the premises. The victim had gone to
bed the previous evening with the property entry points closed and locked. The
gate to the property was forced open and the premises were entered by
damaging the lock on the rear fly screen and glass sliding
doors at the back of
the house. Mr Lawlis did not enter the house. The keys to the Golf and another
car, a Hyundai Elantra, parked
in the driveway, were stolen. The Hyundai, which
was parked behind the Golf, was moved and parked nearby. The Golf was driven
Later that day, at about 6:20PM, the Golf was seen parked near the
residence of one of the co-offenders. Two men, wearing balaclavas
and gloves,
ran to and entered the car. Police suspected they were two of the co-offenders.
7:50PM Mr Lawlis and a co-offender had a telephone conversation. The
co-offender told Mr Lawlis he had obtained some money for
him and told him to
lie to another co-offender, to deprive the other co-offender of his part of the
proceeds of the sale of the car.
Abadee noted that Mr Lawlis told a psychiatrist, Dr Smith, that he “was
going out... found a house where cars were, saw
money, was getting stuck with
them and sometimes being stuck with them and selling them cheaper so I could get
on”. His Honour
noted that in a Sentencing Assessment Report and a letter
of apology Mr Lawlis said his motive for the offences was to fund his drug
Objective seriousness of the offences
assessing the two break and enter and steal offences as “below the
mid-range, but not at the lowest end”, his Honour
found there was a
moderate level of pre-planning, although not necessarily very sophisticated,
indicated by messages within the groups
and the organisation of implements to
break locks and vehicles to collect vehicles anticipated to be stolen; and there
was some minor
damage to the properties involving locks. His Honour found both
of the offences occurred over a short period of time and there were
not repeated
incursions into the same properties. His Honour found it was not possible to
distinguish Mr Lawlis’s role from
those of his co-offenders.
Honour noted that Mr Lawlis was not on conditional liberty or bail at the time
of the offences.
Honour found that the offences were aggravated by being committed in company,
being committed in the homes of the victims and
being committed for financial
gain. His Honour found the offences were not part of a planned or organised
criminal activity, that
the level of planning was not any higher than would be
contemplated for offending of the kind.
Lawlis was 21 years old at the time of the offences and 25 at the time of
sentence. His Honour stated:
“The offender remains young and that fact alone usually renders
considerations of general deterrence and retribution of less
significance and
elevates the significance of rehabilitation; the law recognises the potential
for cognitive, emotional and psychological
immaturity of a young person
contributing to offending.”
Lawlis is an Indigenous man. His Honour recounted most of Mr Lawlis’s
background from a report by psychiatrist Dr Calum
Smith. During Mr
Lawlis’s childhood his father was in gaol for much of the time. When Mr
Lawlis was aged 14 or 15, he was sexually
abused by an officer in juvenile
detention. He became depressed and subject to flashbacks. He began to use
cannabis and the drug
‘ice’ to block out the effects of the assault.
He committed crimes to fund his drug addiction. Mr Lawlis told Dr Smith
after he was released from gaol (which was in September 2022) he had begun to
see drug and alcohol and psychology counsellors,
and had tried medications, but
they caused him migraines. He and his partner had recently had a child (who was
four months old when
Dr Smith interviewed Mr Lawlis in March 2024) and he had
been “clean” since he was released from gaol. He was motivated
a role model for his daughter.
Smith diagnosed Mr Lawlis with a substance use disorder and symptoms of complex
trauma. He considered that his drug dependence
motivated his criminality and
that he was likely to have been intoxicated by crystal methamphetamine at the
time of the offences.
Alexey Sidorov, psychiatrist, had prepared a report for the State, for Mr
Lawlis’s civil proceedings about his assault in
juvenile detention. Dr
Sidorov considered that Mr Lawlis had an Antisocial Personality Disorder,
Amphetamine Use Disorder, symptoms
of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and an
intellectual disability.
Honour accepted a submission about Mr Lawlis’s drug addiction and
offending, which invoked the principles from
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Cth) v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194
”) and stated that his findings could also be reached by the
application of the principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
”). His Honour found:
“This case is not one, in my view, of an offender’s exercise of free
choice in entering into drugs before becoming an
addict. It was a misguided
attempt to cope with his condition and with his severely traumatic experiences.
In turn, it contributed
to certain disorders affecting and impairing the
offender’s executive functioning. I accept on the probabilities, and not
at the matter too finely, that there is a connection between his
conditions and his offending which serves to reduce his moral culpability
makes the offender less than a fully appropriate vehicle for general and
specific deterrence. Acknowledging these matters, and
particularly in view of
the circumstance that the offending occurred when the offender was actually
intoxicated at the time (which
is not itself a mitigating factor), on the other
hand, the concern of his absence of control does, however, bring to bear a
of the need for community protection. That particular factor is,
however, affected by certain aspects of his subjective case to which
later in these remarks”.
Abadee noted that Mr Lawlis’s criminal history disclosed ten prior
convictions, and that he had been incarcerated by Campbelltown
Local Court in
December 2021 for like offending to the two break, enter and steal counts. His
Honour also noted three infractions
since 2021 in Mr Lawlis's custodial history.
His Honour found, on the basis of the Crown's submission and acceptance on
Mr Lawlis, that his record disentitled him to leniency.
is worth noting that Mr Lawlis’s prior record was not lengthy and that
some of the offences had occurred after the offences
for which he was sentenced
by Judge Abadee, although he was sentenced for them before he was sentenced in
the District Court. His
first offences in 2020 were three driving offences and
having custody of goods suspected of being stolen. In 2020 he committed two
aggravated break enter and steal offences for which he was sentenced in October
2021 to two Community Correction Orders. He was sentenced
on the same date to
another Community Correction Order for an offence in February 2021 of having
suspected stolen goods. In March
2021 he committed an offence of an aggravated
break, enter and steal and a steal motor vehicle offence, and they were the
for which he was sentenced to imprisonment in December 2021.
Honour noted that Mr Lawlis took responsibility for his offending, did not blame
his co-offenders, expressed concern about harm
to the victims and was
remorseful. His Honour noted that Mr Lawlis said he did not want his past
difficulties in life to shape the
rest of his life and he was determined to
build a life for his family.
Mr Lawlis’s prospects of rehabilitation, his Honour referred to Mr
Lawlis’s partner of seven years who had a steady
job, his positive
relationship with his immediate family, his employment with his brother-in-law,
an offer of employment, Dr Smith's
opinion that Mr Lawlis’s post offending
conduct and attitudes represented "something of a turnaround", his having shown
in obtaining a mental health plan and becoming abstinent, the latter
of which was key to his rehabilitation. His Honour found that
based on Mr
Lawlis's remorse and his positive reported response to his supervision since his
release his prospects of rehabilitation
to Grounds 1 and 2, his Honour stated the following:
“I have taken into account the sometimes conflicting considerations in s
3A. As the offender’s lawyers submitted, the
nature of the offending is
such that considerations of general deterrence and denunciation weigh heavily in
the exercise, even if
moderated on account of the offender’s mental
condition. The offender himself acknowledged that his record was such as to also
require a sentence which accords weight to personal deterrence. I agree with
this but would also add that for offences of this kind,
further significant
weight should be accorded to acknowledge the harm to the victims and also to
protect the community (notwithstanding
promising signs of the offender’s
rehabilitation). Both parties also emphasised that in the circumstances of this
including his relatively young age, a sentence promoting the
offender’s rehabilitation was also significant. I accept the last
submission.”
Honour noted a submission on behalf of Mr Lawlis that his sentence of
imprisonment should not be longer than three years and for
him to serve such
sentence by way of Intensive Correction Order would be in the community’s
long-term best interests, protecting
the community and assisting Mr Lawlis to
maintain his abstinence and rehabilitation.
his Honour did not refer to it in his remarks on sentence, we note that in the
Crown's written submissions, the Crown had
submitted that if the overall
sentence imposed was less than three years, a lengthy ICO would be within range
and would achieve all
of the relevant purposes of sentencing. In oral
submissions the Crown prosecutor said that upon receipt of Mr Lawlis's
material an Intensive Correction Order may be even more appropriate
than it was at the time of preparing the Crown's written submissions.
Honour stated that there should be a "not insubstantial allowance for
cumulation" in the sentences for the two break enter and
steal offences; that
there should be substantial concurrence between the sentences for the break
enter and steal offences and the
car stealing offences on the s 166 certificate,
as the latter represented the fruits of the breaking and entering offences.
his Honour stated that some level of accumulation was warranted in the
stealing offences to recognise the “intrinsic value
of each vehicle to the
Ground 1 – the sentencing judge erred by
finding that general deterrence weighed heavily on the sentence.
The Applicant’s submissions
applicant made two submissions in support of Ground 1. The first was that in
stating "As the offender's lawyers submitted, the
nature of the offending is
such that considerations of general deterrence and denunciation weigh heavily in
the exercise, even if
moderated on account of the offenders mental condition"
his Honour misstated or misunderstood the submission made by Mr Lawlis’s
counsel on sentence. The second was that in that statement his Honour gave
prominence to general deterrence because of the nature
or class of offending,
not because of the particular offender. He relied on the statement of Bell CJ in
[2022] NSWCCA 75
"The need for general deterrence in any given case, however, must always be
assessed by reference to the personal circumstances of
the offending and which
may have operated on the offender."
submitted that to find that general deterrence must weigh heavily in a sentence
because of the nature of the offending, despite
a subjective case that calls for
a reduced role for general deterrence, risks constraining the sentencing
discretion, which this
Court said was not appropriate in
Robertson v R
[2017] NSWCCA 205
per Simpson J at [89] and
Parente v R
[2017] NSWCCA 284
The Crown’s submissions
Crown relied on statements of this court about the importance of general
deterrence when sentencing for break and enter and steal
[2004] NSWCCA 177
[2015] NSWCCA 86
Abdulrahman v R
[2016] NSWCCA 192
[2017] NSWCCA 10
Crown submitted that the applicant's complaint in Ground 1 was about the weight
given to general deterrence by the sentencing
judge rather than error, the
former being not a proper ground of appeal:
[2021] NSWCCA 30
Crown also submitted that a degree of latitude should be extended to the
analysis of sentencing remarks which were delivered ex
Consideration
submission made by counsel for Mr Lawlis before Judge Abadee was "It is conceded
that, for offences such as these, where such
offences take place in a
victim’s home, involving groups of persons, general deterrence should be
given appropriate consideration
and a sentence denouncing the offender's conduct
should be imposed”.
Honour stated:
"As the offender’s lawyer submitted, the nature of the offending is such
that considerations of general deterrence and denunciation
weigh heavily in the
exercise...".
Crown submitted that His Honour did not make an error in repeating the
submission by counsel for Mr Lawlis, because the submission
by counsel that
general deterrence should be given appropriate consideration should be
construed, in accordance with the authorities
referred to above, as general
deterrence weighing heavily in the sentencing exercise.
understand that mistakes can be made when a judge delivers
sentence remarks. In this case, Judge Abadee delivered a thorough sentence
judgment. However his Honour misstated the submission
made on behalf of Mr
Lawlis, and thus appears to have misconstrued the submission. In that regard his
Honour permitted an irrelevant
matter to affect his sentencing of Mr Lawlis, an
error within
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40.
having been shown, this court must resentence Mr Lawlis:
Kentwell v The
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37.
It is therefore unnecessary for the
court to deal with appeal grounds two and
resentencing Mr Lawlis this court was not asked to depart from the findings of
objective seriousness made by Judge Abadee, or any
other findings. We take into
account the number of offences, their circumstances and their maximum penalties.
take into account that at the time of the offences Mr Lawlis was young, at 21.
He is an indigenous man. His record at the time
of sentence was not long, and
some of those offences had occurred after the offences the subject of this
appeal. He did commit similar
offences of a break, enter and steal and a car
stealing offence shortly after the second offence the subject of this appeal. He
sexually abused in juvenile detention as a teenager and thereafter resorted
to drug use to deal with that trauma. He has been diagnosed
with the mental
health conditions referred to at paragraphs [
]. Those combination of
factors reduce his moral culpability and make him a less appropriate vehicle for
general and specific deterrence
(as Judge Abadee found). He was not on
conditional liberty at the time of the offences the subject of this appeal.
his release on parole in September 2022 he remained offence free while on parole
and bail. He obtained a mental health plan,
attended a psychologist, and
remained abstinent from drugs. His young child born during that time has
motivated him to continue his
abstinence from drugs and his non-offending
lifestyle. His partner of many years is a support in that regard. He has a
employment and had an offer of employment on his release from custody
(at the time he was sentenced). He had remorse for, and insight
into the effects
of, his offending.
the nature of his offences, but that he had embarked on the path to
rehabilitation, protection of the community, or community
safety, is likely to
be better addressed by Mr Lawlis continuing his rehabilitation in the community
so that his further rehabilitation
reduces his risk of reoffending. It is the
opinion of the experts who provided reports about Mr Lawlis that the key to his
not reoffending
is abstinence from drugs. That will likely require, as well as
his family's support and motivation, that he deal with his trauma
by means other
than illicit drug use.
Lawlis provided an affidavit for the court to consider in the event of
resentencing him. He says that since April this year he
has been completing the
Intensive Drug and Alcohol Treatment Program, which was available to him from
that time. He said he has used
the program to continue his rehabilitation and
remain abstinent from drugs. He acknowledged "drug issues are lifelong" and that
will have to work on that issue for the rest of his life. He said he is proud
of his progress since five years ago and hopes to continue
his rehabilitation in
the community. While in custody he has taken pride in engaging in indigenous
painting and taken part in an
art competition.
a young man he shows insight and a positive attitude to continuing his
rehabilitation. He has been able to redirect his life before
entrenched in criminal activity.
the 5% discount for Mr Lawlis’s pleas of guilty we indicate the following
sentences for each offence:
Count 1, 18
months imprisonment with a 12 month non-parole period;
Count 2, 18
months imprisonment with a 12 month non-parole period;
Sequence 2, 7
months imprisonment;
Sequence 3, 6
months imprisonment;
Sequence 6, 9
months imprisonment;
Sequence 10, 6
months imprisonment.
the same approach as Judge Abadee did, that the car stealing offences were the
“fruits” of the break, enter and
steal offences, there should be
substantial concurrence between the sentences for those offences and the
sentences for the break,
enter and steal offences, and a small degree of
accumulation between each of the car stealing offences and some accumulation of
two break, enter and steal offences.
aggregate sentence is 28 months and 3 weeks imprisonment. We consider it
appropriate that Mr Lawlis serve that sentence by way
of an Intensive Correction
Order, that course being more likely to address his risk of reoffending and
advance community safety:
s 66 of the
Intensive Correction Order commences on the date on which it is made: s 71
of the Crimes (S
entencing Procedure
) Act 1999. Mr Lawlis has been in
custody since 12 September 2024, being 13 months and three weeks. In order to
avoid injustice to
him by giving him due credit for that time served in custody,
and to comply with s 71, we have deducted the period in custody of
13 months and
three weeks from the aggregate sentence to reach a sentence of 15 months
imprisonment, to be served by way of an Intensive
Correction Order:
[2021] NSWCCA 97
[2023] NSW CCA 206.
on 3 November 2025 the Court made the following orders:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Allow the appeal.
(3) Quash the sentence imposed in the District Court on 12 September 2024.
(4) Taking into account the time served in custody, sentence Joel Lawlis to 15
months imprisonment, commencing today 3 November 2025
and expiring 2 February
(5) Pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
sentence imposed is to be served by way of an Intensive Corrections Order.
(6) The standard conditions of the order apply, namely:
(1) the offender must not commit any offence; and
(2) the offender must submit to supervision by a Community
Corrections Officer.
(7) The following additional conditions apply:
(1) the offender must participate and maintain his
participation in any programs and treatment facilitated by the Community
Corrections
Service, for psychological therapy and/or other treatment
appropriate for trauma and substance abuse issues, as your treating doctors
consider appropriate, for so long as the doctors consider appropriate, within
the term of the Order.
(2) for the term of the Order, the offender must not take
any illicit drugs or drugs not prescribed for you by a doctor.
(8) Within 48 hours of his release from custody, the offender must report to
the Community Corrections Office nearest to his residence.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter