URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2013/537.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wheat v Wisbey [2013] NSWSC 537 (13 May 2013)
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the decision for a list
of the amendments.
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Case Title:
Wheat v Wisbey
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWSC 537
Hearing Date(s):
19 & 20 March 2013
Decision Date:
13 May 2013
Equity Division
(i) Having found that each Plaintiff is an eligible person, and that
adequate provision for her proper maintenance or advancement
in life has not
been made for her in the Will of the deceased, order that the Plaintiff, Cheryl
Ann Kennedy, receive a lump sum of
$50,000; the Plaintiff, Dianne Patricia
Doherty, receive a lump sum of $40,000; and the Plaintiff, Lorraine Kathleen
Meharg, receive
a lump sum of $35,000 out of property designated as notional
estate of the deceased unless otherwise paid by the Defendant, Faye
(ii) Being satisfied that the deceased's actual estate is
insufficient for the making of the family provision orders, and the costs
orders, that should be made, the burden of the provision made for each
Plaintiff, any interest thereon, and the costs, should be
borne out of property
designated as notional estate of the deceased unless otherwise paid by the
(iii) Order that the Defendant pay each of the lump sums and
pay or provide security for the Plaintiffs' costs within 28 days, failing
consideration is reserved to any party to apply for an order designating
property held by the Defendant for the purposes of
satisfying the family
provision orders made any interest thereon, and for satisfying the orders for
costs of proceedings.
(iv) Order that no interest is to be paid on each
lump sum, if that lump sum is paid within 28 days of the making of these orders;
otherwise, interest calculated at the rate prescribed by s 84A(3)
Probate and
Administration Act 1898
, on unpaid legacies, is to be paid from that date
until the date of payment of the lump sum.
(v) Order that the Defendant
pay the costs of the Plaintiffs, calculated on the ordinary basis, and her own
costs calculated on the
indemnity basis out of the notional estate of the
deceased unless otherwise paid by her.
(vi) Order pursuant to
Succession Act 2006
that each family provision order not take effect as if the
provision was made in a codicil to the will of the deceased.
that the Exhibits should be dealt with in accordance with the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
following the determination of the costs of the
proceedings.
Catchwords:
SUCCESSION - FAMILY PROVISION - The Plaintiffs, daughters of the deceased,
each applies for a family provision order under Chapter
Succession Act
- The Defendant is the widow of the deceased - Deceased left Will but no
application for administration made at date of hearing -
Whether grant of
administration is necessary in order to deal with application - Whether adequate
and proper provision not made in
Will of the deceased for each Plaintiff and if
so the nature and quantum of the provision to be made.
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Family Provision Act 1982
Probate and
Administration Act 1898
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
Amendment (Family Provision) Act 2008
Succession Act 1981
Succession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
Alexander v Jansson
[2010] NSWCA 176
Allardice v Allardice, In re
(1910) 29 NZLR 959
Andrew v Andrew [2012] NSWSCA 308
[2008] NSWCA 100
Blore v Lang
[1960] HCA 73
(1960) 104 CLR 124
Bondelmonte v
Blanckensee
[1989] WAR 305
Borebor v Keane
[2013] VSC 35
Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
[1938] AC 463
Bowyer v Wood
[2007] SASC 327
99 SASR 190
Buckland Deceased, Re
[1966] VicRp 58
[1966] VR 404
Butcher v Craig
Cassel, Re Estate
[2000] NSWSC 294
Christie v Manera
Collins v McGain
[2003] NSWCA 190
Commissioner of Stamp Duties
(Q'land) v Livingston
[1964] UKPCHCA 2
(1964) 112 CLR 12
Cooper v Dungan
(1976) 50 ALJR 539
Crossman v Riedel
[2004] ACTSC 127
Devereaux-Warnes v
Hall (No 3)
[2007] WASCA 235
(2007) 35 WAR 127
Diver v Neal
[2009] NSWCA 54
Estate Harriett Cassel, Re
[2000] NSWSC 294
Flathaug v Weaver
Foley v Ellis
[2008] NSWSC 288
Franks v Franks
[2013] NSWCA 60
Gardiner v Gardiner (NSWSC, 28 May 1998, unreported)
Goodman v Windeyer
[1980] HCA 31
(1980) 144 CLR 490
Gorton v Parks
(1989) 17 NSWLR 1
Harris, In Re
Hawkins v Prestage
(1989) 1 WAR 37
Hitchcock v Pratt
Hughes v National Trustees Executors and Agency Co. of
Australasia Ltd
[1979] HCA 2
(1979) 143 CLR 134
Hyland v Burbidge
Kay v Archbold
[2008] NSWSC 254
Keep v Bourke
[2012] NSWCA 64
Kembrey v Cuskelly
[2008] NSWSC 262
Kleinig v Neal (No. 2)
McLeod v Johns
(1981) 1 NSWLR 347
McCosker v McCosker
[1957] HCA 82
McGrath v Eves
[2005] NSWSC 1006
McKenzie v Topp
MacGregor v MacGregor
[2003] WASC 169
Marks v Marks
[2003] WASCA 297
Mayfield v Lloyd-Williams
[2004] NSWSC 419
Official Receiver in
Bankruptcy v Schultz
[1990] HCA 45
(1990) 170 CLR 306
Oldereid v Chan
[2013] NSWSC 434
Pontifical Society for the Propagation of the Faith v
[1962] HCA 19
(1962) 107 CLR 9
Puckridge, Deceased, In the Estate of
(1978) 20 SASR 72
Singer v Berghouse
[1994] HCA 40
(1994) 181 CLR 201
Slack v Rogan; Palffy v Rogan
[2013] NSWSC 522
Stern v Sekers; Sekers v
[2010] NSWSC 59
Stiles v Joseph (NSWSC, 16 December 1996, unreported)
Stott v Cook
(1960) 33 ALJR 447
Szypica v O'Beirne
[2013] NSWSC 297
Taylor v Farrugia
[2009] NSWSC 801
Union-Fidelity Trustee Co of
Australia Ltd v Montgomery
(1976) 1 NSWLR 134
Verzar v Verzar
[2012] NSWSC
Vigolo v Bostin
[2005] HCA 11
(2005) 221 CLR 191
Walker v Walker
(NSWSC, 17 May 1996, unreported)
Worladge v Doddridge
[1957] HCA 45
(1957) 97 CLR 1
Principal judgment
Lynette Gail Wheat (first Plaintiff)
Cheryl Ann Kennedy (second
Lorraine Kathleen Meharg (third Plaintiff)
Dianne Patricia
Doherty (fourth Plaintiff)
Faye Anderson Wisbey (Defendant)
Representation
Mr J Loxton (Plaintiffs)
Mr M Bradford; Ms A Poljak
(Defendant)
- Solicitors:
Solicitors:
Gamble Law & Estate Planning (Plaintiffs)
Brien Solicitor (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2012/124617
These reasons relate to proceedings, in which a claim for a family
provision order under Chapter 3 of the
Succession Act
was made, initially, by four children, Cheryl Ann Kennedy, Dianne Patricia
Doherty, Lorraine Kathleen Meharg and Lynette Gail Wheat,
out of the estate of
their father, Raymond Joseph Wisbey ("the deceased"). The
applies in respect
of the estate of a person who died on, or after, 1 March 2009. The
Family Provision Act
("the former
"), which was repealed,
effective from 1 March 2009. A family provision order is an order made by the
court, under Chapter 3, in relation
to the estate, or notional estate, of a
deceased person, to provide from that estate for the maintenance, education, or
advancement
in life, of an eligible person.
Plaintiffs' Summons was filed on 19 April 2012, that is, within the time
prescribed by s 58(2) of the Act (not later than 12 months
after the date of the
death of the deceased). The Defendant named in the Summons is Faye Anderson
Wisbey, the widow of the deceased
and the executrix named in his Will. There was
no dispute that she was the proper Defendant in the
proceedings.
any undue familiarity, or disrespect intended, and for convenience, I shall
refer to the parties either by the role each plays
in the proceedings or by her
first name. I shall refer to other family members, after introduction, by her,
or his, first name.
October 2012, Lynette, the first Plaintiff, discontinued her claim on terms that
did not involve an adverse costs order. She has
played no further part in the
proceedings.
the commencement of the hearing, it having been observed, at the pre-trial
directions hearing, that there had been no grant of
administration, and in the
Defendant's submissions, that the Plaintiffs had not sought to designate any
property as notional estate,
the Plaintiffs sought leave to file an amended
Summons to add the following additional relief:
"2 An order pursuant to
designating as notional property of
the said deceased the property identified in paragraph 5 of the defendant's
affidavit made 20
3 An order pursuant to
granting administration of the Estate
of the late Raymond Joseph Wisbey deceased to the plaintiffs."
objection, I granted leave to the Plaintiffs to file the Amended Summons and the
case has proceeded upon the basis of the
relief sought in that
Background Facts
following facts are uncontroversial and provide a useful
background.
deceased died on 25 April 2011 aged 79 years.
deceased was married to the mother of the Plaintiffs, Beryl Hughes, in about
1952, and they were divorced in 1978. (There was
a property settlement between
them but its precise nature was the subject of dispute.)
most of the time that he was married to Beryl, the deceased worked as a manager
for Caltex Oil in Wollongong. Shortly before their
separation and then divorce,
they moved from Wollongong to Shoalhaven Heads so that the deceased could pursue
his interest in training
pacers. It was the deceased and his brother, Barry
Wisbey, who originally bought, and trained, "Koala King", a champion pacing
of the 1970s and 1980s.
was born in about 1944 and is currently about 68 years of age. Before she moved
to the Shoalhaven area and married the deceased,
she grew up and lived in
Victoria. She described herself, prior to her marriage to the deceased, as "a
woman of independent means".
deceased married Faye in August 1978 and they remained married at the date of
his death. Thus, their marriage was of almost 33
years duration. There were two
children of their marriage, namely Lisa Fitzpatrick and Nicole Wisbey. Lisa was
born in March 1979
and Nicole was born in April 1980.
his marriage to Faye, the deceased continued with his career as a trainer. In
1980 "Koala King" won the feature pacer race,
the Inter Dominion Pacing
Championship.
deceased left a Will made on 12 August 1993. Faye was the executrix appointed,
and was the universal legatee named, in that Will.
However, in the event that
she did not survive him, the deceased left a pecuniary legacy of $20,000 to each
of Cheryl, Dianne, Lorraine
and Lynette, and divided the remainder of his estate
between Lisa, Mitchell and Nicole, if each survived and attained the age of
years. (Mitchell Watson is Faye's son by a prior marriage, and is the stepson of
the deceased. He did not play any part in the
proceedings.)
has not sought, or obtained, a grant of Probate in common form of the deceased's
Will to give effect to her appointment as the
sole executrix of the deceased's
estate. She stated that she did not do so, "as he did not leave any assets
requiring formal administration
of his estate" and because, to the best of her
knowledge and belief, "the deceased did not hold assets in his sole name at the
of his death".
parties agreed that at the date of his death, the deceased and Faye held real
estate at Far Meadow (near Berry, New South Wales),
as joint tenants, which
passed, by survivorship, to Faye following the death of the deceased. It was
said to have a total value of
$1,200,000 at the date of death. In addition,
there was a jointly held bank account, in which there was $700,000 at the date
(Sensibly, the parties ignored the personal effects of the deceased
for the purposes of the case.)
property at Far Meadow is a small rural holding on which is constructed a pacer
training track and horse stables. The deceased
and Faye lived there for some
years prior to his death and Faye continues to live there.
were liabilities of the estate at the date of death, including council and water
rates, utilities, medical accounts and funeral
and associated expenses. Only the
funeral and associated expenses, totalling approximately $10,000, were disclosed
in evidence. Faye
has paid all of the debts, funeral and associated
the hearing, the parties agreed that the current value of the real estate was
$1,305,000 and that the jointly held cash was $650,000.
They also agreed, in the
event that provision was to be made for any of the Plaintiffs, that property
with a value of about $977,500
could be designated as notional estate. However,
before any property was designated as notional estate, they agreed that Faye
be given an opportunity to satisfy the burden of any provision ordered by
the Court to be made. That was a commendable approach that
saved time at the
hearing, since it was unnecessary to make submissions on the issue of notional
estate, and has saved time in producing
these reasons, since it is unnecessary
to refer to the notional estate provisions of the
calculating the value of the notional estate, finally available for
distribution, the costs of the proceedings should be considered,
Plaintiffs, if successful, normally, will be entitled to an order that their
costs be paid out of the estate, or notional
estate, of the deceased, whilst the
Defendant, as executrix, irrespective of the outcome of the proceedings,
normally, will be entitled
to an order that her costs be paid out of the estate
or notional estate.
solicitor, Mr Michael Gamble, estimated the Plaintiffs' costs and disbursements
of the proceedings, including counsel's fees,
calculated on the ordinary basis,
to be about $40,000 (inclusive of GST and upon the basis of a two day hearing).
solicitor, Mr Lindsay Brien, has estimated the Defendant's costs and
disbursements of the proceedings, including counsel's fees,
calculated on the
indemnity basis, to be about $38,000 (inclusive of GST and upon the basis of a
two day hearing).
follows that from the gross value of the notional estate (say $977,500), the
total amount of $78,000 may be payable for the parties'
costs, leaving a net
value of notional estate, available for distribution, of about $900,000.
Excluding the estimated value of the
deceased's interest in the real estate at
Far Meadow ($652,500), the amount of $247,500, in cash, is available to satisfy
provision orders.
parties agreed that in the event that the Plaintiffs were successful, the usual
costs orders should be made, although if all of
the Plaintiffs' claims were
dismissed, the Defendant wishes to be heard on costs.
should mention that it was refreshing to see estimates of costs and
disbursements that appeared reasonable. The parties, and their
representatives, for that reason, and otherwise, should be commended for the way
in which the case was conducted.)
only persons described as eligible persons, within the meaning of the
the Plaintiffs, the Defendant, Beryl, and Lisa, Mitchell and Nicole. Lisa,
Mitchell and Nicole do not wish to seek an order
which would
reduce the entitlement of Faye, their mother. Beryl is a witness in the
proceedings and she has not made a claim.
The Statutory Scheme - The
I shall discuss the statutory scheme that is relevant to the facts of the
present case. Although I have set out some of what
I state hereunder in other
cases, in view of the importance of this case to the parties, I shall repeat the
principles. It is important
that they are able to follow the reasoning and for
each to be satisfied that I have considered the evidence and the
submissions.
was repealed by
Succession Amendment (Family Provision)
. A new Chapter 3 was added to the
, which deals with the topic
of family provision from deceased estates. The long title of the
that new Chapter as one to ensure that adequate provision is made for the
members of the family of a deceased person, and
certain other persons, from the
estate of the deceased person. Importantly, this should not be taken to mean
confers upon those persons a statutory entitlement to receive a
certain portion of a deceased person's estate. Nor does it impose
any limitation
on the deceased's power of disposition by his, or her, will. It is only if the
statutory conditions are satisfied,
that the court is empowered, under the
to alter the deceased's disposition of his, or her, estate, to produce a result
that is consistent with the purpose of the
. Even then, the Court's power to
do so is discretionary.
Administration of the Estate - requirement for grant of
administration
has been noted above, there has been no grant of administration in respect of
the deceased's estate. Of course, since there was
no real and personal estate
which the deceased died seised or possessed of, or entitled to, in New South
Wales, at the date of death
(because all property of the deceased was jointly
held and passed to Faye by survivorship), a grant of administration of the
Will was not necessary in order to have property of the deceased vest
in the executor:
Probate and Administration Act
a preliminary question, namely whether it is necessary for there to be a grant
of administration in this estate, before the
Plaintiff's application can be
dealt with, has been raised, so I shall deal with it.
simply states that the Court may, on application under Division 1,
make a family provision order in relation to the estate of a deceased
upon being satisfied of certain things to which I shall turn later in these
reasons. For present purposes, it need only be
said that there is no
requirement, in
, that a grant of administration is a pre-condition of the
power to make an order.
, "deceased person" is defined as "including any person in respect
of whose estate administration has been granted". The use of the
"including", suggests that the phrase is not limited to only such a person. In
this regard, the
differs from the former
, which, in
, specifically
referred to "a deceased person in respect of whom administration has been
granted". This wording in the former
meant that the Court had no power to
make an order under the section unless and until there had been a grant of
administration.
is not defined in the
, although under
of the former
, it was defined
"in relation to a person dying leaving a will, includes property which would, on
a grant of probate of the will,
vest in the executor of the will or, on a grant
of administration with the will annexed, vest in the administrator appointed
that grant". There is no reason to think that the definition would not be
equally applicable to the
estate" of a deceased person is defined in
to mean property
designated by a notional estate order as notional estate of the deceased person.
"Notional estate order" means an
order made by the Court under Chapter 3
designating property specified in the order as notional estate of a deceased
person. A person's
rights are extinguished to the extent that they are affected
by a notional estate order:
sets out the circumstances in which "administration is granted in
respect of the estate of a deceased person". In
, "administration"
is defined by reference to
. That section provides in sub-s (1),
that "administration" is granted in respect of the estate of a deceased person
in certain specified
events including where "probate of the will of the deceased
person is granted in New South Wales or granted outside New South Wales
sealed in accordance with
section 107(1)
Probate and Administration Act
" or where "letters of administration of the estate of the deceased person
are granted in New South Wales ... whether for general,
special or limited
Hitchcock v Pratt
[2010] NSWSC 1508
, Brereton J wrote, at [43]:
"... I would not have dismissed the proceedings on the ground that there was
no relevant grant in New South Wales. A grant was not
previously a precondition
to the institution of proceedings, although one had to be obtained before an
order was made [
Leue v Reynolds
(1986) 4 NSWLR 590].
Under the current
legislation, not even that is necessary. And even if it were, a grant under
could be made prior to any family provision order."
Respectfully,
I agree that a grant of administration is not required at the time an
application for a family provision order is made.
Section 58(1)
specifically provides that an
application
for a family provision order
may be made
whether or not administration of the estate of the deceased
person has been granted (my emphasis). (However, there is a note to
administration may be granted for the purposes of an application for a family
provision order under
, in fact, provides:
Grant of probate or administration to enable application to be dealt
(1) This section applies if an application is made by a person for a family
provision order, or notional estate order, in respect
of the estate of a
deceased person, or deceased transferee, respectively, in relation to which
administration has not been granted.
(2) The Court may, if it is satisfied that it is proper to do so, grant
administration in respect of the estate of the deceased person
or deceased
transferee to the applicant for the purposes only of permitting the application
concerned to be dealt with, whether or
not the deceased person or deceased
transferee left property in New South Wales.
(3) The granting of administration under the
Probate and Administration Act
(a) prevent the Court from granting administration under this section, or
(b) unless the Court otherwise orders, affect any previous grant of
administration under this section.
(4) The provisions of the
Probate and Administration Act 1898
grant of administration under this section, and to the legal representative of
the estate, in the same way as they apply
to a grant of administration under
and the legal representative of any estate for which such a grant has
been made."
, the Court may, if it is satisfied that it is proper to do so, grant
administration in respect of the estate of the deceased person
for the purposes
only of permitting the
application
concerned to be
emphasis). The application referred to is for a family provision order or for a
notional estate order.
does not provide for the making of a grant for the purposes of an application
for a family provision order or for a notional estate
order before such an
application is made.
Importantly,
is different from s 41A of the
Probate and Administration Act
which provided for a grant to be made "in order to permit an application to be
made under the
Family Provision Act
it seems to me that the
differentiates between "when an application is made"
(the date of the filing of the Summons) and "when the application ... is dealt
with" (the date of making a family provision order or notional estate order,
whether by agreement of the parties, or following a
contested hearing).
common prerequisite for the section to apply, at either date, is that there is
an estate of a deceased person, or deceased transferee,
respectively, in
relation to which administration has not been granted.
use of the word "permitting" in the section, in my view, is important. The word
usually means "authorising", "allowing" or "not
preventing". What follows in the
sub-section avoids the need for there to be real and personal estate which the
deceased died seised
or possessed of, or entitled to, in New South Wales, a
pre-requisite to the Court having jurisdiction to grant administration:
Probate and Administration Act
Court is not given any guidance about how to exercise the power in
unnaturally, the section does not provide any criteria by reference to which the
Court should be satisfied. No requirements are
prescribed by the
the Court to determine if it is proper to grant administration in respect of the
estate of the deceased or deceased transferee,
to the applicant, solely for the
purpose of permitting the application concerned to be dealt with.
is it useful to purport to lay down an exhaustive list of the criteria by
reference to which an application ought to be determined.
Whether or not the
court is satisfied that it would be proper will be fact specific and determined
on its own merits.
seems to me, however, that there are several matters that might be relevant at
the time the application under
is being considered, namely: whether a
family provision order or notional estate order in favour of the applicant is to
whether administration is required to facilitate dealing with the real
and personal estate which the deceased dies seised or possessed
of or entitled
to in New South Wales, or the property the subject of the notional estate order
to give effect to the family provision
order which is to be made; and whether
there is consent of any other party in the proceedings to the making of an order
would be an unnecessary inclusion in the
if a grant were not required for
the purposes of the application that has been made being dealt with. Yet, the
discretion given to
the Court ("may, if it is satisfied that it is proper to do
so") should be noted. The discretion suggests that there may be cases
would not be proper to do so.
have considered whether the Court could be satisfied that it would be "proper to
do so" if there were only property of the deceased
that could be the subject of
a notional estate order. There may be such occasions since
applies to both
an application for a family provision order or for a notional estate
is one other matter that I consider relevant to the determination of whether a
grant of administration is necessary.
, relevantly,
"A family provision order takes effect, unless the Court otherwise orders, as
if the provision was made:
(a) in a codicil to the will of the deceased person, if the deceased person
made a will, or
(b) in a will of the deceased person, if the deceased person died
intestate."
the applicant in favour of whom a family provision order is made, receives that
benefit as the result of the creation of rights
pursuant to the making of the
order. That result is reached because the order takes effect as if it had been
made in a codicil to
the will of the deceased: also see,
Union-Fidelity
Trustee Co of Australia Ltd v Montgomery
(1976) 1 NSWLR 134
, at p 141;
McLeod v Johns
(1981) 1 NSWLR 347
, at p 349.
addition, as was pointed out in
Official Receiver in Bankruptcy v Schultz
[1990] HCA 45
(1990) 170 CLR 306
, at 315-316 (dealing with
Succession Act
"The wide powers conferred by
and the manner in which sub-s. (10) is
expressed strongly suggest that the effect of an order under the section is not
the benefits to be expected from the right to due administration
arising pursuant to the will, but to superimpose upon the duty of
administration a judicial order made pursuant to statute. In other words, a new
and independent obligation is created which has
an impact upon the way in which
the executor administers the estate pursuant to his or her existing duty, by
compelling him or her
to comply with the terms of the court's order. Each
beneficiary's right to due administration is made subject to the terms of the
order in the sense that the order governs the executor's actions to the
exclusion of any inconsistent direction contained in or derived
an applicant who obtains a family provision order has the right to seek orders
giving effect to the family provision order against
the executor or
administrator of the deceased's estate to whom probate or administration has
been granted because of the effect of
As a person then beneficially
entitled to part of the deceased's estate, he or she does not have a proprietary
interest in the property
which is the subject of the family provision order but
possesses a right to have the estate duly administered:
Commissioner of Stamp
Duties (Q'land) v Livingston
[1964] UKPCHCA 2
(1964) 112 CLR 12
as provided for in
, the Court has power to make an order that a family
provision order not have the effect set out in (a) and (b) of that section.
in a case where an order under s 91 is not sought or made, but where the
holder of property that may be designated as notional estate
is a party to the
proceedings, the Court would need to make an "otherwise order" under
thereby permitting the Plaintiff to proceed against the holder of property
designated as notional estate in the event that the family
provision order were
not satisfied.
Practically
speaking, the issue regarding whether an order under s 91 does not arise very
often. The cases where there is only notional
estate are reasonably rare. Then,
an order is made, for the purposes of the proceedings, that the holder of the
property sought to
be designated as notional estate is joined as a party to the
proceedings. Usually, as in this case, it is the holder of the property
to be designated as notional estate, who is the contradictor in the proceedings.
The executor named in the Will to whom probate
or administration has not been
granted usually does not play any role in the proceedings although he, she, or
it, may be named as
a defendant.
usually, as in this case, the property sought to be designated as notional
estate agrees to satisfy the family provision order
made in favour of the
applicant, often without the necessity for a notional estate order being
summary, then, in a case where there is an application for a family provision
order in respect of the estate of a deceased person,
or deceased transferee, or
a notional estate order, in relation to which administration has not been
(a) Where there is real and personal estate of which the deceased person dies
seised, or possessed of, or entitled to, in New South
Wales, at the date of
death, a grant of administration is required before an application for a family
provision order can be dealt
with and it would be proper to make an order under
(b) In any other case, where there is no such real or personal estate,
(i) the holder of the property the subject of the application for a notional
estate order is a party to the proceedings;
(ii) a family provision order and a costs order is made in favour of the
(iii) a notional estate order is, or may be, made in respect of the property
the subject of the application for a notional estate
order for the purposes of a
family provision order, or for the purposes of an order that the whole, or part,
of the costs of proceedings
in relation to the estate or notional estate of a
deceased person be paid out of the notional estate of the deceased person;
(iv) an order is made that the holder of the property the subject of the
notional estate order, or that person agrees, to satisfy
the family provision
(v) the court makes an order that the family provision order not take effect
as set out in
then, it may not be "proper" to make a s 91 grant.
stating my view, there is much to be said for the view expressed by Young J (as
his Honour then was) in
Re Estate Harriett Cassel
[2000] NSWSC 294
although in that case, he was speaking of the former
"[8] The grant under s41A is not a grant entitling the grantor to administer
the estate in any way at all. It is a grant purely to
get over the barrier that
would otherwise prevent an application being made under the
Family Provision
[9] Accordingly, what usually occurs in this sort of case is that a grant is
made to the plaintiff who is about to bring proceedings
Provision Act
. The Court, when hearing those proceedings, then needs to appoint
a person to represent the estate under
r16, or some other rule under
[10] All this seems rather pointless. A grant is made purely to remove the
barrier to the
Family Provision Act
claim. It does not provide for the
administration of the estate, provide authority for anyone to enquire as to the
deceased's assets
or the identity or wishes of the beneficiaries. It is left to
the plaintiff to make a series of applications, (1) to the Probate
Court for a
grant; and (2) to the Equity Court for directions as to who should be a
representative defendant. These costly applications
confer no real benefit on
anyone. It may well be that s41A should be amended or the
Family Provision Act
amended so as to permit applications to be made without a grant, provided that
the Court is able to appoint a person to represent
the estate."
the present case, since Faye is a party to the proceedings and has agreed to
satisfy any family provision order and costs order
made in favour of the
Plaintiffs, before a notional estate order is made, I do not think it is
necessary, and, therefore, it is not
proper, to grant administration under s 91
in this case.
mention that I have taken the approach, in the conduct of the Family Provision
List where I consider it proper to do so, if the
parties have agreed on the
resolution of the Plaintiff's case, but there is no grant of administration,
when an application is made
(by the Plaintiff seeking to amend the Summons, or
if a grant of administration will, in any event, be applied for, by the
making an application, for administration), to make an order in favour
of that applicant under s 91. I have done so with
Civil Procedure
in mind and bearing in mind the Court's obligation to determine
completely and finally all matters in controversy between the parties
avoid all multiplicity of legal proceedings concerning any of those matters.
Also, in such circumstances, I have, generally,
dispensed with the requirement
to comply with any Rules requiring the filing of a separate Summons and
associated matters.)
Eligibility and Inadequacy of Provision
turn now to the substantive claims.
key provision is
. The court must be satisfied, first, that each
applicant is an eligible person within the meaning of
(1)(a)). In
New South Wales, it is a multi-category based eligibility system, rather than
one with a general category of eligibility
(as it is, for example, in Victoria).
There are six categories of persons by, or on whose behalf, an application may
be made. Relevantly,
one category is "a child of the deceased"
(s 57(1)(c)
). Clearly, that language is expressive of the person's status, as well
as his, or her, relationship to the deceased. There is no
age limit placed on a
child making an application.
Court, if satisfied of each applicant's eligibility, must, in this case, then
determine whether adequate provision for the proper
maintenance, education, or
advancement in life, of that applicant has not been made by the will of the
deceased, or by the operation
of the intestacy rules in relation to the estate
of the deceased, or both
(s 59(1)(c)).
It is only if the court is satisfied of
the inadequacy of provision, that consideration is given to whether to make a
family provision
In this way, it is said that the court carries
out a two-stage process. It may take into consideration the matters referred to
at both stages. (The operation of the intestacy rules is
irrelevant to this case.)
than by reference to the provision made in the Will of the deceased, or, if
relevant, by the operation of the intestacy rules
in relation to the estate of
the deceased, or both,
leaves undefined the norm by which
the Court must determine whether the provision, if any, is inadequate for each
applicant's proper
maintenance, education and advancement in life. The question
would appear to be answered by an evaluation that takes the Court to
provision actually made in the deceased's Will, or on intestacy, or both, on the
one hand, and to the requirement for maintenance,
education and advancement in
life of the applicant on the other. No criteria are prescribed in the
the circumstances that do, or do not, constitute inadequate provision for the
proper maintenance, education and advancement
in life of the
was said in the Court of Appeal (by Basten JA) in
Foley v Ellis
, at [3], that the state of satisfaction "depends upon a multi-faceted
evaluative judgment". In
Kay v Archbold
[2008] NSWSC 254
, at [126], White
J said that the assessment of what provision is proper involved "an intuitive
assessment". Stevenson J recently
described it as "an evaluative determination
of a discretionary nature, not susceptible of complete exposition" and one which
"inexact, non-scientific, not narrow or purely mathematical, and fact and
circumstance specific":
Szypica v O'Beirne
[2013] NSWSC 297
, the time at which the Court gives its consideration to
the question of inadequacy of provision is the time when the Court is
considering
the application. Under
, the Court has regard to the facts
known to the Court at the time the order is made.
"Provision"
is not defined by the
, but it was noted in
Diver v Neal
[2009] NSWCA
, that the term "covers the many forms of support and assistance which
one individual can give to another. That support and assistance
will vary over
the course of the person's lifetime".
is the word "maintenance", nor the phrase "advancement in life", defined in the
. However, in
Vigolo v Bostin
[2005] HCA 11
(2005) 221 CLR 191
Callinan and Heydon JJ, at 228-229, said, of the words "maintenance", "support"
and "advancement":
"'Maintenance' may imply a continuity of a pre-existing state of affairs, or
provision over and above a mere sufficiency of means
upon which to live.
'Support' similarly may imply provision beyond bare need. The use of the two
terms serves to amplify the powers
conferred upon the court. And, furthermore,
provision to secure or promote 'advancement' would ordinarily be provision
necessities of life. It is not difficult to conceive of a case in
which it appears that sufficient provision for support and maintenance
made, but that in the circumstances, say, of a promise or an expectation
reasonably held, further provision would be proper
to enable a potential
beneficiary to improve his or her prospects in life, or to undertake further
education."
Alexander v Jansson
[2010] NSWCA 176
, Brereton J (with whom Basten JA and
Handley AJA agreed), at [18], stated:
"'Proper maintenance' is not limited to the bare sustenance of a claimant [cf
Gorton v Parkes
[1989] 17 NSWLR 1]
, but requires consideration of
the totality of the claimant's position in life including age, status,
relationship with the deceased,
financial circumstances, the environs to which
he or she is accustomed, and mobility."
In the Estate of Puckridge, Deceased
(1978) 20 SASR 72
, at 77 King CJ
"The words 'advancement in life' have a wide meaning and application and
there is nothing to confine the operation of the provision
to an earlier period
of life in the members of the family:
Blore v Lang
[1960] HCA 73
(1960) 104 CLR 124
per Dixon CJ at 128."
Macready (as his Honour then was) in
Stiles v Joseph
(NSWSC, 16 December
1996, unreported) said, at 14-16:
"Apart from the High Court's statement that the words 'advancement in life'
have a wide meaning and application ... there is little
(if any) case law on the
meaning of 'advancement' in the context of family provision applications.
Zelling J in
In The Estate of Wardle
(1979) 22 SASR 139
at 144, had the
same problem. However, commonly in decisions in which the Applicant's
'advancement in life' has been in issue, the
Court has looked only at the
material or financial situation of the Applicant, and there is nothing to
suggest that provision for
the Applicant's 'advancement in life' means anything
more than material or financial advancement. For example, in
Kleinig v Neal
[1981] 2 NSWLR 532
, Holland J, discusses the financial assistance
which an applicant may need for his or her maintenance and advancement in life
the following terms:- If the court is to make a judgment as to what a wise
and just testator ought to have done in all the circumstances
of the case, it
could not be right to ignore that the particular testator was a wealthy man in
considering what he ought to have
done for his widow or children in making
provision for their maintenance, education or advancement in life. There are
different levels
of need for such things. In the case of maintenance and
advancement in life they can range from bare subsistence up to anything short
sheer luxury. A desire to improve one's standard of living or a desire to fulfil
one's ambition for a career or to make the fullest
use of one's skills and
abilities in a trade or business, if hindered or frustrated by the lack of
financial means required for the
fulfilment of such desire or ambition, presents
a need for such assistance and it would seem to me that it is open to a court to
say, in the case of a wealthy spouse or parent who could have but has failed to
provide such financial assistance, that ... [the
deceased] has failed to make
adequate provision for the proper maintenance and advancement in life of the
spouse or children who
had such need. (at 541)
Pilkington v Inland Revenue Commissioners
[1964] AC 612
Radcliffe defined 'advancement', in the context of a trustee's powers, as 'any
use of ... money which will improve the
material situation of the beneficiary'
(at 635), and this definition was cited with approval by Pennycuick J in
Clore's Settlement Trust
Sainer v Clore
[1966] 2 All ER 272
In Certoma, The Law of Succession In New South Wales (2nd Ed) at 208, it is
'Although 'maintenance' does not mean mere subsistence, in the context of the
New South Wales
, it probably does not extend to substantial capital
investments such as the purchase of a business, an income-producing property
a home for the Applicant because these forms of provision are more likely to be
within the power of the Court under 'advancement
in life'. Maintenance is rather
concerned with the discharge of the recurrent costs of daily living and not
generally with substantial
capital benefit.'
The Queensland Law Reform Commission, in its Working Paper on Uniform
Succession Laws: Family Provision (Working Paper 47, 1995) ...
'Whereas support, maintenance and education are words traditionally
associated with the expenditure of income, advancement has been
associated with
the expenditure of capital, such as setting a person up in business or upon
marriage.'"
Mayfield v Lloyd-Williams
[2004] NSWSC 419
, White J at [114]
"In the context of the
the expression 'advancement in life' is not
confined to an advancement of an applicant in his or her younger years. It is
of wide import. (
McCosker v McCosker
[1957] HCA 82
(1957) 97 CLR 566
at 575) The
phrase 'advancement in life' has expanded the concept used in the Victorian
legislation which was considered in
Re Buckland
permitting provision to
be made for the 'maintenance and support' of an eligible applicant. However Adam
J emphasised that in a large
estate a more extravagant allowance for
contingencies could be made than would be permissible in a small estate and
still fall within
the conception of maintenance and support."
Bartlett v Coomber
[2008] NSWCA 100
, at [50], Mason P
"The concept of advancement in life goes beyond the need for education and
maintenance. In a proper case it will extend to a capital
payment designed to
set a person up in business or upon marriage (
McCosker v McCosker
[1957] HCA 82
Stiles v Joseph
, (NSW Supreme Court, Macready M, 16
December 1996);
Mayfield v Lloyd-Williams
[2004] NSWSC 419)."
word "adequate" connotes something different from the word "proper". "Adequate"
is concerned with the quantum, whereas "proper"
prescribes the standard,
of the maintenance, education and advancement in life:
Devereaux-Warnes v
Hall (No 3)
[2007] WASCA 235
(2007) 35 WAR 127
, per Buss JA, at [72],
words were considered by Lord Romer in delivering the advice of the Privy
Bosch v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
[1938] AC 463
"The use of the word 'proper' in this connection is of considerable
importance. It connotes something different from the word 'adequate'.
sum may be sufficient for the 'adequate' maintenance of a child, for instance,
but, having regard to the child's station
in life and the fortune of his father,
it may be wholly insufficient for his 'proper' maintenance. So, too, a sum may
be quite insufficient
for the 'adequate' maintenance of a child and yet may be
sufficient for his maintenance on a scale that is 'proper' in all the
circumstances."
CJ and Williams J, in
McCosker v McCosker
[1957] HCA 82
(1957) 97 CLR 566
at 571-572,
after citing
Bosch v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
, went on to say, of the
word "proper", that:
"It means 'proper' in all the circumstances of the case, so that the question
whether a widow or child of a testator has been left
without adequate provision
for his or her proper maintenance, education or advancement if life must be
considered in the light of
the competing claims upon the bounty of the testator
and their relative urgency, the standard of living his family enjoyed in his
lifetime, in the case of a child his or her need of education or of assistance
in some chosen occupation and the testator's ability
to meet such claims having
regard to the size of his fortune. If the court considers that there has been a
breach by a testator of
his duty as a wise and just husband or father to make
adequate provision for the proper maintenance education or advancement in life
of the applicant, having regard to all these circumstances, the court has
to modify the testator's
testamentary dispositions to the necessary extent."
Goodman v Windeyer
[1980] HCA 31
(1980) 144 CLR 490
, Gibbs J said at
"[T]he words 'adequate' and 'proper' are always relative. There are no fixed
standards, and the court is left to form opinions upon
the basis of its own
general knowledge and experience of current social conditions and
standards."
Vigolo v Bostin,
at 228, Callinan and Heydon JJ said:
"[T]he use of the word 'proper' ... implies something beyond mere dollars and
cents. Its use, it seems to us, invites consideration
of all the relevant
surrounding circumstances and would entitle a court to have regard to a promise
of a kind which was made here...The
use of the word 'proper' means that
attention may be given, in deciding whether adequate provision has been made, to
such matters
as what use to be called the 'station in life' of the parties and
the expectations to which that has given rise, in other words,
reciprocal claims
and duties based upon how the parties lived and might reasonably expect to have
lived in the future."
J pointed out in
Gardiner v Gardiner
(NSWSC, 28 May 1998, unreported),
that "adequate" and "proper" are independent concepts. He said at
"'Adequate' relates to the needs of the applicant. It is determined by
reference to events occurring up to the death of the deceased,
encompassing what the deceased might reasonably have foreseen before death.
'Proper' depends upon all the circumstances
of the case. These include the
applicant's station in life, the wealth of the deceased, the means and proper
claims of all applicants,
the relative urgency of the various claims on the
deceased's bounty, the applicant's conduct in relation to the deceased, the
applicant's
contribution to building up the deceased's estate, the existence of
dependents upon the applicant, the effects of inflation, the
applicant's age and
sex, and whether the applicant is able-bodied ..."
Palaganio v Mankarios
[2011] NSWSC 61
, at [72], White J observed that the
question of what provision for a person's maintenance, education or advancement
in life is "proper"
and the question of whether the provision made by the
deceased was "adequate" for that person's maintenance, education or advancement
in life involve value judgments on which minds can legitimately differ, and
there are no definite criteria by which the question
Honour added in
Slack v Rogan; Palffy v Rogan
[2013] NSWSC 522
"The question of what level of maintenance or advancement in life is "proper"
depends on all of the circumstances of the case "including
the applicant's
financial position, the size and nature of the deceased's estate, the totality
of the relationship between the applicant
and the deceased, and the relationship
between the deceased and other persons who have legitimate claims upon his or
her bounty"
Singer v Berghouse
[1994] HCA 40
(1994) 181 CLR 201
recently, it was unanimously thought that there are two stages of the
determination. The first stage, provided for by
, has been described
as "the jurisdictional question":
Singer v Berghouse
[1994] HCA 40
(1994) 181 CLR 201
at 208-209. At this stage, the court will consider
make an order for provision for the maintenance, education or
advancement in life of a particular applicant. The Court does this by
determining whether it is satisfied that adequate provision for the proper
maintenance, education or advancement in life of the applicant
has not been made
by the Will of the deceased and/or by operation of the intestacy rules, for the
applicant. If it is not so satisfied,
then the Court is precluded from making a
family provision order.
the applicant has a 'need' or 'needs' is a relevant factor at the first stage of
the enquiry. It is an elusive concept to
define, yet, it is an element in
determining whether "adequate" provision has been made for the "proper"
maintenance, education and
advancement in life of the applicant in all of the
circumstances:
Collins v McGain
[2003] NSWCA 190 (Tobias
JA, with whom
Beazley and Hodgson JJA agreed).
Collins v McGain
Tobias JA said:
"42. Further, there can be no question that, at least as part of the first
stage of the process, the question of whether the eligible
person has a relevant
need of maintenance etc is a proper enquiry. This is so as the proper level of
maintenance etc appropriate
for an eligible person in all the circumstances
clearly calls for a consideration of his or her needs. However, the question of
must not be too narrowly focussed. It must, in my view, take into account,
depending upon the particular circumstances of the case,
present and future
needs including the need to guard against unforeseen contingencies.
47. As I have observed, the issue of need is not confined to whether or not
an eligible person has, at the date of hearing, a then
need for financial
assistance with respect to his maintenance etc. It is a broader concept. This is
so because the question of needs
must be addressed in the context of the
statutory requirement of what is "proper maintenance etc" of the eligible
person. It is because
of that context that, in the present case, the "proper
maintenance etc" of the appellant required consideration of a need to guard
against the contingency to which I have referred."
v Hall (No 3)
at [81] - [84], Buss JA
said, in respect of the first stage of the process:
"The term 'need' has been used to refer to the claimant's inability to
satisfy his or her financial requirements from his or her own
resources. See
per Gaudron J at 227.
'Need' has also been used in the context of a value judgment or conclusion,
namely, that the claimant is 'in need' of maintenance,
etc, because inadequate
provision has been made for his or her proper maintenance, etc. See
(1989) 17 NSWLR 1
per Bryson J at 10-11.
The determination of whether the disposition of the deceased's estate was not
such as to make adequate provision for the proper maintenance,
etc, of the
claimant will always, as a practical matter, involve an evaluation of the
provision, if any, made for the claimant on
the one hand, and the claimant's
'needs' that cannot be met from his or her own resources on the other. See
per Kirby P at 575.
Although the existence or absence of 'needs' which the claimant cannot meet
from his or her own resources will always be highly relevant
and, often,
decisive, the statutory formulation, and therefore the issue in every case, is
whether the disposition of the deceased's
estate was not such as to make
adequate provision for his or her proper maintenance, etc. See
Gaudron J at 227. Compare
per Bryson J at 6-11;
Collicoat v
[1999] 3 VR 803
per Ormiston J at 816 [38], 820 [47]."
the event that the court is satisfied that the power to make an order is
enlivened (i.e. in this case it is satisfied that the
applicant is an eligible
person, and that adequate provision for the proper maintenance, education or
advancement in life of the
person has not been made), then, the court determines
whether it should
make an order, and if so, the nature of any such order,
having regard to the facts known to the court at the time the order is
second stage of the process arises under
Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ, in
Singer v Berghouse
, at 211, affirmed
that the decision made at the second stage involves an exercise of discretion in
the accepted sense. The fact that
the Court has a discretion means that it may
refuse to make an order even though the jurisdictional question has been
answered in
the applicant's favour.
Basten JA, in
Andrew v Andrew
[2012] NSWCA 308
said of the two stage
process referred to:
"29 The combination of changes requires that the court address the nature of
the exercise being undertaken. Three potential consequences
may be identified.
First, there is a simplification of the structure of the process. There is no
longer a two-stage process required.
A degree of artificiality has thus been
removed. The court should now ask what, taking all relevant factors into
account, would have
been adequate provision for the applicant. There is no first
stage of determining whether the actual provision was "inadequate",
followed by
a discretionary exercise of determining what would be adequate and what should
in fact be done.
41 As noted above, the language of the
Succession Act
consistent with the two-stage inquiry which was a common feature of earlier
legislation: cf
Singer v Berghouse
at 208-209. In
Keep v Bourke
[2012] NSWCA 64
the Court appears to have assumed that the two-stage process
continued to operate under the
Succession Act
: at [24]-[29]. However, the
issue not having been directly addressed, there is no constraint on this Court
now adopting a different
approach. Nor does earlier High Court authority
construing an earlier statutory scheme govern the approach to be adopted to
different legislative provisions."
Andrew v Andrew
, Allsop P, at [6], said:
"Whether the process engaged in by the Court in
can still be described
as "two-staged" in the sense discussed in
Singer v Berghouse
181 CLR 201
at 208-211 may be an analytical question of little consequence.
The task involves an evaluative assessment and a choice as to consequence
therefrom, appeal from which is governed by the principles concerning
discretionary judgments:
Singer v Berghouse
[2011] NSWCCA 63
278 ALR 765
JA disagreed with Basten JA, in
Andrew v Andrew
"65 This is the second occasion on which this Court has been called upon to
deal with a claim under
Succession Act
. In the earlier case,
Keep v Bourke
[2012] NSWCA 64
, the Court proceeded on the basis that
approaches taken under
of the now superseded
Family Provision Act
remained relevant and applicable. That matter was explored in greater
detail in the course of argument in the present case. For reasons
I am about to
state, I am of the opinion that the earlier approaches should continue to be
followed in cases such as the present
Keep v Bourke
cases in which the applicant is a child of the deceased and no previous order
for provision out of the estate has been
made in favour of that applicant.
79 First, it is necessary, having regard to s 59(1)(c), for the court to be
satisfied that, at the time when it is considering the
application, "adequate
provision for the proper maintenance, education or advancement in life of the
person in whose favour the order
is to be made has not been made by the will of
the deceased person, or by the operation of the intestacy rules in relation to
estate of the deceased person". Whereas the former
provided that an
order was not to be made unless the court was "satisfied" in the specified way,
the present legislation permits
the court to make an order if "satisfied" in the
specified way and, by necessary implication, precludes the making of an order if
the court is not so "satisfied".
80 Second (and if the court is "satisfied" in the specified way), the "family
provision order" that the court is empowered to make
is, under s 59(2), "such
order for provision out of the estate of the deceased person as the Court thinks
ought to be made for the
maintenance, education or advancement in life of the
eligible person, having regard to the facts known to the Court at the time the
order is made"; and the court may, pursuant to s 60(1)(b), have regard to the
matters specified in s 60(2) in deciding whether to
make an order and the nature
of the order.
81 Under s 59 and s 60, therefore, the task of the court, in a case of the
kind under discussion, is:
(a) to determine the extent of the provision made for the maintenance,
education and advancement in life of the applicant by the deceased's
will or the
intestacy laws;
(b) to form an opinion of the adequacy of that provision;
(c) if the opinion is one of inadequacy, to make an evaluative judgment as to
what provision, if any, ought to be made out of the
estate of the deceased
person for the maintenance, education or advancement in life of the eligible
person, having regard to the
facts known to the court at the time the order is
(d) in making that evaluative judgment, to take into account, as
discretionary factors, the matters in s 60(2).
94 As stated in
Keep v Bourke
(above), the structure and effect of the
Succession Act
provisions warrant continuing adherence to the two-stage
approach indicated by the decisions of the High Court in
Vigolo v Bostin
Franks v Franks
[2013] NSWCA 60
, Young AJA (with whom McColl JA and
Sackville AJA agreed) referred, at [17], to the primary Judge (Macready AsJ)
having "cited the
High Court's decision in
Singer v Berghouse
(1994) 181 CLR 201
and adopted the two stage process required by that
Honour noted also, at [29], that the appellant (in one of the two appeals)
"accepted that it was appropriate for the primary judge
to follow the course
laid down in
Singer v Berghouse
and that [the respondent] had surmounted
the first hurdle of the two stage process referred to therein. Accordingly, he
the key question as whether the primary Judge had erred in
determining the quantum of the provision made for ... in lieu of that
the deceased's will".
[35], his Honour wrote:
"On an appeal against a decision concerning the application of the second
Singer v Berghouse
, the Court is dealing with a discretionary
judgment (see
Singer v Berghouse
(at 211) and
Durham v Durham
[2011] NSWCA 62
[2011] NSWCA 62
80 NSWLR 335
(at 352)). It follows that his Honour's
decision is reviewable by this Court only in accordance with the principles
established in
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
55 CLR 499."
the appeal was allowed, that was because the Court found, at [42],
"... in formulating the quantum of the provision he made for Brad, the
primary judge did not take into account the disparity in the
circumstances between Gregory and Brad. Accordingly, the primary Judge's
decision as to quantum must be set aside."
in the Court of Appeal's judgment in
Franks v Franks
suggests that the
approach followed by the trial Judge, in adopting the two stage process required
Singer v Berghouse
, was wrong.
first instance, there are a number of decisions to which reference should be
Verzar v Verzar
[2012] NSWSC 1380
, Lindsay J
"92 I refrain from characterisation of these elements of the case as "stages"
because that is terminology associated with the
Family Provision Act
Singer v Berghouse
[1994] HCA 40
(1994) 181 CLR 201
at 208-211. Since
Andrew v Andrew
[2012] NSWCA 308
(14 June 2012) per Allsop P at [5]-[6]
and Basten JA at [27], [29] and [41] a single judge of the Court is bound, in my
assessment,
to regard the two-stage decision-making process identified in
Singer v Berghouse
, and confirmed by
Vigolo v Bostin
[2005] HCA 11
, as superseded by enactment of
93 Although the provisions of
ss 59(1)(c)
(2) might formerly have been
treated, respectively, as re-embodiments of the first and second of the
two-stages of decision-making
identified in
Singer v Berghouse
to be applied in Family Provision cases must be taken by me to have been
recently, Ball J, in
Oldereid v Chan
[2013] NSWSC 434
, after referring to
Andrew v Andrew
noted the different approaches being adopted by
trial Judges. His Honour said:
"52 More recent decisions at first instance have differed on whether the
decision in
Andrew v Andrew
requires the court to apply a two stage
process or not. Lindsay J in
Verzar v Verzar
[2012] NSWSC 1380
that a single judge of the court is bound "to regard the two-stage
decision-making process identified in
Singer v Berghouse
superseded by enactment of
Succession Act
" (at [92]). Hallen J,
on the other hand, has continued to apply the two stage test: see
Goldsmith v
[2012] NSWSC 1486
Nowak v Beska
[2013] NSWSC 166
. A third approach, adopted by Macready AsJ in
Morgan v Bohm
[2013] NSWSC 145
, is to consider the case on both bases. There are,
however, difficulties with that approach. If the two approaches involve real
differences,
then presumably there are cases where they will produce different
results. What, then, is to be done applying both approaches? On
the other hand,
if the two approaches are bound to produce the same result, the dispute about
which test should be applied has no
significance.
53 In my opinion, there is clearly a tension between the decisions of the
Court of Appeal in
Keep v Bourke
[2012] NSWCA 64
[2012] NSWCA 308
(2012) 81 NSWLR 656
which only the Court of Appeal
or High Court can resolve. In the meantime, the duty of a trial judge is to
follow the later decision:
Ratcliffe v Watters
(1969) 89 WN (NSW)
at 505 per Street J. In
Andrew v Andrew
, both Allsop P and
Basten JA regarded the reformulation of the test in
as changing, perhaps only subtly, the threshold that must be satisfied
before an order can be made. Basten JA regarded that change
as also changing the
way in which the court should approach the question. Allsop P regarded it as an
analytical question of little
consequence. However it is analysed, though, it is
clear from the terms of
that the court must ask itself the question whether
it is satisfied that "adequate provision for the proper maintenance, education
or advancement in life of the person in whose favour the order is to be made has
not been made". If it is so satisfied, it must consider
whether to make an order
and, if so, the terms of that order. In undertaking each of those steps, it may
have regard to the matters
Whether those steps should be seen
as separate stages that must be followed or as convenient steps in undertaking
what is required
by the legislation does not matter for present purposes."
appears that Ball J was not referred to
Franks v Franks
seems to me, with great respect to those who disagree, that the amendments
introduced by the
do not require, or justify, a different approach. That
approach, adopted in the myriad of cases determined under the
, including
Keep v Bourke
[2012] NSWCA 64
(in which Macfarlan JA (except as to amount
of provision) and Tobias AJA agreed with Barrett JA), and now
(a unanimous decision of the Court of Appeal), requires a trial Judge
to continue to follow the two stage approach in determining
cases under the
until any uncertainty is resolved. Furthermore, as Ball J repeats, the questions
remain the same, namely, whether the Court can
make an order for provision
(whether it is satisfied that "adequate provision for the proper maintenance,
education or advancement
in life of the person in whose favour the order is to
be made"), and if so, whether it should (whether to make an order and, if so,
the terms of that order). As Allsop P said, "it may be an analytical question of
little consequence".
, at least in part, is new. It provides:
"(1) The court may have regard to the matters set out in subsection (2) for
the purpose of determining:
(a) whether the person in whose favour the order is sought to be made (the
"applicant") is an eligible person, and
(b) whether to make a family provision order and the nature of any such
(2) The following matters may be considered by the court:
(a) any family or other relationship between the applicant and the deceased
person, including the nature and duration of the relationship,
(b) the nature and extent of any obligations or responsibilities owed by the
deceased person to the applicant, to any other person
in respect of whom an
application has been made for a family provision order or to any beneficiary of
the deceased person's estate,
(c) the nature and extent of the deceased person's estate (including any
property that is, or could be, designated as notional estate
of the deceased
person) and of any liabilities or charges to which the estate is subject, as in
existence when the application is
being considered,
(d) the financial resources (including earning capacity) and financial needs,
both present and future, of the applicant, of any other
person in respect of
whom an application has been made for a family provision order or of any
beneficiary of the deceased person's
(e) if the applicant is cohabiting with another person-the financial
circumstances of the other person,
(f) any physical, intellectual or mental disability of the applicant, any
other person in respect of whom an application has been
made for a family
provision order or any beneficiary of the deceased person's estate that is in
existence when the application is
being considered or that may reasonably be
anticipated,
(g) the age of the applicant when the application is being considered,
(h) any contribution (whether financial or otherwise) by the applicant to the
acquisition, conservation and improvement of the estate
of the deceased person
or to the welfare of the deceased person or the deceased person's family,
whether made before or after the
deceased person's death, for which adequate
consideration (not including any pension or other benefit) was not received, by
the applicant,
(i) any provision made for the applicant by the deceased person, either
during the deceased person's lifetime or made from the deceased
person's estate,
(j) any evidence of the testamentary intentions of the deceased person,
including evidence of statements made by the deceased person,
(k) whether the applicant was being maintained, either wholly or partly, by
the deceased person before the deceased person's death
and, if the court
considers it relevant, the extent to which and the basis on which the deceased
person did so,
(l) whether any other person is liable to support the applicant,
(m) the character and conduct of the applicant before and after the date of
the death of the deceased person,
(n) the conduct of any other person before and after the date of the death of
the deceased person,
(o) any relevant Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander customary law,
(p) any other matter the court considers relevant, including matters in
existence at the time of the deceased person's death or at
the time the
application is being considered."
can be seen that
enumerates 15 specific matters, described by Basten JA
Andrew v Andrew
at [37] as "a multifactorial list", and by Lindsay J
Verzar v Verzar
[2012] NSWSC 1380
, at [123], as "a valuable prompt" to
which the court may have regard, together with "any other matter the court
considers relevant",
for the purposes of determining eligibility, whether to
make a family provision order and the nature of any such order.
has recently been said by White J in
Slack v Rogan; Palffy v Rogan
[121], that
"lists a wide range of matters that the Court 'may have regard
to', but these do not provide any tangible assistance in answering
the question
in any particular case whether the provision made in a will was less than
adequate for an eligible applicant's "proper"
maintenance, education or
advancement in life".
section does not prioritise the catalogue of matters that may be taken into
account. No matter is more, or less, important than
any other. The weight of
such of the matters specified in the section, which may be taken into account,
will depend upon the facts
of the particular case. There is no mandatory command
to take into account any of the matters enumerated. None of the matters listed
is, necessarily, of decisive significance and none differentiate, in their
application, between classes of eligible person. Similarly,
there is no
distinction based on gender.
does not say how the matters listed are to be used to determine the matters
identified in
Considering each of the relevant matters does not
prescribe a particular result, and whilst there is likely to be a substantial
in the matters that the court may take into account when determining the
answers to what is posed in
, those matters are not identical. For
example, when considering eligibility under
, many of the matters in
will be largely, if not wholly, irrelevant.
is no definition in the
of "financial resources" (which term is referred to
s 60(2)(d)).
However, there is a definition of that term in
Property (Relationships) Act
, which I consider helpful:
"'financial resources' ... includes:
(a) a prospective claim or entitlement in respect of a scheme, fund or
arrangement under which superannuation, retirement or similar
benefits are
(b) property which, pursuant to the provisions of a discretionary trust, may
become vested in or used or applied in or towards the
purposes of the parties
(c) property, the alienation or disposition of which is wholly or partly
under the control of the parties to the relationship or either
of them and which
is lawfully capable of being used or applied by or on behalf of the parties to
the relationship or either of them
in or towards their or his or her own
purposes, and
(d) any other valuable benefit."
course, sub-s (2)(d) refers also to "earning capacity", which means no more than
the capacity to find employment to earn or derive
Furthermore,
consideration of some of the matters in
not only permits, but requires,
a comparison to be made between the respective positions of the applicant and
any other eligible
person, as well as of any beneficiary, whilst others do not.
Importantly, also, many of the matters in sub-s (2), of themselves,
incapable of providing an answer to the questions posed in
aside the question of eligibility, the matters referred to in
considered on "the discretionary question", namely whether to make an order and
the nature of that order. Importantly, under
, attention is drawn to
matters that may have existed at the deceased's death, or
subsequently.
does not mean, however, that some of the matters referred to in
be relevant to the jurisdictional question to be determined at the first stage.
Happily, I am not alone in reaching this
conclusion which is supported by the
following comments made in
Singer v Berghouse
"... The determination of the first stage in the two-stage process calls for
an assessment of whether the provision (if any) made
was inadequate for what, in
all the circumstances, was the proper level of maintenance etc appropriate for
the applicant having regard,
amongst other things, to the applicant's financial
position, the size and nature of the deceased's estate, the totality of the
relationship
between the deceased and other persons who have legitimate claims
upon his or her bounty.
The determination of the second stage, should it arise, involves similar
considerations. Indeed, in the first stage of the process,
the court may need to
arrive at an assessment of what is the proper level of maintenance and what is
adequate provision, in which
event, if it becomes necessary to embark upon the
second stage of the process, that assessment will largely determine the order
should be made in favour of the applicant."
by the comments of Callinan and Heydon JJ in
Vigolo v Bostin
"We do not therefore think that the questions which the court has to answer
in assessing a claim under the
necessarily always divide neatly into two.
Adequacy of the provision that has been made is not to be decided in a vacuum,
or by looking
simply to the question whether the applicant has enough upon which
to survive or live comfortably. Adequacy or otherwise will depend
upon all of
the relevant circumstances, which include any promise which the testator made to
the applicant, the circumstances in
which it was made, and, as here, changes in
the arrangements between the parties after it was made. These matters however
be conclusive. The age, capacities, means, and competing claims, of
all of the potential beneficiaries must be taken into account
and weighed with
all of the other relevant factors."
requires the family provision order to specify:
(a) the person or persons for whom provision is to be made, and
(b) the amount and nature of the provision, and
(c) the manner in which the provision is to be provided and the part or parts
of the estate out of which it is to be provided, and
(d) any conditions, restrictions or limitations imposed by the court.
order for provision out may require the provision to be made in a variety of
ways, including a lump sum, periodic sum, or "in
any other manner the court
thinks fit"
). If the provision is made by payment of an
amount of money, the order may specify whether interest is payable on the whole,
part, of the amount payable for the period, and, if so, the period during
which interest is payable and the rate of interest
family provision order under the
will take effect, unless the court
otherwise orders, as if the provision was made in a codicil to the will of the
deceased, or in
the case of intestacy, as in a will of the deceased
). (As I have written, intestacy is irrelevant in these
proceedings.)
sets out the consequential and ancillary orders that may be
provides that the Court may order the costs of proceedings in
relation to the estate, or notional estate, of the deceased (including
connection with mediation) to be paid out of the estate in such manner as the
Court thinks fit.
Other Applicable Legal Principles - Substantive Application
that no two cases will be exactly alike, there are some general principles that
may be stated. Whilst most of these principles
were stated in the context of the
, they are equally apt in a claim brought pursuant to the
Gorton v Parks
(1989) 17 NSWLR 1
, at 6, that it is not
appropriate to endeavour to achieve "an overall fair" disposition of the
deceased's estate. It is not part
of the Court's function to achieve some kind
of equity between the various claimants. The Court's role is not to reward an
or to distribute the deceased's estate according to notions of
fairness or equity. Nor is the purpose of the jurisdiction conferred
to correct the hurt feelings, or sense of wrong, felt by an applicant. Rather,
the Court's role is of a specific type and goes no
further than the making of
"adequate" provision in all the circumstances for the "proper" maintenance,
education and advancement
in life of an applicant.
Cooper v Dungan
(1976) 50 ALJR 539
, Stephen J, at 542, reminded the Court
to be vigilant in guarding "against a natural tendency to reform the testator's
will according
to what it regards as a proper total distribution of the estate
rather than to restrict itself to its proper function of ensuring
that adequate
provision has been made for the proper maintenance and support of an applicant".
Freedom of testamentary disposition
is not to have "only a prima facie effect,
the real dispositive power being vested in the court":
Pontifical Society for
the Propagation of the Faith v Scales
[1962] HCA 19
(1962) 107 CLR 9
Stott v Cook
(1960) 33 ALJR 447
, Taylor J, although dissenting in his
determination of the case, observed, at 453-4, that the Court did not have a
mandate to rework
a will according to its own notions of fairness. His Honour
"There is, in my opinion, no reason for thinking that justice is better
served by the application of abstract principles of fairness
than by acceptance
of the judgment of a competent testator whose knowledge of the virtues and
failings of the members of his family
equips him for the responsibility of
disposing of his estate in far better measure than can be afforded to a Court by
a few pages
of affidavits sworn after his death and which only too frequently
provide but an incomplete and shallow reflection of family relations
characteristics. All this is, of course, subject to the proviso that an order
may be made if it appears that the testator has
failed to discharge a duty to
make provision for the maintenance, education or advancement of his widow or
children. But it must
appear, firstly, that such a duty existed and, secondly,
that it has not been discharged."
Vigolo v Bostin
, Gleeson CJ pointed out that the legislation did not
confer new rights of succession and did not create legal rights of inheritance.
Rather, his Honour stated, at [10], that it "preserved freedom of testamentary
disposition, but subjected that freedom to a new qualification"
J referred to these principles in
Slack v Rogan
"In my view, respect should be given to a capable testator's judgment as to
who should benefit from the estate if it can be seen that
the testator has duly
considered the claims on the estate. That is not to deny that
Succession Act
interferes with the freedom of testamentary disposition. Plainly
it does, and courts have a duty to interfere with the will if the
provision made
for an eligible applicant is less than adequate for his or her proper
maintenance and advancement in life. But it
must be acknowledged that the
evidence that can be presented after the testator's death is necessarily
inadequate. Typically, as
in this case, there can be no or only limited
contradiction of the applicant's evidence as to his or her relationship and
with the deceased. The deceased will have been in a better position to
determine what provision for a claimant's maintenance and
advancement in life is
proper than will be a court called on to determine that question months or years
after the deceased's death
when the person best able to give evidence on that
question is no longer alive. Accordingly, if the deceased was capable of giving
due consideration to that question and did so, considerable weight should be
given to the testator's testamentary wishes in recognition
of the better
position in which the deceased was placed (
Stott v Cook
(1960) 33 ALJR
per Taylor J at 453-454 cited in
Nowak v Beska
[2013] NSWSC 166
). This is subject to the qualification that the court's determination
and (2) is to be made having regard to the circumstances at the
time the court is considering the application, rather than at the
time of the
deceased's death or will."
in considering the question, the nature and content of what is adequate
provision for the proper maintenance, education and advancement
in life of an
applicant, is not fixed or static. Rather, it is a flexible concept, the measure
of which should be adapted to conform
with what is considered to be right and
proper according to contemporary accepted community standards:
Society for the Propagation of the Faith v Scales
Walker v Walker
NSWSC, Young J, 17 May 1996, unreported);
Vigolo v Bostin
Stern v Sekers; Sekers v Sekers
[2010] NSWSC 59.
How those community
expectations or standards are determined cannot be explained other than by
reference to the
Andrew v Andrew
at [36]; 664.
all cases under the
, what is adequate and proper provision is necessarily
fact specific.
is not a "Destitute Persons
", and it is not necessary, therefore, that
the applicant should be destitute to succeed in obtaining an order:
Allardice, Allardice v Allardice
(1910) 29 NZLR 959
the Court is satisfied that provision ought to be made, then it is no answer to
a claim for provision under the
that to make an order would be to defeat the
intentions of the deceased identified in the Will. The
requires, in such
circumstances, the deceased's intention in the Will to be displaced:
[2008] NSWSC 262
, per White J, at [45].
of the financial needs of an applicant have to be taken into account and
considered by reference to the other factors referred
v Berghouse
. What is proper provision is not arrived at by
adding up all of the identified financial needs:
Hyland v Burbidge
. Nor does it follow that if the Court decides it is
inappropriate to make a specific provision in respect of one identified head
claim that any identified financial need, even a contingent need, in relation to
that claim becomes irrelevant to the final assessment:
Lloyd-Williams
size of the estate or notional estate is a significant consideration in
determining an application for provision. However, its
size does not justify the
Court in rewriting the will in accordance with its own ideas of justice and
Bowyer v Wood
[2007] SASC 327
(2007) 99 SASR 190
, per Debelle
Borebor v Keane
[2013] VSC 35
relation to a claim by an adult child, the following principles are useful to
(a) The relationship between parent and child changes when the child leaves
recipient of parental
ties, affection or support, as the bonds of childhood are relaxed.
(b) It is impossible to describe in terms of universal application, the moral
obligation, or community expectation, of a parent in
respect of an adult child.
It can be said that, ordinarily, the community expects parents to raise, and
educate, their children to
the very best of their ability while they remain
children; probably to assist them with a tertiary education, where that is
where funds allow, to provide them with a start in life, such as a
deposit on a home, although it might well take a different form.
The community
does not expect a parent, in ordinary circumstances, to provide an unencumbered
house, or to set his or her children
up in a position where they can acquire a
house unencumbered, although in a particular case, where assets permit and the
relationship
between the parties is such as to justify it, there might be such
an obligation:
McGrath v Eves
[2005] NSWSC 1006
Taylor v Farrugia
[2009] NSWSC 801.
(c) Generally, also, the community does not expect a parent to look after
his, or her, child for the rest of the child's life and
into retirement,
especially when there is someone else, such as a spouse, who has a primary
obligation to do so. Plainly, if an adult
child remains a dependent of a parent,
the community usually expects the parent to make provision to fulfil that
ongoing dependency
after death. But where a child, even an adult child, falls on
hard times, and where there are assets available, then the community
a parent to provide a buffer against contingencies; and where a child has been
unable to accumulate superannuation or
make other provision for their
retirement, something to assist in retirement where otherwise, they would be
left destitute:
Taylor v Farrugia
(d) If the applicant has an obligation to support others, such as a parent's
obligation to support a dependent child, that will be
a relevant factor in
determining what is an appropriate provision for the maintenance of the
Re Buckland Deceased
[1966] VicRp 58
[1966] VR 404
National Trustees Executors and Agency Co. of Australasia Ltd
[1979] HCA 2
(1979) 143 CLR 134
Goodman v Windeyer
at 498, 505. But the
does not permit orders to be made to provide for the support of third persons
that the applicant, however reasonably, wishes to support,
where there is no
obligation of the deceased to support such persons:
Re Buckland Deceased
Kleinig v Neal (No 2)
[1981] 2 NSWLR 532
v Lloyd-Williams,
(e) There is no need for an applicant adult child to show some special need
or some special claim:
McCosker v McCosker
Kleinig v Neal (No 2)
Bondelmonte v Blanckensee
[1989] WAR 305
(1989) 1 WAR 37
, per Nicholson J at 45.
(f) The adult child's lack of reserves to meet demands, particularly of ill
health, which become more likely with advancing years,
is a relevant
consideration:
MacGregor v MacGregor
[2003] WASC 169
(28 August 2003) at
[179] - [182];
Crossman v Riedel
[2004] ACTSC 127
. Likewise, the
need for financial security and a fund to protect against the ordinary
vicissitudes of life, is relevant:
Marks v Marks
[2003] WASCA 297
. In addition, if the applicant is unable to earn, or has a limited means
of earning, an income, this could give rise to an increased
call on the estate
of the deceased:
Christie v Manera
[2006] WASC 287
[2009] WASC 164
(g) The applicant has the onus of satisfying the court, on the balance of
probabilities, of the justification for the claim:
Hughes v National
Trustees, Executors and Agency Co of Australasia Ltd
(h) Although some may hold the view that equality between children requires
that "adequate provision" not discriminate between children
according to gender,
character, conduct or financial and material circumstances, the
consistent with that view. To the contrary, the
specifically identifies, as
matters that may be taken into consideration, individual conduct, circumstances,
financial resources,
including earning capacity, and financial needs, in the
Court's determination of an applicant's case.
(i) There is no obligation on a parent to equalise distributions made to his
or her children so that each child receive benefits on
the same scale as the
Cooper v Dungan
Blore v Lang
[1960] HCA 73
(1960) 104 CLR 124
, Fullagar and Menzies JJ said, at
"The measure to be applied is not what has been given to one, but what the
other needs for his or her proper maintenance, giving due
regard to all the
circumstances of the case... The ... legislation [is] for remedying, within such
limits as a wide discretion would
set, breaches of a testator's moral duty to
make adequate provision for the proper maintenance of his family - not for the
of ... a fair distribution of ... [the] estate ... Equality is not
something to be achieved by the application of the
, although in some cases
equality may set a limit to the order to be made - for instance, where there is
not enough to provide proper
maintenance for all entitled to consideration whose
need is the same."
to each Plaintiff's claim, Menzies and Fullagar JJ in
Blore v Lang
135, also commented, in respect of "a married woman with a healthy husband in
satisfactory employment who supports her in reasonable
comfort", "her need is
not for the bread and butter of life, but for a little of the cheese or jam that
a wise and just parent would
appreciate should be provided if circumstances
more vividly, but to similar effect, is the approach in
Worladge v Doddridge
[1957] HCA 45
(1957) 97 CLR 1
at 12, in which Williams and Fullagar JJ approved the
following statement, from
In Re Harris
(1936) 5 SASR 497
"Proper maintenance is (if circumstances permit) something more than a
provision to keep the wolf from the door - it should at least
be sufficient to
keep the wolf from pattering around the house or lurking in some outhouse in the
backyard - it should be sufficient
to free the mind from any reasonable fear of
any insufficiency as age increases and health and strength gradually fail."
make clear that I do not intend what I have described as "applicable legal
principles" to be elevated into rules of law. Nor do
I wish to suggest that the
be constrained by statements
of principle found in dicta in other decisions. I
identify them merely as providing useful assistance in considering the statutory
provisions, the terms of which must remain firmly in mind.
Lindsay J said in
Verzar v Verzar
, at [131]:
"Whatever guidance one might draw from analogous cases all analogies, and any
guidelines drawn from a pattern of similar cases, must
yield to the text of the
legislation, the duty of the Court to apply that text to the particular
circumstances, and the totality
of material circumstances, of each case.
Preconceptions and predispositions, comforting though they may be, can be the
inadequate consideration of the jurisdiction to be exercised:
Bladwell v Davis
[2004] NSWCA 170
and [18]-[19]."
respectfully agree with the statement of White J in
Slack v Rogan
"The question of whether the provision, if any, made for an eligible
applicant is adequate for his or her proper maintenance, education
advancement in life is to be assessed having regard to the facts and
circumstances of each individual case. The assessment involves
evaluative judgment which is not to be constrained by preconceptions and
predispositions (
Bladwell v Davis
). This really means that there are no
definite criteria for the exercise of the "evaluative judgment"."
Additional Facts
I set out additional facts that I am satisfied are either not in dispute, or
that have been established to my satisfaction by
the evidence. I do so by
reference to the matters in
to which I may have regard. Where
necessary, I shall express the conclusions to which I have come. I have taken
this course, not
"to dwell on particular matters as if they were, in themselves,
determinant of the broad judgments required to be made under
, at [124]), but in order to complete the recitation of facts that
will assist me to determine the questions that must be
(a) any family or other relationship between the applicant and the
deceased person, including the nature and duration of the relationship
is a daughter of the deceased. She says that she felt she had a close
relationship with the deceased, who she described as
"loving" and
"generous".
married her husband, Michael Kennedy, in 1974. She stated that immediately prior
to that time she had lived at home with her parents.
admits that she did not see the deceased as often as she might have wished to
after his marriage to Faye and that they mainly
kept in touch by telephone. When
she did see the deceased, they usually met at the home of his brother, Barry.
She says that she
would send the deceased birthday, and Christmas,
was about 17 years old when her parents separated. She was then living at home
with them. She describes the family as "happy
and close". In cross-examination,
she also agreed that the deceased was loving to all of his daughters. She, too,
described him as
being "generous" to all of them. She never went without
anything she needed, but denied that "there were luxuries floating
did not feel that her relationship with the deceased changed after he and Beryl
separated, although her relationship with him
did change after he married Faye.
She did continue to keep in contact with the deceased.
says that following her leaving school, after completing Year 10, she worked in
Wollongong before moving to Melbourne, where she
met her husband who she married
in 1976. They lived in Melbourne for about 15 years. She says that she kept in
through Barry, and that when she came back to New
South Wales, on visits to see her family, she would see the deceased. On
after her return from Victoria, the deceased would visit
described the deceased as "a good father" and says that she "never felt we
wanted for anything".
admits that she was upset with the deceased when he decided to leave Beryl, but
that did not did not cause her to terminate her
relationship with him. They,
too, met as often as they could and usually at Barry's home.
Defendant, in submissions, refers to the evidence of each Plaintiff to the
effect that they continued to have a relationship with
the deceased after his
divorce from their mother in 1978. She does not dispute as much, but submits
that "the bulk of the evidence,
such as it is, does not suggest that any of them
were particularly close to the deceased after his marriage to the Defendant". I
am satisfied that this is an apt description of the relationship of each
Plaintiff and the deceased, after his marriage to Faye,
but that may have been
because the deceased was living with his second family. The relationship of
child and parent, in the case
of each Plaintiff, continued until the deceased's
(b) the nature and extent of any obligations or responsibilities owed by
the deceased person to the applicant, to any other person
in respect of whom an
application has been made for a family provision order or to any beneficiary of
the deceased person's estate
is no definition of the "obligations" or "responsibilities" to which the
sub-section refers in the
. One might conclude, however, that what is to be
considered is the nature and extent of any legal, or moral, obligations or
responsibilities.
aside any obligation, or responsibility, arising as a result of their
relationship as parent and child, the deceased did not
have any legal obligation
to any of his children, as adults, imposed upon him by statute or common law.
an obligation or responsibility, to make adequate provision for the proper
maintenance, education or advancement in life, is
recognised in the case of a
Flathaug v Weaver
[2003] NZFLR 730
, at 737, the origin of the
obligation which underpins the Act's recognition of the duty owed by a parent to
a child was put in this
"The relationship of parent and child has primacy in our society. The moral
obligation which attaches to it is embedded in our value
system and underpinned
by the law. The Family Protection
recognises that a parent's obligation to
provide for both the emotional and material needs of his or her children is an
ongoing one.
Though founded on natural or assumed parenthood, it is, however, an
obligation which is largely defined by the relationship which
exists between
parent and child during their joint lives."
fact that an applicant was financially independent, for many years, before the
deceased's death, is a relevant consideration in
determining the extent of any
obligation or responsibility owed.
can be no doubt that an obligation, or responsibility, to make adequate
provision for the proper maintenance and advancement
in life is usually
recognised in the case of a spouse. I consider as relevant, and agree with the
view expressed by Nettle JA in
McKenzie v Topp
[2004] VSC 90
that "[O]ther things being equal, right thinking members of society are likely
to accept that the needs of the widow of
a second marriage should rank in
priority ahead of the claims of the children of a first marriage". However,
ranking in priority
does not, mean, necessarily, that the claims of the children
of a first marriage are extinguished completely.
(c) the nature and extent of the deceased person's estate (including any
property that is, or could be, designated as notional estate
of the deceased
person) and of any liabilities or charges to which the estate is subject, as in
existence when the application is
being considered
have dealt with these matters earlier in these reasons. The value of the
notional estate is not extremely large and if one ignores
the value of the
deceased's interest as a joint tenant in the former matrimonial home, it is
extremely modest.
(d) the financial resources (including earning capacity) and financial
needs, both present and future, of the applicant, of any other
person in respect
of whom an application has been made for a family provision order or of any
beneficiary of the deceased person's
June 2012, Cheryl was employed as a stock controller earning about $1,700 per
fortnight. Her husband used to undertake general
farming jobs in the Goulburn
area. She described him earning "pocket money". Now he cares for his 85-year-old
and her husband own a farm ($600,000), which they hope to sell shortly. It is
not mortgaged. It does not produce income. They
have two cars ($8,000 and $6,000
respectively), on one of which there was a debt owed of $8,000, which has now
been repaid. They
have no other debts. They have savings of about $7,600. They
have combined superannuation of about $90,000.
currently receives a NewStart Allowance of $440 per fortnight. Her husband
receives a Carer's pension of $715 per fortnight.
Their income is sufficient to
meet their outgoings.
have not found alternative accommodation. One possibility advanced, is that they
will move to an area near Moruya and take her
husband's mother with them. They
will then build a granny flat on any home they purchase. Cheryl does not suggest
that the proceeds
of sale of the farm will be insufficient to purchase alternate
accommodation.
has worked throughout her life (other than when she had children), but retired
in April 2011. She has had to return to work
to help boost retirement savings.
She currently works casually with the number of hours varying from week to week.
She earns about
$10,000 per year.
husband continues to work and now earns $65,000 to $75,000 per annum. His
employment is secure. He intends to keep working as
long as health permits. They
own their home ($700,000), which is unencumbered. They own two cars ($4,000 and
$10,000 respectively).
She has superannuation ($15,000) and her husband has
superannuation of $190,000. They have savings of about $10,000.
have some credit card bills which she describes as "manageable" and no other
liabilities.
cross-examination, Dianne gave evidence that her husband's name appears as the
registered proprietor of a home unit in Flinders,
but that the property really
belongs to their youngest son. It was required to be registered in her husband's
name because moneys
were borrowed to pay out the son's partner. The amount
borrowed is $280,000 and it is secured by registered mortgage on the title
that property.
husband received about $4,000 per annum from rent, which amount he discloses in
his income tax return. The income is used to assist
in repaying the mortgage. It
equates to about half of the total rent received. (The total amount of rent
received is paid into an
account in Diane's name and it is from that account the
mortgage repayments are made.)
accept that the evidence given by Dianne about these matters.
was married first in 1970 and was subsequently divorced. She remarried in
November 1999 and remains married. There were two
children of her first
son died following an asthma attack (at a time not disclosed in the evidence)
and she now assists his partner financially,
as well as by helping her with
their three children. One of the grandchildren is partially deaf and requires an
operation to restore
his eardrum. Lorraine intends to pay the cost of the
operation, which is likely to be more than $10,000.
has held a number of jobs as a sales representative but is not working
currently. She currently receives a NewStart Allowance
of $420 per fortnight and
is looking for work.
husband retired from his job as a coal miner in December 2010 upon being
diagnosed with prostate cancer. He currently receives
a disability pension of
$580 per fortnight. They have recently sold their home (for $435,000) and, at
the date of hearing, have not
yet found alternative accommodation. They own a
car ($35,000) and a caravan. She has superannuation ($320,000) and her husband
superannuation of $120,000. They have savings of about $4,000. She has a
Visa card, the balance of which she usually clears at the
end of each month.
They have no other debts.
is retired and, as a hobby, breeds and breaks in horses. She has set out her
financial resources as follows: the whole of the
property at Far Meadow
($1,305,000), all of the savings in a bank account ($650,000), a car ($70,000 -
$75,000), three brood mares
($500 each), three foals ($2,000 each) and three
yearlings ($2,500 each).
(e) if the applicant is cohabiting with another person-the financial
circumstances of the other person
have referred to Cheryl's husband's financial circumstances.
have referred to Dianne's husband's financial circumstances. Dianne gave oral
evidence that her three sons are back living at home.
Each works and two of them
pay board of $100 per week "occasionally ... not very week". Her sons are aged
26, 24 and 22 years.
have referred to Lorraine's husband's financial circumstances.
(f) any physical, intellectual or mental disability of the applicant, any
other person in respect of whom an application has been
made for a family
provision order or any beneficiary of the deceased person's estate that is in
existence when the application is
being considered or that may reasonably be
anticipated
is in fairly good health, apart from suffering from high blood pressure. She
recently was diagnosed with macular degeneration
in one eye.
is not in good health. She says she suffers from high blood pressure and is on
medication. (She says her husband suffers from
heart disease and high blood
was in good health but following the death of one of her children, her health
has suffered. She suffers depression although
takes medication. She has asthma
and high blood pressure.
(g) the age of the applicant when the application is being considered
was born in January 1953 and is currently aged 60 years.
was born in May 1954 and is currently almost 59 years.
was born in March 1957 and is currently 56 years.
(h) any contribution (whether financial or otherwise) by the applicant to
the acquisition, conservation and improvement of the estate
of the deceased
person or to the welfare of the deceased person or the deceased person's family,
whether made before or after the
deceased person's death, for which adequate
consideration (not including any pension or other benefit) was not received, by
the applicant
is no suggestion that any of the Plaintiffs made any contribution to the
acquisition, conservation and improvement of the estate
of the deceased. (I
ignore the fact that as young adults, whilst they lived at home, they paid a
small amount of board.)
doubt, however, each contributed to the welfare of the deceased. The nature of
the contribution to the welfare of the deceased
has been identified
is nothing to lead to the view that the marriage of Faye and the deceased was
not a close, loving, and, generally, a harmonious
one, in which Faye did all
that she could to provide for the happiness and welfare of the deceased. Their
relationship appears to
have been one of love, affection and mutual dependence
and support. Indeed, there were no submissions to the contrary and no
cross-examination
of Faye to suggest otherwise.
(i) any provision made for the applicant by the deceased person, either
during the deceased person's lifetime or made from the deceased
says that she never received any financial help as an adult. However, she admits
that when her daughter was injured in a horse
riding accident in 1993, the
deceased offered to assist to pay the medical bills.
says that she never received any provision from the deceased, but admitted, when
asked in cross-examination, she never sought
says that the only financial assistance she received from the deceased after
leaving home was $5,000, which he gave her to
assist with her son's funeral
expenses. Faye gives evidence, which was not disputed, that she and the deceased
also gave Lorraine
a further $8,000 to "help her with her grief" and assist her
to "get by".
(j) any evidence of the testamentary intentions of the deceased person,
including evidence of statements made by the deceased person
is no evidence of the testamentary intentions of the deceased other than in his
last Will to which I have referred. Even then,
the provision that was to be made
in certain events, for each of the Plaintiffs, was modest.
(k) whether the applicant was being maintained, either wholly or partly,
by the deceased person before the deceased person's death
and, if the court
considers it relevant, the extent to which and the basis on which the deceased
person did so
deceased did not maintain any of the Plaintiffs, before his death, other than
during her childhood.
(l) whether any other person is liable to support the applicant
is no person, other than, perhaps, each Plaintiff's husband, or de facto
partner, with a liability to support her.
(m) the character and conduct of the applicant before and after the date
of the death of the deceased person
evaluation of "character and conduct" may be necessary, not for the sake of
criticism, but to enable consideration of what is "adequate"
and "proper" in all
the circumstances. Importantly, the
does not limit the consideration of
"conduct" to conduct towards the deceased.
have dealt with the relationship of each Plaintiff and the deceased and her
conduct towards the deceased earlier in these reasons.
(n) the conduct of any other person before and after the date of the death
of the deceased person
is necessary to consider the Defendant's conduct also. I am satisfied that she
was a loving and dutiful spouse to the deceased.
Their marriage was an extremely
long one and there was no suggestion that it was not harmonious and loving.
There is no conduct after
the death of the deceased, which is
complaint that each of the Plaintiffs makes about the Defendant and that she
makes of each of them, is not uncommon in circumstances
of a second, or later,
marriage, where there are children of an earlier marriage. Nor is it
particularly relevant to the matters
I have to decide.
(o) any relevant Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander customary
is not relevant in the present case.
(p) any other matter the court considers relevant, including matters in
existence at the time of the deceased person's death or at
the time the
application is being considered
are no other matters that I consider relevant.
Determination
an "eligible person" is a necessary precondition to the Court being empowered to
make an order for the maintenance, education
or advancement in life of the
eligible person. In this case, there is no dispute that each Plaintiff, as a
child of the deceased,
is an eligible person within the meaning of
is also no dispute that the Plaintiffs' proceedings were commenced within the
time prescribed by the
the first question for determination is whether, at the time the Court is
considering the application, adequate provision for
the proper maintenance or
advancement in life of the Plaintiff has not been made by the Will of the
am satisfied, for the purposes of
, that adequate provision
for the proper maintenance, education or advancement in life has not been made
for each of the Plaintiffs,
by the deceased, because the effect of his Will is
such that none of them receives anything. Additionally, each has no capital fund
for the exigencies of life.
relation to Lorraine, I appreciate that she and her husband have reasonably
large amounts of superannuation. But, I note, also,
that Lorraine is currently
not working; that she is 59 years of age, and that she currently suffers from
depression.)
, namely the question what provision "ought to be made for the
maintenance, education or advancement in life" of each of the Plaintiffs
regard to the facts known to the Court, the real area of concern is how to deal
with the claim of each, whilst bearing in
mind the significant competing claim
of the Defendant.
there were no submissions, in relation to each Plaintiff receiving different
provision, this is a case where each should
not receive an equal amount by way
of lump sum, provision. The financial resources of each are different and this
should be reflected
in the provision made.
my view, Cheryl should receive a lump sum of $50,000. Her husband does not work.
She and her husband have security of accommodation,
two cars (of modest value),
a small amount of superannuation and meagre savings. The lump sum will provide a
nest egg for Cheryl
for the future.
should receive a lump sum of $40,000. She and her husband both work (albeit that
her income is modest); they are secure in their
accommodation; they have two
cars; her husband has a reasonable amount of superannuation, whilst her
superannuation is small; and
they have some savings. Again, the lump sum will
provide a nest egg for Dianne for the future.
should receive a lump sum of $35,000. Whilst her husband no longer works, they
have the proceeds of sale of their home (which
is not suggested will be
insufficient to enable the purchase of alternative accommodation); they own a
car and a caravan; and each
has a reasonable amount of superannuation. They,
too, have meagre savings. (I also take into account the financial assistance
by the deceased and Fay referred to previously.)
will be seen that, after payment of the total amount of the lump sums ($125,000)
and the Plaintiffs' costs on the ordinary basis
(estimated to be $40,000), and
her own costs on the indemnity basis (estimated to be $38,000), the Defendant
will still have about
$447,000 on deposit, a car, and an unencumbered home in
which to live ($1,305,000).
interest should be paid on each lump sum if it is paid within 28 days of the
making of the orders; and if not so paid, interest
should be paid as on unpaid
legacies. The usual order for costs should be made.
am satisfied that the deceased's actual estate is insufficient for the making of
the family provision orders, and the costs orders,
that should be made:
and, if necessary, there will need to be an order
designating property as notional estate. However, in accordance with the
of the parties, the Defendant should first consider how the orders
should be met, before a designating order is made. She should
be given the
opportunity to determine how best to meet the order for provision, and for
costs, in each case, that has been made.
make the following orders:
(i) Having found that each Plaintiff is an eligible person, and that adequate
provision for her proper maintenance or advancement
in life has not been made
for her in the Will of the deceased, order that the Plaintiff, Cheryl Ann
Kennedy, receive a lump sum of
$50,000; the Plaintiff, Dianne Patricia Doherty,
receive a lump sum of $40,000; and the Plaintiff, Lorraine Kathleen Meharg,
a lump sum of $35,000; out of property designated as notional estate of
the deceased unless otherwise paid by the Defendant, Faye
Anderson Wisbey.
(ii) Being satisfied that the deceased's actual estate is insufficient for
the making of the family provision orders, and the costs
orders, that should be
made the provision made for each Plaintiff and the costs of the proceedings,
should be borne out of property
designated as notional estate of the deceased,
unless otherwise paid by the Defendant.
(iii) Order that the Defendant pay each of the lump sums and pay or provide
security for the Plaintiffs' costs within 28 days, failing
which consideration
is reserved to any party to apply for an order designating property held by the
Defendant for the purposes of
satisfying the family provision orders made any
interest thereon, and for satisfying the orders for costs of proceedings.
(iv) No interest is to be paid on each lump sum, if that lump sum is paid
within 28 days of the making of these orders; otherwise,
interest calculated at
the rate prescribed by s 84A(3)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
unpaid legacies, is to be paid from that date until the date of payment of the
(v) The Defendant is pay the costs of the Plaintiffs, calculated on the
ordinary basis, and her own costs calculated on the indemnity
basis out of the
property designated as notional estate of the deceased unless otherwise paid by
(vi) Pursuant to
Succession Act
that each family
provision order not take effect as if the provision was made in a codicil to the
will of the deceased.
(v) Order that the Exhibits should be dealt with in accordance with the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
following the determination of the costs of
the proceedings.
14 May 2013
"has" changed to "had" in last line of paragraph.
Paragraphs: 32
14 May 2013
"the to the" changed to "the" in first line of paragraph.
Paragraphs: 56
14 May 2013
closed square bracket added to end of paragraph.
Paragraphs: 121
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (477 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter