URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/589.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Koura v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPIC 589; (5 November 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Koura v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPIC 589
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
Belinda Cassidy
DATE OF DECISION:
5 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; claim for
statutory benefits under
made late; dispute about whether claimant has
full and satisfactory explanation under
section 6.13
; insurer conceded fullness
but argued claimant’s explanation not satisfactory; claimant is a doctor
and did not seek treatment
or make a claim for seven months after the accident
despite severe pain and radicular symptoms; explanation was claimant thought
would get better; claimant was managing symptoms with over the counter
medication and feared he would lose his job;
Karambelas v Zaknic
v Jeon, Walker v Howard,
Diaz v Truong,
Russo v Aiello
considered;
– claimant’s explanation satisfactory;
late claim can be made; costs assessed; de-identification order not made.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
In accordance with Division 7.6 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, the Personal Injury Commission’s (Commission) assessment
late claim for statutory benefits may be made by Jack Koura in accordance with
section 6.13
of the Act.
amount of the claimant’s costs in the matter is assessed at $2,234.10
inclusive of GST.
A statement setting out the Commission’s
reasons for the assessment is included with this certificate.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Koura was involved in a motor accident on 18 October 2023. Dr Koura is a medical
practitioner in the NSW public hospital system.
or about 10 July 2024, Dr Koura made a claim for statutory benefits under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act). The claim was made
against Allianz the third-party insurer of the motor vehicle Dr Koura believes
caused the accident.
1 October 2024 the insurer issued a liability notice to Dr Koura denying any
liability to pay statutory benefits to him on the
basis the claim was made late
and his explanation for why it was late was not full and satisfactory.
17 December 2024, Dr Koura sought an internal review of that decision in
accordance with Division 7.3 of the MAI Act. On 29 December
2024 the insurer
affirmed that decision in part, agreeing the explanation provided was full, but
maintaining that it was not satisfactory.
Koura has referred the issue of whether his late claim can be made to the
Personal Injury Commission (Commission) for assessment
and determination in
accordance with Division 7.6 of the MAI Act. The proceedings were allocated to
held a preliminary conference with the parties on 23 September 2025. The matter
was set down for a short audio-visual assessment
conference on 24 October 2025
so that additional evidence could be taken from the claimant. Mr Hanna appeared
for the insurer instructed
by Sparke Helmore solicitors and Ms Klimoski, a
solicitor in the employ of Gerard Malouf and Partners appeared on behalf of the
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Koura’s claim is for statutory benefits under Part 3 of the MAI Act.
Statutory benefits include weekly income replacement
Division 3.3 of the MAI Act and treatment and care benefits pursuant to Division
6.13(1) of the MAI Act provides that a claim for statutory benefits must be made
within three months after the date of the
accident. If a claim is made more than
three months after the date of the accident, but before the third anniversary
the claim, can
be made but the claimant is required to provide a “full and
satisfactory explanation” for the delay. If a claimant has
explanation, the late claim cannot be
parties agree that Schedule 2, cl 3 (h) provides the Commission with
“... whether for the purposes of Part 6 (Motor
accident claims) the claimant has given a full and satisfactory explanation for
non-compliance with a duty or for delay ...”
THE CLAIMANT’S EXPLANATION
First statement 10 July 2024
claimant says in this statement:
(a) he is 53 years of age, married with three children [2] and [4];
(b) he was involved in a rear end collision at 5.00pm and his vehicle was pushed
into the vehicle in front [6], emergency services
did not attend [7] and he
tried to report the accident to police on 15 July 2024 [8];
(c) he sustained injuries to his lumbar spine (disc herniation), cervical spine
(soft tissue), shoulders (soft tissue), right leg
and foot (nerve damage) [9]
and he provides an extensive list of disabilities and restrictions on his life
(d) the claimant says that he was in “a lot of pain” at the time of
the accident, but he thought his injuries would resolve
[11] so he took pain
medication, but his injuries did not resolve [12];
(e) he did not see his general practitioner (GP) until 12 June 2024 and had
physiotherapy on 31 July 2024 [13] and he takes medication
(Panadol and Nurofen)
including prescription medications (Lyrica and Mobic) [14];
(f) the claimant says he was in good health before the accident and has not had
any previous compensation claims [16] and that for
the five years before the
accident he attended on Auburn Central Medical Centre [17];
(g) Dr Koura says he is a medical doctor and obtained his degree in Russia in
1996 [18]. He has worked at Campbelltown Hospital from
2020 – 2022 and at
the time of the accident was working at Blacktown and Mt Druitt Hospital [19],
(h) he says that since the accident (after July 2024) he had to reduce his hours
and no longer works overtime and claims $600 a week
in lost earnings [21]
terms of the actual explanation, Dr Koura says:
(a) despite the accident “being significant” he did not think his
injuries “were significant enough to make a claim”
(b) his wife encouraged him to make a claim after he sought treatment on
June 2024 as she was fearful his condition would get worse, and his family
relied on him financially [25];
(c) his close friends and family have never made claims [26];
(d) he was unaware of the three-month time limit and if he had known that he
would have lodged a claim [27], and
(e) he contacted his lawyer on 1 July 2024, had a teleconference with them and
signed a costs agreement on 8 July 2024 [28] –
[29] and the claim form was
lodged with the insurer on 10 July 2024 [30].
Second statement 18 June 2025
claimant’s second statement says in relation to his injuries and
disabilities:
(a) his condition has worsened and his pain level (in particular the pain in his
back) has increased significantly [1] and he is
contemplating “lumbar
herniation surgery” [2];
(b) his lower back pain radiates down his right leg and he has constant tingling
and sharp shooting pain [3];
(c) he has been unable to sit, stand or walk (10 – 15 minutes) without
pain [4] and he cannot bend or squat easily [5];
(d) his wife drives him most places because he cannot get comfortable [6] and he
is using a shower chair “because I couldn’t
stand for long
periods” [7];
(e) he has shoulder pain in particular left shoulder pain [8] and pain in his
neck [9], and
(f) he continues to have physiotherapy, is doing hydrotherapy and is taking pain
killers including Endone [12] and he has tried massage
therapy and acupuncture.
He has been referred to a neurosurgeon Dr Kam [14].
terms of the explanation for the delay, the claimant says;
(a) he has never made a claim for compensation and had no idea there was a
three-month limit. He did not appreciate the seriousness
of his injuries and
even if he did, he had no knowledge of the three-month period [16];
(b) that “everyone handles pain differently” and he pushes through
and does not complain [17];
(c) he kept working despite the “large herniation” because he does
not want to rely on Centrelink or lose his job, his
wife does not work, and he
has three children two of whom are in a private school, and he cannot afford to
stop working. He feared
telling his employer about pain because he feared losing
his job [18];
(d) he says at [19] that he was in shock for the first week after the accident
and within two weeks he experienced pain radiating
down his right leg. He said
as symptoms worsened, he took Mobic, Lyrica and Endone and tried acupuncture and
massage. He says in
the weeks and months he continued to work “through the
pain” and that “my wife repeatedly asked me to get checked
but I kept telling her I could handle it”;
(e) as his symptoms worsened in particular the tingling and shooting pain, he
began to “worry that I could end up paralysed”
and that his injury
was more than a back strain or muscle pain and he needed proper investigation
and he “agreed [with his
wife] to see GP for investigation”. He had
a CT scan which he says was “the first in my life” and that was when
he discovered the extent of his injury and when he realised that he needed to
lodge a claim [20];
(f) in answer to the insurer’s argument that there is no contemporaneous
medical evidence he says at [21]:
“I would like to say that the absence of early medical records does not
mean the injury does not exist. It simply reflects that
fact that I was trying
to manage it on my own while continuing to work. I thought my condition would
get better, and I did not want
to stop working.”
(g) before the accident he was healthy and active and not on regular medication
(h) he understands he should have sought medical advice sooner and lodged a
claim earlier, but he had never been in the situation
before and was not aware
of the time limits [23].
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
claimant acknowledges at [16] that the insurer has accepted he has provided a
“full account of his actions, knowledge and
belief.” He says a
reasonable person in his position would have done what he had done, and his
delay is justified [17] and
“It is submitted that a lay
person in the position of the Claimant, who has no understanding of the current
CTP scheme and no
knowledge as to his rights and entitlements in relation to
personal injury claims, would not have appreciated the need to lodge a
within the three-month limitation period.”
claimant says he did not appreciate the severity of his symptoms until after he
saw the doctor and had the scan. He notes at [23]
that the insurer submits he
should have known the severity of his injuries given his medical background. He
refers to his second
explanation which provides more details about his beliefs
concerning his injuries [25a-b]. He submits his role as the sole breadwinner
the family meant “led him to prioritise work and family obligations over
his own health and legal entitlements.” [25d]
While he worked in a
hospital, he says he himself has never had injuries or health issues and does
not usually seek medical attention
claimant refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
saying that a reasonable
person would have been justified in experiencing the same
Insurer’s submissions
insurer submits that the claim was made eight months after the accident without
explanation [4.1].
insurer cites
Karambelas v Zaknic
) and says, the concept of a “satisfactory
explanation” requires the making of an “evaluative judgment or
as to whether, by reference to an objective standard and given the
claimant’s position, the delay which occurred is reasonably
justifiable”. The characteristics and circumstances of the claimant must
be taken into account when applying the objective
insurer confirms its acceptance of the fullness of the explanation [4.10].
insurer says the test of satisfactoriness is an objective one [4.11] and that a
reasonable person in the position of the claimant
would not have been justified
in experiencing the same delay [4.12] because:
(a) the claimant is a doctor and failed to seek medical treatment for eight
months despite symptoms in that period [4.13];
(b) he thought his injuries would resolve, but a reasonable person in the
position of the claimant, being a doctor, would have appreciated
the severity of
the condition or sought to investigate it sooner [4.14];
(c) within two weeks the pain began to radiate however he waited seven months
before investigating it [4.15];
(d) his GP certified him fit for work with restrictions (5 kg and standing for
more than 15 minutes) but there is no evidence Dr
Koura took time off work until
he submitted the claim form eight months after the accident [4.16];
(e) the claimant is a medical doctor in the orthopaedic department with a role
that is physically demanding and he ought to have
investigated his rights sooner
(f) the claimant is suggesting in his second statement that a reasonable person
in his position would have tolerated his pain and
continued to carry on working
[4.18]. The insurer says the test is objectivity, and that a reasonable person
in the position of the
claimant’s would have appreciated the severity of
his symptoms and sought treatment and advice earlier [4.19]. The insurer
the claimant had plenty of time to seek treatment and make a claim and that he
had medical knowledge and training to understand
and appreciate the severity of
and progression of his symptoms [4.20-4.21];
(g) the insurer says at [4.22] there is an issue of causation noting the
claimant was already taking Mobic at the time he saw his
GP (which was the first
time he saw that doctor at that practice) and that the insured said the claimant
did not appear to be injured
when he got out of the car after the accident;
(h) the insurer says it is significant that the claimant continued to work
dispute his neuropathic symptoms emerging two weeks after
the accident
(i) the insurer says that the claimant on the one hand says he did not think his
injuries were serious enough to make a claim but
he says if he had known he only
had three months he would have made the claim [4.24], and
(j) the insurer says that the case of
demonstrates the approach
to take which it that the “reasonable person” is a person in the
claimant’s position
with his characteristics and injuries [4.25].
the conclusion of Dr Koura’s evidence, the insurer made further brief
submissions:
(a) the claimant says there is a medical reason for not seeking treatment
– this is not a case of symptoms getting better but
symptoms which
“ramped up” over time. He was hoping symptoms would go away but they
were not getting better;
(b) the test is an objective standard for the subjective individual. The
reasonable person is one in the position of an orthopaedic
surgeon. It was not a
reasonable response, to not pursue treatment once his symptoms did not abate in
a reasonable period of time,
(c) it is not reasonable for him to remain ignorant and to not take steps to
inform himself. He knows about claims and his right
to claim for personal
injury. The only thing he did not know was the three months limitation period.
With symptoms increasing it
was not reasonable to remain ignorant and to not
make enquiries.
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE
claim form is dated 12 June 2024. Dr Koura says he has not made a CTP claim
before, and he denied having any pre-existing injuries
or illnesses.
claimant described the accident saying he was stopped at a red traffic light,
and the insured vehicle hit his car in the rear
and that he was propelled into
the vehicle in front although his “leg was pushed hard on the
brakes.” He says, “it
was a huge impact, and I was in shock for a
few minutes.” He says his car was a total loss and that “I remained
car for quite some time”.
describes his injuries as follows:
“I have experienced severe
lower back pain with bilateral shoulder pain and leg pain, since the accident.
Since the accident
I have ongoing pain in my lower back with numbness and
tingling sensation in my right leg. Even with painkillers the pain is not
relieving. I haven’t gone to the doctor because I thought the pain will go
away and I didn’t want to take any days off
from my work. I have decided
to attend the doctor and investigate my ongoing pains.”
claimant says he is a doctor at Blacktown and Mt Druitt Hospitals working full
time but that he has not been away from work as
a result of the accident. He did
not authorise the insurer to obtain wage details and employment information from
his employer.
The insured driver’s statement
insured driver, Mr Khalil provided a statement dated 10 August 2024 to the
insurer’s investigators. He says he was driving
his boss’s automatic
car at the time of the accident [25] and [26] and that he had driven it many
times before [27]. He was
travelling with a friend in the passenger seat
accident occurred at about 5.00pm on the Cumberland Highway which was a 70 kmph
zone at the time but it was peak hour so he was
going much more slowly than that
[33]. He came over a rise in the road and saw the traffic in front of him banked
up. He braked could
not stop in time and ran into the back of the other car at
He was a bit shocked, and that the claimant was the first person out of the
vehicle “he appeared to have no physical
injuries” [35]. Mr Khalil
realised the claimant’s car had hit the vehicle in front.
three drivers drove round the corner and exchanged details. Police and ambulance
were not called. He does not know if the other
vehicles were towed but says his
boss’s car was towed the next day [36].
claimant’s GP Dr Zhang referred the claimant for radiology on 12 June
2024. The radiology was performed on 15 June 2024
and reported on 17 June 2024.
The history given was “MVA 7 months ago. Patient complained of shooting
pain to the right lower
limb with tingling sensation 1 week after
was mild to moderate facet hypertrophy from L1-2 to L4-5. There was a small disc
bulge at L4-5 not causing any canal or neuroforaminal
stenosis but there was a
moderate central broad-based disc herniation at L5-S1 causing right
neuroforaminal stenosis and mild to
moderate left neuroforaminal stenosis. He
recommended a CT guided epidural injection.
claimant attended the Auburn Central Medical Centre on 12 June 2024. The
clinical note on that date from Dr Zhang says:
“History of MVA
7 months ago, been work, took Mobic for low back pain, on 18/10/23 was hit by
other car from behind. Patient
complained of shooting pain to the right lower
limb with tingling sensation. Symptoms comes and goes, RMO in Blacktown
claimant returned on 18 June 2024 and was given education, analgesia and
physiotherapy. A certificate of fitness was given and
Lyrica 75 mg
prescribed.
5 July 2024 Dr Zhang records persistent lower back pain with right sided
sciatica and right lower limb numbness and the claimant
apparently reported
being unable to lift more than 5 kg or stand more than 15 minutes. Maxigesic was
added to the medications and
swimming and physiotherapy added to the treatments.
On 19 July 2024 a script for Mobic was provided and a referral to a
physiotherapist
2 August 2024 the claimant complained of electric shocks when receiving massage
to the left leg and numbness and pain to the right
leg. On 30 August 2024 the
claimant was without improvement, and he was “unable to stand and walk
more than 15 minutes.”
25 October 2024 the claimant was referred to Dr Kam and prescribed Endone 5 mg
every six hours as required (PRN). On 22 November
2024 it was noted that the
claimant had not started taking the Endone and was taking Lyrica and Mobic with
“some effect”.
The claimant reported being unable to stand for more
than 10 minutes and was working less hours. On
20 December 2024 the claimant
was taking Endone and Lyrica and Mobic and was awaiting the report from Dr
7 February 2025 Dr Zhang provided a further script for Endone and
(a) reduced right sided knee reflex (normal left);
(b) positive straight leg raise on the right (negative on the left);
(c) 1cm smaller thigh circumference on the right compared to the left;
(d) weakness of right first toe flexion and extension (L5/S1 dermatome), and
(e) sensation of pain and touch reduced at right side L5/S1 dermatome area.
28 February 2025 the claimant reported to Dr Zhang that he was working four days
a week, had lost 5kg and was taking Endone, Lyrica
and Mobic. His weight was
measured at 85.3 kg. Of note is that when he commenced attending the practice
his weight was measured at
85 kg which suggests he had not lost 5 kg. On 22
April 2025 the claimant’s pain remained, along with the numbness and
and he said he was unable to stand for more than 15
Claimant’s evidence at the assessment
claimant said he was originally from Syria but moved to Russia to study
graduating in 1996. He lived in Russia for 14 years and
he worked in hospitals
in Russia after his initial training mainly performing surgery. He was aware
that in the 2000s a scheme for
compensation was introduced for persons injured
in car accident.
Koura came to Australia in 2004, and while he was reluctant to pursue medicine
here, his wife encouraged him to do so. It took
English and convert his qualifications. While he worked at Campbelltown Hospital
initially, he was,
at the time of the accident employed by the Department of
Health at the Blacktown and Mt Druitt hospitals.
his first statement at [17] Dr Koura had said in the five years before the
accident he had gone to Auburn Central Medical Centre.
He was advised that his
solicitors had informed the Commission he did not have a “regular
GP” before the accident and
that he had no past medical issues and no past
medical history. The claimant explained that he had only ever seen Dr Zhang
the accident, and he could not recall whether he had seen any doctor at
Auburn Central Medical Centre before the accident or whether
he had accompanied
his son there. After several questions he confirmed that he had seen doctors in
the five years before the accident
(and at various times since arriving in
Australia) but that he did not have a “regular GP” attending
anywhere that was
convenient to him including practices at Chester Hill,
Granville and Auburn.
confirmed he did not get sick or have illnesses and might only go to the doctor
for flu, vaccinations and things like that.
was asked about his medication use and taken to his first statement at [14]
where it was said he taking Panadol, Lyrica, Nurofen
and Mobic. Dr Koura said he
was not taking all of these medications at once or all of the time adding that
he was also now taking
Endone up to four times a day. He then clarified this by
saying he does not use it when he drives because it makes him drowsy and
him dizziness. Although he takes Endone four times a day, he also said he does
not take it when he is at work because he is
dealing with patients and he just
handles the pain.
claimant was asked about his attendance with Dr Zhang on 12 June 2024. It was
suggested to him that at that time Dr Zhang’s
notes say he was taking
Mobic. Dr Koura said this was a mistake and that at this time he was only taking
Maxigesic. Dr Koura confirmed
that before he saw Dr Zhang on 12 June 2024 he was
only taking over the counter medications and that it was Dr Zhang who prescribed
him Lyrica and Mobic which was helping him. He said no one else had prescribed
him Mobic before the accident.
Zhang explained that he worked in the hospitals on rotation. He had spent time
in emergency medicine and is now doing rehabilitation
medicine but at the time
of the accident he was on an orthopaedic and general surgery rotation. This
involved surgery to the appendix,
gall bladder, hernias as well as assisting
surgical procedures on knees and hips (replacements) broken bones and so on. He
mainly assisted with surgery because he was not a consultant orthopaedic
Koura says he does not have his own rooms and does not do private work. He is a
resident medical officer (RMO) with the Department
of Health. He agreed he had
treated people who have had car accidents, sometimes in emergency and during
their initial treatment.
He said as an RMO he does ward rounds always, but not
outpatients. He looks after patients after their admission to hospital and
before and after surgery.
Koura confirmed his surgical hours were from 7.00am to 4.00pm and that overtime
was from 4.00pm to 9.00pm. He said he used to do
a lot of overtime because it
was expected that RMOs would do overtime. Dr Koura said he was unsure when he
stopped doing overtime
at one stage saying it was after the CT scan in July 2024
and at another time he said it was two months after the accident. He then
he had not stopped doing overtime completely, but had reduced the hours. I asked
him whether he had to explain to his employer
why he was not doing overtime and
he said he just said he told them to “let the young doctors do it”.
Dr Koura says he is currently doing overtime once a week.
said he has not told his employer about the accident and had not told his
employer he was taking medication including Endone.
Koura said he was not really doing surgery now but doing ward work as an RMO and
when they need him for assistance. He says when
he does ward rounds, he has to
walk a lot but he takes breaks. He says he works at the computer typing up notes
and writing prescriptions
at other times.
said a gall bladder operation can take on average an hour to perform and that
hip replacement surgery would take between one and
a half and two hours. I asked
him whether he was sitting or standing? He said he was mostly standing but that
due to his pain he
stands on one leg resting his other leg to relieve his pain.
He says he takes Panamax and Ibuprofen when he is at work.
asked him about Dr Zhang’s certificates of fitness and overtime. Dr Zhang
had certified him fit for normal duties on 18 June
and 5 July 2024. The claimant
said that “normal duties” included overtime. He said he thought he
told Dr Zhang he could
not stand or walk and that he was having difficulties in
June and July doing overtime.
Koura said that as an RMO he was entitled to sick leave and knew that if he was
sick or his back was bad, he could take a day off
work and get paid for it. He
said he had taken sick leave but could not remember how much and preferred to
use his “rostered
days off” instead of sick leave.
Koura said that he was aware he could make a claim if he was injured in a car
accident he said “I know people make claims.
I am a doctor, and I know
these things.” But he was adamant he did not know about “the
limitation” that is he did
not know he had only three months to make a
claim. He said after he saw Dr Zhang and had the scan, he asked friends whether
still make a claim, and they told him he had 12 months to make a
confirmed that from the time he was involved in this car accident, he knew he
could make a claim but that he did not know about
the three months’ time
period to make it.
stated he did not realise how bad his injury was until after the scan and that
he assumed his initial pain would subside with treatment
and pain medication.
When I asked what he meant by treatment he said he had not had
“treatment” from anyone other than
over the counter medication
before he saw Dr Zhang.
Koura said he had the accident and felt pain immediately and diagnosed himself
with back pain “general back pain that everyone
has” and he thought
it would subside. He said his “main issue” was that if he attends a
GP “they will inform
my employer, and I will lose my job”. And he
said he needs his job because he is the only person employed in his family and
he has a lot of expenses.
was asked about paragraph [11] of his first statement. He confirmed he had pain
on the day of the accident, that he was in shock
but felt a crack or noise in
his back, then had pain. I asked whether he had “a lot of pain” at
the time but he said
he could not recall the severity of the pain. He said he
was in shock and pain together and that the pain was increasing.
his second statement at [19] I asked him about being in “shock for the
first week”. He says this is an error and that
he was not in shock for a
week only at the moment of the accident.
was asked about a later sentence when he had recorded that “within two
weeks the pain started radiating down his right leg”.
He said, “that
is true”. I asked what his self-diagnosis was at that time and he said he
thought he had “sciatic
nerve root compression” caused by a slipped
disc, inflammation or herniated disc”. Despite thinking of these things,
he did not think, two weeks after the accident, that he needed urgent medical
was asked whether, from the end of October 2023 until June 2024 he had a lot of
pain and it was radiating down the leg. He then
said the pain at this time was
“on and off”. And it was not “all the time at the
beginning”. He said the
pain was “small at the beginning” and
that, “slowly, slowly until I can’t walk and I sit in the shower
I can’t stand up”.
Dr Koura accepted that throughout
this time, he could work and could sit, stand and walk at work.
his second statement at [20] he said that “as my symptoms continued to
worsen ... I began to worry I could end up paralysed”.
He explained that
because of the radiating pain he was worried he would have to have surgery and
he was worried about the consequences
of surgery could lead to paralysis. Later
he explained that it was his wife who expressed the fear of paralysis and the
consequences
of surgery. Although she was not medically trained, he said they
had been married for more than 20 years and he had often talked
medical cases with her.
put to him that in summary his explanation for the delay was that he was in a
lot of pain on back on the day of the accident, and
within two weeks this pain
started radiating down the back of his right leg, that the pain got worse and
worse until it reached a
point when he could not cope with the pain and then he
went to the doctor. Dr Koura agreed with that. He was asked and agreed that
knew he had the right to make the claim since the day of the accident but did
not know he had only three months to make it. He
also said that the main reasons
for the delay were that he thought he would get better and was he was fearful of
losing his job.
response to questions from Mr Hanna (for the insurer), Dr Koura said:
(a) he worked at both Mount Druitt and Blacktown at the different hospitals on
different days. He was asked whether he knew about
staff doctors who are
available to treat other doctors. He said he thought that if something happened
to him and he needed medical
treatment, he would have to go to an emergency
department or a GP;
(b) he was asked about [19] of his second statement which read as if he had
taken medications (including Mobic and Lyrica), tried
massage and acupuncture
and then after these things failed, at his wife’s suggestion he went to
the doctor. He said that was
wrong and he did not mean to say that. He said he
only ever took Panadol and Panamax before going to the doctor. No one prescribed
it for him, and he did not prescribe it himself;
(c) at first, he said he experienced localised pain in back and agreed that when
operating he would be bending over the patient.
He said, “I used to stand
on one leg sometimes to rest” and would just handle the pain and take pain
(d) the claimant agreed that his back pain was his most concerning issue and
that he no longer experiences significant neck or shoulder
(e) Dr Koura agreed he was aware of spinal conditions “yes 100
percent” and that after the accident he thought he had
a slipped disc and
compression of the nerve. Dr Koura said the pain got worse over time, steadily
and slowly and that when he took
medication it would reduce form 7 out of 10 to
3 out of 10. “Slowly slow, increasing more and more”;
(f) he said he hoped his pain would get better and he expected it to get better.
He agreed that once he noticed symptoms radiating,
that was a progression to
something more serious “I know that”. He agreed with Mr Hanna that
his pain “never got
better, always getting worse slowly”. He said
when he had the scan, he was not expecting a herniation he thought it would be
slipped disc or nerve root compression, and
(g) Dr Koura said that two months after the accident, his pain was continuing
but the over-the-counter medication was helping. At
that stage he was still
working full time and overtime hours.
agreed there were brochures in the hospital entry foyer or waiting room, but he
never touched or read the brochures. He has seen
some advertising on the
television but did not recall specifically seeing advertising for law firms at
the hospital. He said he saw
advertisements for GMP on buses and TV.
Koura said he has never told any of the doctors he works with that he has a sore
back or that he has been involved in an accident.
He says he has friends who
work at the hospital, but he does not feel he can confide in them. He says he
takes medication before
he goes into surgery and they would not know he was
injured and in pain.
agreed that he knew within two months there was something wrong with his back.
He said he knows pain could last years. If he knew
“something big wrong
with me” he said he would have done something but “100 percent I
thought it would go away”.
He did not know anything “big”
happened until after the scan was done showing a herniated disc.
Koura confirmed that English is not his not first language. Assyrian and Arabic
are his first languages and he can also speak Russian
and Ukrainian. He said he
did not type his statements himself. He said they were typed by his lawyers over
the telephone and he signed
them when they were sent to
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
Is the claimant’s evidence reliable?
insurer made no attack on the claimant’s credibility accepting he was not
trying to mislead the insurer, but issues were
raised as to what was said in the
statements and what the claimant said at the assessment conference.
example, the claimant said in his first statement at [17] that in the five years
before the accident he “attended upon the
following medical
practitioners” and he nominated only one Auburn Central Medical Centre. At
the assessment conference Dr Koura
said he had been to other practices but had
no “regular” GP. The insurer did not take issue with this and for
seek to defer the assessment to enable the insurer to make enquiries
with the other practices identified (or obtain the claimant’s
claimant also said in his first statement at [21] that he no longer works
overtime. He gave evidence however that he had reduced
his overtime hours not
stopped them and was currently working overtime one day per week. The insurer
has not sought access to the
claimant’s overtime records from his
claimant’s evidence at the assessment conference was that he was not
prescribed Mobic until after the saw Dr Zhang and that
before this he was only
taking over the counter medication. Dr Zhang’s notes suggests otherwise
and the claimant was taking
Mobic at the time of the first attendance. The
insurer has not sought to defer the assessment in order to obtain a copy of the
PBS or Medicare records.
claimant explained that the statements were typed by someone in the office of
Gerard Malouf and Partner after a teleconference
(not at a face-to-face
meeting). While he said he had read them before signing and that he had read
them before the assessment conference
and that they were true and correct, Dr
Koura identified two errors in [19] of the second statement. The first was his
that he was in shock for a week and the second was the suggestion that
he had been prescribed medication and had acupuncture and
physiotherapy before
he went to Dr Zhang.
claimant said that English is not his first language (after Assyrian / Arabic
and Russian / Ukrainian) and while his evidence
at the assessment conference
could be understood the words and grammar he used at that time did not appear
consistent with the words
and grammar in the statements. It is quite clear to me
that the statements were not the claimant’s own words and have likely
“tidied up” by his solicitor.
Koura said on several occasions that he could not recall certain matters that
were important in respect of his claim. For example,
he could not recall with
any certainty precisely when he cut down his overtime hours and he could not
remember with any precision
whether he had been to Auburn Central Medical Centre
as a patient in the five years before the accident. As it is now two years since
the accident, the claimant’s inability to recall the finer details is
understandable.
I have some concerns about the reliability of the written statements Dr Koura
has given, I do not have doubts as to the general
nature of his explanation
which he gave at the assessment conference.
What is a full and
satisfactory explanation?
6.2(1) of the Act provides that:
“For the purposes of this
Part, a full and satisfactory explanation by a claimant for non-compliance with
a duty or for delay
is a full account of the conduct, including the actions,
knowledge and belief of the claimant, from the date of the accident until
date of providing the explanation.”
insurer has accepted Dr Koura’s explanation is full. Section 6.2(2) then
“The explanation is not a satisfactory explanation
unless a reasonable person in the position of the claimant would have ...
justified in experiencing the same delay.”
test of satisfactoriness is the same as in
Motor Accidents Act
and s 66(2) of the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
(the MAC Act).
it was held that fullness is judged by considering the
explanation given from the date of the accident to the time the explanation
provided, whereas satisfactoriness is judged by considering the delay. In this
case the delay is from three months after the accident
(that is 18 January 2024
when the claim should have been made) to 10 July 2024 (when it was made). The
delay is 25 weeks or close
to six months.
insurer cited the case of
which in turn cites the relevant cases in
relation to satisfactory explanations:
where it was said
that the subjective characteristics and circumstances of the claimant must be
taken into account when applying
the objective standard of the reasonable
person. In that case the person injured sustained a head injury which left him
with significant
cognitive difficulties, hardly a characteristic of the
“reasonable person”;
Diaz v Truong,
Giles JA said (at [42]) that while the standard of a reasonable person is
straightforward, the phrase "justified in experiencing"
a delay means:
“ ... that the reasonable person in the position of the claimant would
have been subjected to the delay and the subjection to
the delay would have been
justified. The hypothetical experiencing of delay must have the quality of a
justified experiencing of
delay", and
where Chief Justice
Gleeson said (at [5], [7]), what will constitute justifiable delay on the part
of a reasonable person in making
a claim is to be considered in the light of the
legislative purposes of the MAC Act encouraging early claims, early
treatment and
including collection of data and setting of premiums. It was also
said in that case that the effect on the insurer is not to be regarded
"...what the Act requires is justification for delay; not demonstration that the
delay caused no harm [to the insurer].”
What is the explanation?
summary, the explanation given by Dr Koura at the assessment conference which I
accept as his explanation is as follows:
(a) Dr Koura was involved in an accident, he was injured and thought he had a
general back strain or muscle pain which he expected
would improve over time;
(b) while his neck and shoulder pains have improved (he says they do not bother
him much now) it is his back pain which has slowly
got worse over time;
(c) the tingling and shooting pain in his right leg was first felt two weeks
after the accident and has got worse slowly over time.
This is corroborated by
Dr Zhang’s notes which record on 12 June 2024 that the radiating pain
“comes and goes”;
(d) the claimant self-diagnosed his condition and self-medicated (over the
counter medication only) until his symptoms got to a point
where he could not
manage them himself. I make this finding on the basis of the claimant’s
evidence and the absence of any
medical record or report to any health
practitioner before
12 June 2024;
(e) he is the family’s sole breadwinner and had to keep working which he
managed to do by modifying his work (standing on one
leg to relive pain in the
other leg while assisting with surgery and reducing his hours) and taking over
the counter medication only
while working. This finding is made on the basis of
the claimant’s own evidence and in the absence of any employment records,
(f) he started reducing his overtime hours after he first saw Dr Zhang and after
his first scan. I make this finding on the basis
Dr Zhang does not record any
variation in the claimant’s “normal duties” in the
certificates of fitness from 12
5 July 2024 and there is no note of a
variation of his duties in the records until
22 November 2024.
Koura’s explanation involves three broad themes:
(a) his belief that his injury would get better;
(b) his fear that if it became known he was injured that he would lose his job
which led to him managing his injury himself, and
(c) his ignorance of the time limit.
Koura was asked many questions about his belief about the nature of his injury
and could not be shaken that he genuinely thought
his injury would get better.
He was not challenged about his belief that he would lose his job if his injury
was known in his workplace
which supports his actions in self-managing his
Koura is a medical practitioner aware of the right to make a claim. I accept his
evidence that he has had no previous incidents,
accidents or claims while in
Australia. I also accept his evidence that he had no knowledge that the claim
should have been made
in three months. I accept therefore that he had no
knowledge of what the limitation period actually was until he saw his solicitors
and that he took no steps to find out about the limitation period before he saw
his solicitors.
Is the explanation satisfactory?
1988 the time for making a claim has been six months not three and the time to
commence court proceedings has, for a long time,
been three years. It is also
noteworthy that all of the cases cited by the parties in their submissions
concern claims made under
the previous schemes where claims were for lump sum
damages and not statutory entitlements.
insurer says that the claimant’s decision not to seek treatment and not
make a claim is not reasonable and that a reasonable
person would not have
waited so long. While I accept that the claimant’s delay is in part
explained by his delay in getting
treatment (the scan that revealed the
herniated disc) the question I have to ask and answer is whether a reasonable
person in the
position of the claimant would have been justified in experiencing
the same six month delay in lodging his claim form.
my view the explanation provided by the claimant for the delay is satisfactory
and that a reasonable person in the position of
the claimant (a medical
practitioner, for whom English is a second language, with a family that depends
on him for financial support)
would have been justified in experiencing the
same, nearly six month delay, for the following reasons:
(a) he was treating and managing his condition in the belief (informed by his
clinical experience in treating others) that it would
(b) he was coping with the pain, pushing through with medication (which reduced
his symptoms), and
(c) he was continuing to work including performing overtime (he was not
experiencing financial loss until some time after 12 June
was only when the claimant had difficulties managing and coping with his pain
and when he became concerned about his work being
affected that he realised he
needed to take action. He went to see a doctor, had a scan and realised he had a
herniated disc which
was a “big thing” for him and more serious than
he had previously thought.
remained ignorant of the three-month time limit until after he decided to make
the claim (having been advised by friends it was
12 months) and lodged his claim
promptly after seeking legal advice.
the insurer has agreed the claimant has a full explanation and I have determined
the claimant has a satisfactory explanation for
the delay in making his
statutory benefits claim, it follows that the late claim can be made in
accordance with s 6.13(3).
What is the amount of costs to be
Koura’s solicitors made a claim for costs on the basis of the sum for a
“regulated miscellaneous claims assessment
matter” as set out in
Schedule 1(3)(1) of the Motor Accident Regulation 2017 which is 16 monetary
units. The insurer did not
oppose an order for costs on that basis.
regulated monetary sum per unit is, as of 1 October 2025, the sum of $126.95.
The amount for the claimant’s reasonable costs
is therefore assessed as
to which goods and services
tax should be added.
Should this decision be
de-identified?
claimant made an application at the conclusion of the assessment conference
under Rule 132(1) (of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
) to have the
published form of these reasons de-identified. No reasons were given by his
solicitor other than the claimant wished
not to have his name published. The
insurer did not object to the decision being de-identified by removing the
claimant’s name.
determination of such an application falls to me under
Rule 132(3)
relevant considerations are set out in
Rule 132(4)
which includes the objects of
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
and the requirement that the
Commission should be “open and transparent about its processes” and
whether it is necessary
in the public interest for the direction to be
claimant is a doctor in the public health system. He has not told his employers
or any of his colleagues that he was involved
in an accident, that he has
injuries that are causing him significant levels of pain which result in him
standing on one leg during
surgery and he is taking medication (outside working
hours) including medication that causes dizziness and sleepiness. In my view
is in the public interest that this decision is published and that is should not
be de-identified.
[2009] NSWCA
[2016] NSWDC
[2012] NSWCA 446
[2009] NSWCA
[2002] NSWCA
Schedule 3(3) provides for
the rounding up or down after the monetary unit calculation is made.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (570 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter