URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1347.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bushell v George [2025] NSWSC 1347 (17 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Bushell v George
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1347
Hearing Date(s):
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15 and 16 July 2025
Date of Orders:
17 November 2025
Decision Date:
17 November 2025
Hmelnitsky J
(1) The proceedings brought by the first plaintiff are dismissed.
Direct the second plaintiff to file and serve short submissions as to the form
of an order for further provision and any notional
estate orders on or before 15
December 2025.
(3) Direct the defendants to file and serve short submissions
as to the form of an order for further provision for the second plaintiff
any notional estate orders on or before 3 February 2026.
(4) Direct the
second plaintiff to file and serve any submissions in reply on or before 17
February 2026.
(5) Direct the parties to file and serve any evidence and
short submissions on the question of costs on or before 15 December 2025.
Direct the parties to file and service any evidence and short submissions in
reply on the question of costs on or before 3 February
Catchwords:
ESTOPPEL — Proprietary estoppel — Encouragement — Where
deceased transferred approximately 3000 ha of farmland to
second defendant
— Where second defendant and plaintiffs are siblings — Whether the
deceased had made representations
to the plaintiffs that they would each get a
third of the farmland — Whether it was reasonable for the plaintiffs to
the alleged representations — Whether the plaintiffs relied to
their detriment on the alleged promises
SUCCESSION — Family provision
— Claim by adult children for provision from the deceased’s estate
Succession Act 2006
(NSW), Ch 3 — Potentially large notional estate
— Where plaintiffs each received cash legacy and second defendant received
farmland — Whether adequate and proper provision made for the plaintiffs
— Where plaintiffs contend they should each
be given further provision to
fund the purchase of farmland
Legislation Cited:
Limitation Act 1969
Real Property Act 1900
Succession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
Alexander v Jansson
[2010] NSWCA 176
; (2010) 6 ASTLR 432
Ashton v Pratt
[2012] NSWSC 3
Bahr v Nicolay (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 604
Barnes v Alderton
[2008] NSWSC 107
(2008) 13 BPR 25,281
[2021] NSWCA 320
Bassett v Cameron
[2021] NSWSC 207
Blore v Lang
(1960) 104 CLR 124
[1960] HCA 73
Bowditch v NSW Trustee and Guardian
Estate Grundy; La Valette v Chambers-Grundy
[2018] NSWSC
; (2018) 17 ASTLR 64
Flinn v Flinn
[1999] 3 VR 712
[1999] VSCA
Frazer v Walker
[1967] 1 AC 569
Gillett v Holt [2001] Ch
Giumelli v Giumelli
(1999) 196 CLR 101
[1999] HCA 10
(1980) 144 CLR 490
[1980] HCA 31
Hampson v Hampson
[2010] NSWCA 359
; (2010) 5 ASTLR 116
Heggies Bulkhaul v Global Minerals
(2003) 59 NSWLR 312
[2003] NSWSC 851
Kramer v Stone
[2024] HCA 48
(2024) 99 ALJR 126
Lumb v McMillan
[2007] NSWSC 386
Mapa Pearls Pty Ltd v
Haliotis Fisheries Pty Ltd
(2023) 71 VR 581
[2023] VSCA 108
McNab v Graham
(2017) 53 VR 311
[2017] VSCA 352
Presbyterian Church (NSW) Property Trust v
Scots Church Development Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 676
(2007) 64 ACSR 31
pseudonym) v E Co (a pseudonym)
[2020] NSWCA 220
(2020) 383 ALR 469
[2015] NSWCA 42
; (2015) 14 ASTLR 442
Sidhu v Van Dyke
(2014) 251 CLR
[2014] HCA 19
Singer v Berghouse (1994) 181 CLR 201;
Slack v Rogan; Palffy v Rogan
(2013) 85 NSWLR 253
Soulos v Pagones; Soulos v Soulos; Soulos v Soulos; Soulos v
Pagones; Kristallis v Soulos; Kristallis v Soulos; Kristallis v Pagones
(2023) 416 ALR 181
Starr v Miller; Starr v Miller
[2021] NSWSC
Strang v Steiner
[2019] NSWCA 143
; (2019) 19 ASTLR 330
[2023] NSWSC 565
Trentelman v Owners – Strata
Plan No 76700
(2021) 106 NSWLR 227
[2021] NSWCA 242
Underwood v Gaudron
[2014] NSWSC 1055
Vigolo v Bostin
(2005) 221 CLR 191
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
James Rodney Bushell (First Plaintiff)
Hannah Sophy McPherson (Second
Peter Bruce George as Executor of the Estate of the late Wayne
Keith Bushell (First Defendant)
Abraham Edward Bushell (Second
Representation:
T Alexis SC / A Zheng (Plaintiffs)
DW Rayment SC / A
Smorchevsky (Defendants)
Solicitors:
Cole & Butler
(Plaintiffs)
Chambers Russell Lawyers (Defendants)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
The dispute in broad outline
The Farming Entities
The Bushell Children
Proprietary Estoppel claims
Detrimental reliance
Succession Act claims
The 1989 Wills
The 2015 Wills
The 2018 Will
The 2021 Wills
Wayne’s health
The facts in more detail
James Bushell – childhood and early
Hannah McPherson – childhood and early
James is promoted at KPMG
Wayne and Jo purchase Arizona and Ivanhoe
James considers purchasing Currawong
Wayne offers to transfer the farm to James in 2008
March 2011 – Hannah moves to Laos
January 2012 – James writes to his father
May 2012 – James moves to Chile
Hannah resigns from Clayton Utz
Wayne and Jo separate
The events of 2013
2014 – Hannah starts a business; moves to
2014 – James is offered a path to partnership
with KPMG Chile
2014 – James takes a sabbatical from KPMG and
returns to the farm
Hannah becomes estranged from Wayne
2015 – James receives a further offer of a
path to partnership
2015 – Wayne and Jo’s financial
April 2015 – James and Wayne have a falling
2016 Annuity Deed
James briefly returns to KPMG
Abe’s divorce
The events of 2018-2019
2020 – Wayne’s meetings with Georgeina
October 2020 – James sends Wayne a
2020 and 2021 – Further meetings between Wayne
and Georgeina Ryan
2020 and 2021 – The contract for sale, the
loan agreement, and the variation
2020 and 2021 – The caveat proceedings
March 2021 – Police incident
NCAT proceedings
The Proprietary Estoppel Claim
Proprietary estoppel by encouragement –
applicable principles
Some observations about the evidence
What did Wayne say?
Did Wayne make the pleaded representations to
Did Wayne expect Hannah to rely on the
representations and expectations?
Did Hannah rely to her detriment on the
representations and expectations?
Did Wayne make the pleaded representations to
Did Wayne expect James to rely on the
representations and expectations?
Did James rely to his detriment on the
representations and expectations?
Conclusions in relation to the proprietary estoppel
Defences to the proprietary estoppel claims
Section 43 of the Real Property Act
Limitation and laches
Limitation Act defences
Laches, acquiescence and delay
The Succession Act claims
James’s current financial circumstances
James’s financial needs
Hannah’s current financial circumstances
Hannah’s financial needs
Abe’s current financial circumstances
Abe’s financial needs
Abe’s evidence about Wayne’s
Family provision claims – applicable
Adult children
Large estates
Estrangement
Farm estates
Testator’s intention
The parties’ submissions on whether adequate
provision was made
Did Wayne’s Will make adequate provision for
the plaintiffs?
Adequate provision – common factors
James’s circumstances
Hannah’s circumstances
Orders for further provision for Hannah
plaintiffs are James Bushell and Hannah McPherson. They are two of the three
children of the late Wayne Bushell, who died on 2
November 2021 at the age of
66. His third and youngest child, Abraham (Abe) Bushell, is the second
defendant. Without intending any
disrespect, I will refer to members of the
Bushell family by their first names. Abe and the first defendant, Peter George,
executors of Wayne’s estate.
Introduction
was a farmer. By 2020, he owned eight parcels of land totalling about 3011
hectares near Barmedman, northwest of Temora in the
Riverina region of New South
Wales (the farm).
18 November 2020, Wayne and Abe entered into a contract whereby Abe purchased
the whole of the land comprising the farm for $13,000,000.
A related ‘Loan
Agreement’ provided for the purchase price to be left outstanding as an
interest only loan at 0.75% per
annum, repayable in 30 years.
24 May 2021, Wayne made his final will. He gave legacies of $600,000 to each of
James and Hannah, to be paid in five equal instalments
over five years. The rest
of his estate was left to Abe, including his share in the company which carried
on the farming business.
11 June 2021, Wayne and Abe executed a document entitled ‘Loan Agreement
– Variation’. Among other things, this
document provided that of the
total $13,000,000 purchase price for the farm, Abe was now only required to
repay $1,200,000 over 5
years, plus $50,000 per year on account of interest, and
that the rest of the purchase price for the farm was a ‘gift’
result of these transactions was that when Wayne died later that year, Abe was
already the owner of the whole of the farmland
and the company which conducted
the farming business, subject to a requirement that he pay only $1,200,000 of
the purchase price
to Wayne’s estate. This amount was sufficient to pay
the legacies to James and Hannah, but nothing more. The evidence shows
land had a total value of about $20,000,000 at the time of Wayne’s
plaintiffs’ primary case is that these transactions and the May 2021 will
represented a serious departure by Wayne from
representations which he had made
over the course of decades as to an eventual three-way split of the land
comprising the farm. They
say that they relied to their detriment on those
representations and that it was unconscionable of Wayne to resile from them.
claim is one of proprietary estoppel by encouragement. The primary relief
sought by each plaintiff is a constructive trust over the
whole of the land to
secure the respective one-third interests which, they say, Wayne encouraged them
to believe they would receive.
the alternative, the plaintiffs ask the Court to make family provision orders
Succession Act 2006
(NSW). To that end, they seek
orders under
designating the land as notional estate for the purpose of
satisfying the orders.
addition to their general denials, the defendants raise a matter that rather
complicates the proprietary estoppel claims. After
Wayne and Abe had entered
into the contract for sale of the land but before settlement, James and Hannah
became aware of their arrangements.
They consulted a solicitor who promptly
lodged caveats against title to the land. Wayne then caused a lapsing notice to
This step precipitated these proceedings, which were commenced by a
summons filed in Court before the Duty Judge shortly before the
caveats lapsed.
Both Wayne and Abe were named as defendants. The summons, together with a
supporting affidavit from their solicitor,
set out the plaintiffs’ basic
proprietary estoppel case. However, the Duty Judge declined to extend the
caveats, principally
because the plaintiffs had delayed in bringing it. In
refusing to extend the caveats, his Honour expressed the view that any
proprietary
right which the plaintiffs had in the land would survive the
proposed transfer to Abe in any event, because Abe would take the land
notice of his siblings’ equitable claims.
thereafter, the caveats having lapsed, the contract for sale was completed and
Abe became the registered proprietor and Crown
lessee of all of the lots
comprising the farm. He now says that by virtue of
Property Act 1900
(NSW) he took title free of James and Hannah’s
equitable claims despite being on notice of them. If the plaintiffs otherwise
succeed in their proprietary estoppel case, it will be necessary to determine
whether any proprietary relief is available in the
The dispute in broad outline
will describe the farm and the background to the litigation in broad outline
before identifying the particular issues in dispute
and dealing with the facts
in more detail.
was the third generation of his family to farm in the Barmedman region. His
grandfather, Abraham Henry Bushell, moved to the
area and acquired two
properties known as Bridgefield and Pinegrove in about 1936. At some point,
these properties became owned by
Wayne’s father, Keith Bushell. They are
where Keith and his wife, Joan, raised Wayne and his two sisters, Janet and
Bridgefield and Pinegrove were eventually transferred to Wayne in June
2018, shortly prior to Keith’s death in early 2019.
Joan also died in
early 2019.
his twenties, Wayne entered into a farming partnership with his parents pursuant
to which they farmed Bridgefield and Pinegrove.
At some point Wayne purchased a
nearby property, The Vale, in his own name.
late 1979, Wayne met Joanne (Jo) Maree Woods who was at that time studying to
become a teacher in Sydney. In 1980, Wayne sold The
Vale and purchased Oaklands,
which adjoined his parents’ farm. Wayne and Jo were married on 2 January
1982 and she was added
to the partnership with Wayne, Keith and Joan (the First
Bridgefield Partnership). That partnership conducted the farming business
three properties, being Bridgefield, Pinegrove and Oaklands, for many years.
2003, Keith and Joan retired from active farming but continued to own and live
on Bridgefield and Pinegrove. The First Bridgefield
Partnership was dissolved at
the end of that financial year and, from 1 July 2003, the farm was run by a new
partnership between
Wayne and Jo (the Second Bridgefield Partnership). Wayne and
Jo leased Bridgefield and Pinegrove from Keith and Joan for that purpose.
time, Wayne purchased additional land in the region. Some adjoined the existing
properties, some did not. By 2018, the eight
parcels making up the farm and
their approximate areas were as follows, arranged in order of acquisition by
(1) Oaklands – 187 hectares;
(2) Bellview – 447 hectares;
(3) Sunnyside (Hills) – 492 hectares;
(4) Twitts – 221 hectares;
(5) Arizona and Ivanhoe – respectively 437 and 243 hectares;
(6) Currawong – 532 hectares;
(7) Bridgefield – 267 hectares;
(8) Pinegrove – 185 hectares.
of these properties are properties under the
Real Property Act
a portion of Bellview which is Crown land and farmed under a Crown lease.
was purchased in Jo’s name in 2011, shortly before Wayne and Jo separated
in September 2012. They were divorced following
a financial settlement in
February 2015. The Second Bridgefield Partnership was dissolved at some point in
2014, although it is not
entirely clear whether this occurred on 30 June 2014 or
31 December 2014. In any event, Jo transferred her interest in that partnership
as well as her interest in Currawong to Wayne as part of their financial
settlement.
evidence included the following diagram of the properties making up the
are numerous improvements on the farm. These were described by James as
“(a) farmhouses on Bridgefield, Oaklands and Arizona;
(b) machinery sheds and haysheds on Bridgefield, Oaklands, Bellview, Hills,
Arizona and Currawong;
(c) woolsheds on Bridgefield and Oaklands;
(d) grain silos on Bridgefield, Bellview and Arizona;
(e) grain sheds on Bridgefield;
(f) fertilizer sheds on Bridgefield;
(g) water pumps, pipes, tanks and troughs on Bridgefield, Pinegrove and
(h) fencing on all properties; and
(i) dams on all properties.”
The Farming Entities
the years, the farming business was conducted through various partnerships,
trusts and companies. I have already mentioned the
First and Second Bridgefield
Partnerships above. The evidence about the entities created or used in later
periods was not always
easy to follow. For convenience, I summarise the position
as follows.
1 June 2012, shortly prior to their divorce, Wayne and Jo caused a new company
to be incorporated, Bridgefield Farming Pty Ltd
(ACN 158 704 440) (the
Bridgefield Company). Wayne and Jo were directors and shareholders. On 25
September 2012, they caused a discretionary
trust to be settled on the
Bridgefield Company as trustee.
1 October 2012, a new partnership was registered for GST purposes, the partners
of which were Wayne, Jo and the Bridgefield Company
(the Third Bridgefield
Partnership). I was unable to determine whether this partnership ever traded.
December 2012, shortly after Wayne and Jo’s separation, Wayne registered
as a sole trader. He seems however not to have traded
as such until 1 January
2015, and even then he only did so for a period of about six months.
September 2014, there was a further partnership established. The partners were
Wayne and Abe (the WKB and AEB Partnership).
1 July 2015, the business was carried on by a partnership between Wayne, Abe and
the trustee of the Abe and Jenna Family Trust
in the proportions 35%, 35% and
30% respectively (the First Bridgeline Agriculture Partnership). A Partnership
Agreement recording
the terms of this partnership was executed on 1 February
2016. Jenna was Abe’s wife at the time.
Abe and Jenna’s separation, Wayne and Abe began trading in a different
partnership (the Second Bridgeline Agriculture
Partnership) on 1 January 2019.
However, they only did so for about six months.
1 July 2019, the farming business has been carried on by Bridgefield Farming Pty
Ltd (ACN 633 676 699) (Bridgefield Farming)
in its own right. This entity was
registered in May 2019. Abe is now the sole shareholder and director of
Bridgefield Farming.
The Bushell Children
was born in 1984. Hannah was born in 1986. Abe was born in 1987. The three
children spent their entire childhoods at Oaklands.
They all have fond memories
of growing up on the farm. From a very young age, all three children did farm
chores like feeding chickens
and dogs, collecting wood, mowing lawns and so on.
They were all heavily involved in the life of the farm in their own way so long
as they lived there.
completed his HSC at Temora High School in 2001. He was an excellent student. He
went to the University of Sydney where he obtained
a first-class honours degree
in Agricultural Economics. He joined the graduate program at KPMG in January
2008, where he gained professional
qualifications and became a successful
auditor. He was offered partnership opportunities with KPMG Chile, where he
worked for several
years on secondment as the lead auditor for BHP Copper.
However, in circumstances discussed below, he declined those offers. Instead,
took a 12-month sabbatical from KPMG to return to Australia to live with his
father on Arizona for about nine months during the
period in which his parents
were seeking to arrive at a property settlement. He then returned to KPMG for
to complete a PhD at the University of Sydney. He
now works as a senior public servant in Canberra. He lives with his partner in
Canberra, where they own a home. Save for a period of about nine months during
the sabbatical to which I have referred, he has not
returned to the farm to live
since graduating from university.
also attended Temora High School. Like James, she was an excellent student. She
completed her HSC in 2003 and moved to Sydney
to study a combined Bachelor of
Arts (Communications) and Bachelor of Law degree at the University of
Technology. She completed her
practical legal training concurrently with her
final year of academic study and was admitted to practice in February 2009. She
employment as a graduate lawyer with Clayton Utz in November 2009. In
2011, she took a 12-month leave of absence to volunteer in
a disability
organisation in Laos. While living in Laos, she resigned from Clayton Utz. She
returned to Australia in April 2012 and
moved with her long-term partner,
Jarrod, to his house in Narrandera. Hannah and Jarrod are now married. They have
two small children
and live in Albury, where they own a home. Save for a period
of about six months during 2009 when she returned to help look after
between being admitted as a lawyer and commencing as a graduate at Clayton Utz,
Hannah has also not returned to the farm
was a terrible student. He was not at all academically inclined. In 2003, his
parents sent him to Yanco Agricultural High School,
a boarding school near
Narrandera, but it did not work out well. He was suspended twice during his year
there. He completed Year
10 at the end of 2003 and returned to the farm, where
he has worked ever since. He has essentially done nothing but farming since
leaving school, although his devotion to the task was doubtful when he was a
very young man. He was married to Jenna Looney, whom
he met when he was about
19. They had three children together. Abe and Jenna are now divorced. Abe has a
new partner, Kiri Baker,
but they do not live together the whole of the time.
Proprietary Estoppel claims
and Hannah both say that Wayne made representations to them throughout their
childhood and early adulthood in relation to an
eventual three-way division of
the land among the three siblings. Their pleaded case was as follows.
alleges that during his childhood, Wayne made representations or otherwise
encouraged him to believe that he would ‘obtain
an equal share in the
[farm] with his siblings’ either under Wayne’s will (if Jo
predeceased Wayne) or under Jo’s
will (if Wayne predeceased Jo but subject
in that event to a life interest in favour of Jo). In the amended statement of
claim, this
was called the ‘equal share representation to James’.
also alleges that during his childhood, Wayne ‘encouraged James to leave
the [farm] and obtain qualifications in an unrelated
profession or vocation
before returning to the [farm] and taking up a permanent or full-time role as
part of the [farm’s] operations’.
In the amended statement of claim,
this was called the ‘qualification expectation to James’.
further alleges that, from time to time since leaving the farm in 2002, Wayne
made representations that were ‘consistent
with or more favourable to
James than the equal share representation’ in that he both repeated the
equal share representation
and also, separately, ‘represented that he
intended to leave to James half or more of the ‘farm’ under his will
or by a transfer during his lifetime’. He also alleges that Wayne
represented that he would leave specific parcels of land
to him under his will
‘or by a transfer during his lifetime’. In the amended statement of
claim, these were called the
‘further representations to James’.
alleges that throughout her childhood, Wayne made an equivalent ‘equal
share representation’ and expressed an equivalent
‘qualification
expectation’ to her in essentially the same terms as the ‘equal
share representation to James’
and the ‘qualification expectation to
James’. Thus, each plaintiff relies on essentially the same equal share
representation
and qualification expectation, so-called.
alleges that the equal share representation and qualification expectation were
repeated to her from time to time after she
reached adulthood. She does not
however rely on any ‘further representations’ such as James
Detrimental reliance
and Hannah say that they relied to their detriment on the representations and
expectations to which I have referred.
says that between 2002 and 2012, in reliance on the equal share representation
and the qualification expectation, he ‘made
academic decisions and pursued
professional opportunities in order to acquire knowledge and skills that would
contribute to the operations
and business of the [farm]’ and that he also
‘returned to the [farm] on a regular basis in order to participate in farm
activities such as assisting with the annual harvest’.
says that between September 2014 and July 2015, he relied on the equal share
representation and the further representations by
doing the following
(1) Declining an offer to pursue partnership with KPMG Chile.
(2) Taking a 12-month sabbatical without pay from KPMG Australia.
(3) Returning to Australia and moving in with Wayne in order to assist him to:
(a) organise his financial assets, including the farm;
(b) formulate a financial settlement between Wayne and Jo; and
(c) obtain ongoing financial support to ensure the continued operation of the
alleges that she relied on the qualification expectation by doing the following
(1) Leaving the farm in 2004.
(2) Pursuing tertiary education at the University of Technology Sydney between
2004 and 2008.
(3) Undertaking practical legal training at law firms in Sydney and completing
her Graduate Certificate in Legal Professional Practice.
(4) Getting admitted to the practice of law in February 2009.
(5) Commencing employment with Clayton Utz in Sydney in November 2009.
alleges that she relied on the equal share representation in doing the following
(1) Making academic decisions in order to acquire knowledge and skills that
would contribute to the operations and business of the
farm rather than doing so
based on personal interest. She specifically pleads that she pursued the
combined arts/law degree ‘at
the expense of a personal interest in and
affinity with medicine’.
(2) Pursuing professional opportunities that also enabled her to acquire
knowledge and skills that would contribute to the operations
and business of the
farm. Particulars of this allegation include such things as doing pro bono work
for rural and regional clients
whilst employed at Clayton Utz, as well as
participating in the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales Showgirl
Competition.
(3) Returning to the farm between 2004 and 2011 in order to help with farm work,
such as the annual harvest.
(4) Resigning from Clayton Utz in March 2012.
(5) Relocating to regional NSW in April 2012 ‘in order to be closer to,
and provide support for’ the farm.
(6) Pursuing employment with organisations operating in the Riverina region
‘in close proximity to’ the farm or that
offered roles ‘that
enable her to continue to acquire experience, knowledge and skills that would
contribute to the operations
and business of’ the farm. Particulars to
this allegation included matters such as taking casual work with an Albury law
taking a position at the Australian Taxation Office in Albury,
volunteering with the Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency
government agency created to accelerate the transformation of agriculture in
Ethiopia based on global best practice. This
last-mentioned position was between
June and October 2014.
also pleads that between 2012 and 2019, she declined other employment
opportunities that were located outside the Riverina
region, in order to remain
close to the farm.
and Hannah say that Wayne was aware of their detrimental reliance on his
representations and expectations and that as a result
of his unconscionable
departure from them, all eight parcels of land comprising the farm are now held
on a remedial constructive
trust for them as to one third each. They say that if
this relief is granted, they would repay and otherwise disclaim the legacies
which Wayne left them under his will.
Succession Act
and Hannah seek orders in the alternative pursuant to
Succession Act
. They submit that the Court should be satisfied that
proper provision was not made for them under Wayne’s will and that the
Court should make family provision orders that would provide them with a
sufficient sum to allow them each to purchase a farm. They
submit that their
legacies of $600,000 each are paltry compared to the overall value of the
says that the legacies given to Hannah and James under the will are adequate
provision for them and that they have not made out
a case for unmet financial
needs. He has also put his own financial circumstances in issue. He says that
the burden of making any
additional provision for James and Hannah would likely
jeopardise his ability to keep the farm intact, contrary to Wayne’s
express wishes.
completing this broad overview of the facts and issues, it is convenient to
describe the various wills which Wayne made over
his lifetime.
The 1989 Wills
made a will on 21 July 1989. By this will, Wayne left Oaklands and his interest
in the Bridgefield Partnership to Jo. He left
some or all of Bellview to Jo, who
was also to be his executor, to be held on trust to pay income to Jo until the
youngest child
attained 23 years, and thereupon for the children equally. The
residue of the estate was left to Jo. In the event that Jo did not
survive him
by 30 days, the properties were given to Keith to hold on trust for the children
in equal shares until the youngest child
attained 23 years.
made a will on 4 August 1989 by which she left her entire estate to Wayne but,
should he not survive her, to her mother Wilma to
hold on trust for the children
in equal shares until the youngest child attained 23 years.
made three wills during the course of 2015.
first was made on 3 February 2015. This will was made right about the time Wayne
and Jo reached their final property settlement
but before final orders were
made. The executors were Wayne’s sister, Janet, as well as James and Abe.
He divided his estate
as follows:
(1) Oaklands, Bellview and Twitts were left to Abe. This represented about 855
(2) Arizona, Ivanhoe and Sunnyside were left to James, Hannah and Abe in equal
shares with Abe ‘to have the first right to
purchase each of his
siblings’ interests in any or all of the properties at the then current
market value...such election to
be made within 12 months of the date of my
death’. This represented about 1172 hectares.
(3) All farming plant and machinery was left to Abe.
(4) The residue was left to any surviving children equally.
second was made on 7 July 2015. This will appointed James, Hannah and Abe as
executors. Clause 3 provided:
“It is my desire that my estate to be divided equally between my children
but for my son ABRAHAM EDWARD BUSHELL to continue
farming on my lands and
therefore for him to be given the opportunity to buy out his siblings’
interests if possible. In making
this Will I have given consideration to the
value of the respective properties and the work performed by Abraham on the
farms during
my lifetime, for which payment is still owed by me. As such it is
intended that Abraham receives a greater share of lands in lieu
estate was then divided as follows:
(1) Oaklands, Bellview and Currawong were given to Abe.
(2) Twitts, Arizona, Ivanhoe and Sunnyside were to be sold, with Abe to have a
right to purchase within two years of the date of
Wayne’s death. The net
proceeds of sale were to be divided equally between James and Hannah.
(3) All farming plant and machinery was left to Abe.
(4) The residue was left to any surviving children equally.
third was made on 17 December 2015. It appointed Abe to be executor. Clause 3
provided that the whole of Wayne’s estate
was to go to Abe or, should Abe
not survive him, to Abe’s estate.
The 2018 Will
next will was made on 14 November 2018. Abe was appointed executor and trustee.
The whole of the estate was to be held by Abe
as trustee of a testamentary trust
for Abe, as the primary beneficiary, Abe’s children, as secondary
beneficiaries, and various
other associated beneficiaries such as Abe’s
spouse, or any grandchildren. The trust was to be discretionary both as to
and income.
The 2021 Wills
made two wills in 2021.
first was made on 11 February 2021. Abe and Mr George were appointed executors.
The farm (whether under the 18 November 2020 contract
or otherwise) and
Wayne’s shares in Bridgefield Farming were devised and bequeathed to Abe.
James and Hannah were each left
$300,000, to be paid over a period of five years
in five equal instalments. The residue of the estate was left to the ‘Abe
Bushell Trust’ established under Part B of this will. Abe was to be the
initial trustee, appointor and principal beneficiary
of this trust. Other
beneficiaries included the descendants of the principal beneficiary and
associated entities. Hannah and James
were beneficiaries only if there were no
other living beneficiaries.
Wayne made a will on 24 May 2021, which is the will admitted to probate. The
main difference between this 24 May will and
the 11 February will was that
Hannah and James were each left $600,000 instead of $300,000 to be paid over
five years in five equal
instalments.
is important to understand Wayne’s conduct over the relevant period
against the background of his declining – and ultimately
debilitatingly
poor – health.
was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease in about September 2002 at the age
of 47. From the outset, his condition made him
physically weaker. This had an
impact on the whole family, because it affected his ability to do manual farming
work. Hannah, who
was then in her final year of high school and the only child
living on the farm at the time, took on additional duties on the farm.
condition was progressive. In June 2011, he underwent deep brain stimulation
surgery. Shortly after this surgery, his
temperament apparently worsened. By
2012, Wayne’s Parkinson’s disease was beginning to affect his
speech. His physical
abilities and involvement on the farm became very limited,
and he was only able to work an average of two hours in the summer and
the winter.
was at this point that Wayne and Jo separated. James observed in late 2013 that
Wayne’s movements were jerkier and that he
had difficulties maintaining
his balance. He noticed that Wayne now needed to rest in the middle of the day,
which he had not previously
done. By this stage, Abe was doing the overwhelming
bulk of the labouring and management work on the farm.
2017, Wayne had become extremely frail. At some point, his eyes stopped opening
fully. The evidence does not however show that
Wayne’s intellectual
capacity was affected by the disease. He remained keenly interested in the
moved into Settlers Village in December 2019. At some point, he was diagnosed
with chronic kidney disease. In October 2021,
Wayne made the decision to stop
died on 2 November 2021, aged 66 years. Probate of Wayne’
will was granted to Mr George and Abe on 30 March 2022.
facts in more detail
will deal with the facts in the following way. First, I will make findings about
the overall course of events. In the course of
doing so I will set out key parts
of James and Hannah’s evidence dealing with the representations and with
their claimed detrimental
reliance. I will then turn to the proprietary estoppel
claims and, in that context and in the light of my other findings, make specific
findings concerning the making of the representations and the questions of
reliance and detriment.
James Bushell – childhood and
early adulthood
recalls discussions during his childhood in which his father said:
“Eventually the farm will be split evenly between you three. There will be
no favourites, it will all be split equally. No
one will be left out. But you
must go away and earn a qualification and get off farm experience before you can
come back.”
general impression was that his father expected the children to return to the
farm at the age of about 25 to 30. His
father would also say things such as
‘one day, part of this land will be yours’. He also recalls his
father telling him
that his will provided for his estate to go first to Jo, and
then for it to be split among the children. Jo also said similar things
James’ childhood. However, James never saw any of their wills until around
the time of this litigation.
also recalls that Wayne told him in 2003 that Wayne’s parents would leave
Bridgefield and Pinegrove to him (ie Wayne)
‘so it’s staying a part
of our farm. It won’t be split. I don’t want to hand on the farm
like Pop is doing.
It has to be equal between the three of you.’
already mentioned, James was a very good student and, after completing high
school, undertook a Bachelor of Agricultural Economics
degree at the University
of Sydney, where he seems to have thrived. When he told his father what he
intended to study, his father
“An agricultural business degree is probably more helpful in the longer
run than an agricultural science degree. They are dime
a dozen and there are
plenty of agronomists around but not that many people are trained in farm
business and know about that sort
had the benefit of a scholarship that covered HECS but did not cover all of his
costs of living at St Andrew’s College.
His parents paid the balance of
his fees for his first year but, from his second year onwards, he was
self-funded, including because
he qualified for independent rate youth
usually returned to the farm during university holidays. He worked on the farm
in these periods and also took part-time seasonal
roles doing agricultural jobs.
He worked for GrainCorp Technical Services in Temora during the 2001/2002 and
2003/2004 harvest periods.
He worked for Ricegrowers Limited on their Easter
Show stand in 2002. In 2003, as part of his studies, he undertook a four-week
experience placement on a rice farm near Deniliquin. Wayne helped him
obtain this position. From time to time he looked after the
farm while his
parents were away for short periods.
his degree, James wrote a thesis on the subject of incentives in the commercial
services remuneration model adopted by AWB Limited.
He discussed his thesis with
his father frequently. He graduated in about March 2006.
his final year of his undergraduate degree, James obtained a position with the
KPMG graduate audit program, which commenced in
February 2006. He indicated his
interest in working in the Consumer and Industrial Markets division and was
hired to join the audit
team in that division. This was his main area of work
for the following six years. He sought out clients in the agricultural sector.
He also joined the Australian Institute of Company Directors.
was assigned to the Qantas audit which, at the time, was the largest audit in
the division and was given the highest level of customer
Hannah McPherson – childhood and early adulthood
recounts several occasions during her childhood on which Wayne made statements
She recalls being at a barbecue
when she was in about year 10 at which Wayne said that ‘down the track,
the farm will be split
with you three kids’. She says that she was heavily
influenced by statements such as these when it came to choosing school
and her university degree. She says she selected business studies and legal
studies for the HSC on Wayne’s advice.
For university, she suggested
Medicine, Law, Geology and Meteorology. Wayne discouraged her from Geology and
Meteorology. As for
the choice between Medicine and Law, he said:
“I kind of want you to study medicine because I didn’t take the same
opportunity and you are good with blood and guts,
but you don’t want to be
at uni forever. Do law then you can be out working and plus you will be more use
to us then on the
farm, I won't have to pay one of those tinny bastards then.
You might actually save me some money!”
said that she was not particularly interested in law but that she chose it
‘based on Wayne’s comment that it would
be useful to the farming
was anxious about leaving the farm for university. She spoke to her father about
this and he said that ‘the farm will always
be here’. He
“Well, whatever we do for one, we do for all three. So, just as James can
decide to come back to the farm, you will have the
same chance. Whatever we do
we do equally. This includes the farm. There will be no favourites. That's how
your mum and I have set
it up in our wills - everything is to be split
said that the promise of obtaining a third of all of Wayne’s property was
‘an expectation that shaped all [her]
plans for [her] life’. She
says that if Wayne had not promised that the farm would always be there for her,
she would not have
chosen to study law at the University of Technology or have
pursued job opportunities in a commercial law firm. She believes she
instead have studied medicine at university. Had she done so, she says that she
would ‘probably have left the [farm]
after High School and aside from
social visits, would never have gone back’.
recalls a conversation with her father during her third year of university when
she was about 20 years old. The conversation
concerned a family that was in
litigation over a farm that had been left to three children as tenants in common
in equal shares.
Wayne reassured her that it would not happen to her and her
brothers. He explained how his and Jo’s mutual wills operated.
Hannah gave
evidence that they then had the following exchange:
“Hannah: Yeah – a third, third, third, right? That’s what I
understand the Kerr parents said in their wills.
Wayne: Yes, the farm will be split evenly between you three. No one will be left
received a graduate offer from Clayton Utz to commence in April 2009. However,
she deferred acceptance for a period of six
months. Her parents were planning an
overseas holiday and asked if she could move back while they were away. Hannah
moved back to
the farm but was not paid for any of her time while she stayed
there. She had some modest savings and took out a personal loan for
tide her over until she began work with Clayton Utz later in the year.
says that she deferred the start of employment with Clayton Utz on the faith of
Wayne’s promise that one day a third
of the farm would be hers.
she did start at Clayton Utz, she did well. She worked mostly in dispute
resolution.
James is promoted at KPMG
did well at KPMG. In January 2007, he was promoted to Accountant 2. In July
2007, he was promoted to Senior Accountant 1. In
July 2008, he was promoted to
Senior Accountant 2. In January 2009, he was promoted to Assistant Manager 1
after only six months
in his prior position. This was an unusually early
promotion, which typically required a full 12 months in the previous role. He
completed the chartered accounting program and became a chartered accountant in
February 2009. He became Assistant Manager 2 in January
2010 and Manager in
January 2011.
2006 and 2012, James travelled to the United Kingdom and New Zealand in the
course of his work on the Qantas audit. He undertook
a graduate exchange to KPMG
USA in 2007. He drafted contributions to the Airline Disclosures Handbooks
series and supported the KPMG
Global Airline Service Team by providing market
research and accounting advice responses to other airline teams within KPMG.
the same time, he was recognised by the KPMG Department of Professional Practice
as a subject matter expert in the application
of AASB141 Biological Assets,
which is the accounting standard that prescribes how to account for biological
assets such as those
produced on farms. He provided advice to several other
audit teams across Australia as to the application of AASB141, including a
lavender farm in Tasmania and a feedlot in the Perth region. He also supported
the partners in charge of the Agriculture Client Service
Team with monthly news
distributions, ad hoc projects related to market research, client targeting and
the preparation of team meetings.
the time at which he worked at KPMG between 2006 and 2012, James continued to
make regular trips back to the farm. He tried
to take annual leave at about
harvest time so as to be able to spend time with the family at Christmas time
and assist with at least
some of the harvest work, but this was not always
possible. He also spent weekends and long weekends visiting the farm during this
Wayne and Jo purchase Arizona and Ivanhoe
and Jo purchased Arizona and Ivanhoe in 2008. Settlement occurred in early 2009.
The fact of this purchase is not of particular
significance for the
plaintiffs’ case, save that they say their parents informed them of the
decision and that they felt involved
in the process. So much can be
Abe contends that the opportunity to acquire these properties was first raised
in a discussion between Abe and Wayne, on
the one hand, and the then-owner, Ms
Henman, on the other. As Abe recalls it, he first suggested that
‘we’ (meaning,
presumably, Abe and Wayne or possibly Abe, Wayne and
Jo) could purchase the land. He says that Wayne responded to the suggestion
“Good idea. Great opportunity to get him to start his farming career.
It’s a good motivator for him.”
and Jo subsequently acquired Arizona and Ivanhoe.
this point, Abe was about 21 years old and living in a unit in Wagga Wagga with
Jenna. They had a young son with particular healthcare
needs. Abe was commuting
daily to work on the farm, which required him to leave home at 5:30AM each day.
Arizona had a homestead
on it, which created an opportunity for Abe and Jenna to
move onto the farm. Abe and Jenna moved to Arizona in about April 2009.
to Abe, after the purchase he and Jenna received a visit from Wayne who
“We are only buying these farms because you’re coming home. If you
didn’t want to come home, we probably would
have sold it all. It will be
yours make sure you do a good job.”
a later affidavit, Abe gave a further and slightly more detailed account of how
Arizona and Ivanhoe were purchased. In this later
affidavit, he said that during
the harvest in 2008 he had a discussion with Wayne in which Wayne
“You will be responsible to get it [ie, the new properties] up and running
and make sure that it’s included in what we
are doing with the farm. I am
getting this for you to move back at the farm. You need to do the roads and work
hard to pay the debt.
You are working towards getting your own land.”
then recounted a further discussion with Wayne in which Wayne said that he had
raised the question of whether Arizona and Ivanhoe
should be acquired in
Abe’s name but that Jo had disagreed and threatened him with divorce.
According to Abe, Wayne said:
“A divorce is expensive and I don’t have the health or the money to
afford it. I will buy them in my name but I am getting
them for you.”
plaintiffs disputed Abe’s account. They especially disputed that Abe could
possibly have had the more detailed recollection
contained in his second
affidavit, given that this detail had not been included in his first affidavit.
They submitted that Abe’s
evidence in his later affidavit must be recent
invention. They also relied on evidence from Jo who generally disputed
said by Abe.
with many aspects of the family history, it is very difficult to form a view as
to what Wayne had in mind when he and Jo purchased
Arizona and Ivanhoe. It is
however necessary to form a view as to whether Wayne said the things which Abe
attributes to him.
there were aspects of Abe’s evidence that I found unsatisfactory (as to
which, see paragraphs [
] below), I am not persuaded that the evidence about
the purchase of Ivanhoe and Arizona contained in Abe’s March 2024
was recent invention. The evidence in his December 2022 affidavit was
less detailed, but even there Abe gave an account in which
Wayne said that
Arizona and Ivanhoe were purchased for him. The two accounts are consistent so
far as the substance of the evidence
is concerned.
considers purchasing Currawong
was shortly after the purchase of Arizona and Ivanhoe that James considered
purchasing Currawong, which borders the eastern boundary
of Pinegrove. He
prepared a detailed tax and cashflow forecast for the property in 2009, which he
discussed with Wayne and Jo. James
did not consider that the purchase would be
viable unless it were farmed by Wayne, either on a contract basis or in a
share-farming
arrangement. However, neither Wayne nor Jo was supportive of the
proposition. For her part, Jo said that she believed James would
be better off
investing in a non-farm asset because the region had been in drought for eight
or nine years at this point and she
did not want James’s money to be tied
up in the farm as well.
recalls a more pointed discussion about the matter with Wayne in which Wayne
“No, we don’t think you should do it, because it will upset Abe and
he won’t want to work on our farm anymore.
He will be very jealous of you
because he doesn’t have the ability to buy land yet and he might leave the
accept that Wayne said this. Given the state of the relationship between James
and Abe (which was generally bad), it stands to reason
that Wayne would have
mentioned Abe in this way in this context. James’s proposal would have
required Wayne, whose Parkinson’s
disease was worsening, to farm Currawong
in circumstances where Wayne was already heavily dependent on Abe to farm his
own properties.
The proposal never seems to have been raised with Abe, but Abe
would have been justified in thinking that the arrangement was one
benefitted James more than it would benefit either Wayne or Abe.
long after this, Wayne and Jo decided to purchase Currawong for themselves. It
was purchased in Jo’s name in February 2011.
James says that shortly
before this occurred, he had had the following discussion with his
“[James]: Dad, I’m a bit disappointed that you’re buying
Currawong even though it is something that I came to you
that I wanted to do.
[Wayne]: Well, it’s too good a farm to lose and it will be good for us.
I’m going to put it in your Mum’s name
so that she feels more
connected to the farm.
[James]: I’m still disappointed. We could find a way to make what I
proposed work.
[Wayne]: Listen, this is how it is going to happen. But eventually the farm will
be split between you three, and we will make sure
that this goes in the part
that is yours.”
evidence may be contrasted with Abe’s evidence of what occurred in
connection with the purchase of Currawong. Abe was involved
in the purchase in
that he discussed the merits of the decision with Wayne, accompanied Wayne in
meetings with Rabobank concerning
the purchase, and spoke to the agent. He had
an expectation that Wayne would purchase the property in his (Abe’s) name
buy it in his own name and then transfer it to him at a later time.
was disappointed that Currawong was purchased in Jo’s name. He recalls
that Wayne said that he had done so ‘because
she threatened a divorce
again’. According to Abe, when he asked what was to happen with the land,
Wayne said, ‘Don’t
worry about it. I will get it sorted and make
sure you get it’.
in turn, disputes Abe’s account of how Currawong was purchased. She says
that she never threatened to divorce Wayne and
that the decision to purchase the
land was made entirely by her and Wayne. She says it was put into her name to
reflect her own contribution
to the farm over many years.
each of James, Abe and Jo contends that Currawong was purchased for their own
ultimate benefit. These divergent accounts of
what occurred in connection with
the purchase are not easily resolved. Nevertheless, it is necessary to reach a
conclusion as to
whether either James or Abe was justified in thinking that they
would eventually come to own Currawong. In my view, neither of them
justified in taking that position. The land was purchased by Wayne and Jo and
was placed into Jo’s name. I can accept that
each of James and Abe hoped
that, eventually, Jo might leave the land to one or other of them in her will.
But neither James nor
Abe ever seems to have had a discussion with Jo about this
matter at the time. There is no evidence that Jo made any representations
that Currawong was purchased for the benefit
of Jo, into whose name it was
transferred.
did nevertheless help James to acquire a property at about this time. On 20 July
2011, Wayne lent James $55,000 for a deposit
on a property in Cammeray. James
repaid this loan in due course. He still owns this
Wayne offers to transfer the farm to James in 2008 or
offered to transfer the whole farm to James in the late 2000s.
only mentioned this 2008 or 2009 offer in his evidence very briefly. He said the
conversation occurred while Wayne and Jo were
present. Wayne said the
“Why don’t I just hand the farm over to you now, and let you manage
and run the farm?”
says that he was shocked by the suggestion as he was only 24 or 25 at the time
and had not yet become a Chartered Accountant.
He rejected Wayne’s offer.
He told Wayne that he thought Hannah and Abe should be involved in the
discussion. James said that
he took Wayne’s offer as an expression of
confidence in him and that it confirmed his understanding that he would have a
of the farm in the future.
evidence about this offer came to light in the following way. On 11 March 2021,
the solicitor for James and Hannah swore an
affidavit on information and belief
in support of their application to extend the caveat over the farm properties.
The solicitor’s
affidavit included the following at paragraph
“I am instructed that there was an occasion in the late 2000’s when
Wayne offered to transfer the [farm] to James, when
both Hannah and Jo were
present. Wayne said to James words to the effect:
‘I’ll sign all of the farms over to you and you can run it if you
Hannah was upset by this as no consideration was apparently given to her and it
was contrary to the years of dedicated work that
she had put into the farms and
the promises and assurances and the expectations from her father that she had
grown up with.”
Cross-examination
revealed that Hannah was not the source of this paragraph. She had no
recollection of this event, although she did
not say positively that it did not
occur. James accepted in cross-examination that he may have been the source of
the paragraph.
In any event, he confirmed that his father made the offer
referred to in paragraph 32 of the solicitor’s affidavit. He also
confirmed that Jo was present when the offer was made. He could not however
recall whether Hannah was there or what her reaction
to this offer may have
find that the offer was made. Although the evidence as to whether Hannah was
present differed between James’s affidavit evidence
and the version of
events relayed by him to the solicitor, it is very likely that Hannah was
present when it occurred, because that
was James’s initial recollection at
the time of instructing his solicitor in 2021. I therefore find that she was
do however accept that Hannah no longer recalls the episode.
March 2011 – Hannah moves to Laos
March 2011, Hannah took a 12-month leave of absence from Clayton Utz to
volunteer in a disability organisation in Laos. Her boyfriend
at the time,
Jarrod (who is now her husband) worked in fisheries for the NSW Government and
it seems that this work took him to Laos.
Before leaving, Wayne told her about
the purchase of Currawong. One of the things Wayne said to her about the
purchase was:
“If you all want to come back to the farm, as we have said to you, then we
are going to need more land.”
in these reasons I will describe the somewhat conflicting evidence given by
Hannah about how she reacted to the news that her
parents had purchased
Currawong: see paragraphs [
January 2012 – James
writes to his father about the farm
2012 and possibly earlier, Wayne was giving serious thought to transferring some
of the properties to Abe, who by this point was
very heavily involved in doing
the actual farming work.
January 2012, James wrote his father a long letter which began, ‘You asked
me what I would do in your position about the
farm’. The letter identified
three issues that James thought Wayne needed to address, being:
“1. Paying off debt incurred and setting up the farm as
your superannuation fund that you will need for the rest of your
2. Developing the most effective succession plan for the farm
3. Giving Abe a taste of real financial responsibility to make
him a more mature individual.”
to the second matter, the body of the letter said that the ‘things that
need to be considered’ included the following:
“- Unresolved succession of Bridgefield and Pinegrove
- Current third/third/third plan (broadly agreed to)
- Changing format of farming from small family concerns to
fully fledged corporate farms and the need to ensure that succession
considered in a business sense (with transactions at arm’s length) and not
seen to favour any individual
- Hills and future potential for gold mine and therefore
potential value difference
- Career intentions of family members
- Tax implications of any transactions.”
letter then stated:
“To date there had been no proper succession plan discussed with the
family apart from the equitable third/third/third policy.
There has been some
discussion however Hannah and me have not been included in this which I am
uneasy about. I have stated my intention
is to be somehow involved in the farm
but this involvement has not been formalised and this I feel should be taken
into account...”
followed what may appropriately be described as an argument for the proposition
that ‘any transfers to Abe therefore will
be premature. Any promises that
have been made [to Abe] should be reconsidered in the broader succession
discussion’. James
said in addition that ‘no additional
consideration should be given to him receiving more than the third he would
receive in succession’.
May 2012 – James
moves to Chile
May 2012, James moved to Santiago, Chile, to take up a secondment with the BHP
Base Metals (later BHP Copper) audit team as the
overall group audit Senior
Manager. In that role, he oversaw seven audit teams, of which two were in Chile
and the other five were
in locations around the world. He also oversaw a number
of technical specialists. The BHP opportunity followed an earlier offer that
not come to fruition, namely a secondment to work on the South African Airways
audit in Johannesburg.
(Senior Manager) with KPMG Chile. During his period living in Chile,
James’s annualised salary increased from AUD112,189 for
the year ending 30
June 2012 to AUD171,691 for the year ending 30 June 2015. This was more than he
would have been paid by KPMG Australia.
Hannah resigns from
Clayton Utz
early 2012, while still in Laos, Hannah spoke to her father about not returning
to Clayton Utz when she came back to Australia.
He did not protest when she said
she was ‘thinking of coming back home instead’. Hannah took comfort
from the fact that
Wayne was not opposed to the idea of her returning to the
farm. Seemingly on the basis of this comfort, she decided to resign from
Utz ‘and return to the [farm]’.
resigned on 23 February 2012. At the time she did so, she had no alternative
employment arranged. She had not had a serious
discussion with her father about
what she would do on the farm beyond the one in which he said he was not opposed
to the idea of
her coming home. She says she was ‘expecting to return to
the [farm] full-time and in turn, be paid as an employee on that
did not however intend to return to live on the farm. There was no house
suitable for her and Jarrod to do so. Instead, her
intention was always to move
with Jarrod to a house he owned in Narrandera, 137km from the farm.
early 2012, after resigning but before returning to Australia, Hannah had a
rather more frank discussion with Wayne about coming
very clear that the farm was at its limits financially and that it could not
support her as well. Wayne
said that she would have to seek employment off the
therefore took work elsewhere. In May 2012, she took a job with Sauce
Communications, a communications company in Leeton that
operated in the
agricultural sector. She resigned in September that same year to take a job at
Murrumbidgee Catchment Management
Authority (MCMA) in Wagga Wagga as a community
engagement officer. While in between jobs she worked at the farm. In May 2012,
assisted with sowing; in June and August, she assisted with spraying for
winter weeds. Her evidence continued:
“I also attended to general farm maintenance, such as gutting and pulling
down old sheds and houses, pulling down and/or erecting
fences, renovating
houses on the farm, clearing and on selling scrap metal, tidying and organising
the farm workshop, machinery and
equipment maintenance and repairs, as well as
business administration and management for Wayne.”
Wayne and Jo separate
and Jo separated in September 2012. Jo moved to a rented home in Temora. Wayne
stayed at Oaklands, at least in the first instance.
He later moved into the
and Jo’s separation coincided with Hannah’s change of employment to
MCMA. For some time after she started at MCMA,
she would occasionally stay with
Wayne on weekends. She did a lot of domestic work for Wayne as well as some farm
work during this
period, although she was not paid for it. Although I accept
that Hannah did assist with the farm during this period, it needs to
be put into
perspective. She did not do anything like the amount of work that was being done
by Abe, who by this stage was living
on the farm full-time.
events of 2013
arrangement referred to in paragraph [
] did not last long. Hannah and Abe had a terrible
relationship. She argued with Abe and refused to invite him to her wedding to
which took place on 1 June 2013. This caused a lot of tension between
Hannah and her parents. In the end, they reached a compromise.
Wayne and Jo
would contribute $5,000 towards the wedding on condition that Abe was invited to
the ceremony and for photos, but he
would not be invited to the reception.
Unsurprisingly, Abe did not even attend the ceremony. The incident caused a
serious fracture
in Hannah’s relationship with her father.
around this time, Wayne and Jo were in discussions with Cole Levy of RSM Bird
Cameron about what Mr Levy described, somewhat loosely,
as ‘succession
matters’. These discussions occurred between July and September 2013 and
involved Abe and his then wife,
visited Australia in the first half of the year, probably in May and possibly to
attend his sister’s wedding, but this
is not clear. He offered to take a
leave of absence to help his father to ‘start working through’ the
matters about which
he (Wayne) had been speaking with Mr Levy. However, James
said that he:
“...could not have a decent discussion with Dad and eventually the
acceptance became too conditional for me to give (i.e. I
had to live with Dad
early August 2013, Wayne and Jo had decided that Abe should become a director
and shareholder of the Bridgefield Company. They
were also considering a
proposal for Wayne to transfer Oaklands and Bellview to Abe. On 2 August 2013,
Mr Levy met with Wayne, Jo,
Abe and Jenna to talk about these issues. That week,
Mr Levy also contacted James, who was by now back in Chile, to discuss the
but the evidence does not allow me to form any conclusion about what they
discussed at this stage.
spoke to his mother at around this time. She said that she and Wayne had been
discussing how to split assets between them and
that they were ‘thinking
of transferring some of the farm to Abe’. She told him that if he wanted
to ‘have a say
in this’ then he had ‘better come home
Monday, 5 August, Mr Levy wrote a long letter to Wayne, Jo, Abe and Jenna
setting out an ‘action plan’ for the matters
discussed at the
meeting held the previous Friday. The letter was headed ‘Succession
Matters’ and identified the following
six matters as ‘Future
Objectives’:
“1. Maintain a profitable and growing farming
enterprise.
2. Financial Security for -
Abe and Jenna
3. Remuneration/Reward for Abe.
4. Appropriate succession planning.
5. Reduction of farm debt.
6. Divorce/Settlement.”
received a copy of this letter. He responded in the form of detailed handwritten
annotations which he forwarded to Mr Levy.
As to the objective of
‘succession planning’ he noted ‘we are not at this stage yet.
No research of models has
been performed.’ He described the proposal to
transfer Oaklands and Bellview to Abe as inequitable.
Levy responded to James’s comments by email on 7 August. He pointed out
that nothing was yet ‘set in concrete’,
but that ‘everything
in the action plan [is] per your parents’ wishes’. As to the
proposal to transfer Oaklands
and Bellview to Abe, Mr Levy said that ‘this
is per Wayne’s wishes’.
wrote a comprehensive response to Mr Levy. He pointed out that the ‘Future
Objectives’ in the letter did not take
into account any of his or
Hannah’s wishes. He said that the ‘succession’ model was one
that his father had raised
previously and which had caused ‘angst’
and ‘massive problems’ in the past. He described it as the first
step on a slippery slope. He described the risk associated with the plan as
being a risk that the ‘business splits’.
“I and my sister do have issue with farm being just given to our brother
as this seems to us to be in a direct contradiction
to an often spoken about
concept of equality in terms of the farm land. The general rule we have always
been aware of was third:third:third.
Any change from this now seems to be unfair
and unfavourable to the two non farming children.”
separate email, James forwarded a document containing some thoughts on
‘concepts of family succession’. It was drafted
as a set of
principles that might govern how a family farming business might work and how
members of the family might engage with
the business. Under a heading
‘Principles of transfers of family business assets’, James
“In the interests of equity, business assets should be split between
estate beneficiaries on an equal basis. Whilst the Family
Provisioning Act uses
the basis of needs of the estate beneficiaries, this acts as a tax on those
estate beneficiaries and assumes
that beneficiaries who have assets of their own
should not participate equally in a distribution. This is not an equitable
fairness to James, his covering email said that this section was not well
drafted. I do not take it to represent his final thoughts
on all matters
concerning family succession.
had several discussions with his parents about these matters in August and
September. After one such discussion he followed
up with an email on 26 August
2013, which he also copied to Mr Levy, containing ‘points and
questions’ about the issues.
His email included:
“I have to be open here, but one of my main concerns is that this
transaction could be seen as effectively an early inheritance.
understand how much of an impact this proposed transaction is going to have on
the long spoken about ‘third/third/third’
distribution that has been
the discussed as being the general rule of how Dad and Mum’s inheritance
will work.”
further email dated 9 September reveals the tension that must have attended
their discussions around these issues at this time.
“Despite last night’s conversations, I still want to send this to
“Dad. I am not at all suggesting that you are ‘past it’,
‘dead already’, or have ‘lost the plot’.
Despite the
description that has been given to me by mum in our last conversations, this is
not the image that I have of you.”
email contained a detailed proposal for a four-way split of the farm properties
among Wayne, Jo, Abe and James but for all four
to continue to be farmed in a
single business. The proposal contained suggestions for values to be trued up on
Wayne and Jo’s
death to ensure that there would be an equal distribution
by value among the children. The proposal also included options or rights
first refusal being granted to other family members in the event that James
decided to sell or was forced to sell his parcels
of land. The same was proposed
in the event that Abe decided or was forced to sell his parcels.
returned to Australia for 10 days between 20 and 30 September. During this
period, he noticed that his father’s Parkinson’s
Disease had
the week commencing 23 September, James and Hannah attended a meeting with their
parents, Abe and Mr Levy. During this meeting,
Wayne expressed his intention to
transfer land to Abe. James and Hannah opposed the suggestion. Abe recalls that
they said in this
discussion that they would take legal action to stop it
occurring and that they would approach the guardianship tribunal ‘to
challenge his capacity’. James and Hannah deny this, but the evidence
includes an email from Mr Levy to Mr Kennedy (a solicitor
from Walsh & Blair
who would have been responsible for drafting the transfers) that same day in
which Mr Levy said:
“May want to hold fire on this one.
The children (non farming) are talking about going to the guardianship tribunal
owing to the father’s mental incapacity...........”
proposal did not progress.
the basis of Abe’s recollection, the contemporaneous note from Mr Levy and
the fact that the land transfer proposal suddenly
did not progress, I find that
James and Hannah did say the things in the September 2013 meeting which Abe
attributes to them, namely
that they would take legal action to stop any land
transfers occurring and that they would approach the guardianship tribunal on
the basis that Wayne lacked capacity.
relationship with Wayne remained poor throughout most of 2013. She rarely
visited. She found her father increasingly
moody and erratic. She felt that
Wayne had been abusive to her in relation to her decision not to invite Abe to
her wedding reception.
She also did not want to see Abe, whom she very much
disliked. That feeling was mutual.
described two particular incidents in about October 2013. In one, her parents
made an unannounced visit to her at work in Wagga
Wagga. They arrived holding
hands, which Hannah found remarkable given the circumstances of their
separation. She said that their
discussion included the following:
“Jo: We know the past year or so has been hard for you, but we want you to
see us as a united front away from the farm.
Hannah: This is really odd especially given I am at work and you are
Wayne: So what? We are your parents, and we are here to see you. You can make
frigging time to see us.
Hannah: Why are you here? Is there something you need to tell me?
Wayne: We are wanting to get along for the sake of you kids. We don’t want
any divisions. You are all equal, including you
Hannah: Where does that leave things in terms of the farm, with your settlement,
powers of attorney, wills and all that stuff?
Jo: We are working through our settlement now. We want to preserve the farm for
Wayne: You have the same opportunities as the boys Hannah. My will is still the
same as it has always been.”
the other incident, also in October 2013, Wayne became highly agitated and upset
when Hannah tried to talk to him about his health.
They were driving at the time
and Wayne, who was in the passenger seat, opened the door and tried to jump out
of the moving car.
accept that both of these incidents occurred, although they are not easy to
reconcile. Wayne must have been very emotionally labile
at this point. Hannah
relies on the first Wagga Wagga incident as amounting to an affirmation by Wayne
of his intention to give her
one third of the farms. But by that point, Wayne
and Jo had already begun planning to transfer land to Abe; and tensions had got
to the point that Hannah and James had threatened Wayne with legal action if he
pursued the plan. On balance, it is impossible to
regard the incident in Wagga
Wagga as amounting to an unequivocal affirmation of Wayne’s intention to
give Hannah one third
of the farms.
2014 – Hannah starts a
business; moves to Ethiopia
was dissatisfied with her work and so she decided to look at other
opportunities. In February 2014, she registered a new business
name, Hendricks
Consulting, under which she proposed to carry on a consulting business. She
promoted the new business as one providing
‘professional and management
consulting services to clients predominately in agricultural and environmental
industries’.
She said that she wanted to work with and learn from clients
so she could broaden her ‘knowledge, skills and experience and
transferability to the [farm]’. She spoke to her father about the new
business. He was generally encouraging, saying ‘well,
as I have said, the
more real-world experience you can get the better. I hope you learn a lot and
then you can tell me how it will
work in practice’.
full-time volunteer role at the ATA, in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. The role was a
six-month contract to work as a communications advisor reporting to the CEO. Her
application was successful
and she moved (presumably with her husband but she
did not say) to Ethiopia in June 2014. Hannah said in an affidavit:
“I only took on the role because at this time, I was still trying to gain
experience in the agricultural industry, based on
my expectation that one day, I
was going to inherit part of the [farm] and would have to be in a position to
run it as viable farming
enterprise.
Had I known then that Wayne did not intend to keep his promise to leave me an
equal share of the [farm], I would not have taken the
role. My financial
position at the time was poor and a volunteer position only decimated them
further. I barely had any savings.
Instead, I would have relocated to a capital
city (any of Sydney, Melbourne or Canberra) where I could find a well-paid
professional
job and started to focus on rebuilding my savings.”
she left, she spoke to her father about the move. He said that the job sounded
interesting and that she should ‘stay
safe and come back’. He added
‘I will need you here’. Hannah says she took this to mean that Wayne
wanted her to
her. She hoped that when she returned to Australia after being
in Ethiopia, she
might resume visiting her father and maybe even rebuild her relationship with
the period of voluntary service, Hannah was offered a paid role as ATA
Communications Director. She declined this role. She
moved back to Australia in
months. She said of the decision
to move back:
“My parents were finalising their divorce and had to work through their
financial settlement. I wanted to be close to the [farm]
during this
accepted in cross-examination that she was concerned about the discussions her
parents were having, although she did not accept
that she was concerned about
her own inheritance. This seems unlikely in view of her evidence about her
return, which was as follows:
“Had I known then that Wayne would ultimately leave the whole of the
[farm] to Abe and break his promise to me, I would not
have cut my assignment
with ATA short in order to return home, in the belief that there might be
meaningful discussions about the
future of the [farm] to be had with Wayne if I
did. I would have stayed in Ethiopia, completed the assignment and pursued the
opportunity
of future paid work if it had been offered.”
other words, she returned in the belief that she would have ‘meaningful
discussions about the future of’ the farm.
This must, I think, be a
reference to discussions about her own inheritance. It stands to reason that she
would have regarded this
as a matter about which discussions remained to be had,
given the events of the previous year.
2014 – James is
offered a path to partnership with KPMG Chile
April 2014, James had a conversation with Maritza Araneda, a new partner in KPMG
Australia, while she was attending the biennial
KPMG client conference for BHP
Billiton. She informed him that the pathway to partnership in KPMG was very
clear and achievable if
he were to stay in Chile. At that time, Ms Araneda was
transitioning in to replace the partner to whom James had been reporting.
told him that he could easily put himself in a position to replace her as the
engagement partner after working for two or three
more years in Chile. As the
engagement partner, James would have had the primary responsibility of the audit
of the BHP Billiton
Copper business, which at the time had revenues of more than
USD11 billion and assets in excess of USD23 billion. It would have been
significant promotion within the global KPMG network.
offered James a route to partnership in KPMG Chile.
This offer was contingent on
him staying in Chile. Had he accepted it, he would have taken primary
responsibility for the audit of
LATAM airlines or an audit of another
significant client and, had he continued working in that role and had he wanted
to pursue partnership,
he would likely have been a partner within two to three
2014 – James takes a sabbatical from KPMG and
returns to the farm
decided not to pursue the prospect of partnership with KPMG Chile. He instead
took a 12-month unpaid sabbatical, during which
time he returned to Barmedman to
live with his father on Arizona for about nine months. He arrived back in
Australia on 9 September
evidence and a significant aspect of his overall case is that he made this
decision in reliance on representations which
Wayne made to him as to his
eventual inheritance of a third of the farm. It is relevant to note that James
did not speak with his
father about his move back to Australia before actually
moving back. Wayne did not ask him to move back. Only after James returned
he say to his father:
“I’ve come home to help you and Mum deal with this financial
settlement, as it is clear to me that it isn’t going
to happen otherwise.
You don’t need to go to court to sort this out. I want to make sure that
the farms are safe and preserved
and I’m going to do all I can to make
this happen. I’ve come home, given up some good opportunities in Chile,
partnership, but this, right now, is more important to me.”
after moving into the house on Arizona where his father was living, James and
Wayne had this discussion:
“[James]: Dad, I am interested in seeing whether there could be an ongoing
role for me on the farm. You know that I want to
make it work, I think I want to leave KPMG and just come back to the farm
permanently. This business
needs skills that I have such as administration,
finance and risk management and I want to use them here now. I might even be
to pick up some off farm consulting too if it works out well enough with
[Wayne]: Alright. Let’s see what happens.”
the period James spent living at Arizona during his sabbatical, Wayne and Jo
were in the midst of their divorce. James spent
much of his sabbatical working
on the proposed financial property settlement between his parents. Much of his
work was directed to
preparing a comprehensive balance sheet as at 31 December
2014 for the purpose of better understanding their overall financial position.
This involved a significant commitment on James’s part, because it
required a close historical analysis of their finances and
those of the farming
business. He also involved himself in the business of the farm in other ways
during this period. He built relationships
with many of the farm’s
suppliers. He liaised with the bank and other financiers, involved himself in
the drafting of contracts
and saw to various other administrative matters. James
also did some labouring work during this period, including some fencing, sheep
monitoring and so on. He assisted with that year’s harvest.
a few days of arriving back at the farm in September 2014, James discovered that
Wayne and Abe had caused the WKB and AEB Partnership
to be registered for GST
purposes. Both Wayne and his accountant, Mr George, explained to James that this
had been done for tax purposes.
Their thinking seems to have been that it was
better to split the farm income across two partners than have Wayne pay tax on
of it. Nevertheless, the Second Bridgefield Partnership had not yet been
dissolved or wound up at this stage. After discussing the
matter with James,
Wayne said that he wanted to go back to using the Second Bridgefield
Partnership, which James believed he duly
did in consultation with Mr George.
continued to prepare the accounts for the farm business on this basis up until
31 December 2014, which was the date of the settlement
balance sheet.
Thereafter, James accounted for the business on the understanding that Wayne was
a sole trader.
Hannah becomes estranged from Wayne
pinpoints October 2014 as the time at which she became seriously estranged from
Wayne. She and Jarrod had found a house in
Albury that they wished to purchase
but they did not have enough money for the deposit. Hannah approached Wayne to
ask him for help,
but he was neither willing nor able to do so at the time. He
pointed out that he was going through a divorce which was probably going
require him to pay millions of dollars to Hannah’s mother, Jo. In the
course of their discussion, Wayne said:
“You will be looked after down the track Hannah like I have always told
you. When the time is right we will work through what’s
next. You need to
wait. Everyone in this family needs to stop being so selfish!”
approached her mother for assistance as well, but she also refused to help.
and Jarrod bought a house that November, but they did so with no financial
assistance from Wayne or Jo. Hannah did not speak
to either of her parents again
for several years.
2015 – James receives a further offer
of a path to partnership
January 2015, James spoke with Alejandro Espinosa, a KPMG Chile partner. They
had the following conversation:
“[Mr Espinosa]: We are actively bidding for the audit of the LATAM
Airlines Group. We want to include you in our proposal as
a named team member
for this bid. We want you to come back and be part of the team. We are in with a
good shot at this, and we will
need all the airline audit people we can get.
You’re at the top of the list because of your Qantas experience.
I think you should come and join the team as soon [as] you can. The offer we
discussed a few months ago is still open. If you work
on the LATAM audit and do
a good job, you’ll establish yourself as a clear candidate for
partnership. Think about it.
[James]: Thanks for thinking of me. I’m sad to say that it’s a no
from me though. I need to be over here.”
then told Wayne what he had done. According to James, Wayne appeared to be
‘happy and relieved’ that he had made
this decision, although James
does not suggest they spoke further about the topic.
to James, if he had known then that Wayne would not leave him a third of the
farm, he would not have remained on the farm
in January 2015. He would instead
have returned to KPMG Chile in order to take up a position on the LATAM audit
team and pursue partnership.
2015 – Wayne and Jo’s
financial settlement
and Jo reached a financial settlement and were finally divorced in early 2015.
Under the terms of their settlement, Jo was required
to transfer Currawong to
Wayne and Wayne was required to pay Jo an amount equal to 50% of the net value
of the farm. The amount was
to be paid in instalments over a 10-year period. The
extended payment period reflected the fact that Wayne needed to borrow funds
from Rabobank to fund the settlement and that the farming business was unable to
support a borrowing of the whole of the required
funds all at once. Their
agreement was designed to ensure that the farm was not broken up and sold in
order to fund the divorce settlement.
reaching this settlement, Wayne and Jo (and, no doubt, their lawyers) had regard
to the balance sheet prepared by James to which
I referred in paragraph [
continued to assist his father with financial and other matters, including in
securing the additional borrowing he needed to
fund the divorce settlement.
before settlement was reached with Jo, Wayne made the will described at
paragraph [
James submitted that this will was consistent with his understanding that Wayne
intended to leave the farm to the children
more or less equally, but it is
impossible to see it that way. It did not provide for an equal division of the
farming properties.
April 2015 – James and Wayne have a
falling out
James had not up to this point told his father or
anyone else in the family that
he was gay. James felt that both Wayne and Abe were very conservative about
these matters and so he
had not broached the issue, especially given the other
matters happening in the family in the few years leading up to this point.
the April discussion, James sensed a significant shift in their relationship.
were other matters also. In about June, James discovered that since April 2015,
Wayne and Abe had again been using the WKB and
AEB Partnership as the trading
entity. This riled James because he was doing the accounts at the time and had
been posting transactions
on the understanding that Wayne was now a sole trader.
This caused him justifiable concern for his own professional position.
soon felt that his relationship with Wayne had deteriorated to the point where
he had no choice but to leave the farm altogether.
Apart from anything else, his
father was not prepared to pay him for the work he was doing. He therefore
decided to re-join KPMG
left the farm in the week of 29 June 2015. He did not say goodbye to his father.
Nor did his father contact him afterwards.
They too found themselves estranged.
James barely spoke to his father ever again.
little over a week later, Wayne made the second of his 2015 wills which I
described at paragraph [
] above. It relevantly provided as follows:
(1) Oaklands, Bellview and Currawong were given to Abe.
(2) Twitts, Arizona, Ivanhoe and Sunnyside were to be sold, with Abe to have a
right to purchase within two years. The net proceeds
of sale were to be divided
equally between James and Hannah.
made a further will on 17 December 2015, described at paragraph [
] above, whereby he
left his whole estate to Abe. At the time of making this will, he also swore an
affidavit to explain why he had
disinherited James and Hannah. The affidavit
“1. My Will dated 17 December 2015 does not contain any provisions for my
other two children James and Hannah because of the
reasons outlined in this
2. My relationship with James and Hannah has deteriorated over the past and has
come to a point where we do not speak to each other
anymore. I do not think
there is any prospect of conciliation.
3. James is an accountant and is more than capable of earning an income; he
earns more than anyone else in the family. James and
I have not spoken since
July this year. James does not get along with my son Abe as well.
4. James would have liked to take the farm on, however not with the associated
5. Hannah is a lawyer and is also more than capable of earning an income. Hannah
and I have not spoken to each other since my ex
wife and I separated.
6. My son Abe is prepared to take the farm on with a large debt. He has been
assisting me with running the farm for approximately
10 years. Abe has not been
to university, nor does he have any other trade.
7. I believe my will is fair and reasonable taking into account my
family’s current circumstances.”
2016 Annuity Deed
mid to late 2015, there were discussions between Jim Main (solicitor), Mr
George, Wayne, Abe and Jenna regarding succession issues
and the farm trading
entity. By this point, Wayne had decided that he wanted Abe to have the farm. At
the same time, he wanted (as
Mr Main put it) to secure for himself ‘an
adequate income, legally secure housing and ... a lump sum to purchase entry to
retirement village if necessary’. Wayne also had a desire to prevent if
possible, any dispute over his will after his death.
Main proposed that Wayne transfer the farms to Abe in exchange for an annual
payment that would cover Wayne’s costs of living.
The annuity was to be
secured by a third mortgage from Abe back to Wayne.
1 February 2016, Wayne executed a Partnership Agreement between Wayne, Abe
and Bridgeline Agricultural Pty Ltd as trustee for the
Abe and Jenna Family
12 April 2016, Wayne executed a Deed of Annuity between him and Abe. Under this
deed, Wayne agreed to transfer land to Abe in exchange
for a lifetime annuity of
$52,000 per annum, a life interest in Arizona and a payment if the life interest
was surrendered.
and Abe also signed transfers and mortgages giving effect to the Deed of Annuity
around this time. However, these were never
registered.
briefly returns to KPMG
his departure from the farm, James re-joined KPMG Australia, where he worked for
a further 12 months. Eventually, he formed
a belief that he could not resume his
previous career trajectory with the firm. He believed that the opportunities
that had previously
been available to him at KPMG Australia were no longer
available, but there was no evidence that he was justified in believing this
whether, if so, this was due to the lengthy sabbatical he had taken from KPMG
Chile. He also felt that he could not return to
KPMG Chile because the offer of
partnership there had been contingent on being part of particular audit teams at
the time the offer
was made and those positions had been filled in the meantime.
If he were to return to KPMG Chile it would likely have been as a local
which would have been less remunerative than his previous position.
June 2016, James resigned from KPMG Australia. He enrolled in a PhD program at
the University of Sydney Business School, where
he also became a research
associate. His area of research was transport management. He completed his PhD
in April 2023.
Abe’s divorce
separation caused Wayne and Abe to restructure the First Bridgeline Agriculture
Partnership. They began trading as the Second
Bridgeline Agriculture Partnership
from 1 January 2019. Wayne essentially took on the partnership share previously
held by the Abe
and Jenna Family Trust. The partnership therefore traded in the
proportions of 65% to Wayne and 35% to Abe for a period of 6 months
Bridgefield Farming became the main trading entity for the farm.
and Abe’s separation was also the impetus for Wayne and Abe’s
decision to rescind the Deed of Annuity. On 4 September
2018, they executed a
Deed of Revocation which revoked the Deed of Annuity. The 2018 deed recited that
none of the obligations in
the Deed of Annuity had ever been performed. To the
extent that any obligations were pending, they were brought to an end.
2018 will (the scheme of which I have generally set out at [
]) was made shortly
after the 2018 Deed of Revocation was signed. It also reflected the fact that
Abe and Jenna had separated.
27 August 2019, the Federal Circuit Court of Australia made final property
consent orders in relation to Jenna and Abe’s
property settlement.
The events of 2018-2019
March 2018, Wayne moved off the farm to live in an apartment in Temora.
reestablished contact with Wayne in April 2018. They met at his mother’s
nursing home in Temora and Wayne got to meet
Hannah’s daughter, who was
then one year old.
the time he left the farm on 29 June 2015, James had no contact with his father
until 1 March 2019, when he received a text message
from him to tell him that
his grandmother had died. James attended the funeral on 6 March in Temora. On
that day, James drove Wayne
from the church to the cemetery, and from there to
the wake at St Paul’s Anglican Church Hall, although he says that the
was a ‘tense time’ for him because him and his father were
father, Keith, died on 4 April 2019. James attended the funeral on 12 April in
Temora, as did Wayne. On this occasion,
they only made passing comments to one
December 2019, Wayne moved into Settlers Village, an assisted living facility in
Wagga Wagga. Hannah thereafter had more frequent
him several times.
2020 – Wayne’s meetings with
Georgeina Ryan
he had revoked the Deed of Annuity, Wayne continued to be keenly interested in
transferring the farm to Abe. As previously,
he wanted to do so in a way that
Abe could afford and which gave Wayne adequate financial security.
2020 and 2021, Wayne had numerous lengthy meetings with a new solicitor,
Georgeina Ryan, about this and other matters. It is necessary
to describe these
meetings in some detail because it was in this setting that Wayne made his final
decisions about his farm and his
Ryan obtained a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Queensland in August
1993 and obtained a Master of Commercial Law from
Melbourne University in 2004.
She was employed in various roles as a lawyer in regional NSW and Queensland
between 1996 and 2017,
when she commenced practice as a sole practitioner,
trading as Regional Business Lawyers in Wagga Wagga. Additionally, between 2000
and 2003 she worked as an in-house lawyer for Rabobank in Sydney. She gave
evidence and was cross-examined.
Ryan was first contacted by Wayne’s accountant, Mr George, in July 2020.
Mr George explained Wayne’s circumstances
at a very high level of
generality. He told Ms Ryan that Wayne wanted to keep his property from being
taken by his son’s (Abe’s)
ex-wife or some other woman in the
future. He also said that Wayne believed the other children (James and Hannah)
had sided with
Jo in his divorce. Ms Ryan and Mr George had a further discussion
a week or so later, to much the same effect but in slightly more
detail. On this
occasion, Mr George told Ms Ryan that Wayne wanted the property ‘to go to
Abe solely’. They discussed
a form of transaction whereby this might occur
in a way that safeguarded the farm ‘in case Abe enters into a relationship
the future’. Several weeks later, after having received documents
concerning Wayne from Mr George, Ms Ryan sent an email setting
preliminary thoughts on the matter. She suggested that the property could be
sold to Abe with a loan back, and then the loan
could be assigned to a
discretionary trust that benefits Wayne while he is alive and thereafter Abe and
his children.
Ryan first met with Wayne on 25 September 2020. He was brought by Abe, whom Ms
Ryan had contacted at Mr George’s suggestion.
Abe explained that Wayne had
Parkinson’s disease. He also told her that he had his own lawyers in
Canberra who looked after
his affairs. All of this put Ms Ryan on clear notice
that she should satisfy herself of Wayne’s capacity to give instructions.
Although there was no challenge to Wayne’s capacity to make his final will
or to enter into the transactions whereby property
was transferred to Abe, it is
appropriate to record that Ms Ryan was astute to this issue from the very outset
and that she satisfied
herself that he did have capacity both to manage his own
financial affairs and to make a will. The lengthy discussions which she
Wayne on this and numerous other occasions, many of which are recorded in notes,
appear to bear out her conclusions on those
first meeting alone lasted about 50 minutes, plus some additional time spent
with Wayne and Abe together. They discussed Ms
Ryan’s suggestion of
transferring land to Abe with a loan back and then assigning the loan to a
trust. Wayne made very clear
that he wanted to transfer the whole of the farm
properties to Abe. Ms Ryan explained to Wayne that he would need to pay out the
balance of Jo’s entitlements from their property settlement in order for
the transactions to occur, for which he would need
outcome of their meeting was that Ms Ryan would organise paperwork to discharge
the mortgage to Jo and that she would send a letter
to Rabobank seeking their
agreement to the transaction. They would meet at a later point to sign
next meeting was on 12 October 2020 at Ms Ryan’s office. Wayne, Abe and
Ms Ryan met for about 20 minutes. There seemed
to be no issue about Rabobank
providing funds to allow Jo to be paid out, although the details of the
transaction were not in evidence.
October 2020 – James
sends Wayne a letter
somehow learned that Wayne was planning to pay Jo out and transfer land to Abe.
On 20 October 2020, he sent Wayne a letter in
which he challenged Wayne about
any proposal he may have to transfer land to Abe. At the time he sent the
letter, Wayne and James
were well and truly estranged. This letter seems to have
been the first contact between them since Keith’s funeral in 2019.
letter was simply addressed to ‘Dad’. It began:
“I am writing this [letter to] you because you have been avoiding talking
I would like honest answers
letter noted that the ‘recent move to pay out mum’ suggested that he
may be planning to transfer land to Abe. The
letter sought information about
what had occurred and what was proposed to occur. James explained that leaving
his role in Chile
had cost him at least $30,000 in savings as well as $120,000
in income, as well as setting his career back. He said he had received
for saving the farm.
2020 and 2021 – Further meetings
between Wayne and Georgeina Ryan
the time of her next meeting with Wayne on 23 October, Ms Ryan had been provided
a copy of James’s 20 October letter. She
was therefore aware of
James’s position.
Ryan had by this time prepared a contract for sale of the farm properties for a
total of $13 million, which is a figure which Wayne
had provided to her. She
explained to Wayne that under the proposed arrangement, the purchase price would
be left as a debt outstanding
but Abe would assume all indebtedness in relation
to the farming business, which at that time came to about $4,550,000.
next meeting was on 18 November 2020. Abe also attended on this occasion. The
three of them met for about 40 minutes, during
which time they discussed the
proposed contract, which was then executed. Next, Ms Ryan and Wayne met
separately for about 30 minutes,
during which they discussed Wayne changing his
the course of this discussion, Ms Ryan raised the possibility of what should
happen if Wayne were to die before the transfer was
completed, and also what
should happen in that event if Abe and his children were unable to take the
farm. She suggested that it
might be appropriate for the farm to revert to James
and Hannah should that occur. In response to this suggestion, Wayne
“Yes I guess that would be okay. James doesn’t deserve the farm now
Ryan also raised the question of what Wayne should provide for James and Hannah
generally. Wayne explained that a previous lawyer
had advised him that it was
best to leave them nothing because they would likely use anything he left them
to ‘pay their lawyers
to fight the will’. Ms Ryan said that she did
not agree with this advice and that it was better to make some provision. She
suggested that an amount of $300,000 each ‘might be enough for a court to
say you have made adequate provision’. Wayne
said he would think about it
and that ‘Abe’s not going to be that happy’.
reference to Abe not being happy was undoubtedly a reference to the fact that
any cash to fund a legacy could only be raised against
the farm and the farming
business. Practically speaking, it was Abe who would have to find the funds to
pay James and Hannah.
next meeting was instigated and attended by Hannah. They met on Sunday, 13
December for about 90 minutes, of which Hannah was
in attendance for about 30-40
minutes. Hannah explained that she wanted to know ‘about the farm and
dad’s will and what
arrangements have been made for his power of attorney
and guardianship’. Wayne said that he was transferring the farm to Abe.
“I’m transferring the farm to Abe. There is going to be a trust
involved so your mother or Jenna can’t get at it.
It has to go to Abe; I
know farm values are high at the moment but they will correct themselves. There
will be another drought and
I want the farm to stay as one.”
to a power of attorney, Wayne suggested it should be Hannah and Abe. There was
also talk of who should be guardians. Wayne suggested
it could be Hannah and
Abe. Hannah said that James would be upset if he was not included. No decision
was made on this issue.
next meeting occurred on 6 January 2021. The purpose of this meeting was to
discuss his will. The meeting lasted about 48 minutes.
explained that he had not heard from Hannah since their 13 December meeting. He
also had not heard from James. He said that
he had not even seen him for two or
three years. He must have had in mind their last meeting at Keith’s
funeral in 2019.
told Ms Ryan that James had sided with Jo in their divorce and that he had
‘overvalued everything’ in the spreadsheet
he had prepared. Wayne
also said ‘if I leave too much to Hannah and James it could bankrupt
instructed Ms Ryan that he wanted to leave Hannah and James whatever cash he
had, including the refundable deposit from his
aged care facility. He mooted a
figure of between $250,000 and $350,000 to each of them.
said he wanted to give Abe power of attorney. He said he wanted to make Hannah
and Abe guardians. He said ‘I don’t
want James; he spat the dummy
and he said things he should not have said’. He also said that he expected
that Hannah and James
would inherit from Jo. The evidence shows that this is
true, although it may not have been as at 6 January 2021.
next meeting was on 11 January 2021. Abe was also present on this occasion. By
this time, caveats had been lodged. Wayne’s
initial response at this
meeting was ‘I don’t understand, I’m not dead yet’. In
relation to their asserted
claims to an interest in the properties, he
“They have no grounds. I have had nothing from James except one letter in
the last few years. He worked on the farm for a year
during uni.”
pointed out that ‘Abe’s the one who has been working on the
farm’ and that he had been doing so since he was
17 or 18. He said that
the last time he had seen James was at his father’s funeral in 2019 and
that he hadn’t seen him
at all during the droughts. After Abe left, they
discussed Wayne’s will and power of attorney. They had the following
“[Ms Ryan]: Have you thought further about the wills and powers of
[Wayne]: I don’t know what to do with them after this. James has a unit in
Cammeray that he is paying off with rent. He lives
with his male partner. I have
not heard from him since. He sent me that letter. I didn’t hear from him
at Christmas. The last
I heard from James was when I started the land transfer
process. I think they heard from Jo that I was paying her out. Hannah tried
invite me for Christmas. She was making half-hearted attempt[s] to talk to me.
She said she wants to help. I saw her last here.
She has talked and texted a few
times. She is too busy though with her job and her kids. And she is not a warm
personality.
I will sign the power of attorney and enduring guardianship. I want to leave the
will. They deserve nothing.
[Ms Ryan]: Okay; have a think about it. I can understand this is upsetting.
Let’s go through the power of attorney and guardianship.”
also instructed Ms Ryan to remove Hannah from the proposed enduring power of
attorney, which he then signed.
after this meeting, it became apparent that Rabobank was unwilling to agree to
the proposal whereby Abe would acquire the land
with such significant debt. It
was this circumstance that eventually led to the revised loan agreement which I
described at paragraph
in the meantime, Ms Ryan and Wayne continued to meet and discuss other matters,
including the caveats and Wayne’s will.
On 11 February 2021, they met for
Wayne to execute the first of his 2021 wills, being that described at paragraph
] above. This will
provided legacies of $300,000 to each of James and Hannah, to be paid over five
Ryan and Wayne had a further lengthy meeting to discuss the caveats on 24
February 2021. Ms Ryan’s evidence about this meeting
assumed some
significance for the plaintiffs’ case. On this occasion, Ms Ryan and Wayne
were discussing correspondence from
the plaintiffs’ solicitor in which a
mediation had been proposed in relation to the caveat issue. As to the substance
claims, he explained his reasons to Ms Ryan. These included:
“I would never promise 1/3 each. It would send the business broke. Abe has
done all the work....
James has only spent about 12 months on the farm. He likes to think he was the
overseer while Abe was the worker...Abe has been good
to me; James has not
He took her side. He assessed assets and stuck up for her.
Hannah has done nothing on the farm. She comes and just takes stuff. She did not
want me to give her away at her wedding...
There were no promises made. If I had the money, the best thing would be to make
it 1/3, 1/3, 1/3 but I do not.
I will leave $600,000 between the two of them.
I don’t know what this ‘good faith’ in the letter is; they
have been obnoxious from the start.”
was the reference to what Wayne would have done if he had ‘had the
money’ that the plaintiffs particularly relied on.
An aspect of their case
is that this note tends to confirm their contention that Wayne had promised them
one third of the farm each.
Ryan was cross-examined about this matter, and about her handwritten note of
this meeting from which the above testimony was reconstructed.
That handwritten
note relevantly appeared as follows:
“Best thing if had money
1/3, 1/3, 1/3 but not
No promises made.”
second line of this note is a little cryptic. One possibility is that it was
originally written as ‘no’ but was overwritten
‘not’. Ms Ryan was unable to say exactly what the word was but
suggested that it could have meant: ‘But
there’s not. There’s
just not’, meaning that he would leave them all one-third each if he could
afford to, but
that there was simply not enough money for that to be viable. I
accept that that is the most likely explanation of what Wayne said.
understand the note to amount to an admission to Mr Ryan that he had promised
them one-third each.
is next relevant to note what occurred in a meeting on 15 March 2021. By this
point, the plaintiffs’ application to extend
the operation of their
caveats had been refused. On this occasion, Wayne repeated many of the matters
he had already mentioned to
Ms Ryan as to why he felt that legacies of $300,000
each were appropriate. As before, his reasons included that ‘that is the
amount the farm can handle’. He also said ‘James and Abe do not get
on and the farm is not big enough to split up’.
disinclination to agree to an arrangement whereby Abe assumed all of the debt
contemplated by the December agreements
meant that it was necessary for Ms Ryan
and Wayne to revisit their proposal. They met to discuss this on 26 March 2021.
Ms Ryan pointed
out that this may present an opportunity for him to rethink his
decision to provide only $300,000 each to Hannah and James. Ms Ryan
suggested a
figure of $500,000 each. Wayne said ‘Abe will not be happy; but
[it’s] still the cheapest farm he is ever
going to buy’.
20 April 2021, Hannah commenced guardianship proceedings in NCAT. Her
application was twofold. She sought an order for the appointment
of a guardian
on the basis that Wayne was incapable of making decisions for himself. She also
sought a financial management order.
This angered Wayne enormously. Wayne and Ms
Ryan attended an online directions hearing for those proceedings on 6 May.
Before that
hearing, Wayne said to Ms Ryan:
“Abe looks after me. He’s doing fine. I make my own decisions. I
decided to go to Settlers...I do not want this. How
can she do this to
had a further meeting on 12 May at Settlers Village which lasted around 70
minutes. By this stage, they had been provided with
the affidavits on which
Hannah was relying in the NCAT proceedings. Wayne said:
“I’ve read the affidavits. They are nasty. Hannah did not do most of
the helping when we were overseas. My father was
still about then; he looked
after the farm. She might have helped a bit. She also had an account for goods
in town. I don’t
think they should get anything. They are nasty; I am
doing this will under your advisement only. I will need to check if Rabobank
happy with mortgage.”
is no doubt that Wayne was very upset and angry about Hannah’s application
to NCAT. However, at another hour-long meeting
at Settlers Village on 21 May,
Wayne told Ms Ryan that he now wanted to give Hannah and James $600,000 each. It
was apparent from
evidence given by Ms Ryan in cross-examination that, by this
stage, his attitude towards making provision for Hannah and James had
despite his anger about these proceedings and about the guardianship
proceedings. The notion of making more provision for
them was entirely his idea.
He also said that Hannah should be appointed as substitute enduring guardian in
case ‘Abe gets
hurt or dies’.
Ryan prepared a revised will, enduring power of attorney and enduring guardian
appointment according to the instructions given
on 21 May. They met at her
office on 24 May to go through the documents and for them to be executed. She
met with him for about 80
minutes on this occasion. He signed his final will, as
described at paragraph [
], as well as the revised loan agreement.
subsequently executed another appointment of enduring guardian in June 2021 in
favour of his sisters, Janet and Wendy. He wanted
them to be the ones making
decisions about medical matters, which is a conclusion he reached after
discussions with his doctors.
2020 and 2021 – The contract
for sale, the loan agreement, and the variation
November 2020, Wayne was the sole proprietor of all eight lots comprising the
farm. The contract of sale of the properties was
executed on 18 November 2020.
Wayne was the vendor and Abe was the purchaser. The purchase price was
$13,000,000. There was no provision
for a deposit. The date for completion was
42 days after the contract date. Special condition 36 was entitled ‘Vendor
and provided as follows:
“36.1 The Vendor:
(a) Acknowledges part payment being the value of the Rabobank liability assumed
from the personal guarantee of the vendor of $4,550,000;
(b) Has agreed to assist the purchaser in completion of this sale by lending to
the purchase[r] the balance of the purchase price
on the terms and conditions of
the Loan Agreement Annexed to this contract.”
was a form of loan agreement annexed to the contract. It provided for an advance
of $8,450,000 for 30 years at interest of 0.75%
per annum, payable on the first
day of each month. This equates to interest of $63,375 per year, or $5,281.25
variation of loan agreement (the Loan Variation) stated that it was executed on
11 June 2021. I note Ms Ryan’s evidence
that this occurred on 24 May 2021,
but no point was taken about this discrepancy. I note that Ms Ryan did otherwise
attend Settlers
Village on 11 June 2021 for the updated appointment of enduring
guardian to be executed.
Loan Variation recited that Wayne wished to commence succession planning in
relation to his land and business. It referred to
the contract of sale and to
the form of loan agreement annexed to that contract and then recited that
‘the parties have agreed
to replace that Initial Loan Agreement with this
Loan Agreement and proceed to complete the contract for sale’. It then
“D. This Loan Agreement is intended to document as part of Wayne’s
succession planning the following matters:
(i) A gift to Abe representing an early inheritance and acknowledgement of the
work Abe has done on the farm since he started work
on the farm when he was 17.
This amount does not reflect the full value of the gift being made to Abe as the
full value is dependent
upon him meeting his obligations under this agreement
and on him fulfilling his father’s wish that the farm remain intact for
future generations;
(ii) An amount of $1,200,000 secured by a first mortgage to go into
Wayne’s estate so that he may make provision for his other
two children,
James Bushell (‘James’) and Hannah McPherson (‘Hannah’)
if he so decides;
(iii) Payments of $50,000 per annum to meet Wayne’s financial needs in
retirement. These payments are being paid by Abe as
interest on the $1,200,000;
(iv) Wayne is to have the ability to call on Abe for additional amounts of
$50,000 if he needs them to meet his medical and living
(v) If Abe decides in the next 10 years that he wants to sell the land and no
longer be a farmer he has an obligation to pay some
of the equity value of that
land to James and Hannah.
E. Abe and Wayne acknowledge that James and Hannah have brought legal
proceedings against them in relation to the farming land. Abe
takes the land on
notice of those proceedings and agrees to bear all the costs associated with
those proceedings including the risk
of those proceedings being successful. It
is noted at the date of this agreement that Hannah has withdrawn from those
proceedings.”
information table specified the Principal Sum as $1,200,000, the interest rate
as 4.166% per annum and Security as a first registered
mortgage over the Secured
Land, which was defined to be Twitts.
body of the Loan Variation provided that Wayne agreed to advance the Loan to Abe
on the terms of the agreement. The Loan was defined
to be the total of the
Unsecured Amounts and the Principal Sum. The Unsecured Amounts were defined to
be certain amounts, if any,
payable by Abe under clauses 5, 7 and 8.
5 required Abe to make contributions towards Wayne’s housing, food,
medical care and medication.
7 and 8 were as follows:
7. Claim by James
7.1 Abe must pay all costs and liabilities associated with the Claim including:
(a) legal costs; and
(b) any amount agreed between the parties in settlement of the Claim;
(c) any amount ordered to be paid by the Supreme Court in respect of the Claim;
and indemnifies Wayne against all liabilities in relation to the Claim.
7.2 Abe acknowledges the Claim and agrees to settle the purchase of the Land
with notice of the Claim.
7.3 Abe will not bring any claim against Wayne as vendor under the Property Sale
Agreement in respect of or arising out of the Claim
and indemnifies Wayne
against all costs and liabilities in respect of the Claim.
8. Sale of Land
8.1 Abe agrees to pay:
(a) One-quarter of the Net Sale Proceeds to James less:
(i) 100% of any amounts paid by Abe in respect of the Claim if Hannah ceases
being a party to the Claim; or
(ii) 50% of any amounts paid by Abe in respect of the Claim if Hannah remains
party to the Claim;
(b) One-quarter of the Net Sale Proceeds to Hannah:
(i) without deduction if Hannah ceases being a party to the Claim; or
(ii) less 50% of any amounts paid by Abe in respect of the Claim if Hannah
remains a party to the Claim;
if Abe sells the Land within 10 years from the date of this deed.
8.2 The amount payable under clause 8.1 reduces each year by 10%. For the
avoidance of doubt, as an example in year 5, the amount
would be 50% of
one-quarter of the Net Sale Proceeds and after 10 years from the date of this
loan agreement, no amounts are payable
under clause 8.1.
8.3 The amount payable under clause 8.1 also reduces by:
(a) If Wayne has died by any Bequest received by James Bushell or Hannah
McPherson from the estate of Wayne; or
(b) if Wayne is still alive, by any amount of the Principal Sum repaid to Wayne
on the sale of the Land.
8.4 This clause does not apply if Abe sells the Land to fund a purchase of other
agricultural land on which Abe intends to carry
on farming either in Abe’s
own capacity or in a Related Entity.
8.5 Abe charges the Land and any land purchased in the future as [a] result of
the sale of the Land with the obligations under this
2020 and 2021 – The caveat proceedings
salient facts in relation to the caveat proceedings are as follows.
and Hannah caused caveats to be lodged on 20 December 2020. The estate or
interest specified in the caveats was expressed to
be an equitable interest in
land either ‘as beneficiary of constructive trust by virtue of
representations by Registered Proprietor
relied upon by Caveator to [his or her]
detriment or beneficiary of a resulting trust by virtue of financial
contributions or equitable
charge in favour of Caveat or by financial
contributions’. Wayne caused lapsing notices to be served on 11 February
Hannah and James made an application before the Duty Judge in Equity on 11
March 2021 for an order under
Real Property Act
extending the operation of the caveats. The application was refused in the
circumstances described at paragraphs [
of the contract for sale of the properties occurred on 27 August 2021, after the
Loan Variation had been entered into.
6 November 2021, Hannah and James caused further caveats to be lodged against
the properties. The estate or interest specified
in the caveats was an
‘equitable interest arising from the Registered Proprietor receiving a
transfer of the properties with
notice of the claim by the Caveator as a
beneficiary of a constructive trust against the previous Registered Proprietor
arising from
representations made by Wayne to James.’ Between December
2021 and April 2023, the parties were in dispute about these caveats.
Eventually, Abe caused lapsing notices to be served on 28 April 2023. Hannah and
James brought urgent proceedings by way of notice
of motion in these proceedings
for the caveats to be extended. This application came on before the Duty Judge
in May 2023. The Court
extended the caveats for a brief time until the dispute
could be heard and determined on a contested basis before Hammerschlag CJ
on 13 June 2023. On that day, the parties reached an agreement for the caveats
to be removed in return for Abe giving an undertaking
to the Court in the
following terms:
“I, Abraham Edward Bushell, undertake to the Court not to further encumber
the properties identified in Caveats AR587648 and
AR587723 other than:
(a) For the further bona fide and reasonably necessary expenses of the farming
business carried on the properties to a maximum of
$2,000,000; or
(b) By further order of the Court.
I, Abraham Edward Bushell, also undertake not to dispose of any of the above
properties until further order of the Court.”
March 2021 – Police incident
24 March 2021, Hannah received a call from Constable Lyons of the NSW Police.
Constable Lyons was investigating a complaint that
Hannah had ‘been
visiting [Wayne] frequently in the past few weeks at Settlers and bullying,
threatening and intimidating him.’
explained that she had not been in Wagga Wagga at the time of the alleged
incident. However, since she worked within the Australian
Federal Police by this
stage, she was required to self-report this incident to the Professional
Standards Unit, which commenced an
internal investigation. She was cleared from
any wrongdoing on 13 April 2021.
police report of the incident was in evidence. Although it was largely redacted,
it included the following:
“The victim owns a farm and has recently been placed in Settlers Village
in Estella due to his health and age. The [next of
kin] has been working at the
farm and has taken over the business. The family is currently going through
court matters in relation
to the ownership of the farm/business.
Police were called due to the [next of kin] and P/R [redacted] concerned that PN
[redacted] and Hannah MCPHERSON [redacted] were
visiting the victim at Settlers
Village and believe they were trying to persuade him in relation to the
farm/business.
Police attended and spoke with the victim, P/R and NOK. There has been nothing
threatening said and police advised if the PNs do
turn up and the victim does
not want them there then to contact police however at this stage the PNs have
not committed any offences.
Police advised if they are concerned they can apply
for an ADVO themselves at court.”
prevaricated when cross-examined about this incident. He was reluctant to be
drawn on the issue. He eventually said that he did
not recall speaking to
Constable Lyons. The plaintiffs submit that this was a device to avoid the
issue, that he did make the complaint
to the police and that the complaint was
false to his knowledge at the time he made it.
is force in this submission. The police report strongly suggests that Abe was
the source of the complaint. It seems remarkable
that he would not recall
speaking to the police about such a matter. I find that Abe was the person who
made the complaint. I also
find that he had no proper basis for making the
complaint at the time he did. It was not to his credit that he was so unwilling
speak about the matter in the witness box.
event was traumatic for Hannah. She says – and I accept – that it
crystallised her resolve to discontinue as a plaintiff
in these proceedings,
which is what she did on 1 April 2021.
NCAT proceedings
evidence was that she became increasingly concerned about Wayne’s health
through late 2020. She was also centrally
concerned about Wayne being pressured
by Abe into ‘making decisions about the [farm] that were not in his best
There is no doubt that Hannah held these concerns from late
2020 after she was informed about the proposed transfer of the farms
21 April 2021, Hannah made an application for the appointment of a guardian and
financial manager in the Guardianship Division
at NCAT. Abe became a party to
those proceedings. I note that, at this time, Abe held Wayne’s power of
attorney and had been
appointed his guardian.
19 October 2021, NCAT made orders dismissing the application for the appointment
of a guardian but appointing the NSW Trustee and
Guardian as Wayne’s
financial manager. However, by the time these orders were made, the transfer of
the properties to Abe had
already occurred.
re-joined these proceedings by Amended Statement of Claim filed on 6 April 2022,
several months after Wayne had died. She says
that the reason for this was that
the primary consideration behind her discontinuance (being Wayne’s health
and welfare) no
longer applied. I accept that evidence.
Proprietary Estoppel Claim
Proprietary estoppel by encouragement – applicable
Kramer v Stone
[2024] HCA 48
(2024) 99 ALJR 126
, the majority identified
the elements of equitable estoppel by encouragement in the following
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
, Brennan J set out
six requirements for an equitable estoppel which... were formulated at a level
of generality sufficient to include
an equitable estoppel which arises by reason
of encouragement by the making of a promise as well as an equitable estoppel
which arises
by reason of acquiescence. When the focus is only upon an equitable
estoppel which arises by reason of encouragement from a promise,
the elements
that must be satisfied can be refined as follows.
[37] First, as with the requirement for representations in estoppels by
representation generally, there must be a ‘clear and
unequivocal’
promise made by the party estopped (the promisor) to the party who relies upon
the promise (the promisee). Of
its nature, the clear and unequivocal promise
will generally concern some representation about future conduct.
[38] Secondly, a reasonable person in the promisor’s position must have
expected or intended (or the promisor actually did
expect or intend) that the
promisee would rely upon the promise by some action, omission or course of
conduct. This is what is meant
by references, including throughout this appeal,
to the promise being an ‘encouragement’ for the promisee to act.
[39] Thirdly, the promisee must have relied upon the promise by acting or
omitting to act in the general manner that would have been
expected. In order to
establish reliance, it is ordinarily necessary for the promisee to show not
merely that the promise was one
factor taken into account in motivating the
promisee’s action or omission but that the promisee would not have acted
to act in the absence of the promise. In other words, it must usually
be shown that the promisee’s reliance ‘made a difference
promisee] taking the course of action or inaction’.
[40] Fourthly, the consequence of the promisee’s reliance must be that the
promisee will suffer detriment if the promise is
not fulfilled, in the sense
that the promisee will be left in a worse position, as a consequence of reliance
upon the promise, than
if the promise had not been made. Unlike the recognition
of a gift, or the enforcement of a testamentary promise under a valid will,
the enforcement of a contractual promise, it is the existence of detriment
arising from reasonable reliance upon an unfulfilled
promise that completes the
recognition of the estoppel and moulds the remedial response. As this Court has
repeatedly held, ‘[i]t
is not the existence of an unperformed promise that
invites the intervention of equity but the conduct of the plaintiff in acting
upon the expectation to which it gives rise’. Hence, the relief is
‘moulded accordingly to prevent th[e] detriment’.
In cases where the
detriment suffered by a plaintiff is ‘a relatively small, readily
quantifiable monetary outlay on the faith
of the [defendant’s]
assurances’ then, apart from interest, the likely equitable relief ordered
will be compensation
in the amount of the monetary outlay. By contrast, where
the detriment suffered ‘involves life-changing decisions with irreversible
consequences of a profoundly personal nature’, the likely equitable relief
will be to require fulfilment of the assumption
upon which the plaintiff acted,
such as by a conveyance of rights, or an assessment of the monetary value of the
assumption.”
(footnotes omitted)
is also relevant to have regard to what was said by Meagher JA in
pseudonym) v E Co (a pseudonym)
[2020] NSWCA 220
(2020) 383 ALR 469
at [15] (Leeming and Payne JJA agreeing).
His Honour explained by reference to what had been said in
(1999) 196 CLR 101
[1999] HCA 10
that proprietary estoppel
by encouragement is:
“...founded in an assumption as to the future acquisition of ownership of
property which has been induced by a representation
or promise upon which there
has been detrimental reliance by the plaintiff.”
Honour continued:
“Whether any, and if so what, representation has been made is to be
judged ‘objectively according to the impact that
whatever is said [or
done] may be expected to have on a reasonable representee in the position and
with the known characteristics
of the actual representee’ per Mance LJ
[2004] EWCA Civ 957
[2004] 2 All ER (Comm) 833
follows that the question of whether a representor made a ‘clear and
unequivocal promise’ (
Kramer v Stone
at [37]) sufficient to found a
proprietary estoppel by encouragement cannot necessarily be answered merely by
reference to the words
used by a promisor. It will very often be necessary to
determine whether it was reasonable for the plaintiff to interpret the words
used in the way they claim to have understood and relied on them.
far as the question of detrimental reliance is concerned, a plaintiff must
usually establish that he or she would have acted differently
in the absence of
the relevant encouragement or if he or she had been told that the promise would
not be kept:
at [88]-[89] (Meagher JA). The conduct of the
representor need not necessarily be the sole inducement operating on the mind of
Sidhu v Van Dyke
(2014) 251 CLR 505
[2014] HCA 19
Kramer v Stone
at [39]. However, it is not sufficient to show that the
promisee believed the promise and that he or she took it into account as
factor to motivate a certain course of action or inaction.
Abe submitted, it follows from what was said by Meagher JA in
[88] and [89] that the particular concern here is to identify what the
plaintiffs would have done if the promises had not been
made or if the
plaintiffs had known that Wayne did not intend to keep them. The issue is
whether their conduct was influenced by
the representations in such a way as to
make it unconscionable for Wayne to insist on his legal rights concerning the
Trentelman v Owners – Strata Plan No 76700
(2021) 106 NSWLR
[2021] NSWCA 242
(Bathurst CJ, with whom Bell P and Leeming
JA agreed).
it is relevant to have regard to what has been said about the ability of
statements of testamentary intention to give rise
to an estoppel. The plaintiffs
referred me to the remarks of Brooking JA in
Flinn v Flinn
[1999] 3 VR
[1999] VSCA 109
“Most people, I suppose, know that the maker of a will can revoke it at
any time before death. How is a promise to leave property
by will to be
understood? Surely it will ordinarily be regarded by the promisee as a promise,
not merely to make a will which can
be revoked at any time before death, but to
make a gift by means of an instrument which will take effect upon the
donor’s death.
In other words, the promise of a gift by will is ordinarily
to be understood as meaning just that – an effective gift by will,
effect on death, not an ineffective, because revoked, disposition. Of course it
all depends on the circumstances. If a woman
says to her niece,
‘It’s time I made a new will. I’ll see the solicitor soon.
I’m going to leave you my house.
But don’t forget that I might
change my mind again and leave it to your brother next year’, any claim to
an equity by
proprietary estoppel would very likely break down at the start.
This would be on the basis there had never been a promise to leave
property by
will, only an intimation of intention to make a will coupled with a disclaimer
of an intention not to revoke it.”
‘intention not to revoke’ referred to in this passage ‘may be
shown by circumstances short of an explicit statement
that the promise
is irrevocable’:
Barnes v Alderton
[2008] NSWSC 107
BPR 25,281 (Young
CJ in Eq) at [58]. The relevant question was expressed by Ward
CJ in Eq in
Bassett v Cameron
[2021] NSWSC 207
v Alderton,
to be: ‘not whether the person incurring the detriment
understood that testators may change their wills, it is whether it was
reasonable for the person incurring detriment to understand the particular
encouragements or inducements in the circumstances to
be an irrevocable
promise’. I note that an appeal was allowed from
Bassett v Cameron
but her Honour’s decision in relation to the proprietary estoppel claim
was not disturbed: see
Bassett v Bassett
[2021] NSWCA 320
the same passage, Ward CJ in Eq also cited Robert Walker LJ (Waller and Beldam
LJJ agreeing) in
Gillett v Holt
[2001] Ch 210 at 228 for the proposition
that: ‘reliance on representations of a testamentary disposition may be
in circumstances where assurances to this effect are repeated over a
long period’.
Some observations about the evidence
plaintiffs’ case depends to a significant degree on their recollections of
things said to them many years ago, mostly during
their childhoods and early
adulthood, none of which is corroborated by any contemporaneous written record.
It is appropriate to exercise
a degree of caution in assessing evidence of that
kind. I specifically bear in mind what McClelland CJ in Eq said about the
fallibility
of human memory in
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
I bear in mind what Brereton J said in
Ashton v Pratt (No 2)
[2012] NSWSC
utterances of the deceased, which only the deceased could have denied.
defendants submitted that, in these circumstances, the Court should ‘place
reliance almost entirely upon documentary evidence’
rather than the
evidence of James and Hannah. The documentary evidence to which the defendants
referred consists of the various wills
made by Wayne and Jo and the letters sent
by James in 2012, 2013 and 2020.
accept that I should have regard to those documents in assessing the
plaintiffs’ evidence, but I am not prepared to proceed
quite on the basis
suggested by the defendants. It is necessary to weigh James and Hannah’s
evidence in the light of the cautions
already expressed and in the light of all
the evidence and the overall logic of events. This means that I will take the
James’s correspondence into account in determining whether the
representations were made and I will, as Brereton J suggested,
look to see
whether they tend to corroborate the witnesses’ accounts. But I will not
rely on them to the general exclusion
of what the witnesses have to say.
What did Wayne say?
first step is to determine what Wayne said to each of Hannah and James.
and James were cross-examined about the state of their recollection. It was
suggested to them (and submitted to me) that their
recollections had been
affected by the passage of time and that their evidence was, at least in part, a
reconstruction of events
and conversations.
counsel for Abe submitted that it defied belief that Hannah and James should be
able to recall all the matters to which they
deposed. The conversations with
Wayne on which they rely occurred during their childhood, adolescence and, at
the latest, their early
adulthood. He submitted that it was inherently unlikely
that they would be able to recall these conversations at the level of detail
out in their affidavits.
I am cautious about placing too much weight on my own perceptions of the
witnesses in a matter which turns on their evidence
long ago, it is relevant to note that both James and Hannah were good witnesses
who appeared to do their
very best in the witness box to answer questions.
Hannah was slightly more dogged in maintaining that her recollection was
but I do not criticise her for this.
that as it may, it is necessary to consider other matters, including the
inherent logic of events, in determining what Wayne said
to each of James and
Hannah. In this respect, I note the following matters.
contrary to Abe’s submission, I do not consider that the matters which
Hannah and James claim to recall are expressed
at a level of detail that is
impossible to credit to memory alone. On the contrary, their evidence is
generally somewhat abbreviated,
in the sense that they can recall specific,
limited things being said but they cannot recall the whole of the conversation
setting in which it occurred. For example, James recalls that either
Wayne or Jo said on several occasions:
“You have to have a qualification you can fall back on before you come
fairness to James, he has not sought to embellish this recollection with other
details. It is apparent from his cross-examination
that if he could have
recalled other details, he would have included them. But he cannot.
like effect is Hannah’s recollection of a conversation she had with Wayne
when she was about 16 in the context of learning
how to slaughter a sheep. She
recalls him saying:
“The boys can’t do this stuff you know. You will be good at doing
these things on the farm when you are older. Bloss,
there are things I get you
to help me with especially where blood and guts are involved because the boys
can’t. They just vomit.
You have a place here on the farm.”
and James do also recall more detailed conversations, however these all seem to
have been when they were slightly older and
on occasions which were distinct and
memorable. For example, Hannah recounts more detailed conversations she had with
Wayne on the
occasion of choosing subjects for school, or on the occasion of
attending a particular barbecue, and on the occasion of discussing
Parkinson’s disease and what might happen when he dies.
of what the plaintiffs recall is to the effect that Wayne said that the farm
would always ‘be there’ for them, and
expectation that they will get qualifications. Their recollections about the
‘equal share’
representation are similarly quite general. I do not
think it is inherently unlikely that persons in the plaintiffs’ position
would remember statements such as these. Furthermore, their recollections are in
some respects very similar to Abe’s own recollections
from a similar age.
For example, Abe recalls his father saying to all three children ‘on the
rare occasion’ that ‘you
will all be looked after’.
neither plaintiff can be accused of having embellished their recollection in a
way that was tailored to suit their case.
That is because the key conversations
which they recall are expressed in a very general way and do not easily lend
themselves to
being characterised as irrevocable promises concerning ownership
of land. In fact, as I will next explain, I do not consider that
plaintiffs’ evidence even taken at its very highest supports a conclusion
that the pleaded representations were made or
that it was reasonable of the
plaintiffs to treat such statements as giving rise to such representations.
my view, Wayne did say the things to Hannah and James that they recall.
Did Wayne make the pleaded representations to Hannah?
Hannah was a thoughtful and attentive witness and although I have no reason to
generally doubt the reliability of her evidence,
her evidence, taken at its
highest, supports a conclusion that her father said things to her in a fairly
general way about what his
will might provide and about the farm generally
‘being there’ for her, but it does not support a conclusion that
made clear, irrevocable promises to her about her title to property to
found an estoppel. In my view, it was not reasonable for a
Hannah’s position to understand anything said by Wayne as being an
irrevocable promise of inheritance.
reasons for reaching this conclusion are as follows.
the words which Hannah attributes to Wayne in her affidavits are in their
natural and ordinary meaning difficult to construe
as irrevocable promises about
title to property. For example, she recalls that Wayne said to her during her
“If you don’t get a qualification, you can’t come back to the
farm. It is as simple as that.”
also recalls him saying to an unknown person in her presence and in the presence
of Jo, at a time when she was still at school:
“I expect all my kids to leave and get a qualification before they come
back and work the farm.”
she was in year 11 or 12, she recalls this conversation with Wayne:
“Hannah: You really like having things in order before the Bank Manager
comes don’t you?
Wayne: Yep. That’s one person you want to keep onside.
Hannah: Do you have other things in order too?
Wayne: What do you mean?
Hannah: Like arrangements for when your Parkinson’s gets really bad and
for when you are not around?
Wayne: Your mum will take care of that for me. We also have wills in place that
we made after you kids were born. You will each get
moving to university in February 2004, she recalls the discussion set out at
paragraph [
Hannah’s evidence was that she took comfort from this conversation that
there would ‘always be a place for [her]
to return to the [farm]’.
She also sets out a discussion with Wayne when she was about 20 years old, to
which I have referred
at paragraph [
none of these statements was there an unequivocal promise that Wayne intended to
leave one third of his property to Hannah, come
what may, provided only that she
meets the ‘qualification expectation’. Wayne’s statements were
general statements
of his testamentary intention. They were made when Hannah was
a child or very young adult. To the extent they expressed an expectation
how Hannah should behave (moving off the farm, getting a degree and so on) they
were just that: expressions of a parent’s
expectations. They were not
promises about an interest in land.
Wayne’s expectation about Hannah obtaining a qualification never seems to
have been tied to his statements about inheritance.
This is equally true of
similar kinds of expectations expressed to James. I accept that an expression of
expectation that conditions
a promise about the future ownership of land may, in
appropriate circumstances, reasonably be understood as an encouragement which
when acted upon to a person’s detriment may found an estoppel concerning
ownership. A parent might say that they ‘expect’
their child to work
hard on the farm for low wages in return for inheriting it one day. But the
expectations on which Hannah and
James purport to have relied were never
expressed in that way. Hannah accepted in cross-examination that Wayne never
said to her
that if she did
meet the ‘qualification
expectation’ then she would be disinherited. The expectations expressed by
Wayne were not tied
to ownership of the land or to inheritance.
the very best for Hannah, the statements on which her case in proprietary
estoppel depends were equivocal on the key question of
whether Wayne was making
binding promises about ownership or whether he was making general statements
the representations and expectations on which the plaintiffs rely were never
expressed in the context of Wayne positively
encouraging either of them to stay
on or return to the farm. In all of the evidence as to when and how Wayne made
the representations
and expressed the expectations, there is no suggestion that
he was actually encouraging his children to give up their careers in
try their hand at farming. The evidence is only that he told them what he
intended to do with the land in his will and how
he expected his children to go
off and get qualifications. To the extent he was encouraging them to do
anything, it was to leave
the farm to do other things. This matter, on its own,
is not decisive. But it does bear on the question of whether a reasonable person
would have understood that Wayne was making binding commitments or expressing
serious encouragement.
the evidence does not show that Hannah has ever asserted the existence of
promises about the farm prior to these proceedings.
She did not raise the issue
in the context of resigning from Clayton Utz, returning from Laos, or returning
from Ethiopia. Nor did
she mention any promises about the farm in the course of
the NCAT proceedings. By the time those proceedings were brought, she had
already been a named plaintiff in these proceedings in which her fundamental
allegation was that any transfer of land to Abe would
be a clear departure from
binding promises to leave one third of the farm to her. However, she
discontinued that case and instead
turned her attention to having a guardian
the course of the NCAT proceedings, Hannah appears never to have mentioned that
Wayne was acting contrary to clear promises made
by him over many years to all
three of his children. Nor did Jo, who supported the application, mention that
such promises had been
of the differences between Hannah’s evidence before NCAT and her evidence
in these proceedings warrant further comment.
At paragraph [19] of her affidavit
before NCAT, Hannah said that the following conversation happened concerning the
purchase of Currawong:
“Wayne: We are going to buy Tommy’ McGrath’s farm
Hannah: Why on Earth would you want to do that?! Dad, your health isn’t
great and it’s only going to get worse. We have
just come out of one of
the worst droughts in history. The farm already has so much debt which will take
years and years to pay off,
if at all. Why add to it? Isn’t that enough to
Wayne: Yes but how about you think of instead as our superannuation for the
future instead of another block of dirt?
Hannah: This is mad. Have you really worked this through?”
gains the distinct impression from this paragraph that Hannah’s objection
to the purchase of Currawong was that it was financial
the version of events presented in these proceedings, she said that the
following conversation occurred:
“Jo: We are going to buy Tommy McGrath’s farm,
‘Currawong’.
Hannah: Why on Earth would you want to do that?! Dad, your health isn’t
great and it’s only going to get worse. We have
just come out of one of
the worst droughts in history. The farm already has so much debt which will take
years and years to pay off,
if at all. Why add to it? Isn’t that enough to
Wayne: Yes, but how about you think of it instead as our superannuation for the
future instead of another block of dirt?
Hannah: This is mad. Have you really worked this through?
Yes, we have. If you all want to come back to the farm, as we have
said to you, then we are going to need more land
”. (emphasis added)
evidence continued as follows:
“Although I did not know how much debt the farm was in at the time, I knew
that Dad had recently acquired Arizona and Ivanhoe
in 2008 and the farm was
already carrying a significant amount of debt. I was concerned that the farm
would be unable to service
the additional debt incurred to buy Currawong and
that this might mean that Dad had to sell all or part of the [farm] to meet
debt obligations. I was also concerned because Wayne’s health was
deteriorating and I was worried about the effect that buying
an additional
property might have on his health, as it would likely increase his stress and
Following this conversation, I understood that Currawong was being purchased as
part of Wayne’s intended plan to leave a sufficient
share of the [farm] to
each of me and my siblings so that we could each make our livelihoods on the
gains the distinct impression from this evidence that although Hannah at first
believed it to be an improvident purchase, Wayne
in fact acquired Currawong as
part of his long-standing and reasonable plan to leave property to her and her
siblings, precisely
as he had promised.
explained the differences between her evidence in NCAT and her evidence in these
proceedings as reflecting the different issues
with which the NCAT proceeding
was concerned. She is correct that the issues in that proceeding were very
different to the issues
in this proceeding. However, it remains the case that
she described the same event in ways that were different in important ways
across the two proceedings. In one account, she mentioned the promises that are
fundamental to her case here. In the other account,
she did not, even though it
would have made perfect sense for her to have done so even in the context of the
different issue being
decided by NCAT.
further, similar discrepancy may be seen in the way Hannah described her
reaction to being told by Ms Ryan in December 2020 that
Wayne intended to
transfer the farm to Abe, as to which see paragraphs [
]. Paragraph [122] of
her affidavit before NCAT was as follows:
“I was totally taken aback because dad’s care and costs were going
to be funded by a loan. In my thinking, the only way
that this approach made
sense was if Abraham was receiving the farm for nominal or limited consideration
by way of an intergenerational
transfer. This would also be exempt from
contrast, paragraph [223] of her first affidavit in these proceedings
“I was utterly shocked when Wayne told me this, as it was very different
to what I had always understood would happen, which
was that the [farm] would be
left to me and my siblings in equal shares. I could not believe what I heard,
but I tried to hide my
feelings as I was concerned that if I confronted Wayne
during the meeting in front [of] Ms Ryan, he might lose his temper with me
create a scene.”
is a sharp contrast between these two accounts. In one, she is thunderstruck by
the departure from a solemn promise. In another,
she does not mention the
do not believe that any part of Hannah’s evidence is recent invention, as
the defendants submitted it was. But on the question
of whether she actually
understood Wayne’s words as binding promises or as general statements of
his testamentary intentions,
her own evidence across the two fora suggests that
she has not consistently been of one view or the other. In other words, I
these discrepancies in her evidence to her own equivocation as to
whether Wayne really did make binding, irrevocable promises to
inheriting the land.
I am not willing to place any significant weight on Jo’s evidence as to
whether Wayne made binding promises to Hannah
and James about their inheritance.
Like Hannah, Jo gave evidence in the NCAT proceedings but did not mention any
promises about Hannah
or James inheriting land. Her evidence in those
proceedings contained an absolutely excoriating description of Abe, including as
a young child. She described his unsuitability to be in a position of care for
Wayne in terms that were deeply personal and antagonistic.
So scathing was her
attack on his character that it is impossible to accept her as an impartial
historian of the relationship between
Wayne and any of his children.
also note the evidence about a letter written by Jo in the year 2000, which
happened to be unearthed from a time capsule on the
celebration of the
sesqui-centenary of Barmedman. This letter referred only to James and Abe
becoming the next generation of Bushell
farmers in the region. She did not
mention the possibility of Hannah becoming a farmer, which is inconsistent with
her evidence that
Wayne had always promised a three-way division of the land.
According to her evidence in these proceedings, by 2000 the children
promised a three-way split of the land. The letter does not bear this out. Nor
did Jo ever mention any promises about the
land in the context of her divorce
and property settlement, when it would have been obvious to do so. If, as she
suggested, she transferred
Currawong to Wayne in the expectation that he was
duty-bound to leave all of his property to the three children equally, it is
to see why she would not have said so at the time.
my view, even though I can accept that Wayne said the things which Hannah
recalls him saying, I cannot accept that a reasonable
person in Hannah’s
position would have understood his words as being binding promises from which he
was not entitled to depart,
regardless of how things might turn out for either
Did Wayne expect Hannah to rely on the representations
and expectations?
fact that Wayne expressed expectations about James and Hannah obtaining
qualifications, which he undoubtedly did, points strongly
to a conclusion that
Wayne intended his children to leave the farm and to obtain qualifications that
would allow them to live independently
of the farm. His specific concern was
that they should obtain qualifications in a field other than farming that could
support them.
He no doubt hoped that they would heed his advice (as they did)
but he cannot possibly have intended that they would act to their
detriment by
giving up those careers to return to the farm even if the farm could not support
them. It was precisely because he feared
the farm would not be able to support
them that he encouraged them to get qualifications in the first place.
to Wayne’s statements about equal treatment or a three-way split of the
land, the evidence does not support a conclusion
that Wayne ever believed he had
made a binding promise to this effect or that he intended the plaintiffs to rely
on those statements,
least of all to their detriment. None of his many wills
ever divided the estate in accordance with such a promise. The closest were
1989 wills, but these pre-date any alleged promises and, even then, first left
the whole estate to Jo. From the time any promises
were made or expectations
expressed, Wayne’s numerous wills all diverged very significantly from any
notion of equality. Clearly,
Wayne never considered that anything he had said to
his children bound him to leave his estate equally among them.
other things done by Wayne over the years are inconsistent with a finding that
he intended Hannah and James to shape their futures
around an eventual three-way
split of the land. He offered to transfer all of the land to James in the late
2000s (see paragraph
]); he seriously entertained transferring land to Abe
in 2013 (see paragraph [
]); and he entered into the Deed of Annuity (see
paragraph [
2015 by which he agreed to transfer all his land to Abe. This may just be more
evidence of Wayne’s willingness to depart
from promises, but the
consistency with which he conducted his affairs over such a long period of time
(that is, the consistency
with which he acted as if he had made no promises)
tends to suggest that he honestly did not consider that he had made the sort of
promises alleged. I note that when the issue was specifically raised in the
course of the caveat dispute, Wayne firmly expressed
the view to his solicitor
that the notion of having made promises was ‘nonsense’.
does the evidence support a conclusion that a reasonable person in Wayne’s
position would have considered they had made
a binding promise. Such a person
would in my view have considered statements such as these as being statements of
present testamentary
intention that did not give rise to an estoppel. Although
the plaintiffs say that Wayne’s assurances were ‘repeated over
long period’ and therefore reasonable to rely on as representations
Bassett v Bassett
at [20]), there was never any evidence of Wayne having
made an ‘explicit statement that the promise is irrevocable’
Barnes v Alderton
at [58]). No doubt they were said by way of
reassurance, but the reassurance was offered in the context of Hannah and James
the farm to do other things, not in the context of them being encouraged
to stay on the farm, nor in the context of them being encouraged
to return to
Did Hannah rely to her detriment on the representations and
expectations?
more significant difficulty with Hannah’s case is that even if Wayne did
make promises to her as alleged, I do not consider
that she relied on them to
her detriment. There are two aspects to this conclusion, being the third and
fourth matters identified
at [39] and [40] of
Kramer v Stone
Specifically, I conclude that (a) the promises were not a ‘contributing
cause’ (in the sense explained in
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[91]-[93]) to Hannah making any significant decisions and (b) Hannah is not
materially worse off than if she had known that
Wayne might not keep his
key decisions which Hannah made while still at school and at university, such as
choosing subjects for the HSC and choosing a
degree, were matters that cannot
sensibly be said to have been done in reliance on a promise about what would
happen when her father
died. The evidence shows that her choices about HSC
subjects and about her degree were made in much the same way most children of
that age make such choices. She had many discussions with her father and others
made numerous suggestions
to her about what to study for the HSC, including modern history and legal
studies. He was not opposed
to her studying medicine at university. He did not
threaten to disinherit her if she studied medicine. Her evidence rises no higher
than that she felt ‘assured’ in making her choices that the
‘farm would always be there for her’. There is
no suggestion that
she was at all worried about – or even cognisant of – her
inheritance at the time of making these
decisions as a 16, 17 and 18 year-old.
Undoubtedly,
Hannah was influenced by what her parents said. But the evidence does not allow
me to conclude that she decided what
to study based on what she believed she
needed to do to protect her rights on her father’s death.
evidence does not establish that Wayne’s promises were a contributing
cause of the other decisions upon which Hannah relies
on to establish detriment.
Hannah’s decision to resign from Clayton Utz in February 2012 (see
paragraphs [
] above) was made in
circumstances where she had spoken to her father and had received nothing but an
indication that he was ‘not
opposed’ to her returning to the farm.
She made the decision with no plan to move to the farm to live and with no firm
understanding
of what work she might do on the farm. Her father certainly did
not encourage her to return. In fact, she moved to Narrandera with
her long-term
boyfriend, with whom she had moved to Laos in the first place. I do not think it
can be said that the move from Laos
to Australia was in reliance on
Wayne’s promises. I do accept that Hannah hoped to be able to work on the
farm. However, I
am unable to accept that the prospect of inheriting one third
of the farmland was a contributing cause of her decision to return
when she did
in that she ‘would not have acted or omitted to act in the absence
of’ that alleged promise. At most, it
was one matter amongst others that
she took into account in deciding when to return to Australia and, in the
absence of it, was unlikely
to make a difference to her decision:
she did finally have a frank conversation with her father about working on the
farm, he made quite clear that the farm could
not support her: see paragraph [
]. This should have
made it clear to Hannah that it was not safe to assume that what Wayne had said
either about the ‘farm always
being there for her’ or about his
expectation that she would be able to return to the farm if she got a
qualification was a
binding promise. Clearly enough, Wayne did not think these
past statements bound him to act in any particular way.
makes it all the more difficult to accept that her decision to return to
Australia from Ethiopia in September 2014 was made in
reliance on Wayne’s
promises about her inheritance. Hannah’s evidence about the decision to
move back to Australia in
September 2014 is set out at paragraph [
] above. However, by
this point she knew that Wayne did not consider himself bound by the
representations and expectations alleged
in these proceedings. As the events of
2012 showed, he was not willing to have her back on the farm despite having met
his so-called
‘qualification expectation’. I do not accept that
Hannah’s decision to come back to Australia in 2014 was attributable
her confident belief that she was going to inherit one third of the farm. By
this point, Hannah had received clear indications
that it was not guaranteed
that Wayne would honour any previous representations concerning ownership of the
same may be said about Hannah’s decision to find work in the agricultural
sector between 2016 and 2018. She said that she
‘would not have had the
same focus on pursuing regional roles in the agricultural sector’ if she
had known that Wayne
did not intend to keep his promise to her. She said that
she would have ‘looked at non-agricultural roles’. She said
she found a good opportunity that was located in Melbourne or Canberra, she
would have considered commuting from Albury.
am unable to accept this evidence. By the time she and Jarrod bought their house
in Albury at the end of 2015, Hannah had had a
major falling out with both her
father and mother, which lasted for years. Despite having met the
‘qualification expectation’,
she had already been rebuffed from
working on the farm on her return from Laos. Nor had anything come of her hopes
of working on
the farm on her return from Ethiopia. She was fully aware that her
parents had contemplated transferring land to Abe in the past,
contrary to the
alleged promises. This proposal had not gone ahead, but only because she and
James had threatened to approach the
guardianship tribunal. Furthermore,
although not decisive, it is relevant that her father never actually encouraged
her to return.
By 2016, she could not have had any doubt that her father did not
consider himself bound by long-ago promises of equal treatment.
therefore do not accept that Hannah’s numerous attempts to obtain work in
the agricultural sector between 2016 and 2018 were
made in reliance on
Wayne’s promise that she would inherit a third of his property. As with
the other acts of reliance for
which she contends, the position rises no higher
than that she took the prospect of inheriting a share of the farm into account.
far as the question of detriment is concerned, it is very difficult to conclude
that Hannah is in a worse position in life compared
to where she would be if she
had known that Wayne might not keep his promises. She has two degrees from a
very good university, including
a law degree. She was admitted to practice as a
lawyer and has experience working in one of the country’s largest law
where she excelled. She has been able to find work ever since leaving
that firm, although mostly not in law. She currently has very
good, highly
remunerative employment. She has had opportunities for overseas travel,
including substantive roles in volunteer organisations,
which she has been in a
position to take advantage of, not once but twice. She owns a home with a
mortgage that she and her husband
are managing to service. She has a legacy of
$600,000 from her father’s estate which she accepts she would not have if
promises had been kept. She and her brother will each inherit half of the
residue of their mother’s estate, to the exclusion
of Abe. Their mother,
it is to be remembered, received half the 2014 value of the farms in her
property settlement with Wayne.
case on this issue is heavily dependent on the proposition that she would have
been financially far better off by choosing
medicine to begin with or, having
chosen law, by staying at a big city law firm.
far as concerns the option of studying medicine instead of law, there was no
evidence that this was an available option for her
at the time. I do not know
whether she had the HSC results to study medicine and, if so, where she would
have been prepared to go
to study it. I note that she has been unsuccessful in
obtaining enrolment in a graduate medicine course in later years.
far as concerns the decision to leave Clayton Utz and then the decision to leave
the ATA, there is no firm basis to conclude that
Hannah would have taken a
markedly more financially successful path in life than the one she has. She has
been offered and taken
significant opportunities. She has also passed
opportunities up or put them on hold in order to pursue significant volunteer
She has pursued work in areas outside the law. I accept that it is quite
possible that if she had decided to stay at Clayton Utz
then she may have become
a successful partner with a busy practice. So too might she have decided to take
extended sabbaticals to
Laos and Ethiopia and to move to Albury with Jarrod in
any event. The ‘what if’ scenario is too uncertain for me to be
to conclude with confidence that she is actually worse off than if she had known
that Wayne would not keep his promises.
follows from this that even if I am wrong in my other conclusions, I would not
conclude that Hannah’s reliance on the representations
and expectations
has been to her detriment.
Did Wayne make the pleaded
representations to James?
conclusions in relation to James’s proprietary estoppel claim are largely
the same as my conclusions in relation to Hannah’s
claim. That is, I am
unable to conclude that Wayne made sufficiently clear and unambiguous promises
to James; nor that Wayne actually
intended for James to rely on them (nor that a
reasonable person in Wayne’s position would have expected that James would
on them); nor that James actually did rely on Wayne’s promises to his
detriment. My particular reasons for reaching these conclusions
statements which Wayne made to James were somewhat less vague than the
statements made to Hannah. For example, he said that ‘part
of this land
will be yours’.
the other hand, as with Hannah, the language used does not easily lend itself to
being understood as binding promises about what
would happen when Wayne died,
come what may. His comments may all equally be understood as statements of his
testamentary intention
which any reasonable person would understand are capable
my view, the statements made by Wayne were not clear and unambiguous promises,
nor would a reasonable person in James’s position
have understood them as
such at the time they were made. There were numerous occasions prior to this
litigation on which it would
have been obvious for James to remind his father of
a binding promise he had made but where he did not do so. One explanation for
this is that it is only more recently that he has come to see such statements as
binding promises. For example, in all his correspondence
with his parents in the
context of their proposal to transfer land to Abe during 2013, he never once
reminded them that they had
already promised one third of the property to him.
This is despite the fact that he arced up quite significantly at their proposal
and despite the fact that he and Hannah were prepared to go to the guardianship
tribunal to challenge his capacity if he went ahead
with the proposal.
correspondence during 2013 shows that he had strong views about the question of
succession. However, it also shows that
he considered that the ‘current
third/third/third plan’ was something that had only been ‘broadly
agreed to’.
Importantly, he made the following statements in that
correspondence:
(1) ‘To date there had been no proper succession plan discussed with the
family apart from the equitable third/third/third
(2) ‘Until a plan has been agreed I think that it could be dangerous to
involve Rabo.... This plan does not include all viewpoints...’.
(3) ‘More options need to be investigated that have more agreement in the
family, the adoption of this model without sufficient
research will cause more
issues than it solves’.
(4) ‘The general rule we have always been aware of was third:third:third.
Any change from this now seems to be unfair and unfavourable
to the two non
farming children’.
are all entirely understandable statements from someone who is concerned about
the decision his parents might make about their
property and, specifically,
whether they might depart from previously expressed general statements of
intent. They are far less understandable
as statements from someone who believes
that the question of inheritance was definitively settled years prior. When he
in cross-examination about why he had not referred to any promise in
this context, his answer was that ‘it had always been
implied’. I do
not however think that there was any implied reference to a promise in his
communications at this time. To the
contrary, I infer from his communications at
this time that he did not consider that binding promises had been made.
his childhood and early adulthood, James never sought any assurances from his
father about what he proposed to do about succession.
It is a matter that James
was not anxious about and did not raise. It seems to have been very far from his
mind. He was happy to
head off to university to study and then to join KPMG.
There seems never to have been an occasion on which a solemn assurance about
succession would naturally have been made. A reasonable person in this position
would have understood unsolicited statements from
his father about succession as
statements of testamentary intent, not irrevocable promises.
my view, although I am willing to accept that Wayne said the things that James
attributes to him, I find that those statements
were not clear and unambiguous
representations of the kind pleaded.
Did Wayne expect James to
rely on the representations and expectations?
with Hannah, I find that Wayne did not expect or intend that James would
detrimentally rely on his representations and expectations.
Nor would a
reasonable person in Wayne’s position have expected that James would
detrimentally rely upon them. I reach the
same conclusions on this issue as I
reached in the context of Hannah’s claim at paragraphs [
the case of James, it is particularly clear that Wayne never believed he had
made an irrevocable promise about a three-way split
of the land. Wayne in fact
offered to transfer all of the properties to James in 2008 or 2009, which James
declined. The 2013 correspondence
on the topic of succession also tends to
support the conclusion that anything said by Wayne about that topic in earlier
been in the nature of general statements of testamentary intention,
not binding promises intended to encourage a course of action
or inaction by
Did James rely to his detriment on the representations
and expectations?
with Hannah, the greater difficulty lies in the fact that James has not relied
to his detriment on the representations and expectations.
If I were to find that
the pleaded representations and expectations were established, I would have
reached the following conclusions
on the questions of reliance and detriment.
James, like Hannah, pleads that he made numerous decisions in reliance on his
father’s promises, his submissions particularly
focused on his decision to
take a year-long sabbatical from KPMG Chile, starting in 2014. I have described
this decision at paragraphs
] above. However, the course of correspondence and
meetings during the previous year about his parents’ proposal to transfer
land to Abe and about succession generally make it impossible to accept that he
took this sabbatical in reliance on promises made
during his childhood and early
adulthood about inheritance. When asked about this issue in cross-examination,
James said that when
he returned to Australia he was not at all worried that his
parents were not going to abide by their promises to him. In other words,
claims that he returned to Australia with full confidence that a third of the
farm would be his, come what may.
cannot accept that this was so. I can accept that he returned to the farm in the
hope and expectation that he might be able to make
a life for himself as a
farmer. But his experience the previous year cannot have left him in any doubt
whatsoever that the question
of inheritance was one that was still up in the
air. He knew by this point that the question of inheritance was a complicated
and that apart from anything else it would depend on the terms of his
parent’s property settlement.
Hannah, James was pressed in cross-examination about what he would have done if
he had known that Wayne might not keep his promises
to him. These questions were
directed to all of the decisions which, in his pleading, James claimed were made
in reliance on Wayne’s
promises and encouragement. Save for saying that he
believed he would have stayed longer in Chile, James’s evidence was that
he did not know what else he would have done.
present circumstances are generally very good. He has extremely good
professional and academic qualifications. He has
gained excellent domestic and
international experience in a difficult, competitive and highly regarded
profession. He has excellent,
stable employment in the Commonwealth public
service. He has savings and an investment property. He has a $600,000 legacy
father. He stands to inherit half of his mother’s estate. He
lives with his partner, from whom he is relatively economically
independent.
They own their home and comfortably service their debt.
case is that if he had stayed in Chile in 2014 and pursued partnership with
KPMG, he would now be in a far better position
than he is now. But as to what
his life would now look like if he had made that decision, there is little to no
evidence. I do not
think it is safe to proceed on the assumption that he would
necessarily have become and would thereafter have remained a partner
either in Chile or Australia. At most, there is a chance that he would be in
that position. Such evidence as there is about
his general ambition to become a
partner at KPMG is equivocal. In his first affidavit, he maintained that he had
‘never intended’
and was ‘never interested’ in pursuing
partnership with KPMG.
evidence also shows that James did not actually pursue partnership after
returning to KPMG Australia in 2015. He left after about
12 months to do
something altogether different, namely study for a PhD.
accept James’s evidence that he felt that partnership opportunities had
somewhat passed him by after returning from his sabbatical,
which included about
nine months at the farm. However, he had taken that sabbatical knowing that
farming might not work out for him.
The very reason he did not resign in 2014
when he returned to the farm was that he knew it might not work out and that he
to return to KPMG, which is what happened. It is relevant to note that
his plan to use his sabbatical to reestablish himself on the
farm failed for
reasons that had nothing at all to do with his father’s failure to keep
his promises.
Furthermore,
although I can accept that he felt that partnership opportunities had passed him
by, there was no evidence that he was
justified in feeling that way. He called
no evidence about his attempts to pursue further promotion with KPMG or about
the prospects
of becoming a partner.
am therefore unable to accept that James has suffered material detriment by
relying on the equal share representation and the qualification
expectation. Nor
did he suffer any detriment in relying on the so-called ‘further
representations’, which included the
representation that he might receive
more than one third of the farms. The evidence of this representation was the
offer made in
the late 2000s, which James rejected: see paragraphs [
]. He did not rely on
Conclusions in relation to the proprietary estoppel
proprietary estoppel claims are not made out.
Defences to the
proprietary estoppel claims
Real Property Act
case I am wrong about the proprietary estoppel claims, it is appropriate to deal
with the question of whether Abe has nonetheless
obtained indefeasible title in
the farm properties despite being on notice of the plaintiffs’ claims.
Real Property Act
is that Abe acquired
indefeasible title to the farm from Wayne notwithstanding any ‘notice
direct or constructive of any ...
unregistered interest’ in the land,
including any claims against Wayne in respect of the land.
overcome the effect of these provisions, the plaintiffs allege that the
exception to indefeasibility applies. They rely on clauses 7.1 and
7.2 of the Loan Agreement Variation in which Abe acknowledged
their claims and
undertook to abide by the determination of the Court. Those clauses were as
“7.1 Abe must pay all costs and liabilities associated with the Claim
(a) legal costs; and
(b) any amount agreed between the parties in settlement of the Claim;
(c) any amount ordered to be paid by the Supreme Court in respect of the Claim;
and indemnifies Wayne against all liabilities in relation to the Claim.
7.2 Abe acknowledges the Claim and agrees to settle the purchase of the Land
with notice of the Claim.”
Frazer v Walker
[1967] 1 AC 569
at 585, Lord Wilberforce said that the
principle of indefeasibility exemplified by provisions such as
Real Property Act
“...in no way denies the right of a plaintiff to bring against a
registered proprietor a claim in personam, founded in law
or in equity, for such
relief as a court acting in personam may grant.”
Bahr v Nicolay
(1988) 164 CLR 604
[1988] HCA 16
613 (Mason CJ and Dawson J), 637-638 (Wilson and Toohey JJ) and 653-656 (Brennan
it is not enough to establish an
in personam
exception to prove that the
registered proprietor had mere notice of an unregistered interest or claim:
Mapa Pearls Pty Ltd v Haliotis Fisheries Pty Ltd
(2023) 71 VR 581
. The terms of
Real Property Act
clear. Rather, there must be an ‘additional ingredient’ to the
notice, being some form of ‘acknowledgment
of the unregistered interest,
or an agreement or undertaking to act in accordance with it, from which the
registered proprietor later
Heggies Bulkhaul v Global
Minerals Australia
(2003) 59 NSWLR 312
[2003] NSWSC 851
’) at [103] (Austin J). An
‘acknowledgement’ in this context must refer not only to a
recognition that a right exists,
but an undertaking to respect that right:
Presbyterian Church (NSW) Property Trust v Scots Church Development Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 676
(2007) 64 ACSR 31
and [114] (Young CJ in Eq)
approving of
at [103]. As Young CJ in Eq said at [114]:
“One must be a little careful with this word ‘acknowledgment’.
Acknowledgment in this type of case means more that
the realisation that a right
exists. It connotes the case where a person not only recognises that a right
exists, but also undertakes
to respect that right. However, it does not appear
necessary that the undertaking need be known to the person whose right is in
at the time when it is made.”
the point is not an easy one, I would have held that clauses 7.1 and 7.2 of the
Loan Variation amounted to an undertaking
by Abe to respect or act in accordance
with any right, estate or interest that James and Hannah might establish in the
through these proceedings. Had it been necessary to do so (ie, had
Hannah and James actually made out their estoppel cases), I would
in personam
exception was made out.
note that in paragraph 2(m)(iv) of their Reply, the plaintiffs raise an
allegation of ‘equitable fraud’ against Abe.
The plaintiffs did not
advance any submissions about this issue. In light of what I have otherwise said
in personam
exception, it is unnecessary to say anything about
the allegation of equitable fraud.
Limitation and laches
Limitation Act
defendants first rely on
Limitation Act 1969
concerns actions for fraud and conversion in respect of
trust property and relevantly provides for a limitation period of twelve
as follows:
(1) An action on a cause of action—
(c) to recover trust property, or property into which trust property can be
traced, against a trustee or against any other person
is not maintainable by a trustee of the trust or by a beneficiary under the
trust or by a person claiming through a beneficiary under
the trust if brought
after the expiration of the only or later to expire of such of the following
limitation periods as are applicable---
(e) a limitation period of twelve years running from the date on which the
plaintiff or a person through whom the plaintiff claims
first discovers or may
with reasonable diligence discover the facts giving rise to the cause of action
and that the cause of action
has accrued, and
(f) the limitation period for the cause of action fixed by or under any
provision of this Act other than this section.
states that the term ‘trust’ for the purposes of that Act
includes implied and constructive trusts.
provides, in relation to an action to recover land, the limitation period
is twelve years from the date on which the cause of action
first accrues to the
Section 36(1)
provides that the limitation period for an action to
recover land applies in like manner to an action to enforce an equitable
dealing with the limitation defence in the alternative, it is necessary to
engage in some conjecture as to the basis on which the
plaintiffs would have
succeeded on the proprietary estoppel claim had I not rejected it. Although
there may have been a range of
outcomes, I consider it appropriate to proceed on
the basis that the plaintiffs would have succeeded on the basis of their primary
case, which is that Wayne did not resile from any promises until the
transactions of 2020 and 2021 (namely the transactions described
at paragraphs
that basis, the
Limitation Act
defences could not succeed. It was only at
that point that the cause of action accrued. Alternatively, it was only at that
that the plaintiffs discovered all of the facts entitling them to bring
proceedings.
defendants submitted that where a constructive trust arises by reason of a
proprietary estoppel, the trust arises at the time
the promisee relies to their
detriment on the relevant promise or encouragement in such a way as to render it
unconscionable for
the promisor to resile from the promise or encouragement.
Authority for this submission is to be found in
Soulos v Pagones; Soulos v
Soulos; Soulos v Soulos; Soulos v Pagones; Kristallis v Soulos; Kristallis v
Soulos; Kristallis v Pagones
[2023] NSWCA 243
(2023) 416 ALR 181
Soulos v Pagones
’) at [471] (Ward P); see also
(2017) 53 VR 311
[2017] VSCA 352
(Tate JA, Santamaria JA
and Keogh AJA agreeing). The defendants say that in the present case, a
constructive trust arose many years
ago (on the plaintiffs’ case) when the
plaintiffs first did things in reliance on Wayne’s promises.
may be so. But the question arising under the
Limitation Act
is not when
the constructive trust arose. It is, rather, when the cause of action accrued
or when the plaintiffs discovered facts necessary to demonstrate
that it had accrued
That will not ordinarily occur in a case such
as this, ie in a claim for proprietary estoppel, until the promisor resiles from
promise or, at the very least, the plaintiff has some cogent basis to
contend that the promisor will do so. Both for the purpose
that did not happen in the present case until well within the period of 12 years
prior to the commencement of the proceedings.
it been necessary to deal with this defence, I would have found that it was not
Laches, acquiescence and delay
the defendants state that even if the estoppel claims are not statute-barred by
Limitation Act
, the doctrines of laches or acquiescence based on
delay operate to bar the plaintiffs’ entitlement to a remedy.
of those defences have any application to the present circumstances. James and
Hannah caused caveats to be lodged on the farm
properties on 20 December 2020,
only one week after Hannah first found out that Wayne was proposing to transfer
the farm to Abe.
This was over eight months before the transfer was in fact
settled. This cannot be said to reveal any unreasonable delay in bringing
claim such as to enliven the doctrines of laches or acquiescence.
it been necessary to deal with these defences, I would have found that they were
not made out.
Succession Act
the alternative, Hannah and James seek family provision orders, including orders
designating the farm properties as notional estate.
The facts described in the
context of the proprietary estoppel claims are generally relevant to the
resolution of this part of the
case. In addition, it is necessary to note some
further matters concerning the financial position of the parties.
James’s current financial circumstances
currently holds the position of Assistant Director in the Department of
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications,
Sports and the
Arts. This is an EL1 role and is based in Canberra. James lives with his
partner, Scott, in Watson, ACT.
currently earns a gross annual income of $139,534, which comes to $8,442 after
tax per month. His employer contributes $1,791
per month to his superannuation.
James has been earning an additional $1,000 per month in connection with a
fractional CFO position
with a home loan originator. However, this arrangement
was expected to come to an end by about September or October 2025.
December 2024, James and Scott purchased a home in Watson as tenants in common
in equal shares for the sum of $895,000. They are
jointly liable for a mortgage
on this property. The mortgage currently stands at about $685,000. Monthly
repayments are about $4,059
per month. Total costs associated with ownership of
the Watson property (including loan repayments, utilities, strata, insurance
etc) come to $67,928 per year, of which James’s share is half, or $33,964.
This equates to $2,830 per month.
also still owns his apartment in Cammeray. This is the apartment which his
father helped him to acquire in 2011. The property
has a current estimated
market value of about $1,200,000. The Cammeray property is rented out for $725
per week and is subject to
a mortgage of about $350,000. Mortgage repayments are
$2,378 per month. After taking into account rental income and all expenditure
associated with ownership of the Cammeray property, this investment results in a
cash outlay of about $200 per month.
at 1 July 2025, James had superannuation of about $345,000. He had cash of
$49,379 in an offset account associated with the mortgage
on the Cammeray
property. He had cash of $25,016 in an offset account associated with the
mortgage on the Watson property. He owns
a car worth about $10,000 and has
various personal assets that are not of significant value.
addition to the home loans on the Watson and Cammeray properties, James has
other liabilities totalling about $30,000 in connection
with the Watson
property. These relate to the installation of solar panels and a strata loan. As
at 1 July 2025, his credit card
debt was $9,235 and he had a tax bill of $5,000.
has to date only received $360,000 of his legacy from his father’s estate.
He did not say how he has used these funds,
however I was informed by senior
counsel for the plaintiffs that he has contributed a fair amount of this to
superannuation.
estimates that he spends about $1,625 per month on food and groceries. He
estimates other costs, such as car and other personal
costs, of about $2,101 per
month. He says he also has annual travel expenditure for multiple domestic trips
and one international
trip in the amount of $20,000 per year. He also expects to
make additional concessional superannuation contributions of $5,000. His
evidence does not specify whether this is a monthly or annual contribution.
submits that his cash flow modelling shows negative cashflow on a monthly basis.
This submission is based on Annexure B to James’s
affidavit updating his
financial position for the hearing. Annexure B shows that James has a monthly
cash shortfall of $2,376 once
all of the abovementioned income and expenditure
is taken into account.
the monthly cash shortfall figure of $2,376 – which would be a fairly
serious shortfall for any individual –
would only be correct if James
intended to make concessional superannuation contributions of $5,000 per month,
every month each year.
As mentioned above, James’s evidence is silent as
to how often he intends to make additional $5,000 contributions to
superannuation.
It seems most unlikely that James intends to make an additional
$5,000 contribution to superannuation every month. Apart from the
fact that he
simply cannot afford to do so, he would well and truly exceed his concessional
contributions cap. It seems much more
likely that what he meant in his Annexure
B was that he intends to make a single $5,000 concessional contribution each
year. If that
is so, his net monthly position before travel expenses, and
ignoring his employer’s contribution to superannuation, is that
surplus of $2,499. Once his proposed annual domestic and international travel is
taken into account, his monthly surplus
is $832. These figures assume that he
still receives his monthly CFO income of $1,000. It follows that he will be only
slightly cashflow
negative even if he has multiple domestic holidays and has an
international holiday every year, once he ceases to earn income from
time CFO position.
addition to his share of the Watson property, Scott owns a property in Waterloo,
New South Wales, and a property in Townsville,
Queensland. The Waterloo property
is worth $700,000 and is subject to a mortgage of about $92,000. The Townsville
property is worth
has superannuation of about $393,000. He owns a car worth about $35,000.
Scott’s gross annual income is about $116,000,
which comes to about
$82,000 after tax. This equates to $6,833.33 per month.
and Scott are relatively financially independent from one another. Apart from
their joint arrangements concerning the Watson
contributions to household and living expenses. James does not expect to be
supported by Scott.
has been working in his current role since 10 July 2023. Although there is the
potential for promotion within the public service,
he has made several
applications for other positions, including EL2 positions within his current
department, but has not been successful
to date. He has been informed that the
unit in which he presently works is likely to undergo some restructuring and so
placed on a redeployment register. He is unsure how long this process
will take and he believes that his prospects for promotion
are low for the
foreseeable future.
James’s financial needs
his September 2022 affidavit, James described his present financial needs as
being $400,000 to discharge the mortgage on the Cammeray
described his future needs as follows:
(1) $300,000 for costs associated with having children through potential
adoption, surrogacy or other means.
(2) $2,000,000 for costs associated with raising children.
(3) $50,000 for a new car.
his updating evidence, James says that he still needs about $50,000 to buy a new
car in the near future. He will need about $50,000
to contribute to some
essential repairs to the Watson property. He anticipates needing to spend about
$30,000 on the Cammeray property.
That property is in a block of 27 units
constructed in 1966. The whole block requires a new roof and windows.
the heading ‘The financial resources (including earning capacity) and
financial needs, both present and future, of the
plaintiff’, James states
that he has always expected to own his own broadacre grain farming enterprise in
the Barmedman/Temora
district. He says that he would need at least 2000 acres
for a farm to be viable. His evidence shows that farming land of that size
the Barmedman/Temora district would likely cost between about $7 million and $8
million, which reflects a price of between $3,500
and $4,000 per acre. Based on
Rabobank’s basic lending criteria he estimates that he would need 60%
equity to secure a loan
for the remainder. This means that he would need between
$4.2 million and $4.8 million of his own funding. He conservatively estimates
that he would need an overdraft facility of $750,000 for initial acquisition
costs, planting for the first few years, and additional
costs of machinery that
cannot be contracted. If he were to realise his equity in the Cammeray property
for about $500,000, he estimates
that he would still require additional funding
of between $4.45 million and $5.05 million for the venture to begin.
submissions proceeded on the same basis as his affidavit, namely that the
acquisition of 2000 acres of land is a financial
need within the meaning of
Succession Act
James primarily seeks a transfer
of so much of the land comprising the farm as amounts to 800 arable acres.
Alternatively, he seeks
provision in cash of $7 million to $8 million to allow
him to purchase equivalent land.
Hannah’s current
financial circumstances
is the breadwinner in her household. She is currently employed by the Royal
Australian Navy. Her annual gross salary exclusive
of performance allowance is
$159,229, which comes to $9,942.66 after tax per month. Her current position is
based in Canberra and,
as part of a flexible working agreement, she is required
to travel at her own expense to Canberra for work at least once each fortnight.
If she were to pursue promotion with the Navy, she and Jarrod would have to
relocate to Canberra, where the cost of living is significantly
higher than in
and Jarrod jointly own their home in Albury, which has a current value of about
$870,000. Hannah has superannuation of about
$258,500. She owns two cars. She
and Jarrod have only nominal amounts of cash. They have modest savings for their
education. All up, the assets which Hannah owns either in her
own name or jointly with Jarrod come to $1,254,402.
of 1 July 2025, the total amount owing on their mortgage was $610,780. Hannah
has various other liabilities also. She has had to
replace both family cars over
the past 24 months. She has credit card debt and another personal loan, as well
as a tax debt. They
have also borrowed money from Jarrod’s parents that
they must repay. All up, Hannah’s liabilities come to $868,705.
has to date received only $360,000 of her $600,000 legacy. She has used almost
all of these funds to meet various contingencies
over the past few years. She
has explained these contingencies in her affidavits and it is unnecessary to
repeat them. She has certainly
not wasted any money. To the contrary, she and
Jarrod appear to manage their money responsibly.
is employed by Charles Sturt University on a part time basis. He has a very
narrow specialty in freshwater fisheries research.
His employment is insecure,
variable and limited in tenure. He has worked for several years on a contract
basis in various fixed-term
roles. His monthly take-home pay is $5,127.
Jarrod’s only substantial asset other than his interest in the Albury home
superannuation, which had a balance of $180,781.71 as of June 2023.
and Jarrod have two young children, a daughter who turned 9 and a son who turned
5 at around the time of the hearing. Despite
a modest standard of living, Hannah
and Jarrod have regular monthly household expenditure that about equals or
slightly exceeds what
they earn. It is inevitable that as their children grow
older, the household budget will come under even greater strain.
Hannah’s financial needs
her September 2022 affidavit, Hannah described her needs broadly as follows.
(1) ‘Millions of dollars’ for raising children.
(2) Funds to allow her to study medicine. The amount required was not specified,
but she gave evidence that the course itself would
cost $355,707 and that her
working hours would be reduced to eight hours per week, and so she would require
funds to meet the shortfall.
As at late August 2022, however, her application to
study medicine had not been successful.
(3) Funds for doing roofing and other repairs to her Albury home, totalling
$77,548.08. Also, funds to acquire a new car in the amount
of $45,490.
is no doubt that Hannah has had a lifelong wish to study medicine. As I have
recounted above, she attributes her decision to
study law to the fact that she
was encouraged away from medicine by her father and that in making this decision
she relied on his
promises about her inheritance. Although I have rejected her
evidence about her reliance on Wayne’s promises (as to which,
paragraphs [
]), I accept that she
has a genuine wish to study medicine and that she would do so if she could.
she has thus far been unsuccessful in obtaining admission to a medical school
program. She now accepts that this is an option
that is no longer open, which is
a source of regret for her.
an updating affidavit sworn on 1 July 2025, Hannah states that she has always
expected and wanted to pursue a life on the land.
She states that in the event
she is unsuccessful in her proprietary estoppel claim, she anticipates that she
will require funds to
purchase 200 to 400 acres of land near where she currently
lives in order to run 100 to 200 head of Angus cattle. She estimates that
will need between $2.5 million and $4 million to purchase land. In closing
submissions, it was submitted that she should receive
further provision in the
sum of about $4 million.
Abe’s current financial
circumstances
owns the whole of the property acquired from Wayne. The parties agree that the
properties had a combined market value of $23,560,000
as at 26 March 2024. There
was no evidence about the value of his shares in Bridgefield Farming.
at 25 June 2025, Abe’s assets apart from the farm and Bridgefield Farming
included superannuation of about $57,000, cash
of about $28,000 and some
relatively insignificant personal items. Overall, these other assets come to
Bridgefield
Farming owns the farming business, including the plant and equipment valued at
approximately $4.9 million as at 20 May
2024. It has two Rabobank finance
facilities secured by a first-ranking mortgage over Abe’s land and
supported by personal
guarantees given by Abe. Both are ‘All-in-One’
accounts with a combined facility limit of $5,940,000 as at 20 June 2025.
that date, there was $339,169.39 available in one of the facilities. Bridgefield
Farming also has equipment finance liabilities
for an approximate amount of
$4,355,859.
Bridgefield
Farming also has other current liabilities, including over $1,000,000 for
fertiliser, fuel and chemicals. It also has
a tax debt of $45,077 in respect of
which it has entered into a payment plan of $600 per week.
Altogether,
as of 20 June 2025, Bridgefield Farming had total liabilities of about $11
2024 cropping season was disastrous for Bridgefield Farming. There was a
freezing event between 14 and 19 September 2024 which
significantly damaged the
wheat and canola crops. For the 2024 season, Abe had prepared a plan which
budgeted a yield of $1,625 per
hectare for canola and $1,330 for wheat. Due to
the freezing event, the canola crop yielded only about $677 per hectare and the
crop yielded only about $815 per hectare. These figures are all exclusive
of GST. In the result, the draft forecast accounts for
the 2024 season show a
loss of $2,553,543.
has planted chickpea and wheat for the 2025 season. He forecasts net income of
$1,110,618 for chickpea and $795,246 for wheat.
only source of income is the farm. That income is derived by Bridgefield
Farming, which pays him a wage. Abe’s salary
for the year ending 30 June
2022 was $83,400, including superannuation. His salary for the years ending 30
June 2023 and 2024 was
$88,920, including superannuation. He is required to pay
$156.33 per week for child support to his former wife.
the middle of 2024, Abe was charging Bridgefield Farming rent of $410,000 per
annum. However, in the light of his overall financial
circumstances this
arrangement has come to an end. Bridgefield Farming is unable to pay rent for
the time being.
has three children from his former marriage. His eldest son, Liam, left school
after finishing Year 10 to help out on the farm.
Liam lives with Abe on
Bridgefield. Abe’s other two children currently attend high school.
and his partner, Kiri Baker, live together at Bridgefield occasionally but
predominantly live separately with Abe living at Bridgefield
and Kiri in Wagga
Wagga. They do not share finances. Kiri’s taxable income for the year
ended 30 June 2023 was $114,840. She
also had $201,478 in her superannuation
account as of March 2024. Abe says that Kiri does not support him financially,
nor does he
expect her to do so.
is also required to fund the legacies to Hannah and James in accordance with
clause 5.3 of Wayne’s will. The most recent
instalments were due on 2 May
2025, but Abe was unable to make the payments. Shortly prior to the hearing, Abe
sought the plaintiffs’
consent to vary the undertaking referred to at
paragraph [
allow him to fund the May 2025 instalments of the legacies. The plaintiffs
Abe’s financial needs
present and future financial needs are straightforward. He wishes to be able to
continue to farm the whole of the farm,
as he has done. His principal concern in
relation to the plaintiffs’
Succession Act
claims is that any order
for further provision is likely to jeopardise the viability of the farming
operation, which is his only
source of income. He believes that the farm would
be unworkable if it is required to pay further provision to Hannah and James in
anywhere near the amounts they are claiming.
is important to keep in mind that both in their proprietary estoppel case and
also in their
Succession Act
claims, Hannah and James do not seek a
result whereby they would receive some land, but with a corresponding assumption
They do not wish to share in any of the liabilities associated with the
farming operations incurred by Abe after Wayne’s death.
They do not seek
any equity in the farming business. Their position is that Abe should be
required to remain responsible for all
of the debt accumulated after
Wayne’s death, whatever the outcome.
relied on a report dated 17 July 2024 prepared by an agricultural economist, Dr
Mike Stephens of Meridian Agriculture. That report
had been prepared on
instructions from the solicitors for James and Hannah, who duly served it. In
the end, James and Hannah did
not to call Dr Stephens. However, counsel for Abe
did call him and his report went into evidence. Dr Stephens was also
cross-examined.
Stephen concluded that the farm as it currently is, ‘can be a viable
of the questions asked of Dr Stephens was whether the farms would be viable if
split into three parcels. He expressed the view
that, with debt levels where
they were as at June 2023, properties of that size would not be viable.
note that in his own evidence, Abe expressed the view that farming works on an
economy of scale and that ‘if the farm was
to be reduced and divided into
three equal shares’ then it would be unworkable and that ‘the farm
would not be successful’.
This evidence was admitted on the basis that it
was limited to evidence of Abe’s belief. His belief is in this respect
with Dr Stephens’ conclusion that a three-way division of the
farm and farm debt would not be viable.
Abe’s evidence
is also relevant to take into account promises made to Abe about his own
inheritance.
evidence about his father’s promises to him was as follows.
1997, when Abe was 10 years old and driving a new tractor around the farm, Wayne
said to him: ‘If you work hard enough and
are committed to the farm, it
will be yours one day’. I have no reason to doubt this evidence, although
nothing much turns
early 2008, when Abe began a Diploma of Business Agriculture and Farming
Management at the Primary Industry Centre, Wayne said
to him: ‘I’ve
always told you that if you put the work, you get rewarded with the business.
It’s time that you
have some land to your name.’ I accept this
evidence. It is consistent with what I have found in connection with the
of Arizona and Ivanhoe. It is also consistent with other evidence to
the effect that Wayne started to express a desire about putting
Abe’s name at around this time.
Wayne and Jo’s separation in late 2012, Wayne said to Abe:
“I don’t see a reason why you shouldn’t have the place. You
have been doing the right thing, working hard. I don’t
want this to happen
again. I want to keep the farm together for future generations.”
accept that Wayne said this. The evidence shows that Wayne did begin to more
strongly favour the idea of transferring land to Abe
from about the time that he
and Jo separated. At this point (namely late 2012) it would however have been
necessary to treat such
a statement about ‘having the place’ as a
mere statement of testamentary intention, because the separation created such
uncertainty about Wayne’s ability to deal with the farm pending a property
settlement with Jo. As at late 2012, this was still
years away.
says that he relied on what Wayne said to him about coming to own the farm. He
says that if Wayne had not made these statements,
he would not have worked as
hard as he did on the farm.
accept this evidence. Abe was fully committed to the task of farming the land
during the whole of the period from – at least
– the purchase of
Ivanhoe and Arizona up to the time he acquired all of the properties shortly
prior to Wayne’s death.
His commitment to doing so did not waver according
to the particular way in which that business was being conducted, or by whom.
Over that period, his responsibilities only ever increased, as did the amount of
work he was required to do in the farming business.
I accept that at least one
good reason why he was so committed to the farm was for the reason he gives,
namely that Wayne led him
to believe that he would come to own it, by
inheritance or otherwise.
Family provision claims –
applicable principles
substantive issues for determination in this part of the case are:
(1) whether a family provision order for each of Hannah and James ought to be
made having regard to the provisions of
Succession Act
(2) whether it is appropriate to make notional estate orders under
Succession Act
and, if so, what orders should be made.
to the first issue, the exercise involves a two-stage process. In
(1994) 181 CLR 201;
[1994] HCA 40
, Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ
said at 208:
“It is clear that, under these provisions, the court is required to carry
out a two-stage process. The first stage calls for
a determination of whether
the applicant has been left without adequate provision for his or her proper
maintenance, education and
advancement in life. The second stage, which only
arises if that determination be made in favour of the applicant, requires the
to decide what provision ought to be made out of the deceased’s
estate for the applicant.”
209-210 their Honours continued:
“The determination of the first stage in the two-stage process calls for
an assessment of whether the provision (if any) made
was inadequate for what, in
all the circumstances, was the proper level of maintenance etc. appropriate for
the applicant having
regard, amongst other things, to the applicant’s
financial position, the size and nature of the deceased’s estate, the
totality of the relationship between the applicant and the deceased, and the
relationship between the deceased and other persons
who have legitimate claims
upon his or her bounty.
The determination of the second stage, should it arise, involves similar
considerations. Indeed, in the first stage of the process,
the court may need to
arrive at an assessment of what is the proper level of maintenance and what is
adequate provision, in which
event, if it becomes necessary to embark upon the
second stage of the process, that assessment will largely determine the order
should be made in favour of the applicant. In saying that, we are mindful
that there may be some circumstances in which a court could
refuse to make an
order notwithstanding that the applicant is found to have been left without
adequate provision for proper maintenance.”
Bassett v Bassett
at [78]-[81] the Court (Bell P, Leeming and Payne JJA)
“[78] Before an order for provision can be made in favour of a child of
the deceased (who is an ‘eligible person’
within the meaning of
Succession Act
), the Court must be satisfied that ‘adequate
provision for the proper maintenance, education or advancement in life of the
person in whose favour the order is to be made has not been made by the will of
the deceased person’:
Succession Act
s 59(1)(c).
[79] Satisfaction in this regard is ‘jurisdictional’ insofar as it
is a prerequisite to the Court exercising its discretionary
power to make an
order for provision pursuant to
see, for example, as to the use of the
description ‘jurisdictional’,
White v Barron
[1980] HCA 14
(1980) 144 CLR
[1980] HCA 14
at 208-210;
Hampson v Hampson
[2010] NSWCA 359
; (2010) 5 ASTLR 116 at [69]-[72]. Care must, however, be taken
when answering this jurisdictional question not to confine the relevant
consideration to an applicant’s financial or material needs; the language
of ‘proper maintenance, education or advancement’
involves more than
simply a question of financial needs: see
Sgro v Thompson
[2017] NSWCA
[80] Once the level of satisfaction referred to in [78] has been reached, the
Court has a broad discretion, ‘
having regard to the facts known to the
Court at the time the order is made’
(emphasis added), to make such
order for provision out of the estate as ought to be made ‘for the
maintenance, education or
advancement in life of the eligible person’:
Succession Act
[81] In considering both whether to make a family provision order and the nature
of any such order if the threshold required by
is satisfied, the
Court is entitled to consider the broad range of matters specified in
Succession Act
. The breadth of the matters that may be considered
does not, however, authorise the making of an order which is for a
purpose other than ‘the maintenance, education or advancement
the eligible person’. Nor does it relieve the Court of the need to make
the order ‘having regard to the facts
known to the Court
time the order is made. (emphasis added)’.”
have also had regard to the excellent summary of the statutory scheme by
Tarbes v Taleb
[2023] NSWSC 565
provision is ‘proper’ is informed largely by the factual matrix of
each case, general knowledge and current social
(1980) 144 CLR 490
[1980] HCA 31
at 502 (Gibbs J,
Stephen and Mason JJ agreeing). It may also be informed by a consideration of
the testator’s ‘moral
obligation’ or ‘moral duty’:
Vigolo v Bostin
(2005) 221 CLR 191
[2005] HCA 11
Adult children
is relevant to have regard to what has been said about the position of adult
children. Hallen AsJ summarised the general principles
Bowditch v NSW
Trustee and Guardian
[2012] NSWSC 275
, which were cited with
approval by the Court of Appeal in
Bassett v Bassett
“(a) The relationship between parent and child changes when the child
leaves home. However, a child does not cease to be a
natural recipient of
parental ties, affection or support, as the bonds of childhood are relaxed.
(b) It is impossible to describe in terms of universal application, the moral
obligation, or community expectation, of a parent in
respect of an adult child.
It can be said that, ordinarily, the community expects parents to raise, and
educate, their children to
the very best of their ability while they remain
children; probably to assist them with a tertiary education, where that is
where funds allow, to provide them with a start in life - such as a
deposit on a home, although it might well take a different form.
The community
does not expect a parent, in ordinary circumstances, to provide an unencumbered
house, or to set his or her children
up in a position where they can acquire a
house unencumbered, although in a particular case, where assets permit and the
relationship
between the parties is such as to justify it, there might be such
an obligation:
McGrath v Eves
[2005] NSWSC 1006
[2009] NSWSC 801.
(c) Generally, also, the community does not expect a parent to look after his,
or her, child for the rest of the child's life and
into retirement, especially
when there is someone else, such as a spouse, who has a primary obligation to do
so. Plainly, if an adult
child remains a dependent of a parent, the community
usually expects the parent to make provision to fulfil that ongoing dependency
after death. But where a child, even an adult child, falls on hard times, and
where there are assets available, then the community
may expect a parent to
provide a buffer against contingencies; and where a child has been unable to
accumulate superannuation or
make other provision for their retirement,
something to assist in retirement where otherwise they would be left
Taylor v Farrugia
(d) There is no need for an applicant adult child to show some special need or
some special claim:
McCosker v McCosker;
Kleinig v Neal (No
[1981] 2 NSWLR 532
Bondelmonte v
Blanckensee
[1989] WAR 305
(1989) 1 WAR 37
per Nicholson J at 45.
(e) The applicant has the onus of satisfying the court, on the balance of
probabilities, of the justification for the claim:
Hughes v National
Trustees, Executors and Agency Co of Australasia Ltd
[1979] HCA 2
(1979) 143 CLR 134
(f) Although some may hold the view that equality between children does not
discriminate between children according to gender, character,
financial and material circumstances, the Act is not consistent with that view.
To the contrary, the Act specifically
identifies, as matters that may be taken
into consideration, individual conduct, circumstances, financial resources,
including earning
capacity, and financial needs, in the Court's determination of
an applicant's case.”
Large estates
is also relevant to note what has been said about claims for provision in
relation to relatively large estates. Although the estate
in the present case is
not large, the property that could potentially be designated as notional estate
is of significant value.
plaintiffs referred me to
Blore v Lang
(1960) 104 CLR 124
[1960] HCA 73
at 135 for the proposition that, where there is sufficient estate, it may be
that the needs that may be met from it may extend beyond
the ‘bread and
butter of life’.
the case of large estates, it is sometimes said that Courts are ‘free to
make a more liberal assessment of what is proper
provision in the sense that
competition for limited resources is much reduced or eliminated and unqualified
by competing claims’:
Tarbes v Taleb
at [227]. What is considered
‘proper’ provision for maintenance, education and advancement of an
eligible person in the
case of large estates may in some circumstances
‘far outweigh’ what would be considered ‘necessary’ for
‘adequate’ maintenance, education and advancement: see
Estate Grundy; La Valette v Chambers-Grundy
[2018] NSWSC
; (2018) 17 ASTLR 64 at [114] as cited by Meek J in
Tarbes v Taleb
note also Meek J’s comments at [231]-[232]:
“[231] The inquiry into adequacy is not limited to considering whether the
plaintiff has enough to survive or to live comfortably
without provision (or
further provision, as the case may be) from the deceased’s estate:
Spiteri v Vassallo
at [19] per Williams J.
[232] What is adequate in any given case may transcend the necessities of life
in a sense of basic requirements for food, clothing
and shelter or what is
necessary for subsistence. It may extend to consideration of matters that for
example make life more comfortable
or to advance a person’s position in
as McLaughlin AsJ said in
Lumb v McMillan
[2007] NSWSC 386
“The ample size of the estate does not justify the Court in being
profligate in disposing of the assets of the Deceased and
in awarding to each
Plaintiff an amount which is more than that to which that Plaintiff would be
entitled. The Court should do no
more than remedy the failure on the part of the
Deceased to make adequate provision for the proper maintenance of each
Plaintiff.”
Soulos v Pagones
, where the Court warned about the dangers of
engaging in a ‘blank cheque exercise’ in the context of a family
claim where the estate was substantial:
“It must be emphasised that the statutory provision speaks of adequacy of
provision for the ‘proper’ maintenance
or advancement (education
here not being relevant) in life, as was emphasised in
Sgro v Thompson
The fact that this was a large estate (albeit that the bulk of the wealth was
effectively tied up in the family company) does not
provide a basis for some
kind of blank cheque exercise ...”
Estrangement
is also relevant to note the Court’s approach to cases where the deceased
and the applicant were estranged. In
Hampson v Hampson
[2010] NSWCA 359
(2010) 5 ASTLR 116, Campbell JA said at [80]:
“The requirement to have regard to the totality of the relationship can in
many cases be satisfied by considering the overall
quality of the relationship
assessed in an overall and fairly broad-brush way, not minutely.
Consideration of the detail of the relationship is ordinarily not called for
except where there is an unusual factor that bears on
the quality of the
relationship, such as hostility, estrangement, conduct on the part of the
applicant that is hurtful to the deceased
or of which the deceased seriously
disapproves, or conduct on the part of the applicant that is significantly
beneficial to the deceased
and significantly detrimental to the applicant, such
as when a daughter gives up her prospects of a career to care for an aging
Neither entitlement to an award, nor its quantum, accrues good deed
by good deed. Indeed, it is a worrying feature of many Family
Provision Act
cases that the evidence goes into minutiae that are bitterly fought over, often
at a cost that the parties cannot afford,
and are ultimately of little or no
also note the reasons of Hallen J in
Underwood v Gaudron
[2014] NSWSC
to [244] which were not disturbed on appeal.
plaintiffs referred me to
Starr v Miller; Starr v Miller
[2021] NSWSC
(Hallen J) for a statement of the general principles in
family provision cases concerning rural properties, which were cited in
Bassett v Bassett
“The nature of the estate may also be a relevant factor in the
Court’s consideration. Yet, the Act does not direct the
formal retention
in the family of one form of property (such as a farm) against another. If a
farm must be sold to provide for the
proper maintenance, education or
advancement in life of the applicant, that may be unavoidable. There are no
special rules which
apply to such cases.”
that as it may, I note what his Honour said at [626] to the effect that, where
possible, Courts are inclined to avoid the sale
of farming properties in order
to make further provision to other eligible persons.
Testator’s intention
relevance of the testator’s intentions in family provision cases was
explained by White J in
Slack v Rogan; Palffy v
(2013) 85 NSWLR 253
[2013] NSWSC 522
and approved in
Strang v Steiner
[2019] NSWCA 143
; (2019) 19 ASTLR 330 at [72]. I note
his Honour’s observations about that matter.
defendants particularly referred me to
Salmon v Osmond
[2015] NSWCA 42
(2015) 14 ASTLR 442 for the proposition that family provision orders must
‘give appropriate weight to the intentions of the
testator and the
circumstances of the beneficiaries under their will.’
Salmon v Osmond,
the deceased owned five grazing properties. He was
survived by his wife and seven children. One of his children, Michael, had
on the farm through his life and received minimal remuneration for his
work there. The deceased made various bequests to his wife
and several of his
children. Michael and the deceased’s wife were significantly favoured.
primary judge had ordered additional provision to be made to one of
Michael’s sisters, in the sum of $200,000. The Court
of Appeal found that
this amount was disproportionately high in the context of Michael’s
competing claim. The Court of Appeal
instead ordered a legacy of $50,000 to be
given to the sister in addition to the release of a $14,000 debt that the
deceased had
bequeathed her under his will. Part of the reasoning of the Court
was that ‘the provision ordered by [the primary judge] altered
disposition of the estate to such an extent that the deceased’s wish that,
of his children, Michael be the principal beneficiary,
was not given appropriate
weight.’ In coming to this amount, the Court of Appeal considered how much
the sister would require
to, and over what period of time the sister could
reasonably, discharge her mortgage.
case provides some guidance on the how the intentions of the testator may inform
the question that arises under
Succession Act
, but I do not
take it to lay down any generally applicable principle about that
The parties’ submissions on whether adequate
provision was made
parties’ respective submissions on this issue may be summarised as
and Hannah submit that their legacies under Wayne’s will were dwarfed by
the benefits provided to Abe under the 18 November
2020 contract of sale and the
Loan Variation. Their benefits were not only vastly smaller in gross amount
($600,000 each compared
to over $20 million) but were payable over time.
Moreover, the estate’s ability to fund their legacies depends utterly on
ability to service the Loan Variation, which as events have shown is
not guaranteed.
Furthermore,
they submit, Wayne only made any provision for them at all on the basis of Ms
Ryan’s firm advice that James and
Hannah would otherwise have a sound
basis to seek an order under
Succession Act
submits that his estrangement from his father either related to his
father’s homophobic intolerance of James’s
sexuality or his
steadfast and strongly held view that James had sided with his mother during the
divorce. He submits that Wayne’s
testamentary wishes were neither rational
nor well informed.
plaintiffs also submit that the promises made by their parents, even if not
sufficient to ground any relief based on proprietary
estoppel, plainly played a
significant role in their lives. They say that this fact should inform the
Court’s approach to assessing
Wayne’s moral obligation to them. They
submit that the proper maintenance and advancement in life of each plaintiff
their ability to realise their lifelong expectations of making a living
off the land.
submits that no order for further provision should be made. He particularly
points to the powerful evidence that Wayne’s
testamentary wishes were for
the farm properties to remain intact and for them to be farmed by Abe. Wayne
firmly believed that the
farm should not be split up. Abe submits that the
legacies for James and Hannah reflect what Wayne believed to be the amount that
could be provided out of the estate without risking the loss of the farm as a
continuing, single enterprise.
also points out that the plaintiffs have undertaken tertiary education and have
opportunities for gainful employment. Each is,
in fact, very favourably
employed. Each will inherit from their mother, who received half of the 2014
value of the farms under the
divorce settlement. By contrast, Abe’s
ability to support himself, his partner and child, and the support payments he
is required
to make to his former wife, are all dependent on the income he
receives from the farming business.
Abe submits that his siblings do not have a ‘need’ to acquire
farming properties. He says that a testator is
not generally under any moral
obligation to provide a mortgage-free home, much less a farming property, to an
independent, adult
Did Wayne’s Will make adequate
provision for the plaintiffs?
relevant question for determination, to be approached in the light of the
authorities discussed above, is whether ‘adequate
provision for the proper
maintenance, education or advancement in life of the [plaintiffs] has not been
made by the will of the deceased
s 59(1)(c).
my view, Wayne made adequate provision for James but did not make adequate
provision for Hannah. As will be seen, although I have
concluded this issue in
Hannah’s favour, my conclusion nevertheless involves a rejection of
substantial aspects of her case.
Proper provision for Hannah, in my view, is
nowhere near the amount sought by her.
will state my reasons for these conclusions by dealing first with matters that
are common to the plaintiffs and then with their
circumstances.
Adequate provision – common factors
and Hannah are adults. They made lives for themselves entirely independently of
Wayne as soon as they were able to do so. They
had been leading entirely
separate lives from him for many years prior to his death. Neither had been
financially dependent on Wayne
since their student days.
wishes in relation to how his estate should be divided among his three children
were very clearly expressed. The steps
which he took during his lifetime to
transfer the land to Abe and the content of his final will reflect his clearly
expressed, sincere
and abiding interest in ensuring that the farm was not split
up. This consideration animated his thinking about his estate more than
other since at least 2015. He was entitled to give primacy to this
consideration. It was not irrational: see [72] of
Salmon v Osmond
the third generation of his family to farm the Barmedman region and he had an
honest, ardent desire that Abe should be the
also took careful legal advice over a long period about how to deal with his
land and how to prepare his will. Notwithstanding
his temptation to cut James
and Hannah out of his will altogether, which he initially wanted to do and which
he had been previously
advised to do, he accepted Ms Ryan’s advice that he
should consider them in his will, which is what he did.
plaintiffs submitted that the provision made for James and Hannah was made under
sufferance and that it did not reflect a genuine
weighing of his
children’s legitimate claims. I do not however accept that
characterisation of what occurred. The evidence
shows that Wayne accepted Ms
Ryan’s advice – despite his instinct to do otherwise – and
that the amounts he decided
to leave to James and Hannah were, in the end, even
more than Ms Ryan had advised. Relevantly, the legacies for James and Hannah
were calculated in an amount that Wayne believed Abe would be able to bear
without having to sell any of the farming properties.
This reflected his main
concern, which was to assure the ongoing viability of the farm.
it is appropriate to have regard to the statements made by Wayne during Hannah
and James’s childhoods and early adulthoods
split of the lands, I do not consider it appropriate to give that matter
significant weight in determining
whether they received adequate provision. That
is because, as I have already found, those statements were not binding promises
it was not reasonable for Hannah and James to rely on them as such. They
were not promises of the kind described in
Alexander v Jansson
; (2010) 6 ASTLR 432 at [18], that is, promises upon which there was
detrimental reliance. Nevertheless, I do take them into account
and I do give
them some weight in deciding whether the legacies for the plaintiffs were
far as the question of financial need is concerned, the main plank of the
plaintiffs’ case is that they require further provision
to allow them to
pursue farming in their own right. This aspect of their claimed financial need
is common to them both.
am entirely unable to accept this submission. Neither plaintiff has demonstrated
that their maintenance, education and advancement
in life has been or will be at
all compromised by the fact that Wayne did not leave them sufficient funds to
acquire a farming property.
Each plaintiff has led and will continue to lead a
full and rewarding life quite apart from the fact that they do not also own a
final submissions, the total provision which the plaintiffs say they should have
received under the will for this purpose comes
to between $11 million and $12
million. Further provision of that magnitude would amount to such a destruction
of the scheme of the
will and to such a thoroughgoing rebuke of Wayne’s
obvious wishes concerning the continuity and viability of the farm that
submission is impossible to accept, whatever promises may have been made to the
plaintiffs during their childhood and early adulthood
inheritance. Given that Abe currently guarantees at least the Rabobank
All-in-One facilities associated with
the farming business, totalling about $6
million, and that his only asset is the farm, the orders sought by the
plaintiffs would
leave him in an impossible financial position.
fact that the potential notional estate in this case is relatively large is a
matter to be taken into account, but it is not a
matter that causes me to reach
any different conclusion about the weight to be given to the plaintiffs’
submission about acquiring
farmland. Often with large estates the
‘competition for resources’ is much reduced because an order for
further provision
can be made without unduly affecting the financial interests
of other beneficiaries. I am not persuaded that this is such a case.
of the potential notional estate must be understood in the light of the debt
associated with it and the variable income
which it produces. The fact that Abe
is struggling to make sufficient profit to fund the plaintiffs’ legacies
shows that any
further provision may require the sale of land, which is
something that Wayne did not wish to occur. Although not decisive, that
matter that is appropriate to take into account in determining whether legacies
of $600,000 were adequate and in reaching a
conclusion as to the amount and form
of any family provision order.
I recognise the apparent unfairness in one child inheriting substantially more
than the others, it is important to give due
weight to the testator’s own
assessment of what was fair in all the circumstances. Although James and Hannah
each made contributions
to the farms over the years, these were sporadic and
brief. Their contributions were vastly outweighed by Abe’s contributions
to the farm. Wayne’s sense of fairness was undoubtedly affected by his
strong desire to keep the farm intact and for Abe to
farm it. In so far as he
did want Abe to own and farm it, this undoubtedly reflected Abe’s
significantly greater connection
with and contributions to the farm.
sense of fairness was also undoubtedly affected by the legal action which Hannah
and James had taken against him. This
included the lodgement of the caveats, the
commencement of these proceedings and the NCAT proceedings. So far as James was
Wayne found himself late in life, at a time of grave ill health,
being sued by a son with whom he had barely spoken since 2015. The
proceedings would have been especially upsetting because they sought the
appointment of a guardian. This involved a challenge
to his capacity, in part on
the basis of evidence from Jo, from whom Wayne had been acrimoniously divorced.
Wayne was angered and
upset by these manoeuvres. He found them hurtful. He was
entitled to feel that way and he was entitled to take these matters into
in dividing his estate. These are matters that are appropriate for me to take
into account in determining whether Hannah
and James received adequate
James’s circumstances
addition to the matters referred to above, it is necessary to consider
James’s particular circumstances independently of
those of his sister. As
I said at paragraph [
], he has extremely good professional and academic
qualifications. He has excellent, stable employment in the Commonwealth public
service. He has savings in superannuation and an investment property. He stands
to inherit half of his mother’s estate, whatever
that may be. He lives in
a stable relationship with his partner, from whom he is relatively economically
independent. They own their
consider that the legacy of $600,000 represents an appropriate contribution
towards James’s financial needs.
mortgage on the Cammeray property currently sits at about $350,000. His share of
the mortgage on the Watson property
is about $342,500. The $600,000 legacy would
cover a significant proportion of James’s overall indebtedness.
is also relevant to note that the Watson property was only purchased in December
2024. Prior to the purchase of the Watson property,
his $600,000 legacy would
have covered the entirety of the Cammeray mortgage and left surplus funds which
could have been used to
fund other avenues of advancement in life.
considerations also bear upon the question of whether $600,000 is adequate
provision for James. Since 2015, Wayne and James
had barely spoken. The only
occasions on which they had seen one another were at the funerals for
Wayne’s parents. Even then,
James’s evidence was that their
interactions were tense. At one of them, they only made ‘passing
comments’ to
one another. This is not a criticism of either of them. It
does however illustrate the degree to which the filial ties between them
loosened by the time of Wayne’s death.
submitted that Wayne harboured two irrational prejudices against him and they
bore on their estrangement and on Wayne’s
decision-making about the farms
and his estate. The first concerns his homophobic intolerance of James’s
sexuality, which I
accept formed part of his attitude towards James. However, I
do not accept that is a reason to find that James’s legacy is
inadequate.
It is important to note that the first will made by Wayne after he and James
spoke about this issue still left a substantial
legacy to James: see paragraph
] above. This was
even after James had left the farm without saying goodbye. It was only later
that Wayne made a will in which he
disinherited James. Abe also pointed out that
Wayne never drew a distinction between James and Hannah so far as his
testamentary
obligations were concerned, either before or after their falling
out. Earlier and later wills treated Hannah and James on a like
footing. The
final will gave them identical legacies. Although I accept that Wayne was
intolerant of James’s sexuality and
that this may have been a significant
reason behind their estrangement, he ultimately saw him as standing in the same
position as
Hannah so far as his testamentary obligations were concerned.
second matter concerns Wayne’s conviction that James sided with Jo during
the divorce and that he valued their marital assets
in a way that favoured Jo. I
accept that this was an aspect of Wayne’s thinking when it came to his
will. It is a matter that
was raised in discussions (years later) with Ms Ryan.
Nevertheless, while this may have contributed to their estrangement, the
of Ms Ryan shows that Wayne’s decision to give James a legacy of
$600,000 was made in spite of this concern, not because of
matters mentioned in the previous two paragraphs are matters which, no doubt,
caused or worsened the breakdown in their relationship.
However, they are not a
reason to conclude that James’s legacy of $600,000 was insufficient.
Neither individually nor together
were those prejudices anywhere near as
significant in Wayne’s decision-making as his other and more pressing
concerns, which
were to keep the farm intact, for Abe to inherit it and for Abe
to continue to farm it. It was these concerns more than any other
that informed
the steps he took to deal with his estate during his lifetime and by his final
will. They remain appropriate matters
for me to take into account in determining
whether James received insufficient provision.
all of these matters into account, I am satisfied that adequate provision has
been made for James.
Hannah’s circumstances
question of whether adequate provision was made for Hannah is more finely
financial needs are relatively greater than James’s, in that she is the
main income-earner in a family of four
which includes two young children. She
does presently earn more than either of her siblings, but she has relatively
less in superannuation
and no investments compared to James.
and Jarrod’s home mortgage stands at about $610,780. In contrast to James,
Hannah did not receive any help from either
Jo or Wayne when she sought to
purchase her home. She also has other liabilities. She is relatively less able
(than James) to meet
contingencies such as replacing cars without going into
even further debt.
Hannah and Jarrod own the Albury property jointly, Hannah earns significantly
more than Jarrod, whose income is variable.
The $600,000 legacy which Hannah was
left would likely cover a significant proportion of the entire mortgage, and all
of her ‘share’
of the mortgage repayment obligations. However, to
the extent Hannah has received a portion of that legacy, she has not been able
to use the funds to pay down her household debt.
if she were to contribute the whole of the remaining $240,000 to the home
mortgage, she will still have reasonably significant
indebtedness. It is also
appropriate to take into account that she has entered into a payment plan with
the ATO, and has had to call
on friends for financial assistance and deferred
household expenses
was also relatively closer (than James) to Wayne in the years preceding his
death. Although Wayne did not accept her invitation
to attend Christmas in 2020,
it is relevant that their relationship had recovered from their estrangement to
the point where she
wanted him to join her family for Christmas at all. The
evidence about their interactions in his final months shows that there was
degree of rapprochement even despite the NCAT proceedings. Hannah also
discontinued as plaintiff in these proceedings during
Wayne’s lifetime out
of concern for his wellbeing.
sum of $600,000 represents a significant contribution towards Hannah’s
financial position. However, I do not consider that
it was adequate having
regard to all of the circumstances to which I have referred.
Orders for further provision for Hannah
question of whether I should now order further provision for Hannah requires a
consideration of
Succession Act
, because it is likely
that the defendants are unable to meet any order for further provision except
out of notional estate.
the conclusion of the hearing, the defendants submitted that if I were minded to
make an order for further provision, then they
should be given an opportunity to
be heard in relation to the form of any such order and, in particular, the form
of any notional
estate orders. The plaintiffs did not submit that this would be
an inappropriate course to take.
is appropriate in these circumstances that I at least indicate the amount of
further provision that I propose to order. This will
allow the parties to
address me on the form of the order and the identification of particular
property as notional estate.
do not consider it at all appropriate to make an order for further provision in
an amount sufficient for Hannah to acquire a farming
property, which is what she
seeks. As I explained at paragraphs [
], her primary case is impossible to accept.
is nevertheless left with a sizeable amount of household debt even after taking
into account the $240,000 she is yet to receive
as part of her legacy. Hannah
and Jarrod have used the instalments of that legacy to meet other household
financial commitments and
have not been able to reduce their home mortgage in
any material way. In my view, her legacy of $600,000 did not sufficiently
for her needs as the main earner in a family of four including two young
in determining a proper amount of provision, it remains appropriate to take into
account Wayne’s clearly expressed
desires concerning the farm. The matters
to which I referred in paragraphs [
] cause me to conclude that in determining a proper
amount of provision, significant weight should still be given to Wayne’s
general intentions in that regard. As I have explained, his overall testamentary
wishes were developed over a long period of time
and with the benefit of
thoughtful legal advice, which he heeded.
balancing the considerations of Hannah’s needs with Wayne’s
testamentary intentions and with Abe’s interests
in keeping the farm
intact as far as possible, I consider that a proper amount of provision for
Hannah (including her $600,000 legacy)
is $900,000. Subject to hearing the
parties further in relation to the application of
, I consider that Hannah should receive further provision out of notional
estate in the sum of $300,000.
additional amount of provision which I propose to order out of notional estate
may to some degree imperil Abe’s ability
to keep the whole of the
farmlands intact. If it does so (which, on the evidence, is unclear) then it is
to a degree that I consider
to be appropriate, particularly when regard is had
to Abe’s conduct in reporting Hannah to the police without justification.
At the same time, it is an amount that still gives primacy to Wayne’s
desire to see the farm continue under the stewardship
of Abe, who has taken it
on in its entirety including all of the debt associated with it.
to hearing the parties further in relation to the application of
Succession Act
, I consider that Hannah should also receive further
provision out of notional estate in the sum of $300,000.
proceedings will be dismissed insofar as they concern the first plaintiff,
will direct the second plaintiff and the defendants to make submissions in
relation to
Succession Act
and as to the form of final
orders. I will also give the parties an opportunity to be heard on costs.
orders and directions will be as follows:
(1) The proceedings brought by the first plaintiff are dismissed.
(2) Direct the second plaintiff to file and serve short submissions as to the
form of an order for further provision and any notional
estate orders on or
before 15 December 2025.
(3) Direct the defendants to file and serve short submissions as to the form of
an order for further provision for the second plaintiff
and any notional estate
orders on or before 3 February 2026.
(4) Direct the second plaintiff to file and serve any submissions in reply on or
before 17 February 2026.
(5) Direct the parties to file and serve any evidence and short submissions on
the question of costs on or before 15 December 2025.
(6) Direct the parties to file and service any evidence and short submissions in
reply on the question of costs on or before 3 February
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.52 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter