URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tsaccounis v Owners Corporation SP 18593 [2001] NSWSSB 20 (6 November 2001)
Tsaccounis v Owners Corporation SP 18593
[2001] NSWSSB 20
(6 November 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES MANAGEMENT ACT 1996
APPLICATION NO : SB01/00341
SCHEME : SP18593
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME CRONULLA NSW
APPLICANTS : V Tsaccounis
RESPONDENT : Owners Corporation
Strata Plan 18593
Pursuant to
section 183
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
") an order is made reallocating unit entitlements as follows:
Allocation of
Unit Entitlement
RESERVED DECISION
THE APPLICATION
By an application lodged with the Registry on 22 May 2001 Mr V Tsaccounis, the
applicant sought an order reallocating unit entitlements.
The grounds on which
the application were made were that:
• Lot 2 is the only unit in a complex without a garage or carspace;
• The two rear units are much bigger than Lot 2;
• Lot 2 is on the ground floor without a view and faces south;
• Based on the different areas;
A request was made that following unit allocations be made out of 100.
Further grounds were set out in a letter accompanying the application and in
addition orders were sought that the owners corporation
and strata managers
adjust the applicants levies effective from 21 May 2001 and any levies including
special levies he is required
to pay. He says he took ownership of the unit on
8 November 2000 but seeks adjustment of levies from 21 May 2000.
An application was also made for payment of the costs of the application fee
$54.00, valuation fee $450.00, Residex Real Estate sales
figures report $38.50,
Land and Property Information search $20.00.
Attached to the application was a valuation, strata plan, strata roll, and
correspondence with the secretary and strata managers
of the owners corporation
and other documents. The matter came before the Tribunal on 26 July 2001 when
interim orders were made
noting the proper respondent, joining the owners of lot
1 and setting timetables for the filing of submissions or further documents.
APPLICANTS EVIDENCE
Mr Tsaccounis appeared at the hearing and gave evidence in support of his
application. His evidence was that he purchased the premises
in November 2000,
at the time of purchase he was in receipt of a report of a strata searching
company which included the minutes
of the last annual general meeting.
In April he contacted the Strata Managing Agent by fax to seek a copy of
the strata roll with a view to preparing his application
for reallocation of the
unit entitlements. This request was followed by two further requests. At the
general meeting of the owners
corporation he indicated his intention to make an
application. He located the valuer by looking in the yellow pages. He
M Craig, registered valuer to prepare the valuation and met Mr Craig
at the premises to arrange for inspection. He relies on the
valuation given by
M Craig who notes in the valuation that he is a registered valuer no. 4173. The
valuation is dated 21 May 2001.
The valuation was prepared for the purpose of
supporting the application for reallocation of unit entitlements. The valuation
the land, the dimensions and area, the zoning as residential and
describes the improvements as follows:
"Erected upon the land is a two (2) level residential apartment building
described below with garages at the rear.
6.1 Construction
Reinforced concrete and
Roof Covering
Painted cement
6.2 Finishes
Walls Cement render.
Ceilings Plaster.
Coverings Tiles and carpet."
The building is described as:
"A two level building with side access and two Home Units on each level.
Level 1 or ground level:
Unit 1 at the rear of the building and
Unit 2 at the front of the building.
Level 2 or Upper level : U
nit 3 at the rear of the building and
Unit 4 at the front.
Only Lots 1, 2 and 4 have Garages. Lot 2 does not have on site parking at
The living areas of the units are set out below:
Unit 1 – 86 square meters
Unit 2 – 69 square meters
Unit 3 – 86 square meters
Unit 4 – 69 square meters
The area of each garage is set out below :
Unit 1 – 13 square meters
Unit 3 – 14 square meters
Unit 4 – 13 square meters."
He estimates it has been erected for approximately 30 years.
Included in the amount of the valuation are normal fixtures and fittings.
valuation provides as follows:
"The Valuation Approach
Direct Comparison
In assessing the value of the subject property we have utilised the direct
comparison approach. Under this approach we have had regard
to Sales during
1982 of properties within the surrounding locality in Cronulla, reflecting
market conditions. We have inspected
the sales evidence externally and made
comparisons with the subject property.
We have considered all of the inherent and external features
and position of the
Site area and
and Aspect – Ocean, District or
Accommodation
area of Unit and level of each
Construction and
Availability
and type of car parking
A list is given of 5 properties sold in similar
locations to the subject home units in 1982 ranging from $56,000.00 to
$80,000.00.
The strata plan currently provides the allocation of unit
entitlements on the basis of 1 unit entitlement for each lot.
opinion is given as follows:
"It is my opinion that Unit Entitlements ("UE") for the subject Strata Plan
are unreasonable. There are various inconsistencies and
these have been
addressed in determining the Valuation for each Unit (or Lot) in the
Certificates of Valuation annexed to this Report.
Some of the issues considered
(1) Unit 2 does not have a garage nor does that unit have a registered car
(2) Each of the other three Units have lock up garages.
(3) Again despite the same UE for each Unit the Living Areas differ as
described above.
(4) Finally both of the Upper floor Units enjoy views. In one instance
district views and in the case of Unit 4 at the front views
of the Beach and
The date of valuation is given as at
13 May 1982. Valuation certificates are provided for each of the premises as
"Unit 1 - $67,000.00
Unit 2 - $60,000.00
Unit 3 - $72,000.00
Unit 4 - $75,000.00"
The applicant also provided a number of photographs of the property taken by
RESPONDENTS EVIDENCE
Mr P Shallard gave evidence on behalf of the owners of lot 1 L and J
Kentall as well as providing a written submission. Mr Shallard
gave evidence
that from May 1967 he conducted a business as real estate agent registered
valuer and auctioneer until some 8 to 10
years ago when he retired. During his
practice he was personally responsible for the acquisition and development of
an auctioneer. He is currently in the computer industry employed
which provides property information to six thousand clients. He acts as a real
estate consultant for that organisation.
His evidence and submissions
were as follows:
The valuation fee for a reputable valuer is in the order
of $1,200.00. The $500.00 fee paid for this valuation should indicate that
little weight should be placed on it. He disputes the valuation, noting that
there are two different methods in respect of providing
values. That based on
unit area and that based on market value.
He submits that there are a
number of mistakes of fact in the valuation which discredits the valuation such
as the garages are not
lock up garages. They comprise brick back wall and side
walls with no dividing wall. Lot 2 has the use of paved area as part of
common property for its parking. The age of the building would be reflected in
the date of registration of the strata plan, 1982.
The references to
views is overstated in the valuation. There may be some views from one of the
bedrooms in Lot 4. He disputes it
would be ocean and beach views, it would only
be ocean views.
His submission on the comparable sales prices referred to
in the valuation were that the only comparable properties would be premises
similar location, ie walking distance to the beach. He referred to a number of
valuations for properties sold in July 2000
noting that the purchase price for
the applicant’s property was the lowest at $240,000.00 ranging up to
$740,000.00. No evidence
of the detail of those properties was
The valuer is not practising in the local area and does not have
the advantage of local knowledge. No internal inspection was carried
A submission provided by Mr G Grocott the owner of lot 4 opposed the
making of orders in summary on the following grounds:
His unit is the same size as
lot 1 and also faces south. It has a minor view of the ocean from the main
bedroom. It is difficult
to compare the values of views or
The unit entitlements have
remained unchanged since the block was built in the
It would be unfair to adjust or
backdate the levies. If they are changed it should only be from the date the
matter was determined.
The submission of Mr R
Nascivera of lot 3 also opposed the making of orders on a number of grounds as
The applicant has acted
unilaterally without consulting the lot owners or owner
corporation.
The valuer is not located in
the same area.
Lot 2 has claimed the paved
area in front of the lot for parking. This has been the case for the last five
The valuation overstates the views
from lot 3. The view is predominantly of a large neighbouring tree and
multi-floor buildings and
lot 4 has a lock up garage. Parking for lots 1 and 3 is more accurately
described as brick carports.
inaccuracies suggest that the valuer did not inspect the property and reflects
Mr Tsaccounis' views alone.
APPLICANT IN
Mr Tsaccounis submits that the matters relied on by the other
lot owners in relation to the valuation should be disregarded. There
to say that Mr Craig is not competant to provide the application. There is no
requirement that he practice in the area.
The valuation takes account of the
different features of each lot, including floor space, garage, position and
The only way to effectively challenge the valuation is by the
evidence of another valuer.
Section of the 183 of
which gives the Tribunal power to determine such applications provides
as follows:
183 Order for reallocation of unit
entitlements
Board may make order allocating unit
entitlements
The Board may make an order allocating unit
entitlements among the lots that are subject to a strata scheme in the
specified in the order.
Circumstances in which
order may be made
An order may be made only if the Board considers
that the allocation of unit entitlements among the lots:
unreasonable when the strata plan was registered or when a strata plan of
subdivision was registered, or
(b) became unreasonable because of a
change in the permitted land use, being a change (for example, because
of a rezoning)
in the ways in which the whole or any part of the parcel
could lawfully be used, whether with or without development
Matters to be taken into
consideration
In making a determination under this section, the
Board is to have regard to the respective values of the lots and (if a
development contract is in force in relation to the strata scheme)
to such other matters as the Board considers
Application to be accompanied by
An application for an order must be accompanied by a
certificate specifying the valuation, at the relevant time of registration
or immediately after the change in the permitted land use, of each of
the lots to which the application relates.
Qualifications of
person making valuation
The certificate must have been given by the
holder of a current certificate of registration under the
Registration Act 1975
as a practising real estate valuer authorised under
to make such a valuation (a qualified
Ancillary orders that may be made if original
valuation unsatisfactory
The Board may, if it makes an order
allocating unit entitlements that were not allocated in accordance with a
valuation of a
qualified valuer and, in the opinion of the Board, were
allocated unreasonably by a developer, also order:
payment by the developer to the applicant for the order of the costs
incurred by the applicant, including fees
and expenses reasonably incurred
in obtaining the valuation and the giving of evidence by a qualified
valuer, and
(b) the payment by the developer to any or all of the
following people of such amounts as may be assessed by the Board
represent any overpayments (due to the unreasonable allocation) for which
liability arose not earlier than 6 years before
the date of the
the lessor of a leasehold strata scheme
owners corporation
the owners of lots.
Recovery of
amounts awarded
An amount ordered to be paid under this section may
be recovered as a debt.
Who may make
application?
An application for an order under this section may be
made only by:
(a) an owner of a lot (whether or not a development
within the parcel, or
(b) the owners corporation,
(c) the lessor of a leasehold strata scheme, or
local council, or by any other public authority or statutory body
representing the Crown, being an authority or
body that is empowered to
impose a rate, tax or other charge by reference to a valuation of
The only valuation evidence put before me was that of Mr Craig.
I note Mr Shallard has been retired from practice for more than eight
The respondents attempted to challenge that evidence on a number of grounds.
The only matter raised by them which is an
inaccuracy is the reference to the
garages being lockup garages. This is not supported by the evidence otherwise
before me. However
I do not consider that much turns on the inaccuracy. What
is significant is that three of the lots include car parking spaces which
housed in a substantial structure which provide some protection from the
elements. The fact that the owner of lot two has over
time parked vehicles on
the common property is not relevant to the value of the lots. Such parking is
not a right nor are there
any property rights to the land on which the vehicle
is parked as opposed to the other lots.
I do not consider the price paid
for the valuation is by itself a reason not to accept its findings, nor do I
consider it relevant
that Mr Craig's business is not located in the area.
There is no "overstatement" in relation to the views or other
descriptions. The valuation describes the different features of the
the descriptions are supported by the photographs. The fact that there was no
internal inspection of other lots may in
some matters be significant if the
features or fittings comprising the common property within the lot varied
substantially this may
have an impact on the value. There is no evidence to
suggest the internal features of the lots are different in a manner which will
impact on the valuation.
Mr Craig sets out his methodology in the
valuation. He also provides comparable sales figures for other properties sold
in the area
around the time of registration of the stata plan. No similar
evidence was provided by any of the respondents. I note Mr Shallard’s
suggestion that the proximity to the beach would be a key factor, but there is
nothing to indicate that this was not considered by
satisfied that the respondents have established that the valuation evidence
should not be given due weight, the matters put
by way of submission do not
discredit the valuation evidence. Further there is no other evidence of value
before me to contradict
that of Mr Craig.
On the evidence before me I am
satisfied that the allocation of unit entitlements at the time of the
registration of the strata plan
was unreasonable. The unit allocation of 1 for
each lot does not reflect the respective values of the four lots. I determine
unit entitlement should be reallocated as follows:
Allocation of
Unit Entitlement
This is in slightly different terms to that sought in the
application however it reflects more accurately the difference in the relative
values of the four lots.
Section 183(6)
provides the Board may, if it
makes an order allocating unit entitlements that were not allocated in
accordance with a valuation
of a qualified valuer and, in the opinion of the
Board, were allocated unreasonably by a developer order the payment of costs and
This provision gives the Tribunal powers to make orders against the developer
only. I am not aware of any similar provision by which
orders such orders can
be made against the owners corporation or other lot owners. I am not satisfied
that it is a matter where
costs orders should otherwise be made. The costs
incurred by the applicant are ones which are imposed as a result of the process
required for the reallocation of unit entitlements, which is done by the
Tribunal after a hearing. The submissions of the respondents
did not result in
any additional costs.
6 November 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (66.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter