URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SMITHSON, Jonathan Tan Meng Kwang [2024] NSWMPSC 1 (22 January 2024)
QMD/236724 : 137090/23
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Jonathan Tan Meng Kwang Smithson
MED0002056992
Date/s of Inquiry:
13 December 2013
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul - Chairperson
Dr Hester Wilson
Dr Nicholas Kowalenko
Ms Rosemary Kusuma
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Angela Petrie, instructed by Jordan Mitchell of Health Care Complaints
Appearance for Dr Jonathan Tan Meng Kwang Smithson:
Dr Peggy Dwyer SC, instructed by Andrew Davey of Unsworth Legal
Date of decision:
22 January 2024
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to reprimand, and impose conditions.
Publication of decision:
No non-publication direction made.
STATEMENT OF DECISION
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION v DR SMITHSON
Introduction
1. Dr Smithson was first registered as medical
practitioner in New South Wales in 1987. He gained fellowship of the Royal
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists in 1994. On
29 June 2000 his name was removed from the register. In 2015
Dr Smithson applied
for re-instatement and on 2 November 2016
Dr Smithson again became registered as a medical practitioner.
Dr Smithson’s re-registration
was subject to several conditions
including conditions that he comply with the Medical Council of NSW’s Drug
Screening Policy
and the Participant Procedure: drug screening policy, and a
condition that he practise under supervision.
2. The Health Care Complaints
Commission alleges that Dr Smithson has contravened some of those
conditions by returning positive drug
test results, self-administering Codeine,
failing to undergo a urine drug screen, and practising for a period without the
supervision. The Commission says Dr Smithson’s conduct
amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
3. The Commission also
complains that Dr Smithson has an impairment as defined by s5 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW) in that he suffers from a Substance
Use Disorder (DSM 5).
4. Our inquiry is to assess whether the allegations
concerning Dr Smithson’s conduct since January 2019 amount to
unsatisfactory
professional conduct and whether he has an impairment. If so, is
it appropriate and necessary to make protective orders and what
should be those
5. We have found that on some occasions Dr Smithson has
contravened conditions on his registration such that his conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. Although Dr Smithson suffers from a
Substance Use Disorder, he does not have an impairment.
6. We have decided to
reprimand Dr Smithson and to continue the existing conditions on his
registration though with some variation.
The condition not to self-medicate or
self-administer certain drugs will become a critical compliance condition such
that a contravention
of the condition would result in cancellation of
Dr Smithson’s registration. Dr Smithson will be permitted to
practise under
less restricting supervision.
7. Our inquiry comes after a
long and complex history, which is well summarised and reviewed in three
There was no contest about the history. It is not necessary that we repeat or
review the history other than to be aware of it.
8. Dr Smithson
largely acknowledges the facts of the complaint against him and agrees with the
conditions to be imposed. Notwithstanding
Dr Smithson’s admissions
and his acceptance of the conditions it is appropriate for us to review the
Complaint, the evidence
in support of the allegations and the necessary orders
to be made to protect the public.
9. At the outset we wish to state that
there are no criticisms of Dr Smithson’s clinical conduct. Nothing
arising from our
inquiry gives us any concern about his current practice as a
psychiatrist. He is well respected by his colleagues and supervisors.
condition that Dr Smithson be supervised, albeit to a lesser extent than
before, is a not a reflection on his clinical abilities
or the quality of work,
but a continuation of support for Dr Smithson in managing his Substance Use
The Complaint
10. The Complaint was made by the Commission on
30 June 2023. The Complaint contains four separate complaints each
with its own particulars.
The Complaint amended an earlier complaint by adding
particulars 5 to 13 inclusive to Complaint Three. In addition, the particular
to Complaint Four was amended so that “Substance Abuse Disorder
(DSM 5)” read “Substance Use Disorder (DSM 5)”.
There were no objections to these amendments, and we proceeded on the Complaint
in the form Attachment “A”.
11. The Complaint contains four
separate complaints. Complaints One, Two and Three are allegations
Dr Smithson contravened conditions
on his practice amounting to
unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined by s139B(1)(c) of the Health
Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) (the National Law). Complaint Four
is an allegation that Dr Smithson has an impairment within the meaning of
s5 of the National Law.
12. Complaint One alleges failure to comply with
a condition imposed on 20 November 2018 that required
Dr Smithson:
To comply with the Medical Council’s Drug Screening
Policy and Participant procedure: drug screening (as varied from time to
and attend for
a) urine drug screening three times a week
b) quarterly hair drug screening.
13. We refer to the Medical
Council’s Drug Screening Policy and Participant procedure: drug screening
as “the Policies”.
14. The particulars of Complaint One are
four alleged breaches of the Policies each being the return of a “positive
contrary to a condition imposed on 20 November
15. Complaint Two is in similar terms, other than the relevant
condition was imposed on 11 February 2020. The Commission alleges
five “positive results” contrary to the condition on his
16. Complaint Three alleges contraventions of conditions
imposed on 8 February 2021 being:
(a) nine “positive results” said to be in
contravention of the condition to comply with the
(b) self-administration of Codeine contrary the condition not to
self-administer;
(c) failure to undergo a urine drug screen on
15 June 2021 in contravention of the condition to comply with the
Policies; and
(d) practising without category B supervision in
contravention of a condition to only practise with category B
supervision.
17. A further particular of Complaint Three is an allegation
that all the failures to comply with the Policies particularised in Complaints
One, Two and Three amount to a pattern of behaviour by Dr Smithson that
raises concerns about his compliance with the Policies, such
that he has not
complied with the Policies in contravention of the condition to comply with the
18. The allegation of Complaint Four is that Dr Smithson
suffers from a Substance Use Disorder (DSM 5) which amounts to an impairment
within the meaning of section 5 of the National Law.
19. Angela Petrie appeared on behalf of the Commission instructed by
Jordan Mitchell of the Commission. Dr Peggy Dwyer SC appeared
on behalf of
Dr Smithson instructed by Andrew Davey of Unsworth Legal.
inquiry was listed for hearing on 13, 14 and 15 December 2023, but
concluded in one day. There was almost no disagreement
parties requested we proceed to deal with both the determination of the
Complaint and the question of any
protective orders at the same time.
Commission relied upon seven volumes of material dealing with the history and
proposed protective orders. We received the
material without objection and
marked it as follows:
(a) Exhibit A – Documents served by the Commission
Folder 1 of 3, Tab 1 to Tab 40, to which we added at Tab 2 the
Evidentiary
Certificate from
(b) Exhibit
B – Documents served by the Commission Folder 2 of 3, Tab 41 to
(c) Exhibit C – Documents served by the Commission
Folder 3 of 3 Tab 81 to Tab 120;
(d) Exhibit D –
Additional documents served by the Commission: transcript of proceedings before
the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal on 22 and
23 December 2020 and 25 January 2021:
(e) Exhibit E
– Further bundle of documents served by the Commission: a folder of
24 documents including pathology reports from
16 December 2021
and communication between Dr Smithson and the Medical
(f) Exhibit F – Further documents provided by the Commission:
a compendium of all the results for urine drug screening from
1 November 2016 to 14 November 2023 and for hair drug
screening from 22 February 2019 to
14 November 2023.
(g) Exhibit G - Folder of documents relied on by
the Commission concerning “stage 2 proceedings” containing recent
screening results with responses from Dr Smithson.
22. On behalf of Dr Smithson Dr Dwyer tendered two
folders of material, which we received without objection and marked as
(a) Exhibit 1 – Documents Served by Dr Smithson
Tab 1 to Tab 18, containing Dr Smithson’s statement of 16
January 2023;
(b) Exhibit 2 – Additional Documents Served by
Dr Smithson, Tab 1 to Tab 9 containing a statement from
Dr Smithson dated 3 November
2023, referees’ reports and a
report of Dr Tarun Yadav dated 22 September 2023.
23. Dr Dwyer drew our attention to
Dr Smithson’s statement of 3 November 2023 where
Dr Smithson admitted certain particulars
of the Complaint (as set out
below) though without conceding unsatisfactory professional conduct:
(a) the factual matters of particulars 1, 2 3, and 4 of
Complaint One;
(b) the factual matters of particulars 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 of Complaint Two;
(c) the factual matters of particulars 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of Complaint Three, but not
particular 13; and
(d) Dr Smithson denied Complaint Four but
admitted he suffers from Substance Use Disorder (DSM 5) which he said
“is in long
term remission”.
24. We understood Particular 13 of Complaint Three as a
compendium of the factual matters of the particulars of Complaints One, Two
Three. These grouped facts are then alleged by the Commission to amount to
“a pattern of participant behaviour [that]
raises concern about their
compliance with this policy, the related procedure or related conditions on
their registration”
(see paragraph 4.2 of the Drug Screening Policy
– Exhibit B Tab 71), which is said to demonstrate non-compliance with the
and thus a contravention of the conditions to comply with the
25. On Dr Smithson’s behalf Dr Dwyer conceded and
accepted that the admissions of the factual matters of particulars 2, 3 and
Complaint Three, being:
(a) self-administer Codeine;
(b) failure to attend for a
urine drug test; and
(c) practice contrary to supervision B
were in breach of the Policies and each event amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct as alleged in Complaint
26. Dr Dwyer accepted that simple non-compliance with a condition
would amount to a contravention of a condition within the meaning
139B(1)(c)(i) of the National Law. The question of the assessment of
non-compliance was not a matter for discretion. If the
events happened, then a
contravention of a condition was established even if only
‘technically’ or ‘automatically’.
27. There was
evidence to show that Dr Smithson had self-administered Codeine, had failed
to attend a urine drug test, and had practised
without category B supervision.
It might be said that each was a ‘one-off’ or was inadvertent.
Nevertheless, each was
conduct in contravention of conditions and it follows
that unsatisfactory professional conduct was established. We agree with that
28. Further, the Commission and Dr Smithson jointly submitted
a document setting out what the parties considered would be appropriate
protective orders for us to make. The concessions as to factual matters, the
admission of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
the agreement as to
proposed protective orders significantly narrows the matters requiring
consideration.
29. Dr Smithson gave evidence and answered our questions.
He confirmed the admissions made in his two statements and the concessions
by Dr Dwyer on his behalf, He also confirmed his agreement with proposed
protective orders.
30. Taking account of the concessions made and the
agreement of the parties, the issues for our consideration were:
(a) do any of the drug test results alleged by the Commission
amount to non-compliance with the Policies?
(b) is non-compliance with the
Policies a contravention of the relevant condition?
(c) if so, do those
contraventions amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
breaches of conditions amount to a ‘pattern of behaviour’?
Dr Smithson impaired?
(f) what are the appropriate protective
(g) does any conduct warrant a reprimand?
(h) whether to make any
condition a critical compliance condition?
31. We deal with each in turn.
Are any of the drug test
results non-compliant with the Policies?
32. The question of compliance with
the Policies depends on what is required by the Policies.
33. The form of the
condition that applied at each of the times of alleged non-compliance
To comply with the Medical Council’s Drug Screening
Policy and Participant Procedure: drug screening (as varied from time to
and attend for:
a) urine drug screening 3 times a week; and
b) quarterly
hair drug screening.
34. The Drug Screening Policy is at tab 71 of
Exhibit B. The Participant procedure: drug screening policy is at
tab 72 of Exhibit
35. Paragraph 4.2 of the Drug Screening
Policy provides:
Non-compliance with drug screening is any failure to follow
the requirements of this policy, the Council’s participant procedure:
screening, and any drug screening conditions on the particular
participant’s registration.
Non-compliance with drug screening
includes, but is not limited to, the circumstances listed in the following
36. The table provides that a relevant circumstance for all types of
screening is:
A positive result for a substance where there is no written
confirmation from a treating practitioner that they advised, prescribed,
administered that substance.
37. Paragraph 8.2 of the Participant
Procedure: drug screening policy provides, with respect to urine drug
A urine drug screening is positive if both of the following
• It shows your sample contains a substance listed in Appendix
• A treating practitioner has not confirmed they advised, prescribed
or administered that substance.
38. The policy is in similar with respect to
hair drug screening:
A hair drug screening is positive if both of the
following apply:
• It shows your sample contains a substance listed in
• A treating practitioner has not confirmed they advised,
prescribed or administered that substance.
39. It was agreed by the parties
and is clear from the evidence that no treating practitioner had “advised,
prescribed or administered”
the relevant drugs.
40. Appendix A is
located at paragraph 15 Appendices of the policy and has the heading
“Substances to be screened”. Below
that heading is a two column
table with the left hand column headed “Substance to be tested”
below which are listed different
hand column is headed “Detection limits”. Listed below and adjacent
to each category of substance to be tested are the words “As per AS/NZS
4308:2008” or an amount of ng/ml, such as 10
or 50 or 0.5.
41. Each of
the drugs listed in the particulars of the Complaint appears in the
“Substance to be tested” column. Each
of those particulars (apart
from one, see below) alleges the “presence” of a drug at a
particular “concentration”.
Some of those concentrations met or
exceed the Detection limits listed in Annexure A, and some do not. When can it
be said a result
“shows [the] sample contains a substance listed in
Appendix A”? If that requirement is met, then the Policies say the
“screening result is positive”.
42. Ms Petrie submitted that
all that was required for a sample to “contain a substance listed in
Appendix A” was for
the drug test to show the presence of a substance
listed under the heading “Substance to be tested”.
43. Dr Dwyer
submitted that given Appendix A is headed “Substances to be
screened” and consists of two columns (one of
which identified the
substance, and the specified a detection) then both columns were to be satisfied
before it could be said a drug
test result contained a substance listed in
Appendix A.
44. In our view the correct interpretation on a plain reading
of the Policies and Appendix A is that a drug screen is positive when
requirements of both columns are meet – the substance to be tested is
present at or above the specified detection limit.
Which of the drug tests
results met those requirements?
45. The particulars of each drug test
result (except for one, see below) states the relevant detection level drawn
from Appendix A.
For the assistance of the Committee the parties prepared
a schedule listing whether the result particularised in each of the Complaints
was above or below the relevant detection level. The drug test results with
detection levels at or above those set out in Appendix
(a) Complaint One, particular 1, on
14 January 2019;
(b) Complaint Two, particular 2, on 30 March
(c) Complaint Two, particular 3, on 6 April 2020;
(d) Complaint Two,
particular 5(a), on 8 July 2020;
(e) Complaint Three, particular 1(a), on 21
(f) Complaint Three, particular 5, on 6 December
(g) Complaint Three, particular 7(a), on 14 March
(h) Complaint Three, particular 9, on 9 August 2022;
(i) Complaint
Three, particular 10, on 14 October 2022; and
(j) Complaint Three, particular
12, on 14 November 2022.
46. We conclude that in respect of the particulars listed
above the drug test results satisfied the requirements of the Policies to
positive result for the specified drugs.
47. The Policies define such a
positive result to be non-compliance with the Policies. We conclude that the
drug test results contained
in the particulars listed above amounted to
non-compliance with the Policies.
48. Particular 6 of Complaint Three does
not specify a detection level. Without further information we are unable to
determine whether
the drug test result meets the requirements of Appendix A for
a positive result.
49. Particular 13 of Complaint Three is a compendium of
other particulars and includes all the allegations of drug test results made
the Complaint. It does not itself allege any additional drug test
50. The balance of the particulars alleging drug test results specify
detection levels below those listed in Annexure A. In our view
those drug test
results are not ‘a positive result’ as defined by the Policies.
Those results, whatever other relevance
or utility they may have, are not
examples of non-compliance with the Policies.
Is non-compliance with the
Policies a contravention of a condition?
51. Paragraph 4.1 of the Drug
screening policy provides:
Participants must comply with all aspects of this
policy, the Council’s Participant: drug screening, and all drug screening
conditions on their registration.
52. As set out above paragraph 4.2 of the
Drug screening policy provides that a ‘positive result for a
substance’ is non-compliance.
It is non-compliance as a failure to follow
the requirements of the Participant procedure: drug screening policy in that a
screening result was positive because the sample contained a substance
listed in Appendix A.
53. The relevant condition for each of Complaints
One, Two and Three was in the same terms, being to comply with the Policies. In
our view, the examples of ‘positive results’ as found by us are each
a failure to comply with the Policies.
“Positive results” and
unsatisfactory professional conduct
54. Section 139B(1)(c)(i) of the
National Law provides that a “contravention by the practitioner (whether
by act or omission)
of a condition to which the practitioner’s
registration is subject” is unsatisfactory professional
55. The condition on Dr Smithson’s registration was to
comply with the Policies. The ‘positive results’ were examples
non-compliance with the Policies. That non-compliance was a failure to comply
with the Policies. Not to comply is a contravention
of the condition.
Accordingly, the ‘positive results’ are each a contravention of the
condition to comply. On that
basis we find unsatisfactory professional conduct
established for each example of a ‘positive result’.
Was there a
‘pattern of behaviour’?
56. In Particular 13 of Complaint Three
the Commission alleges that the various listed examples of non-compliance with
the Policies
raise a concern about Dr Smithson’s compliance with the
Policies amounting to a contravention of the condition to comply with
57. Paragraph 4.2 of the Drug screening policy provides there is
non-compliance by a participant with the policy if:
a pattern of participant
behaviour raises concerns about their compliance with this policy, the related
procedure or related conditions
on their registration.
58. To conclude that
there has been non-compliance it would be necessary to show:
(a) a pattern of events,
(b) being behaviour by the
participant,
(c) that raises concerns,
(d) about compliance,
participant.
59. The events relied upon by the Commission are the drug
results showing the presence of a drug whether ‘positive’ or
(there were at most 25 over four years) and self-administration of Codeine,
missing a drug test, and practising without the required
supervision.
60. It is hard to discern a pattern in these apparently random events other
than they all involve Dr Smithson. What was Dr Smithson’s
behaviour in the events? As to the drug results we are unable to conclude they
arose because of some behaviour of Dr Smithson.
The expert evidence, not
contested, is that drug use by Dr Smithson cannot be excluded or
necessarily accepted as an explanation
for the results – none may involve
behaviour by Dr Smithson, or some or all may. Identifying a pattern is
elusive at least
without knowledge of the behaviour of Dr Smithson having
some impact on the results.
61. The self-administration of Codeine was
behaviour of Dr Smithson. It was a singular event and apparently
unconnected to any other
event. There is no evidence before us that it has been
62. The missed drug test followed a public holiday –
Dr Smithson should have attended on the Tuesday if the Monday was not
Dr Smithson now understands his obligations. The event is
apparently unconnected to any other and has not been repeated.
occurrence of the period (10 days) of practice without required supervision was
not an act of Dr Smithson’s but arose
from an unexpected absence of
his supervisor. He failed to notify the Council when he became aware of his
supervisor’s absence.
Apparently, he believed that the persons acting in
his approved supervisor’s role would be sufficient. He later put in place
procedures to avoid the problem arising again. There is no apparent pattern in
these events nor any connection with other matters.
64. Even if there were
a pattern in Dr Smithson’s behaviour, we do not have any concern
Dr Smith has been subject to the
Policies since at least November 2018. He has attended for testing hundreds of
times. The drug
results may or may not arise from his behaviour. The three
individual events stand alone as one-offs.
65. Particular 13 of Complaint
Three has not been substantiated, and we do not make a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Does Dr Smithson have an
impairment?
66. Dr Smithson admits he suffers from a Substance Use
Disorder (DSM 5) which he describes as being in remission. That diagnosis
is confirmed by Dr Tarun Yadav who reviewed Dr Smithson on 22
September 2023 (Exhibit 2. Tab 9, page 42) - “Dr Smithson suffers
from a severe substance use disorder” with “low risks to
relapse”. We accept Dr Yadav’s assessment.
Dr Smithson’s substance use disorder amount to an impairment as
defined by s5 of the National Law. In our view Dr
Substance Use Disorder is a medical condition. The issue is whether that mental
condition “detrimentally
affects or is likely to detrimentally
affect” Dr Smithson’s “capacity to practise”.
68. The Commission says that Dr Smithson’s mental condition is
likely to detrimentally affect his practice because he may relapse
at any time.
69. Dr Dwyer submitted that there was no likelihood of relapse given
there had been no relapse for ten years and Dr Smithson was well
by his medical practitioners and by other strategies that minimised or avoided
70. Dr Dwyer drew our attention to comments of the
detrimentally affect” and from the Court of
that our assessment was to be
“current” and not speculative.
71. Dr Yadav’s
assessment is positive in his conclusion that there are no present impacts on
Dr Smithson being detrimentally
affected in his capacity to practise and
indeed the information is to the contrary. Significantly he says there is
to relapse” and those risks are being mitigated with
current conditions on registration and ongoing engagement with health
professionals, including mental health and additional experts which allows
Dr Smithson to strengthen insight and strategies for relapse
prevention for
the long term.
72. In our view the evidence does not support a conclusion
that Dr Smithson’s substance use disorder is an impairment under
National Law. In our view Complaint Four is not substantiated.
73. As set out above we have found proved that Dr Smithson was
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct: on each occasion of
‘positive result’; the self-administration of Codeine; missing a
drug test; and practising without the required supervision.
Our task is to
consider whether to make protective orders. In doing so, we are to give
paramount consideration to the health and
safety of the public and to impose
restrictions only as necessary to that end.
74. The parties agreed that the
existing conditions with some modifications should continue. Dr Smithson
has been subject to consistent
conditions, with minor variation, since 2016. In
summary, those conditions have been:
(a) To practise in the public sector;
(b) To oblige his
supervisors to report issues to the Medical Council;
(c) To practise under
Category B supervision;
(d) Not to deal with ‘drugs of
addiction’;
(e) Accept mentoring;
(f) Accept reporting requirements;
(g) Not self-medicate;
(h) Report medications;
(i) Comply with the
(j) Attend a psychiatrist for review;
(k) Attend review
interviews;
(l) Attend a general practitioner;
(m) Attend a
psychiatrist;
(n) Attend an addiction specialist;
(o) Take medications as
prescribed;
(p) Attend a 12 Step program or similar; and
(q) Be guided by
medical advice.
75. The Commission and Dr Smithson jointly propose that
conditions of this kind should continue but with Category C supervision and
addition of a critical compliance condition with respect to self-administration
of drugs. It is apparent from Dr Yadav’s
Dr Smithson’s evidence that the presence of those conditions has,
over the years, worked to diminish the risk of
a relapse by Dr Smithson and, if
continued, will do so in the future. We agree with those assessments, and the
continuation of similar
conditions. The parties also propose a reprimand.
A reprimand
76. In addition to the positive results of the drug tests
Dr Smithson contravened a condition on his practice in three
(a) he self-administered Codeine without a prescription from a
treating practitioner;
(b) he failed to undergo a urine drug screen test on
15 June 2021; and
(c) he practised contrary to the category B
supervision requirements.
77. When it came to the self-administration of Codeine
Dr Smithson was aware that he was breaking a condition though he thought
circumstances were special. Nevertheless, he failed to advise the Council
of his breach until he did so through a letter of his
21 June 2021 (Tab 57, Exhibit B). It is apparent that
Dr Smithson was aware of the condition not to self-administer the
but he did so anyway. It seems it did not occur to him to notify the Council of
his apparent breach of the conditions until
two months later when dealing with
some other issues. The contravention was not inadvertent or without fault. He
was aware of his
obligation to meet the condition as required but did not do so.
He now understands that he should have notified the Council and could
sought advice from his mentor or another practitioner who could have given him
guidance. Nevertheless, his conduct warrants
censure as demonstration that the
conduct was unacceptable and to remind others of the importance of complying
with conditions in
the protection of the public.
78. Dr Smithson says
his failure to undergo a urine drug screen test on 15 June 2021 arose
because he “overlooked” the
requirement to attend on a Tuesday when
there was a public holiday on the Monday. Without much thought he did not
consider whether
he had an obligation to make up for the missed test. His
lawyer on his behalf said Dr Smithson had later “carefully
the policy, which may mean Dr Smithson may not have
previously read the policy or he had not retained what he had read. The policy
had been in effect for at least two years at that time (Tab 58,
Exhibit B). Either way, it was a breach of an important obligation
warrants a reprimand.
79. Dr Smithson admits that for the period
15 to 24 June 2021 he practised contrary to the category B
supervision requirements. Though
Dr Smithson was aware of his obligation
to work with an approved supervisor he did not seek Council approval for a new
when his current supervisor went on leave on short notice. He
appears to have taken the approach that it was enough to have a supervisor
some kind even if that person had not been approved (Tab 52,
Exhibit B). His approach was casual, and he did not take his obligation
80. Each of these three particulars are examples of
Dr Smithson’s inattention to his obligations under the
81. We reprimand Dr Smithson for the self-administration of
Codeine, his failure to undergo a drug screen on 15 June 2021 and for
practising contrary to category B supervision requirement from 15 to
24 June 2021.
Supervision
82. Dr Smithson has been
practising under Category B for some years meaning his supervisor must be
at the same premises. A change
to Category C supervision would remove that
requirement and allow him to be supervised by telephone contact with the
supervisor if
Dr Smithson requires assistance.
83. It is apparent from
Dr Smithson’s referees, his colleagues, and his supervisors that he
is working at or above his level.
On a day to day basis there is no practical
need for the level of supervision required by Category B. It is enough that he
to contact somebody if he requires assistance or has some concerns.
Dr Smithson gave evidence that he enjoys his work and is intent
continuing to practise at the highest level that he can. Although registered as
a specialist psychiatrist he is not presently
a member of the College, but he
hopes to again become a member. That he continues to work provides him with
stability and connection.
84. Dr Smithson is not sure that a position
for him with category B supervision will continue to be available and he is
other opportunities to practise at a high level but within the public
health system. There is nothing in the material before us
that would suggest
protection of the public requires Dr Smithson be under category B
supervision. The evidence from Dr Yadav and
Dr Smithson himself is
that working under supervision has been a benefit. It is apparent he is well
capable of working safely with
Category C supervision. We do not have any
concerns with Dr Smithson continuing to work in the public sector under the
of the supervision provided by category C supervision.
reaching this conclusion we are impressed by Dr Yadav’s opinion that
Dr Smithson benefits from engagement with colleagues
professionals. Doing so with a higher level of responsibility and without close
supervision with provide Dr Smithson with
greater job satisfaction,
something that supports Dr Smithson in avoiding a relapse.
compliance condition?
86. The positive drug tests are not sufficient to
establish whether Dr Smithson is or is not self-administering.
Dr Smithson is unable
to explain the positive drug tests: perhaps some
contamination or inadvertent ingestion, or socialising with a friend who is a
user. Dr Smithson is adamant that he has not taken drugs for
10 years nor has he since experienced cravings. He says he has strategies
in place to deal with cravings involving engagement with his mentors and
practitioners, supported by meditation, exercise, and gym
work. A critical
compliance condition will place a heavy onus on Dr Smithson to do all that
he can to ensure there is no breach
of the condition not to self-administer.
87. Although not impaired within the meaning of the National Law
Dr Smithson does suffer from a substance use disorder. Dr Yadav
there is at low risk of relapse, but that risk is mitigated by continuation of
the conditions on his registration and the ongoing
engagement with health
professionals. Continuing engagement with mental health and addiction experts
will allow him to strengthen
insight and strategies of relapse prevention for
the long term (Page 43, Exhibit 2). We take it from
Dr Yadav’s report that
it is important for Dr Smithson to comply
with the conditions of practise to minimise the risk of relapse. At the heart
conditions is the condition not to self-administer any drug of
addiction. Dr Smithson is committed to staying clear of drugs so
may continue to practice.
88. Dr Smithson agrees to the condition not
to self-administer being a critical compliance condition. This is a factor in
our consideration.
A positive drug test may support a complaint that there has
been a contravention of the condition not to self-administer. Were
to come before the Council or the Commission there is a duty to refer the
complaint to the Tribunal (s145D of the National
Law). The Tribunal “must
cancel” the registration if satisfied there has been a contravention of
the critical compliance
condition (s149C(3) of the National Law).
Dr Smithson understands that contravention will result in cancellation, and
that consequence
motivates him not to self-administer so that he may continue to
Determination and orders
89. Pursuant to s146B(1)(a) of the
National Law we reprimand Dr Smithson.
90. Pursuant to s146B(1)(b) and
s146B(2) of the National Law we impose the following conditions on
Dr Smithson’s registration:
practise only in a public health service approved by the Medical Council of NSW.
obtain Medical Council of NSW approval prior to changing the nature and/or place
of his practice.
to possess, supply, administer or prescribe any ‘drug of addiction’
(Schedule 8 drug) as defined by the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
practise under Category C supervision in accordance with the Medical Council of
NSW's Compliance Policy - Supervision (as varied
from time to
each meeting the practitioner is to review and discuss his practice with his
approved supervisor with particular focus on:
management of boundaries;
management of work-related stress;
management of clinical material; and
of conditions and compliance.
authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide proposed and approved
supervisors with a copy of the decision which imposed this
authorise the supervisor to notify the Medical Council of NSW immediately if
there are any concerns in relation to the practitioner’s
compliance with
any conditions or the practitioner’s health.
nominate an experienced psychiatrist to act as the practitioner’s
professional mentor in accordance with the Medical Council
Compliance Policy - Mentoring (as varied from time to time).
each mentoring meeting the practitioner is to include discussion of initially
the issues highlighted in the decision which imposed
this condition and then any
personal and/or professional practice issues as they arise from time to time.
authorise the mentor to report, in an approved format, to the Medical Council of
NSW every three months about the fact of contact,
and to inform the Medical
Council of NSW if there are any concerns about the practitioner’s
professional conduct, health or
personal wellbeing.
authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide the proposed and approved
mentors with a copy of this decision and a copy of private
conditions on the
practitioner’s registration, if any.
forward evidence to the Medical Council of NSW within 14 days if this decision
that the practitioner has provided a copy of this
decision to the Head of
Department (or equivalent supervisor) in any place that he works.
14 days of a change in the nature or place of his practice, the practitioner is
to forward evidence to the Medical Council
of NSW that he has provided a copy of
the decision which imposed this condition, and a copy of his current conditions
to the Head
of Department (or equivalent supervisor) in any place he works.
authorise and consent to any exchange of information between the Medical Council
of NSW and Medicare Australia and Pharmaceutical
Regulatory Unit for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with these conditions.
to prescribe for self-medication.
to self-administer any drug of addiction (Schedule 8 drug), any narcotic
derivative, non-prescription compound analgesic or cold
medication unless such
medications are prescribed by the practitioner’s treating practitioner and
taken, as directed by the
practitioner’s treating practitioner.
In the event the practitioner is prescribed or directed to take
narcotic derivative; or
non-prescription compound analgesic or cold medication;
within seven
days of being prescribed such substance or drug by the practitioner’s
treating practitioner, the practitioner must
notify the Medical Council of NSW
and provide written confirmation of the treatment from the treating
practitioner.
This condition not to self-administer is a critical compliance condition
imposed under ss.146B(3) and (4) of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National
comply with the Medical Council of NSW's Drug Screening Policy and Participant
Procedure: drug screening (as varied from time to
time) and attend
urine drug screening; and
hair drug screening.
attend for treatment by a general practitioner of the practitioner’s
choice. The frequency of treatment is to be determined
by the treating general
practitioner. The practitioner:
authorise the general practitioner to inform the Medical Council of NSW of any
failure to attend for treatment, termination
of treatment or if there is a
significant change in the practitioner's health status (including a significant
temporary change).
provide the Medical Council of NSW with the professional details of the treating
general practitioner.
attend for treatment by a psychiatrist of the practitioner’s choice. The
frequency of treatment is to be determined by the
treating psychiatrist. The
practitioner:
authorise the psychiatrist to inform the Medical Council of NSW of any failure
to attend for treatment, termination of treatment
or if there is a significant
change in the practitioner's health status (including a significant temporary
provide the Medical Council of NSW with the professional details of the treating
psychiatrist.
attend for treatment by an Addiction Specialist (either an Addiction Medicine
Specialist [FAChAM] or an Addiction Psychiatrist
[Cert. Addiction Psych.]) of
his choice. The frequency of treatment is to be determined by the addiction
specialist. The practitioner:
authorise the addiction specialist to inform the Medical Council of any failure
to attend for treatment, termination of treatment
or if there is a significant
change in the practitioner's health status (including a significant temporary
provide the Medical Council of NSW with the professional details of the treating
addiction specialist.
practitioner shall take any medication prescribed by the practitioner’s
treating practitioners.
practitioner shall attend the Doctors in Recovery group or similar 12 Step
program at least once a week and provide evidence to
the Medical Council of NSW
of his attendance.
practitioner shall authorise the Medical Council of NSW to forward copies of
this decision and any subsequent reports and other
information relevant to the
practitioner’s health and treatment to the practitioner’s
supervisors and treating practitioners.
Medical Council of NSW is the appropriate review body to review the conditions
imposed on the practitioner.
Appeal and review
Dr Smithson has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of the date of this
Statement of Decision.
Dr Smithson also has the right to seek a review by the Medical Council
of NSW of the Committee’s order to impose conditions.
Dr Smithson’s principal place of practice be anywhere other than NSW
at the time of seeking a review of conditions,
Dr Smithson may make an
application for review to the National Board.
Distribution of decision
Our decision is to be provided to Dr Smithson, the Health Care
Complaints Commission, the Medical Council of New South Wales, and
the National
Board, and be published pursuant to s171E(4) of the National Law.
Mark Paul - Chairperson
22 January 2024
Smithson v Medical Council
(2016) NSWCATOD 82.
Smithson v Medical Council of NSW
NSWCATOD 17
Medical Council of NSW v Smithson
[2021] NSWCA
The Certificate establishes
what were the conditions in force at particular points in time. It is apparent
that the Policies were
unchanged for the entirety of the relevant period. For
that reason, we were not required to consider: whether the words in the
(as varied from time to time)
capable of permitting a variation to a condition after it is made (and if so, to
what degree?): or that the condition
is invalid for uncertainty or otherwise: or
the Policies are to be read as at the time the conditions were made; and in the
of a procedure for ‘variation’.
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Bialowas
[2015] NSWCATOD 16
Caladine v The
Commissioner, Health Care Complaints Commission
[2007] NSWCA 362
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter