URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/849.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Larken v Perry [2025] NSWPICMP 849; (4 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Larken v Perry [2025] NSWPICMP 849
Stephen Larken
RESPONDENT:
APPEAL PANEL
John Wynyard
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Margaret Gibson
DATE OF DECISION:
4 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
appeal by claimant as Medical Assessor (MA) did not assess the left upper
whether MA under an obligation to assess a part of the anatomy that
was not named in the referral; whether procedural fairness required
so; whether spinal radiological investigations showing relevant pathology
accompanied by complaints of pain should have
resulted in a whole person
impairment (WPI) assessment; whether lumbar spine examined by the MA; whether
adequate reasons given;
– employer conceded left upper
extremity should have been in the referral and consented to a re-examination;
Skates v Hills Industries Ltd
referred to; lumbar spine properly examined
and findings given; MA admitted to not reading relevant material before
assessment interview;
presumption of regularity considered;
Jones v The
Registrar WCC
Stolzenberg v Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer
considered and applied; claimant re-examined; MAC revoked.
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
11 April 2025 Stephen Larken lodged an Application to Appeal Against the
Decision of a Medical Assessor. The medical dispute was
assessed by Dr Ross
Mellick, a Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC)
on 20 March 2025.
15 April 2025 Stephen Larken lodged a Reconsideration Application as a body part
“the left upper extremity had been omitted
inadvertently from the
23 April 2025 the respondent conceded that the terms of the referral had omitted
the left upper extremity.
14 May 2025 the respondent lodged its Notice of Opposition to the Appeal.
delegate of the President Ms Candy Yang determined that the matter should
proceed to the Appeal Panel notwithstanding the agreement
regarding the left
upper extremity, as the appellant relied on incorrect criteria and demonstrable
error as grounds of the appeal.
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
1 March 2021 (the
Guidelines) and the
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
(AMA 5). WPI is reference to
whole person impairment. Baseline WPI is a reference to the total WPI assessed
before deduction for the
effect of pre-existing injury, condition or abnormality
pursuant to s 323 of the 1998 Act.
RELEVANT FACTUAL
21 January 2025 this matter was referred to the Medical Assessor seeking an
assessment of WPI caused by injury to the nervous system,
lumbar spine, thoracic
spine and scarring (TEMSKI) arising from an injury on 4 June 2015.
Larken was employed as a strapper at the respondent's stables. He was standing
on a ramp on the date of injury holding the reins
of a horse which he had just
finished exercising and was about to walk down the ramp. The horse reared and
knocked Mr Larken off
the ramp causing him to fall to the ground. He had no
recollection of the impact.
thought he was unconscious for 6 to 10 minutes and his next recollection was the
ambulance officer speaking to him.
Larken was discharged from the John Hunter Hospital on 11 June 2015 and the
notes recorded that he had suffered post-traumatic
amnesia throughout that time.
discharge summary stated that he had been trampled by a horse and sustained a
haematoma to the thoracic spine, a compound fracture
dislocation to the right
elbow and a head injury.
reference to the right elbow the Medical Assessor considered was a typographical
error as the injury occurred to the left elbow.
Larken underwent at least nine additional surgical procedures on his elbow, the
last having been performed about 12 months prior
to the assessment.
complained of ongoing back pain which limited his physical function to the
Medical Assessor.
being asked, Mr Larken also said he had difficulty with memory and judgment
since the injury.
Larken was also present at the consultation and she indicated that Mr Larken
began to suffer marked impairment of retentive memory
after the injury which was
continuing. He was unable to be responsible for the financial affairs of the
family or to make judgment
decisions Mrs Larken having taken over that function.
Larken also reported that Mr Larken became disorientated in space on occasion
which was illustrated by his asking her which way
to go when he is in a familiar
environment.
Larken had also withdrawn from the community. He no longer was a reader, nor was
he an amateur painter to the same degree he used
Medical Assessor found a 15% combined value which consisted of 14% for the
nervous system and 1% for the scarring. He found 0%
WPI in relation to both the
lumbar and the thoracic portions of the spine.
PRELIMINARY
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that the worker
should undergo a further medical examination because
the nature of the error
demonstrated as described below meant that a re-examination was
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
Further medical examination
Margaret Gibson of the Appeal Panel conducted an examination of the worker
29 August 2025 and reported to the Appeal Panel.
Medical Assessment Certificate
parts of the medical certificate given by the Medical Assessor that are relevant
to the appeal are set out, where relevant, in
the body of this decision.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions which have been considered below by the Appeal
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes
of fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
Medical Assessor gave his findings on physical examination at [5] of the MAC.
regard to the claim for injury to the spine he
movements were performed over a normal range of symmetrically including rotation
to right and left without muscle
guarding or spasm. He was able to perform
forward flexion in the standing position, bringing his fingers to the lower
third of his
lower legs in the midline without muscle guarding. Lateral flexion
and extension were performed with marginal limitation symmetrically
lumbar muscle guarding all (sic) muscular spasm at any level. There was no local
muscular spinal tenderness.”
Medical Assessor also examined the “shoulder” (we assume the left
shoulder). He said:
“He exhibited normal shoulder, wrist and finger movements on
formal testing and also when removing his tight T-shire and replacing
was also no impairment of the fine finger movement bilaterally, nor wasting of
the intrinsic muscles of the hands. He was
able to remove his footwear,
requiring the need to unit his shoelaces and retie them whilst seated in a
chair; he did so easily and
with unimpaired bimanual dexterity or spinal
movements. There was 10 degrees less elbow extension on the left side compared
the right elbow.”
considering the investigations before him at [6] of the MAC, the Medical
“Compression
fractures were recorded with particular reference to the thoracic
vertebrae. Rib fractures were recorded to have involved the 4
ribs on the left side.
The discharge summary records radiological information, including CT scans of
the thoracic spine, performed on 4 June 2015 and reports
‘there is a loss
of vertebral body height in the T3 vertebrae secondary to compression fracture
of indeterminate age. There
are no cervical spine fractures...” Attention
was directed to the compression fractures and I quote, ‘there are also
compression fractures of the T3, T8, T9 and T10 vertebrae. The T3 fracture
appears old; the lower fractures are of indeterminate
age. The posterior
elements are intact. A bone scan or MRI may be helpful if clinically
required’. Reference is also made to
a CT scan of the cervical spine
indicating there to have been no abnormalities at that site.”
Medical Assessor referred further to the thoracic spine in considering the
investigations. He
multiple radiological reports; on dated 16 August 201 provides detail regarding
the thoracic spine compression fracture
in these terms, ‘there is wedging
without associated oedema at T2, T3, T8, T9 and T10.... Height loss is most
marked at T3
where anterior vertebral height loss of 50% is noted.”
Medical Assessor examined the MRI scan of the lumbar spine on 16 August 2021
stating that it indicated degenerative disease “But
no reference was made
to a compression fracture in the report prepared by Dr McWhirter”.
Medical Assessor noted that earlier lumbar spine MRI scans of August 2018 and
18 September 2018 made no reference to compression fractures.
CT scan performed on 20 July 2018 again referred to mild degenerative disease,
as the Medical Assessor said without reference to
compression fractures.
an MRI of the lumbar spine on 26 June 2017 reported by Dr Holt again referred to
degenerative changes without reference to
“focal disc protrusion, neural
compression or compression fracture.”
his summary the Medical Assessor noted that there was “clear
documentation” of the incident including that Mr Larken
had 6 to 10
minutes of unconsciousness and six days of post-traumatic amnesia with an
ongoing impairment of mental status functioning.
is documentation from other doctors drawing attention to long standing spinal
fractures dated from earlier traumatic
events not mentioned during history
taking to the writer by Mr Larken. These documentary details are noted
subsequent to the history
provided to my [sic] by Mr Larken.
The documentary evidence does not allow the
identified compression fracture to have occurred at the time of the injury in
The findings on physical examination identified no significant
limitation or asymmetry of spinal movements in particular no guarding
spasms in the lumbar or thoracic region.”
commenting on the evidence before him the Medical Assessor again noted that
Dr O'Sullivan on 29 December 2022 took a history of injuries “not
mentioned to me during my consultation with Mr Larken.”
Medical Assessor listed and described those injuries noted by Dr O'Sullivan as
“The first of those injuries was in 2014 when he
reported falling from a horse. Injuries were significant causing pelvic and
sacral fractures with history from Mr Larken to
Dr O’Sullivan that he
had always had back pain since the injury in 2014. There is also history
recorded in Dr O’Sullivan’s
report documenting history from Mr
Larken that he recalls being told at the site of the injury on 4/6/2015 that he
was about to be
given Ketamine injections for pain. That instruction must have
been given by the ambulance officers and is in keeping with Mr Larken’s
vague recollection reported to me today that he was informed at the I site of
the injury that unconsciousness had been preset for
between 6 and 10 minutes. Dr
O’Sulliaven also recorded that unconsciousness occurred and estimated a
time of 7 minutes...”
Medical Assessor referred to other information that was contained in Dr
O'Sullivan's report.
Having noted this information that was not available to him at the time of the
consultation with Mr Larken, the Medical Assessor
clinical findings on examination today reported above do not depend on verbal
testament and Mr Larken’s memory and
reveal no significant impairment of
spinal movement and no muscle guarding or muscle spam at any spinal level.
On the basis of evidence available to the writer and following the directives
of the SIRA Guides and AMA 5, my clinical judgement
and taking into account the
normal spinal movements and the absence of muscle spasm noted during my
examination today or guarding
there is no evidence of any impairment of spinal
function nor compression fractures causally connected to the injury which
on 4 June 2015.”
SUBMISSIONS
Larken referred to the standard cases as to the interpretation of incorrect
criteria and demonstrable error.
Ground one: Failure to exercise
noted above the referral did not include a request for assessment of the left
upper extremity. It was alleged that the Medical
Assessor misdirected himself by
stating that he was required to assess those injuries that were referred to him.
Larken went so far as to say it was unclear why the Medical Assessor took that
course. Mr Larken said that the Medical Assessor
had noted the injury to the
left elbow and conducted a physical examination of it. It “should have
been clear,” it was
submitted, that there was no issue about the elbow, as
it had not been raised in the reply. A reading of the dispute notices would
have shown that the respondent agreed that the left elbow should be assessed.
Ground two: Procedural fairness
Larken submitted that a clerical error appeared to have occurred in the referral
Larken contended that as the Medical Assessor was aware that there was an injury
to his elbow it was not procedurally fair that
he simply ignored it. “It
was incumbent upon the MA to bring the error to the attention of the parties
before proceeding on
that error to the worker's obvious disadvantage”, Mr
Larken said.
Larken observed that the Medical Assessor had seen that there had been about 10
surgical procedures to the left elbow and therefore
“One would have
expected” that the error would have been brought to the parties’
two grounds may be dealt with shortly.
is no obligation on a Medical Assessor to peruse the pleadings in order to
discover the parameters of his assessment. His function
is to consider the
injuries and consequential conditions that have been defined within the
referral. The referral is a standard form
document prepared by the Registry
after the parties have agreed, or the Personal Injury Commission (Commission)
has ordered, that
an assessment be carried out by a Medical Assessor. The
Commission circularises a draft of the referral to the parties to ensure
its contents properly reflect their agreement, or the orders made, and the
parties are invited to notify the Commission if
there is any objection. A
failure to do so by both parties was described by Basten JA as
“inexplicable” in
Skates v Hills Industries Ltd
Honour expressed an opinion that such a failure would provide a sound reason for
refusing leave to appeal.
Accordingly
Mr Larken’s submissions are misconceived. There was no failure by the
Medical Assessor as alleged, rather the failure
lies with the legal
representatives.
appears that both parties in the present case failed to raise the matter with
the President, but we note that the respondent agrees
that a referral for
assessment of the left elbow was intended and does not object to a
re-examination by a Panel member for that
1 and 2 are accordingly rejected.
Ground three: Lumbar spine
Larken submitted that it did not appear that the lumbar spine had actually been
examined, and the finding by the Medical Assessor
in his summary at [7] of the
MAC that there was no significant limitation in the lumbar (or thoracic) region
was consequently contradictory.
(The submission at 24 alleged that the Medical
Assessor had found that there was significant limitation, but we assume that was
typographical error).
was further submitted that “it is not clear” whether the Medical
Assessor took into account the MRI scan of 17 August
2021, which demonstrated
disc pathology at L4/5 and L5/S1, apart from “to defer to degenerative
Medical Assessor had failed to assess the lumbar spine in accordance with the
mandated guideline contained in Table 15 –
3 of AMA 5, Mr Larken said. The
evidence of the radiological scans suggested, he submitted, a higher lumbar
rating than Category
Ground four: Thoracic spine
Larken submitted that it was not clear how the Medical Assessor dealt with much
of the radiological material, and referred as an
example to an MRI scan of 17
August 2021 which demonstrated a compression fracture at T7.
the Medical Assessor noted that there were multiple radiological reports
detailing compression fractures in the thoracic spine,
Mr Larken said it was
unclear why they did not result in an assessment of WPI.
Mr Larken submitted that it would be “glaringly improbable” that
there would be no deficit in the thoracic spine even
on the history taken by the
Medical Assessor, which included the acknowledgment of a haematoma to the
thoracic spine and Mr Larken
noted that the Medical Assessor noted the presence
of pain in both the thoracic and lumbar spine (although he did not explain how
that complaint could sound in any award for WPI).
Larken referred to Table 15-4 of AMA 5 and submitted that the finding of a
compression fracture should have resulted in an impairment
between 5-28% WPI.
submitted that the findings from the radiological scans would suggest an
impairment higher than Category 1.
Ground five: Reasons
were referred to
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v
in that the Medical
Assessor had failed to disclose his path of reasoning in reaching his medical
conclusion.
Respondent submissions
respondent submitted that there had been no error made by the Medical Assessor
and that the appeal should be dismissed. It submitted
that a review of the MAC
did not support either ground 3 or ground 4 of Mr Larken’s
submissions.
to the failure to refer to the left upper extremity in the referral, the
respondent submitted that it had conceded that the reference
was omitted and did
not oppose Mr Larken's application for re-examination by the Medical Assessor
for that purpose.
were referred to some dicta in
Ferguson v State of
to the effect that the
pre-eminence of clinical observations could not be understated, and that the
judgement as to the significance or otherwise of the
matters raised in the
consultation was very much a matter for the
Larken is to be re-examined because the respondent has conceded that the terms
of the referral omitted any reference to injury
to the left upper extremity
to Mr Larken’s submission that the lumbar spine was not the subject of any
findings on examination, we note that the Medical
Assessor in his summary at [7]
of the MAC stated:
“The documentary evidence does not allow
the identified compression fracture to have occurred at the time of the injury
2015. The findings on physical examination identified no significant
limitation or asymmetry of spinal movements in particular no
guarding or muscle
spasms in the lumbar or thoracic region.”
his examination findings, the Medical Assessor said at [5] of the MAC, to
“Thoracic movements were performed over a normal range
of symmetrically including rotation to right and left without muscle
guarding or
spasm. He was able to perform forward flexion in the standing position, bringing
his fingers to the lower third of his
lower legs in the midline without muscle
guarding. Lateral flexion and extension were performed with marginal limitation
symmetrically
without lumbar muscle guarding all [sic] muscular spasm at any
level. There was no local muscular spinal tenderness.”
can be seen that although the paragraph began by referring to “thoracic
movements,” it is probable that his reference
to forward flexion lateral
flexion and extension were concerned with an examination of the lumbar spine,
which is reinforced by his
reference to “lumbar muscle guarding.” Mr
Larken’s submissions on this ground are also rejected.
the findings by the Medical Assessor regarding the compression fracture at T7 do
raise a question as to his findings generally
Medical Assessor noted that the investigations showed pathology at T2, T3, T8,
T9 and T10, with height
loss most marked at T3 where anterior vertebral height
loss of 50% was found.
authority relied on by the respondent,
, related to the
circumstances of an assessment for psychological injury, where there are no
physical signs or investigations to assist
a Medical Assessor. The situation is
somewhat different in a case of physical injury such as confronted the Medical
Assessor in this
is a presumption of regularity that a Medical Assessor as an administrative
officer, will have performed such clinical tests
as might be required and indeed
read the material that was forwarded to him as part of the referral in order to
carry out his function.
presumption was considered in detail by Griffiths AJA in
Stoltzenberg v
Workers Compensation Nominal
following an
erroneous application of the maximum by the delegate of the President. At [112]
his Honour said:
“112. The passage referred to
Jones v Registrar Workers Compensation Commission
[2010] NSWSC 481
at [50] by the
Delegate contains observations by James J that, in a judicial review of a
medical assessment certificate where the
medical assessor had conducted a
clinical examination of the plaintiff and found that ‘the range of motion
in the cervical
spine was symmetrical’, a presumption of regularity
applied that the medical assessor had performed such tests as required
that determination. Again, that passage does not support the resolution of a
dispute as to what was said during a consultation.”
a Medical Assessor is required to read the material on which he was to base his
assessment in order to make his determination.
It is difficult to have
confidence in the authenticity of the MAC when the Medical Assessor stated that
he was not aware of relevant
facts contained in the documentation at the time of
the examination. The Medical Assessor said variously:
is documentation from other doctors drawing attention to long standing spinal
fractures dated from earlier traumatic
events not mentioned during history
taking to the writer by Mr Larken. These documentary details are noted
subsequent to the history
provided to my [sic] by Mr Larken. (At [7] of the
I have a detailed neurological report from Dr O'Sullivan
dated 29/12/2022 in which he refers to history taken from Mr Larken. That
history includes reference to injuries not mentioned to me during my
consultation with Mr Larken..”(At [10c]).
these reasons, a re-examination was held with Medical Assessor Margaret Gibson
of the Panel on 19 September 2025. Her report
“Examination Conducted By:
Medical Assessor Margaret Gibson
Date of Examination:
29 August 2025
workers medical history, where it differs from previous
Mr Larken had been working as a strapper with Paul
Perry Stables at the Broadmeadow racetrack. He said he was working between 35
and 40 hours a week at that stage and had been in the job for about 6 months.
At the time of the subject injury he had been standing on a ramp and holding
onto a horse. He said the horse had just finished exercising
(although he had
not done the exercising). He was to walk the horse down the ramp, but it became
unruly and reared up and knocked
him over. He landed on the lower part ramp and
the horse jumped on top of him, so he was crushed under the horse. He could not
much else about the impact. He said he had slowly lost consciousness. He
had apparently been unconscious for about 10 minutes. He
remembered when he
awoke he noticed his left arm was bent at a funny angle and the arm felt weak.
By that stage he had been moved
onto the ground by bystanders.
An ambulance arrived and he was transferred to John Hunter Hospital. He was
an inpatient there until 11 June 2015 and diagnosed with
a head injury, compound
fracture dislocation of his left elbow and a thoracic spine haematoma. He said
he had subsequently undergone
11-12 procedures to the injured left elbow, the
last performed May this year and involved an ulnar nerve transposition procedure
done by Dr Benjamin East at Warners Bay Hospital. He said that since this
procedure he has developed wasting of the muscles of his
left hand and he is now
struggling with normal day-to-day activities including self-care.
DETAILS OF ANY PREVIOUS OR SUBSEQUENT ACCIDENTS, INJURIES OR
Mr Larken was involved in a motor vehicle accident on 2 October 2012 and
injured his low back. At the time he had been driving his
utility to work at
Somerset Pest Control. He had lost control of the vehicle on a wet road and went
into to a ditch. About 6 weeks
later, on 15 November 2012, he had x-rays of his
thoracic spine which revealed fractures at T3 and T4. He was referred to Dr
Ferch. He was eventually cleared for return to work on light duties on
16 November 2012.
On 22 June 2014, he fell from one of his horses at home and sustained
fractured right sacral ala. On 18 August 2014, CT scan of pelvis
fracture line displaced over the anterior sacral ala on the left.
On 22 May 2015 he had fallen from his horse and fractured his right scapula
and right ribs. He had a month of work but hadn’t
required any surgical
GENERAL HEALTH
Mr Larken said that he suffers with asthma and uses a Ventolin inhaler and a
WORK HISTORY
After leaving year 10 at school he worked as a tiler.
He had worked in pest control between 2004 and 2013 for various different
companies including Somerset Pest Control.
At the time of the subject accident, he was working with Paul Perry Stables
as a strapper. However, he said his main job at the time
was as a pest control
inspector. He had been working part-time with Pelican Pest Control. He said he
had been offered a full-time
position and was due to commence work in this job a
few weeks after the accident.
Since the accident in 2016, he started work as a disability support worker.
He was in the job for 6-12 months. He said he was required
to assist the clients
on a physical basis. He seemed to indicate that he had been struggling with the
physical aspects of the work
and also he had some issues with his mental
history since the original Medical Assessment Certificate was
PRESENT TREATMENT
Mr Larken visits his general practitioner on a monthly basis for
certification.
He visits an exercise physiologist every few weeks.
Following the recent surgical procedure, he had 1-2 reviews with Dr East who
had recommended he have hand therapy, but no other specific
treatment was
offered. Several weeks ago, he commenced treatment with a hand therapist who he
now sees monthly.
He takes escitalopram 40mg daily, tapentadol 150mg twice daily, pregabalin
75mg twice daily and paracetamol as required.
PRESENT SYMPTOMS
Mr Larken reported a deep diffuse ache in his upper back. This is worse when
driving, getting in and out of bed or walking even slowly.
There is low back pain most of the time, rated 6-9/10 severity. This improves
with rest and worsens with any activity apart from swimming,
which he finds
He said his legs feel weak at times. There is pain over the front of both
thighs. At times he feels unstable when walking.
There is left elbow pain most of the time, rated at 8/10 severity. He finds
his left elbow is stiff and there is a numb sensation
over the ulnar two fingers
and the ulnar forearm.
SOCIAL ACTIVITIES/ADL
Mr Larken lives with his wife, 20-year-old daughter and her partner and
baby, in a house in Maitland. They had been living there
for the last 18 months.
His wife volunteered that they moved 7 times since the accident as they rent and
He said he has difficulty with self-care, so doing up buttons and getting on
his shoes. His wife has to help. He does do a bit of
whipper snippering about
the yard but his wife does the lawn mowing. He does the washing up at home but
none of the cooking.
on clinical examination
Mr Larken was accompanied to the
assessment by his wife Janine. He was right hand dominant.
He was 185cm tall and weighed 105kg. There was no limp. There were no
walking aids. He was able to walk on heels and toes.
On examination of the thoracic spine, there was a marked kyphosis. There was
no tenderness. There was normal rotation bilaterally.
There was no asymmetry,
muscle spasm or guarding.
On examination of the lumbar spine, there was three-quarters normal flexion,
one-third normal extension, three-quarters normal lateral
flexion bilaterally
and normal rotation bilaterally. There some muscle guarding with extension.
Straight leg raise was 45° bilaterally. Neurotension signs were
negative bilaterally.
On examination of the lower limbs, circumferential measurements were 45cm at
both thighs, 44cm at both calf.
There were normal power, sensation and reflexes bilaterally.
On examination of the upper limbs, circumferential measurements of the arms
were 32cm on the right, and 31cm on the left, right forearm
32cm and left
forearm 28cm.
Elbow flexion on the right 140° and on the left 120°, extension
0°, on the right -20° on the left. Pronation
was 60 degrees and
supination 50 degrees. Provocation testing for epicondylitis and carpal tunnel
syndrome was negative.
There were normal power, sensation and reflexes
in right upper limb.
On the left there was 4/5 power with elbow flexion and extension due to
pain. There was atrophy of the interosseous muscles of the
left hand. Finger
abduction was reduced against resistance. Thumb adduction was reduced against
resistance. Left upper limb sensation
was reduced to light touch and two point
discrimination in an ulnar distribution involving forearm and hand.
He had multiple scars over the left elbow. There was an 18cm curved scar
anteriorly. There was a 20cm scar laterally extending over
the olecranon and 8cm
distally and 12cm proximally. There was a 3cm scar over the lateral aspect of
the left elbow. There were no
suture marks and all scars were pale but clearly
visible. One of the smaller scars at the elbow had some atrophic features. There
was no adhesion.
On examination of both hands, there were no colour, temperature or nail
changes although subjectively he reported a cold sensation
in the left hand.
CALCULATION
Ulnar Sensory impairment 60% x 7 = 4.2 = 4%
Ulnar Motor impairment 25% x 40 = 1.75 = 10%
Left elbow – 6% UEI =
Lumbar spine
There was asymmetry and muscle guarding. There was no radiculopathy present.
Based on Chapter 4 Workcover Guides and AMA 5, Table
15-3, p 384 the Lumbar
Spine was assessed at DRE Lumbar Category I, thus 5
Thoracic spine
There was no asymmetry, muscle spasm or guarding. There was no radiculopathy
present. Based on Chapter 4 Workcover Guides and AMA
5, Table 15-4, p384 the
thoracic spine was assessed at DRE Thoracic Category I, thus
of any additional investigations since the original Medical Assessment
Certificate
He brought no imaging studies with him for the
assessment.”
adopt Medical Assessor Gibson’s report. There was no appeal against the
finding of the Medical Assessor of 14% for injury
to the nervous system.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 20 March
2025 should be revoked, and a new MAC should be
issued. The new certificate is
attached to this statement of reasons.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Stephen Larken
Respondent:
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Ross Mellick and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as to
the matters set out in the Table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in NSW workers compensation
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
Nervous system
4 June 2015
Left upper extremity
4 June 2015
Chapter 16 Table 16-15, 16-10, 16-11, 16-3
Lumbar spine
4 June 2015
Chapter 4 para 4.27, 4.30, 4.33
Chapter 15 Table 15-3
Thoracic spine
4 June 2015
Chapter 4 para 4.27, 4.30, 4.33
Chapter 15 Table 15-4
Scarring (TEMSKI)
4 June 2015
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
[2021] NSWCA 142
[2017] NSWSC 887
Jones v The
Registrar WCC
[2010] NSWSC
[2025] NSWCA 40
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.17 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter