URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/278.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FZK v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice (No 4) [2025] NSWCATAP 278; (31 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
FZK v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice (No 4)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 278
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
31 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Appeal Panel
Seiden SC DCJ, Deputy President
H J Dixon SC, Senior Member
(1) In accordance with
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), a hearing in relation to the application
for costs is dispensed with.
(2) The recusal application is
(3) The application pursuant to
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) seeking an amendment to the
respondent’s submissions requiring the addition of the names of the
solicitors and their
signatures is dismissed.
appellant’s application pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) is dismissed.
(5) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of
the appeal including in respect of the appellant’s stay application
fixed amount of $4,476.05 within 28 days.
Catchwords:
Costs – costs of appeal where appeal dismissed – special
circumstances established – whether appropriate to make
a lump sum order
for costs – quantification of lump sum amount – costs awarded
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Crimes Act 1900
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW), Clause 12 of Schedule 4
Cases Cited:
203 Castlereagh Street Pty Limited v Skybloo Holdings Pty Limited
NSWCATAP 29
601 Management Company Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] VCAT 2129
Al Aaraj v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 166
Bechara trading as Bechara and Company v Bates
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v Pentelow
[2019] HCA 29
(2019) 269 CLR 333
Birketu Pty
Ltd v Atanaskovic
[2025] HCA 2
Boughen v Kumar & Paentia (No 2)
NSWCATAP 262
BPU v New South Wales Trustee and Guardian (Costs)
NSWCATAP 87
Brahmbhatt v Osorio
[2023] NSWCATAP 188
Brodyn Pty Ltd v
Owners Corporation - Strata Plan SNP 73019 (No 2)
[2016] NSWCATAP 224
Wingecarribee Shire Council (No 2)
[2020] NSWCATAD 225
Brunsprop Pty Ltd v
Joanne Hay and Wes Davies
[2015] NSWCATAP 152
Coal and Allied Operations Pty
Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Hattersley (2001) 51 NSWLR 333;
CPD Holdings Pty Ltd t/as The Bathroom Exchange v Baguley
NSWCATAP 21
Cripps v G&M Dawson Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 81
DYH v Public
Guardian (No 3)
[2022] NSWCATAP 34
eMove Pty Ltd v Naomi Dickinson
NSWCATAP 94
FHH v Port Stephens Council (No 2)
[2023] NSWCATAP 282
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2016] NSWCATAD 77
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 120
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice (No 3)
[2025] NSWCATAP
Gabrielle v Abood (No 4)
[2023] NSWCA 100
Grasso v The Owners –
Strata Plan No. 52399
[2022] NSWCATAP 91
Idoport Pty Limited v National
Australia Bank
[2007] NSWSC 23
Islam v Metricon Homes Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCATAP
Latoudis v Casey (1990) 190 CLR 534;
[1990] HCA 59
McEwan v Port
Stephens Council (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAP 386
Megerditchian v Kurmond Homes Pty
[2014] NSWCATAP 120
Michael Wilson & Partners v Emmott (No 2)
News v Cotes (No 2)
[2019] NSWCATAP 235
Owners Corporation
– Strata Plan 4521 v Zouk
[2007] NSWCA 231
QYFM v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 15
Re Filsell and Comcare
[2009] AATA 90
Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Sanna Construction Pty
Limited v Kelly (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 203
Sethi v Secretary, Department of
Communities and Justice (No 2)
[2024] NSWCATAD 107
STAR Training Academy Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Police (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAP 98
Sweeten v Haggerty (No
[2025] NSWSC 897
The Owners – Strata Plan 5319 v Price
NSWCATAP 245
The Owners – Strata Plan No 82306 v Anderson
The Owners – Strata Plan No. 47027 v Peter Clisdell Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCATAP 46
The Owners Strata Plan No 79633 v Graorovska (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAP 245
Wilson v Dash (No.2)
[2018] NSWCATAP 155
Burbank Montague Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCATAP 135
Texts Cited:
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal Administrative and Equal Opportunity
Division Guideline August 2017
Principal judgment
FZK (Appellant)
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
(Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Appellant (Self-Represented)
Department of Communities
and Justice, Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00034387
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to an order made on 25 September 2024 under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the disclosure of the name of
the appellant is prohibited. The appellant is to continue to be known by the
pseudonym FZK.
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
Date of Decision:
06 January 2025
J D Little, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2024/00314723
Preliminary issues
- paragraph 3
Issue 1 – recusal application
- paragraph 4
Issue 2 – amendment to a document
- paragraph 9
Issue 3 – whether the costs are legal
- paragraph 12
Issue 4 – summary dismissal of costs
application
- paragraph 18
Dispensing with a hearing
- paragraph 24
Award of costs
Award of costs generally
- paragraph 30
No tenable basis
paragraph 42
Frivolous or vexatious
- paragraph 44
Unsubstantiated assertions of improper conduct
- paragraph 46
Self-represented parties
- paragraph 51
Costs are compensatory not punitive
- paragraph 52
Recoverable costs
paragraph 53
The Respondent’s materials
- paragraph 55
Respondent’s evidence
- paragraph 57
Respondent’s submissions
- paragraph 59
No tenable basis in fact or law – section
- paragraph 60
Frivolous, vexatious, misconceived and lacking in
substance – section 60(3)(e)
paragraph 71
Refusal or failure to comply with the duty imposed
by section 36(3) – section 60(3)(f)
paragraph 73
Other relevant matters – section
- paragraph 74
Appellant’s submissions
Special circumstances
- paragraph 81
Consideration in relation to special
circumstances
Section 60 matters
Collateral purpose
- paragraph 89
Section 36 NCAT Act
- paragraph 91
Other matters
paragraph 94
Relative strengths
- paragraph 102
Frivolous, vexatious or misconceived
- paragraph 105
Self-representation
- paragraph 112
Conclusion in relation to special
circumstances
- paragraph 114
Overall discretion
- paragraph 117
Fixed or lump sum order
- paragraph 120
- paragraph
REASONS FOR DECISION
first instance, the appellant contended that the respondent failed to comply
with a summons (the Non-Compliance Hearing). That
application was dismissed by a
Senior Member on 6 January 2025 (the Compliance Decision). Subsequently, leave
to appeal was refused
and the appeal was dismissed:
FZK v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 150
Appeal Decision). The respondent applied for their costs of the appeal, on the
basis that there are “special circumstances”
as contemplated by
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (the NCAT
the reasons set out below, including the lack of utility of the appeal, the
unmeritorious submissions of the appellant, and unsupported
serious allegations
made against the Tribunal at first instance and the respondent, we are satisfied
that there are indeed special
circumstances; and further, that in all the
circumstances and in the exercise of our overall discretion, a costs order
made. Further, to avoid delay and the potential expense of a costs
assessment, we are satisfied that an order for costs in a fixed
appropriate; however, we have discounted the amount sought by the respondent.
Preliminary issues
appellant’s submissions identify what are said to be five issues, followed
by brief submissions in relation to each of the
paragraphs of s 60(3) of the
NCAT Act relied upon by the respondent. Four of those issues should be dealt
with prior to considering
an award of costs.
recusal application
1 concerns an application that the Appeal Panel members recuse themselves from
hearing the costs application. The argument in
support of this relates to a
criticism of the Appeal Decision; in particular, insofar as the Appeal Decision
proceeded on the basis
that the Compliance Decision was an interlocutory
decision, as opposed to a decision which entitled the appellant to appeal as of
right, by reason of what occurred at a call over and programming hearing for the
appellant characterises this issue as conduct of “judicial misbehaviour
and breach of members’ code of conduct, let
alone actual bias.” We
understand the application is brought on the basis of actual or apprehended
recently outlined the principles for recusal in
FZK v Secretary, Department
of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 120
. In accordance
QYFM v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 279 CLR 148
[2023] HCA 15
, we have each turned
our minds to this question.
the conclusion, nor the appellant’s stated dissatisfaction with the Appeal
Decision and in particular, that leave to
appeal was required because the
Compliance Decision was an interlocutory decision, founds a reasonable basis to
conclude that we
are unable to bring to bear an independent mind to the
determination of the question of costs, nor that there is a reasonable
apprehension
of bias. As to actual bias, the focus is on prejudgment. We are
each, separately, satisfied that, on an objective and subjective
assessment, we
would not bring preconceived conclusions to bear and that we are open to
persuasion. As to apprehended bias, the logical
link between the matters raised
by the appellant and the feared deviation from the course of deciding the case
on the merits, is
not made out.
application that we recuse ourselves is dismissed.
– amendment to a document
Issue 2, the appellant seeks an amendment, pursuant to s 53 of the NCAT Act, for
the solicitors employed by the respondent to write
their names on their
submissions and to sign those submissions. Section 53(1) of the NCAT Act
provides that the Tribunal may, in
any proceedings, make any amendment to any
document filed in connection with a proceeding that the Tribunal considers to be
in the interests of justice.
aside the question of whether s 53(1) extends to a power to amend a
party’s submissions, which we need not decide, we
do not consider it is
necessary, in the interests of justice, to accede to the application for an
amendment of those submissions.
It is clear on the face of the document that the
party on whose behalf the submissions were filed had the authority to do so. A
argument was rejected by a partially similarly constituted Appeal Panel
FZK v Department of Customer Service
[2024] NSWCATAP 185
application for an amendment to a document is dismissed.
– whether the costs are legal costs
3 raised by the appellant is that the amounts claimed for costs by the
respondent are not legal costs. The appellant argues
that the legal officers are
employees of the respondent and that they are not from a law practice providing
legal services to the
respondent. The appellant further argues that the legal
officers neither charge Attorney-General’s rates, nor will the respondent
be liable to pay the legal officers the Attorney-General’s rate in
addition to salaries. On this basis it is said that the
amount claimed does not
relate to legal costs.
Birketu Pty Ltd v Atanaskovic
[2025] HCA 2
(Gageler CJ, Gordon,
Edelman, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ), the majority of the High Court affirmed
what had been decided in
Bell Lawyers Pty Ltd v Pentelow
[2019] HCA 29
(2019) 269 CLR
, 352 [50], 351 [47] as follows:
“Nevertheless emphasised in
Bell Lawyers
was that rejection of the
exception did not entail any disturbance of the in-house
solicitor rule, which was noted by Gageler J to have been established before
introduction of the
exception and which was described by the
plurality in terms of ‘the well-established understanding in relation to
lawyers employed by governments and others, that where such a solicitor
appears in proceedings to represent his or her employer the
employer is entitled
to recover costs’. The in-house solicitor rule was referred to as being
applied in practice ‘on
the footing that the actual cost to [the employer]
of the legal services provided by its employed solicitor would not exceed, in
any substantial amount, the sum recoverable by [the employer] for professional
legal costs’.”
practitioners employed by the Crown, or a statutory authority, or a corporation,
are entitled to have their work assessed
on the same basis as that of
independent solicitors exercising comparable skills in the performance of
comparable work. It is not
the manner in which the practitioner carries on his
or her profession which counts, it is the nature of the work, the time spent,
and the skill, care and responsibility involved:
Commonwealth Bank of
Australia v Hattersley
(2001) 51 NSWLR 333;
[2001] NSWSC 60
Tribunal has, on a number of occasions, treated costs in respect of in-house
lawyers employed by Government departments as capable
of being awarded:
v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice (No 2)
[2024] NSWCATAD
Brown v Wingecarribee Shire Council (No 2)
[2020] NSWCATAD 225.
do not accept the appellant’s submissions that the claimed costs do not
relate to legal costs. Contrary to the appellant’s
submission, an award of
costs is in favour of the employer, and not in addition to salaries.
reject the submission that the costs sought are not legal
Issue 4 – summary dismissal of costs
application
4 raised by the appellant claims that the fact that the respondent did not file
a Notice of Representation with legal representative
details constitutes an
admission that it is self-represented and not legally represented. It is argued
that self-represented parties
are not entitled to legal costs. This submission
proceeds to argue that, accordingly, the appellant seeks summary dismissal
vexatious” grounds pursuant to s 55(1)(b) of the NCAT Act.
is no requirement for a party to file a Notice of Representation under the NCAT
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (the NCAT
Rules). A party is only required to provide an address for service, which is to
be included in an originating document
or reply: r 16(1) of the NCAT Rules. The
Reply to Appeal form includes a section where the respondent must provide an
address for
service and representative details. The respondent duly completed
that section in the Reply to Appeal filed 28 February 2025.
correspondence to the Registrar of the Tribunal on 25 July 2025, the appellant
requested that the Registrar request the respondent
to file a Notice of
Representation “to correct the (respondent’s) error” and that
the costs application not be
listed until the notice (signed by the
respondent’s “legal representatives”) is filed. However, as
there was no
requirement to file such a document, the appellant’s requests
are not relevant to the determination of the costs application
brought by the
respondent.
request that the costs application not be “listed” or heard is
there is no merit in the submission that the respondent was not represented in
the appeal proceedings by legal practitioners
in respect of whom it is entitled
to recover legal costs if successful; as explained in relation to Issue 3.
Accordingly, there is
no basis to entertain an application under s 55(1)(b) of
the NCAT Act.
application to dismiss is dismissed.
Dispensing with a
Appeal Panel gave the parties an opportunity to provide submissions in relation
to whether the Appeal Panel could dispense with
a hearing of the costs
application. The appellant opposed such a course. The appellant argues that the
proposing party, the Appeal
Panel, and the agreeing party, the respondent, have
a burden of proof as to why a hearing should be dispensed with. It is argued
that s 50(2) of the NCAT Act requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that the
written materials before it are adequate to determine
the issues, therefore
proposing such an outcome before the filing of the materials, is prejudgment and
actual bias. The appellant
argues that as there is no affidavit filed, a hearing
is warranted.
have considered the appellant’s opposition to dealing with this
application on the papers and dispensing with a hearing.
Nevertheless, we are
satisfied that the written submissions and materials enable us to deal with the
application on the papers. Whilst
the respondent did not file an affidavit, we
are not bound by the rules of evidence (s 38(2) of the NCAT Act) and we had
a detailed schedule of how the costs were calculated, including the
rate, the time taken and nature of the task and the basis for
calculating the
amount sought, including where no charge was calculated and the overall discount
from that position.
Re referral by Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under
Government Act 1993
, concerning Mr Thaler, a Councillor
[2025] NSWCATOD 102
it was said at [16]:
“In the event a hearing is the starting position, the factors that were
material to my consideration to dispense with a hearing
(1) In favour of holding a hearing:
(a) The Objects of the Tribunal include ‘to ensure that
the Tribunal is accountable and has processes that are open and transparent;
to promote public confidence in tribunal decision-making in the State and in the
conduct of tribunal members’: ss 3(f)
and (g) of the NCAT Act.
(b) The importance of open justice:
John Fairfax & Sons
Pty Ltd v Police Tribunal
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
[2005] NSWCA
(c) The principles of open justice apply to the Tribunal:
Forest v Suzanne
[2022] NSWCATAP 188
(2) In favour of dispensing with a hearing:
(a) In relation to ‘proceedings’, the starting
position is that a hearing is required (unless it falls into one of
specified exceptions) and that hearings are open to the public (unless otherwise
ordered): ss 50 and 49 of the NCAT Act. However,
this decision concerns a
question which arises anterior to the commencement of proceedings. The issues
the subject of this decision
do not concern an extant proceeding. There is no
‘proceeding’ in the Tribunal, to decide whether or not to accept the
referral. There is no proceeding unless and until the Tribunal accepts the
(b) If and when the Tribunal decides to conduct proceedings,
the Act expressly provides for the circumstances of when a hearing
referred proceedings may be dispensed with: s 470B.
(c) By way of contradistinction, the Act does not expressly
refer to a hearing in relation to the decision to conduct proceedings.
I accept that where the rules of procedural fairness required it, this might be
(d) This decision relates to the question to whether the
Tribunal should accept the referral; it is not the occasion to test evidence,
nor to form concluded views on the submissions.
(e) This is not the occasion to form concluded views in
relation to the allegations of misconduct or the defences to the
contentions.
(f) The parties provided comprehensive written submissions.
(g) No oral evidence is required; and nor is there any need for
cross examination.
(h) This decision will be published and will expose the
Tribunal's reasoning and the submissions.
(i) Where, as here, the hearing would likely simply amount to a
recitation of the written submissions, there is a public interest
in conserving
the Tribunal's resources and the costs to the parties.
(j) The guiding principle of the NCAT Act is to facilitate the
just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings
the Tribunal: s 36(6) of the NCAT Act.
(k) No issue was raised as to prejudice, if this decision is
undertaken without a hearing; although I note the Councillor’s
to this course.”
considerations arise here. This decision concerns the costs of an appeal against
an interlocutory decision. The respondent’s
reasoning for their
calculation of costs is, here, well exposed and can be assessed against the
background well known to the parties
and the Appeal Panel; as set out in the
Appeal Decision. As detailed further below, in considering a fixed sum costs
order, it is
appropriate for the Appeal Panel to take a “broad
brush” approach:
Bechara trading as Bechara and Company v Bates
[2016] NSWCA 294
) at [12]-[15];
Sweeten v Haggerty
[2025] NSWSC 897
. Accordingly, no oral
evidence is required; and this is no occasion to test the evidence. Further, as
the respondent articulated
its position in detail, both as to the relevant legal
principles and an analysis of the issues and quantum, the appellant had the
benefit of those submissions and materials which provided an adequate
opportunity to reply. There are costs savings in dispensing
with a hearing and
we are not persuaded that the grounds relied upon by the appellant in opposition
to dealing with the matter on
the papers merit a hearing, when viewed against
the factors weighing in favour of dispensing with a hearing.
Notwithstanding
the appellant’s objection to the Appeal Panel dispensing with a hearing,
having afforded the parties an opportunity
to make submissions and having taken
those submissions into account, we are satisfied that this is indeed an
appropriate case in
which to dispense with a hearing.
accordance with s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, a hearing in relation to the
application for costs is dispensed with. The proceedings
are determined on the
basis of materials provided to the Tribunal: s 50(4) NCAT
Award of costs
Award of costs generally
60 of the NCAT Act regulates costs of proceedings in the Tribunal. Section 60
(1) Each party to the proceedings in the Tribunal is to pay the
party’s own costs.
(2) The Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before it only
if it is satisfied that there are special circumstances
warranting an award of
(3) In determining whether there are special circumstances warranting an
award of costs, the Tribunal may have regard to the following
(a) whether a party has conducted the proceedings in a way that
unnecessarily disadvantaged another party to the proceedings,
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the
time taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or
(d) the nature and complexity of the proceedings,
(e) whether the proceedings were frivolous or vexatious or otherwise
misconceived or lacking in substance,
(f) whether a party has refused or failed to comply with the duty imposed
by section 36(3),
(g) any other matter that the Tribunal considers relevant.
usual rule is that a party is to pay their own costs of proceedings but, as the
legislation makes clear, the Tribunal may make
an order for costs if satisfied
that there are “special circumstances”: s 60(2) NCAT
leading principles are apposite.
special circumstances are circumstances that are out of the ordinary. It is not
necessary to establish extraordinary or exceptional
circumstances:
see Megerditchian v Kurmond Homes Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 120
quoting Cripps v G&M Dawson Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 81
per Santow JA at [60]; CPD Holdings Pty Ltd t/as The Bathroom
Exchange v Baguley
[2015] NSWCATAP 21
the onus is on the party seeking an order for costs to satisfy the Tribunal that
there are special circumstances warranting
an award of costs in its
favour: see McEwan v Port Stephens Council (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAP
the Tribunal is to consider whether the circumstances are sufficient to amount
to special circumstances that justify departing
from the general rule that each
party bear its own costs:
BPU v NSW Trustee and Guardian (Costs)
NSWCATAP 87
. The mere existence of one of the enumerated factors in
s 60 of the NCAT Act will not of itself be sufficient to warrant the
that there are special circumstances.
each case will depend on its own particular facts and
circumstances: Brunsprop Pty Ltd v Joanne Hay and Wes Davies
NSWCATAP 152
mere success (or failure) of an application does not give rise to special
circumstances: The Owners – Strata Plan 5319
NSWCATAP 245
the discretion to award costs must be exercised judicially and having regard to
the underlying principle that parties to
proceedings in the Tribunal are
ordinarily to bear their own costs: eMove Pty Ltd v Naomi
[2015] NSWCATAP 94
what is required is for the Tribunal to exercise its discretion in a manner
which is fair and reasonable having regard to
the particular circumstances of a
particular case.
decision to award costs pursuant to s 60(2) of the NCAT
Act involves, in effect, two decisions. The first is the Tribunal’s
satisfaction that there are special circumstances warranting an award of costs.
The satisfaction involves a degree of subjectivity
and thus, in a broad sense,
may be described as a discretionary decision (as described in respect of similar
legislative provisions
in a different statutory context in Coal and Allied
Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and
Hayne JJ). If the Tribunal has regard to any matters as set out
in s 60(3) of the NCAT Act, the matters
must be given due weight.
s 60(2) of the NCAT Act makes clear, if the requisite satisfaction is reached,
the Tribunal “may” make the order. Satisfaction
as to the existence
of special circumstances merely enlivens the discretion to award costs rather
than mandating an award of costs:
Al-Aaraj v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 166
; Brodyn Pty Ltd v Owners
Corporation - Strata Plan 73019 (No 2)
[2016] NSWCATAP 224
This necessitates the making of a second decision (which we term the overall
discretion) as to whether in all the circumstances,
an award for costs should be
No tenable basis
interpretation of s 60(3)(c) of the NCAT Act was considered by the Appeal Panel
DYH v Public Guardian (No 3)
[2022] NSWCATAP 34.
The Appeal Panel
stated at [20]-[22]:
“20 The Victorian case law considered an equivalent provision to s
60(3)(c) of the NCAT Act provides some helpful analysis.
The Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal may also award costs if fair to do so having regard to
‘the relative strengths
of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable basis in fact or
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
(“VCAT ACT”), s 103(3)(c). The meaning and operation of s
103(3)(c) of the VCAT Act were considered by Senior Member
Family Corporation Pty Ltd v Casey CC (Red Dot)
[2008] VCAT 691.
[14] – [15]:
“The relative strengths of the claims appear to refer to the strength of
claims of one party compared to the strength of the
claims of another. A
difficult, doubtful or test case might be necessary to clarify the legal
position of the parties. It is probably
seldom that an order for costs would be
made having regard to this consideration alone where there was a real issue to
be tried and
real justification for the claims made on either side. I take it
that it is generally where there is a very weak case for one side,
all, that this consideration is likely to lead to an order for costs. I note
that the wording says that the absence of
a ‘tenable basis in law or
fact’ is a consideration included within the consideration of the relative
strengths of the
claims of the parties.
This certainly cannot mean that an unsuccessful party should be required to pay
costs because, at the end of the case, that party’s
claims have been found
to be untenable in fact or law to the extent that they were not upheld and were
not successful. That would
amount to ‘costs following the event’. It
would compromise the general rule created in s 109(1).”
21 The Senior Member also commented (at [19]) that
‘“untenable” in the context of s 109(3)(c) means something
so weak as to be unarguable, rather than merely weak’.
22 In our view, the Senior Member’s observations apply with equal force to
s 60(3)(c) of the NCAT Act.”
circumstances may be established because a claim is lacking in substance, even
if such a finding was not expressly made in
determining the substantive
application, provided such a finding is not inconsistent with the
reasons given for dismissing the application:
Zucker v Burbank Montague Pty
[2018] NSWCATAP 135
Frivolous or vexatious
respect of s 60(3)(e) of the NCAT Act (whether proceedings are
frivolous or vexatious or otherwise misconceived or lacking in substance),
Appeal Panel has adopted the statement of Ipp JA in Owners Corporation
– Strata Plan 4521 v Zouk
[2007] 69 NSWLR 61
[2007] NSWCA 23
) at [45], that “lacking in substance” means not
“reasonably arguable”. It is a meaning, his Honour held,
dissimilar to “frivolous, vexatious, misconceived”:
[45], which has been applied to s 60 of the NCAT Act by this Tribunal: Zucker at
words “frivolous” and “vexatious”, used together, may
signify that the application lacks a legal foundation
or that it is “not
legally properly based”:
Fox v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
Police Force
[2016] NSWCATAD 77
Fox v Commissioner of Police
[26], quoting
601 Management Company Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] VCAT 2129
Fox v Commissioner of Police
Re Filsell and Comcare
[2009] AATA 90
“vexatious” “can include proceedings brought with the
intention of annoying or embarrassing or harassing
the other party, or for some
collateral purpose other than having the court or tribunal adjudicate on the
issues raised by the proceedings,
or, irrespective of the motive of the
litigant, if the proceedings are so obviously untenable or manifestly groundless
as to be utterly
Re Filsell and Comcare
[2009] AATA 90
Fox v Commissioner of Police
Unsubstantiated assertions of improper conduct
Allegations
of deliberate falsehood, perjury, bad faith, personal impropriety and corruption
might be described as scandalous:
Young v Cooke
[2016] NSWSC 408
per Garling J;
Munsie v Dowling (No 4)
[2015] NSWSC 37
per Hoeben CJ at CL. Allegations are scandalous where they scandalise the Court
or an individual by being on the Court record:
Young v Cooke
at [50(c)].
Such allegations have “no place in the determination by the Court of
whether relief ought to be granted”
and in part led the summonses to be
struck out:
Young v Cooke
at [50(c)]. Similarly, in
Munsie v Dowling
, Hoeben CJ at CL said that the defendant’s “scandalous
and unsubstantiated” assertions of judicial corruption and
of personal
impropriety on the part of the opposing party led, in part, to the
defendant’s submissions being struck out as
“scandalous and
embarrassing”: at [18], [25].
allegations might amount to an abuse of process:
NSWCATAP 144
) at [57]. Alternatively, an application that
seeks to vindicate findings of a criminal offence or misconduct might be
described as
having a collateral purpose, as those findings cannot be made in
this forum:
Minister for Education and Early Childhood Learning v Zonnevylle
(2020) 103 NSWLR 91
[2020] NSWCA 232
per McCallum JA,
MacFarlan JA agreeing at [1], Leeming JA agreeing at [2];
Attorney-General
(NSW) v Wentworth
[1988] NSWCA 8
(1988) 14 NSWLR 481
, 491 per Roden J.
appeal panels have considered whether scandalous allegations may or may not
constitute “special circumstances”
for the purpose of an award of
costs under s 60 of the NCAT Act. However, we note that concerning an award of
costs, every matter
depends on its facts and is to be viewed in the context of
its own proceedings.
is exemplified by the different outcomes of the cost applications of the
following three decisions. On the one hand, in
Liang v University of
Technology, Sydney
[2019] NSWCATAP 17
, costs were awarded in part
due to allegations contained in the appellant’s appeal submissions which
were described by the
Appeal Panel as “scandalous”. These
allegations, when considered cumulatively with other matters, were found to
special circumstances under s 60 of the NCAT Act, although the Appeal
Panel noted that the appellant was self-represented. On the
other hand, in
MSP Consulting and Building Constructions Pty Ltd v
Karkoulas (No 2)
[2016] NSWCATAP 183
MSP Consulting
scandalous submissions made by the appellant, costs were not awarded, as lack of
legal representation was found to tip
the balance against an award of costs:
MSP Consulting
three matters concerned the grant of an award of costs against an appellant who
was self-represented.
Self-represented parties
lack of representation can tip the balance against an award of costs, the Appeal
Panel has noted that a party, including
a self-represented party, does not have
a “licence to use NCAT’s proceedings to make scandalous
allegations against an
Costs are compensatory not punitive
award of costs is intended to be compensatory and not punitive: Latoudis v
Casey (1990) 190 CLR 534 at 567;
[1990] HCA 59
; Grasso v The Owners
– Strata Plan No. 52399
[2022] NSWCATAP 91
Recoverable costs
(1) the costs of, or incidental to, proceedings in the Tribunal (s 60(5)(a) NCAT
(2) the costs of, or incidental to, the proceedings giving rise to the
application or appeal, as well as the costs of or incidental
to the application
or appeal (s 60(5)(b) NCAT Act).
to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal Administrative and Equal
Opportunity Division Guideline August 2017 on costs
(Costs Guideline), a party
can seek the following costs:
(1) the fees charged by the lawyer for preparing and running their case;
(2) the out-of-pocket expenses (disbursements) of their lawyer; and/or
(3) the out-of-pocket expenses (disbursements) of a self-represented party.
The Respondent’s materials
respondent submits that the Costs Guideline provides that a party may ask for
the fees charged by the lawyer for preparing and
running the case. The
respondent relies on the work performed by four solicitors employed by the
respondent and submits that the
levels are appropriate for the performance of
work in respect of the appeal.
respondent submits that the Appeal Panel should make an order for a fixed sum of
$6,886.23, in accordance with paragraph 11(a)
of the Costs Guideline, being the
total sum of the legal costs sought by the respondent on a discounted basis, or
such amount as
the Appeal Panel considers
appropriate.
Respondent’s evidence
respondent included, as part of its written submissions dated 9 July 2025, a
schedule of the respondent’s costs in preparing
for the appeal. The
schedule contains information about:
(1) the solicitors who carried out the work,
(2) the solicitors’ hourly rate and daily maximum,
(3) a weblink to the Attorney General’s rates for legal representation,
(4) a table which includes the date, action, solicitor, time taken and time
claimed for the legal work carried out for the appeal.
schedule appears to have been prepared for the purpose of the written
submissions. There is no accompanying affidavit by any
of the solicitors for the
respondent attesting to the truth or accuracy of the information contained in
the schedule, nor has the
respondent submitted any evidence of the time and cost
of the legal work performed for the appeal, for example by way of screenshots.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent relies on s 60(3)(c), (e), (f) and (g) of the NCAT
No tenable basis in fact or law – section
the respondent’s view, the appeal had no prospects of success as their
case was without foundation as to be hopeless. It
is submitted that the
appellant made claims that had no tenable basis in fact or law (s 60(3)(c) of
the NCAT Act) and was weak in
comparison to the respondent’s case.
respondent contends that the appellant was fully aware that the arguments raised
and maintained in support of the appeal, and
that pressing the
respondent’s non-compliance with the summons, were baseless and misguided.
The appellant elected to pursue
the appeal in the face of their knowledge that
the appeal had no prospects of success.
respondent submits that the transcript of the Non-Compliance Hearing on 17
December 2024 establishes the great lengths undertaken
by the Senior Member to
explain the uncontroversial jurisprudence regarding a party’s obligation
to comply with a summons.
It was explained that the respondent’s
obligation is limited to the production of information in its custody and
control. The
respondent’s written submissions dated 13 December 2024 were
consistent with the Senior Member’s explanation.
the Non-Compliance Hearing, the respondent maintained its position that the
“2017 SAP Manual” sought by the appellant
under the summons was not
held by the respondent. The respondent made oral submissions on the day and
provided affidavit evidence
by Kimberly Tram, a payroll team leader employed in
Shared Services and Customer Experience in the Corporate Services Division in
the Department of Communities and Justice, in support of its contention that the
respondent had complied with the summons as the
2017 SAP Manual was not in the
respondent’s “custody and control”.
the Non-Compliance Hearing, the Senior Member also explained to the appellant
that reliance on clause 12(1)(b), schedule 4
Government Information
(Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW) (the GIPA Act) to assert that the respondent
had an immediate right of access to the 2017 SAP Manual held by a third party
was groundless. That clause provides:
12 Government information held by agency
(1) A reference in this Act to government information held by
an agency is a reference to –
(b) information contained in a record held by a private sector
entity to which the agency has an immediate right of access ...
Compliance Decision, the decision the subject of the appeal, addressed the
appellant’s contentions about the principles
to be applied in the context
of allegations of non-compliance with a summons as follows (from
[54(2)(a)]):
(a) I reject the submission that, where a document is not in a party’s
possession, custody or control that the failure to produce
that document is
non-compliance. A summons can only compel a person to produce documents that are
in his or her ‘possession,
custody or control’ and in such
circumstances where documents are not in a party’s possession, custody or
control, there
will be nothing to produce. This is uncontroversial.
(c) With respect to the Applicant’s reliance on s 12(b) of Schedule 4 of
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW), that provision
has no bearing on the law as it relates to disclosure obligations with the
sections expressly limited to references
to a document being held pursuant to
that Act. However, even if that was incorrect, as stated in paragraph (a) above,
there is no
evidence to establish that the Respondent has an ‘immediate
right of access’ to the SAP Manual even if held by ‘GovConnect
NSW’ or that ‘GovConnect NSW’ is a ‘private sector
appellant’s Notice of Appeal was accompanied by submissions in support
(appellant’s initial appeal submissions) in
which they raised three
grounds of appeal:
“Appeal ground 1 – Whether the Respondent is in control of the
documents when the documents are with another government
Alternatively, Appeal ground 2 – Whether Clause 31 is to be adopted if the
person named objects to production
Appeal ground 3 – whether the Respondent failed to comply with the
respondent submits that the orders sought under the appellant’s Notice of
Appeal and accompanying submissions demonstrate
an intention at the time of
filing the appeal to readvance the same grounds as asserted during the
Non-Compliance Hearing. The respondent
also submits the appellant’s Notice
of Appeal and accompanying submissions are in support of the contention that the
had failed to comply with the summons. These grounds had been
expressly rejected by the Tribunal.
is then submitted that an appeal to the Appeal Panel does not provide a losing
party in the Tribunal with an opportunity to run
its case again, nor is it
sufficient for an appellant to disagree with the outcome and to contend that
there should have been a different
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Brahmbhatt v Osorio
NSWCATAP 188
respondent recognised that the appellant is self-represented. However, it is
said that the appellant has experience in the Tribunal
and is familiar with the
processes of both the Tribunal and its Appeal Panel. The appellant also has
extensive experience in other
court and tribunal proceedings. It follows that
the appellant understood the limited prospects of the appeal at the time of
the respondent noted that the appellant filed further submissions
(appellant’s appeal submissions) in support of the
appeal on 13 March
2025. A significant portion of the appellant’s appeal submissions were
irrelevant to the real issue in dispute,
including making baseless allegations
of misconduct, intimidation and evidence tampering by the Senior Member who
determined the
matter at first instance, and alleging contempt in the face of
the Tribunal by a solicitor from the respondent.
vexatious, misconceived and lacking in substance –
section 60(3)(e)
respondent submits that the appeal proceedings were vexatious, misconceived and
lacking in substance as the proceedings:
(1) lacked legal foundation for the reasons set out above;
(2) were initiated with the intention of delaying the advancement of their
substantive matter. This is further supported by the fact
that the appellant
appears to have initiated the administrative review application with limited, if
any, genuine belief in its substantive
(3) were brought for the purposes of ventilating unsubstantiated claims that the
solicitor for the respondent was “in contempt”
of the Tribunal and
urging the Appeal Panel to make a finding of misconduct against the Senior
Member who determined the Non-Compliance
proceedings.
respondent then seeks to support this ground on the basis that there were two
forms of collateral purpose; namely delaying the
advancement of the substantive
matter and urging the Appeal Panel to make a finding of misconduct and
contravention of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) (Crimes
Refusal or failure to comply with the duty imposed by
section 36(3)
section 60(3)(f)
respondent submitted, relying on s 36 of the NCAT Act, that the appellant has
refused or failed to comply with the duty imposed
by that section to cooperate
with the Tribunal to give effect to the guiding principle of the NCAT Act. The
respondent identifies
the history of conduct said to support this
Other relevant matters – section 60(3)(g)
respondent argued that it is difficult to conceive that the appeal constituted a
legitimate assertion of the appellant’s
rights to obtain the records
sought under the summons issued to the respondent. The appeal was superfluous in
that it was an appeal
against a decision of the Tribunal that had no potential
or practical effect upon the appellant. This is because it had already been
determined that the respondent did not have custody and control of the summonsed
respondent draws attention to the appellant demonstrating an awareness as early
as the Non-Compliance Hearing on 17 December 2024
that the information sought
under the summons was held by a third-party entity (the Department of Customer
Service/GovConnect) and
not the respondent. The appellant’s submissions
dated 16 December 2024 state:
“... 8: (the Appellant) seeks leave to amend the Summons ‘order to
person named below’ to GovConnect NSW, to produce
the SAP Manual.”
transcript of the Non-Compliance Hearing evidences that the appellant was aware
that GovConnect is a “business unit of government
within the Department of
Customer Service” (DCS). It was also explained to the appellant that a new
summons would need to be
filed as DCS is a “new party”. This was
reflected in the Compliance Decision at [54].
or around 4 February 2025, the appellant served a summons on DCS. The summons
issued to DCS was in materially the same form as
that issued to the respondent
and sought “the 2017 version of the SAP User/Operational
Manual/Handbook/Guideline of FACS”.
The respondent says this evidences
that the appellant did not lodge the appeal with the intention of asserting a
legitimate intent
to obtain the SAP Manual in support of the substantive
respondent also highlighted that the appellant brought an application against
DCS for non-compliance with a summons seeking the
SAP Manual. On 20 March 2025,
before the appeal was heard, the Tribunal held that DCS had complied with the
summons and did not have
possession, custody or control over the 2017 SAP Manual
(DCS Compliance Decision).
light of the above, the respondent contends the appellant was fully aware that
the appeal would have had no practical effect on
changing the outcome that the
respondent did not hold the records and therefore did not have custody and
control of the 2017 SAP
that regard, the appeal was unnecessary and wasteful of the resources of the
respondent and the Appeal Panel. It is said that the
appellant’s reliance
on the appeal process appears to have served as a basis for not filing
submissions in support of their
underlying administrative review application.
This has contributed to the delay in the finalisation of the underlying,
substantive
proceedings.
Appellant’s submissions
Special circumstances
appellant’s submissions under the heading “Issue 5” relate to
the provision under s 60(3) of the NCAT Act that
the respondent may claim out of
pocket expenses on special circumstances. As indicated below, where we have
found the submissions
warrant greater consideration, we have done as
appellant argued the respondent’s submissions in relation to special
circumstances are misconceived, false, prejudgement,
opinion or conclusions
without evidential support. However, there is no substance to this broadly
framed and generalised submission.
Nevertheless, we have considered the question
of special circumstances in detail below.
respect of the submissions by the respondent that there is no tenable basis in
fact or law for the appeal, the appellant argues
that the submissions are
misconceived, as an appeal is to review the Tribunal’s decision that the
“appellant disagrees
with, and the Appellant is entitled to a new hearing
at the appeal.” That submission, however, does not address the issue to
which it purports to respond; which is whether the appeal was a re-run of the
first instance case and unarguable. In addition, there
is no automatic right of
appeal in respect of an interlocutory decision that an appellant disagrees with
and no automatic entitlement
to a new hearing: s 80(3) NCAT Act. The Appeal
Panel determined in the Appeal Decision that the first instance decision, the
of the appeal, was an interlocutory decision; notwithstanding the
appellant’s submissions to the contrary: Appeal Decision
at [66]. This is
not the occasion to challenge that finding; and the decision regarding costs
must proceed on that footing.
appellant submits that the submissions by the respondent, in relation to the
question of whether the appeal was frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived and
lacking in substance, are misconceived. This submission by the appellant is
based on opinion and conclusions without
evidential or legal support, and is not
elaborated upon. Nevertheless, this issue is considered below.
appellant then deals with the reliance by the respondent on collateral purpose
and takes issue with the analysis by the respondent.
We take the
appellant’s view into consideration below.
response to the respondent’s reliance on s 36(3) of the NCAT Act, the
appellant argues that the submissions are misconceived,
as the parties have a
duty to the Tribunal to comply with directions and orders. The appellant argues
that communications between
the Tribunal and the parties are irrelevant in
respect of compliance. This issue is considered below.
relation to the submissions by the respondent in reliance of s 60(3)(g) of the
NCAT Act, the appellant submits that the submissions
are false, namely that the
submission that the respondent did not have access and control of the 2017 SAP
Manual was false. No grounds
are provided as to why this is so; although, to the
extent they are premised on the same grounds as the appeal, we have already
these: Appeal Decision at [76].
have also had regard to the submissions by the appellant on 28 July 2025 which,
in our view, do not add materially to the earlier
submissions, except for the
submission in relation to s 50 of the NCAT Act which we have dealt with
Consideration in relation to special circumstances
Section 60 matters
Collateral purpose
respondent’s submissions in this regard fall into two categories: (1)
delay; and (2) scandalous submissions. Insofar as
delay is concerned, we are not
persuaded by the respondent’s arguments in respect of collateral purpose
under s 60(3)(e) of
the NCAT Act, and do not conclude they tend towards special
circumstances, in this case. Further, the absence of raising this issue
appeal also dictate against this submission. Leaving aside for this moment that
we ultimately found all of the appellant’s
grounds unmeritorious, we are
satisfied that the appellant did not bring the appeal to delay the underlying
proceedings. The appellant’s
ultimate goal was to obtain the 2017 SAP
manual, which viewed objectively, the appellant views as critical to the
underlying administrative
review proceedings.
respect to the appellant’s submission that the Tribunal, at first
instance, was guilty of misconduct or contravention of
the law or that the
respondent was in contempt or made false submissions, or the like, this might
suggest that an appeal has been
brought for collateral purpose. Whilst viewed
objectively, we accept the appellant’s submissions as being brought to aid
ultimate goal of obtaining a copy of the 2017 SAP Manual, the assertions
were groundless and might be described as scandalous. It
is in that sense that
they were collateral to the real issues in dispute. We consider this under a
separate heading discussed below.
Section 36 NCAT Act
respect of the reliance by the respondent on s 36 of the NCAT Act, such matters
are more appropriately dealt with, if raised, in
the substantive hearing and we
do not attach any weight to those submissions.
also note the appellant’s contention that parties have a duty to the
Tribunal under s 36 of the NCAT Act, therefore, inter
partes communications are
not relevant. The proposition that the parties have a duty to the Tribunal under
s 36(3) of the NCAT Act
is correct; but this extends beyond what happens at
the hearings.
already noted, we are not persuaded that the appellant did not lodge with the
intention of asserting a legitimate intent to obtain
the SAP Manual. For the
same reasons, we also do not intend to give weight to the respondent’s
arguments that the appellant’s
reliance on the appeal process was to
provide a basis for not filing submissions in support of the administrative
review application.
Other matters
relation to s 60(3)(g) of the NCAT Act, we regard the following matters as
material for our consideration.
the nature of the proceedings at first instance which involved a challenge to
compliance with a summons to produce a limited
number of documents. Proceedings
of that nature are not intended to provide an avenue, or drawn-out process, for
a full-scale trial
and should be dealt with expeditiously and efficiently. A
party who does not agree with the outcome does not have an automatic entitlement
to pursue appellate proceedings. There are sound reasons for requiring the grant
of leave for an interlocutory decision. The requirement
for leave to appeal
promotes expedition and avoids delays of the substantive proceedings and avoids
unnecessary fragmenting of the
appeal process:
Thomas Borthwick & Sons
(Pacific Holdings) Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
(1988) 18 FCR 424, 431
(Bowen CJ, Lockhart and Sheppard JJ).
may be more scope to grant leave to appeal for a decision that, although
interlocutory, has the practical effect of finally
determining rights:
parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
, 225, 226 (Latham CJ, Rich, Dixon, Evatt
and McTiernan JJ). This case, concerning as it did the question of compliance
with a summons,
did not finally determine rights and the requirement for leave
was an important aspect of the appeal.
it is also clear that the appellant prosecuted the appeal as if entitled to a
second chance without identification of error,
either on a question of law or
otherwise. The bar for leave to appeal an interlocutory decision requires
identification of an important
point of principle and more than a merely
arguable case:
Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services v
(2017) 95 NSWLR 597
[2017] NSWCA 206
(Gleeson JA, on behalf
of the bench).
note the appellant contends that the directions made at a call over after the
filing of the Notice of Appeal, to the effect that
the Appeal Panel would decide
whether to allow the appeal to proceed on grounds other than a question of law,
provided a basis for
the appellant to consider that the appeal was as of right
on a question of law. However, no question of law was identified at the
over by the Tribunal. It must also be borne in mind that the Notice of Appeal
had already been filed, and that the Notice did
not identify any question of law
entitling the appellant to prosecute the appeal.
questions of law are at times difficult to identify or articulate, the appellant
did not adequately identify errors which,
upon evaluation by the Appeal Panel,
could be regarded as raising a question of law; and no warrant for the grant of
leave was identified.
whilst not known at the date of lodging the appeal, the appellant prosecuted the
appeal to a hearing, held on 2 May 2025,
in circumstances where one of the
issues pursued, namely, an obligation to seek documents which were not in the
respondent’s
possession, from DCS, was maintained when it was already
apparent due to the DCS Compliance Decision of 20 March 2025, that DCS did
have such a document in its possession. This raised the question of whether,
even if the appellant was right as a matter of law,
there was any utility in
pursuing the appeal.
matters weigh in favour of our satisfaction as to the existence of special
circumstances.
Relative strengths
respect of s 60(3)(c) of the NCAT Act, we are of the view that the appellant
made claims that had no tenable basis in fact or law.
The central point the
appellant argued was that the respondent had an obligation to seek the document
from another business unit,
a claim which had been explained in the Compliance
Decision as not available, yet, without any legal support, was again pursued on
these claims were pursued beyond the scope and the express terms of the summons,
which did not impose any such obligation
on the respondent, without any basis
for arguing that the summons could be, or should be, interpreted in such a way.
In addition,
the relative strength of the respondent’s case far outweighed
the strength of the appellant’s case which displayed an
absence of any
considerations under s 60(3)(c) of the NCAT Act weigh in favour of our
satisfaction as to the existence of special
circumstances.
Frivolous, vexatious or misconceived
relation to s 60(3)(e) of the NCAT Act, we are of the view that the case was
from the outset hopeless. It was at all stages misconceived
and lacking in
substance. However, it was also of little utility, as it appears to have been
accepted that the respondent did not
have physical possession of the SAP Manual.
Further, the person identified as having the SAP Manual, who the appellant
the respondent was required to seek the document from, DCS, had
already been held to have complied with a summons seeking the SAP
despite not producing it: DCS Compliance Decision. This is to say that, the main
argument of the appellant was that the respondent
should seek the document from
the DCS; when the appellant was aware from the DCS Compliance Decision that the
DCS did not have the
document. This demonstrated that even if the appellant was
correct and the respondent had an obligation to ask DCS for the document,
would have come to naught. This marks the appeal as frivolous, vexatious or
misconceived.
appellant made various allegations in the course of the appeal proceedings
towards the respondent and the Senior Member who determined
the matter at first
instance. The appellant, in their written submissions dated 13 March 2025,
stated that the respondent “wilfully
failed” to comply with the
Summons and was consequently “in contempt of the Tribunal.” The
appellant accused the
respondent’s solicitor of lodging a “false
document per s307C of
” and of making numerous “false
submissions”. The appellant, in the same written submissions, directed
various accusations
against the Senior Member. These accusations included
improper conduct, false claims, evidence tampering, and purposeful deceit on
part of the Senior Member, as well as alleged threats made by the Senior Member
to the appellant. Three of these accusations
included allegations of
contraventions of the
. The appellant’s written submissions
included an annexure of the various sections of the
said to have been
contravened by the respondent and Senior Member. These allegations were
unsubstantiated.
following submissions alleging misconduct on the part of the Senior Member who
heard the case below included:
“23. [The Senior Member] breached bias and evidence rule
by falsely accusing the Appellant being ‘non-compliance’,
that ‘non-compliance’ accusation is without evidential support.
24. [The Senior Member] further breached evidence rule, by
tempering with 40 paragraphs of evidence, constitutes an admission she
evidence to support her decision, an offence per
(Particular IV).
25. [The Senior Member] demanded the Appellant to produce
evidence, knowing she has no power to request at direction hearing. They
unwarranted demand per
(Particular V).
26. [The Senior Member] prepared the Decision in publication
format, knowing it won’t be published, but to deceive with false
accountability and confidence, an offence per 192E of
(Particular
was no substance to any of the allegations directed at the practitioner or the
Senior Member. We have regard to this conduct:
The Owners Strata Plan No
79633 v Graorovska (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAP 245
view these allegations as scandalous. They did not further the substantive
submissions raised in the appeal.
are satisfied that these allegations contributed to the manifest weakness of the
appellant’s appeal under
and to the lack of substance under
s 60(3)(e) of the NCAT Act.
factor weighs in favour of our satisfaction of the existence of special
circumstances.
Self-representation
recognise that the appellant is self-represented. However, the Tribunal at first
instance went to some lengths to set out the facts
and law which should have
informed the appellant of the nature of a summons and the errors of the
appellant’s complaints. Nonetheless,
the appellant sought to challenge
that reasoning without any apparent identification of error.
will, however, give weight to this factor against our satisfaction of the
existence of special circumstances and we are not persuaded
respondent’s arguments that the appellant’s familiarity with
proceedings counts against them, in this regard.
Despite involvement in several
proceedings, the appellant is not a lawyer.
Conclusion in
relation to special circumstances
Recognising
that the starting position is that each party bears their own costs, the matters
which favour special circumstances outweigh
any factors in favour of there not
being special circumstances, which we have identified above.
Accordingly,
we are satisfied that in this case, special circumstances exist warranting an
award of costs. Viewed cumulatively, the
following factors were significant:
(1) Relative weakness of the appellant’s case.
(2) The lack of identification of any basis for the assertions of error.
(3) The appeal was prosecuted as a re-run of the first instance proceedings.
(4) The subject matter was an interlocutory dispute concerning compliance with a
summons that did not have the practical effect of
determining rights.
(5) There was an identifiable lack of utility; even if the appeal ground could
have been made out, as the person said to have possession
of the documents had
been found not to so have: DCS Compliance Decision.
(6) The myriad of unsupported and scandalous submissions made.
are satisfied that this case is out of the ordinary. This is not overcome by the
fact that the appellant is self-represented and
not a lawyer, although allowance
has been made for this.
Overall discretion
we are satisfied that there are special circumstances, we now turn our minds to
whether an award of costs ought to be made. In
respect of our overall
discretion, having regard for the matters which we have set out above, we
consider that an award for costs
should be made in this case. Whilst we accept
that the mere existence of special circumstances does not, of itself, justify
the exercise
of the discretion to award costs, in this case, we consider that
there are special circumstances warranting an award of costs. These
include, in
particular, the raising of scandalous submissions, the lack of a tenable basis,
the mere re-run of the case at first
instance without identification of error,
and the lack of utility. These considerations are weighty. This, coupled with
the circumstances
that the decision appealed was an interlocutory procedural
decision that did not render a final determination, weigh in favour of
of costs. In this regard, we take into consideration that the appellant is
self-represented. Nevertheless, we do not see
this factor as sufficient to
mitigate against the gravity of the special circumstances we have identified.
appellant has not raised any meaningful or reasoned arguments as to why we
should not exercise our discretion in favour of the
respondent.
regard to the fact that an award of costs is to compensate the winning party, we
consider that the special circumstances in
this case warrant an award of costs
and there are no overbearing countervailing factors.
lump sum order
respondent has asked the Appeal Panel to make a lump sum costs order.
is wide acceptance in the Tribunal, that s 60 of the NCAT Act empowers the
Tribunal to make such an order. Section 60(4) provides
as follows:
(4) If costs are to be awarded by the Tribunal, the Tribunal may—
(a) determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid, and
(b) order costs to be assessed on the basis set out in the legal costs
legislation (as defined in
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Act 2014
) or on any other basis.
appeal panels have interpreted s 60(4) of the NCAT Act as providing a source of
power for the making of a lump sum order
in one of two ways:
(1) That s 60(4)(a) of the NCAT Act gives the Tribunal a discretion to determine
“to what extent costs are to be paid”,
which includes the making of
a fixed sum costs order:
203 Castlereagh Street Pty Limited v Skybloo
Holdings Pty Limited
[2017] NSWCATAP 29
203 Castlereagh Street
[35]. We note that
203 Castlereagh Street
has been followed in a number
of subsequent appeal panel and first instance decisions: see, for example,
Wilson v Dash (No.2)
[2018] NSWCATAP 155
The Owners –
Strata Plan No 82306 v Anderson
[2018] NSWCATCD 1
News v Cotes (No
[2019] NSWCATAP 235
FHH v Port Stephens Council (No 2)
[2023] NSWCATAP 282
Sanna Construction Pty Limited v Kelly (No
[2025] NSWCATAP 203
(2) That s 60(4)(b), which allows the Tribunal to order costs to be assessed
“on the basis set out in the legal costs legislation
or on any other
” (our emphasis) enables it to make an order for lump sum costs:
STAR Training Academy Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police (No 2)
NSWCATAP 98
appeal panels have accepted, without advancing any reasoning about the
construction of s 60(4), that it provides a source of
power for the making of a
lump sum costs order. That was the approach of the Appeal Panel in the oft-cited
Islam v Metricon Homes Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCATAP 116
, in which the
Appeal Panel stated:
“...we agree that in the exercise of its broad discretion in relation to
costs and in accordance with s 60(4), the Tribunal
has the power to make a gross
sum costs order...”
has also been held that when s 60(4) is read in conjunction with the guiding
principle in s 36 of the NCAT Act requiring the Tribunal
to facilitate the just,
quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings, there is ample
statutory power to support
the making of a lump sum costs order:
Kumar & Paentia (No 2)
[2021] NSWCATAP 262
– Strata Plan No 82306 v Anderson
[2018] NSWCATCD 1
is not necessary to resolve the question of the source of power, as we consider
it beyond argument that the Tribunal has such power.
We proceed on the basis
that s 60(4)(a), at least, provides a source of power, and that the discretion
to make an order for lump
sum costs must be exercised judicially.
principles were identified in
Idoport Pty Limited v National Australia
[2007] NSWSC 23
) at [9], per Einstein J:
“For present purposes it seems convenient to commence with a recitation of
the principles which inform the exercise of the
discretion:
i. the purpose of the rule is to avoid the expense, delay and aggravation
involved in protracted litigation arising out of taxation:
Beach Petroleum NL
(1995) 57 FCR 119
, Von Doussa J page 265: [following Purchase J
Leary v Leary
[1987] 1 All ER 261
who described the purpose of the
rule allowing the fixing of a gross sum as ‘
the avoidance of expense,
delay and aggravation involved in protracted litigation arising out of
(All ER page 265)];
ii. the touchstone requires that the Court be confident that the approach taken
to estimate costs is logical, fair and reasonable:
Beach Petroleum
iii. the fairness parameter includes the Court having sufficient confidence in
arriving at an appropriate sum on the materials available:
[2002] NSWCA 213
(2002) 54 NSWLR 738
, per Giles JA at para [22]; [following
Wentworth v Wentworth
(CA, 21 February 1996, unreported, per Clarke JA)
and adopted in
Sony Entertainment v Smith
(2005) 215 ALR 788
; BC200500963 at para [199];
iv. a gross sum assessment, by its very nature, does not envisage that a process
similar to that involved in a traditional taxation
or assessment of costs should
take place:
Harrison v Schipp
at para [22];
v. the gross sum ‘can only be fixed broadly having regard to the
information before the Court’:
Beach Petroleum
Hadid v Lenfest Communications Inc
[2000] FCA 628
it was said
that the evidence enabled fixing a gross sum ‘only if I apply a much
broader brush than would be applied on taxation,
but that ... is what the rule
contemplates’.]
vi. nevertheless the power to award a gross sum must be exercised judicially,
and after giving the parties an adequate opportunity
to make submissions on the
Leary v Leary
[1987] 1 WLR 72
Beach Petroleum NL v
Johnson (No.2)
(1995) 57 FCR 119
vii. In terms of the necessity for the approach taken to be logical, fair and
reasonable, Von Doussa J in
Beach Petroleum NL v Johnson (No 2)
, put the matter as follows, at paras [16]:
‘On the one hand the Court must be astute to prevent prejudice to the
respondents by overestimating the costs, and on the other
hand must be astute
not to cause an injustice to the successful party by an arbitrary “fail
safe” discount on the cost
estimates submitted to the Court:
at 265. ...’”
at [12]-[15], the Court of Appeal added that the following
principles also apply:
“12 The power to award a lump-sum should only be
exercised when the Court considers that it can do so fairly between the
and where an appropriate sum can be determined from the available materials:
Harrison v Schipp
(2002) 54 NSWLR 738
[2002] NSWCA 213
Beach Petroleum NL v Johnson (No 2)
(1995) 57 FCR 119
13 The power may also be exercised where a party’s
conduct has unnecessarily contributed to the costs of the proceedings,
especially where the costs incurred have been disproportionate to the result of
the proceedings:
Hamod v New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
Beazley JA (Giles and Whealy JJA agreeing).
14 A ‘broad brush’ approach is appropriate. To
require the same or similar level of detail as in a formal costs assessment
would defeat the purpose of the lump sum order:
Auspine Ltd v Australian
Newsprint Mills Ltd
(1999) 93 FCR 1
[1999] FCA 673
Titan National Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2015] NSWCA 121
15 The courts have typically applied a discount in assessing
costs on a gross sum basis:
Hamod v New South Wales
the broad brush approach was reaffirmed in
at [32] per Payne
“A “broad brush” approach is appropriate when lump sum costs
are ordered. To require the same or similar level
of detail as in a formal costs
assessment would defeat the purpose of the lump sum order:
Auspine Ltd v
Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd
[1999] FCA 673
(1999) 93 FCR 1
[1999] FCA 673
O’Loughlin J;
Penson v Titan National Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2015] NSWCA
per JC Campbell AJA.”
principles set out in
have been applied by the
Tribunal countless times. A recent example is the Appeal Panel’s decision
Sanna Construction Pty Limited v Kelly (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 203
which sets out the accepted approach to the making of a lump sum order for costs
in the Tribunal as follows:
“17 As to the making of a lump sum order for costs, in a
number of cases the Appeal Panel has recognised a power to make
such an order
pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
and has proceeded to make such an order: see, for example,
Allsopp v Owners
Corporation SP 6006
[2024] NSWCATAP 93
News v Cotes (No 2)
NSWCATAP 235
203 Castlereagh Street Pty Ltd v Skybloo Holdings Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 29.
We note that in the two cases first mentioned the amount
ordered was a relatively modest amount and involved a significant discount
respect of the solicitors’ costs that were actually incurred.
Michael Wilson & Partners v Emmott (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 309
, the Court of Appeal applied the principles
relevant to the making of a gross sum costs order as set out in
Hamod v State
of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
and as stated in
Gabrielle v Abood
[2023] NSWCA 100
, where the Court (Bell CJ, Kirk and Adamson JJA)
said at [6]:
The power to make a gross sum costs order provided by
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) is discretionary. Authority establishes
that the discretion is not confined and may be exercised whenever the
circumstances
warrant its exercise; it should only be exercised when the Court
considers that it can do so fairly between the parties, and that
includes having
sufficient confidence in arriving at an appropriate sum on the materials
available; courts have typically applied
a discount in assessing costs on a
gross sum basis; and the court is not required to undertake a detailed
examination of the kind
that would be appropriate to taxation or formal costs
assessment: see
Hamod v New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
and authority there cited.
, the Court also said:
45. In the present case, as adverted to above, the evidence as to the costs
incurred by the respondent is more than sufficient to
enable an assessment of a
gross sums costs order to be made. This is appropriate where the amount sought
is relatively small and
the costs of assessment are likely to be
disproportionate to the amount that may reasonably be in issue on assessment.
on a gross sum costs application does not apply a process similar to a
taxation of costs, but adopts a much broader brush. A discount
is ordinarily
warranted to reflect the contingencies ordinarily inherent in the assessment
process. That said, one must be astute
to avoid both overstating the recoverable
costs and underestimating the appropriate amount by applying some arbitrary
discount to
the amounts claimed.
46. In all the circumstances it is appropriate in our opinion to fix the gross
sum costs order by: (1) allowing 85% of the solicitor’s
costs, including
in respect of the costs of the preparation of this gross sum costs application
(being a conservative discount of
15% rather than the 35% that the applicant
suggests); (2) allowing the whole of Counsel’s fees and disbursements
not on their face excessive), including in respect of the costs of
the preparation of this gross sum costs application; (3) applying
discount of 10% to the sum of the solicitor’s and Counsel’s costs so
calculated, to take into account contingencies
inherent in the taxation process
and the complaints made by the applicant as to the components included in the
costs claimed; and
(4) adding to that figure the filing fee for this application
the Court had before it evidence from the
respondent’s solicitor as to the discounts applied in the assessment of
consider it appropriate to make a lump sum costs order as we accept this could
avoid further delay and the potential expense of
a costs assessment. We take
account of the following factors:
(1) The appellant only addressed the question of whether the respondent is
entitled to legal costs, at all; and made no challenge
to the quantum if that
argument was rejected, as it has now been. In any event, as discussed below, we
are able to take that into
consideration in determining the appropriate amount.
(2) We have sufficient material before us to exercise the discretionary power
“fairly between the parties”, as we have
“sufficient
confidence in arriving at an appropriate sum on the materials available”:
Gabrielle v Abood (No 4)
[2023] NSWCA 100
, the Court (Bell CJ, Kirk and
Adamson JJA) at [6] applied by the Court of Appeal in
Michael Wilson &
Partners v Emmott (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 309
(3) As noted by Payne JA in
, “no matter how strongly a
litigant feels about their case, it is never appropriate to make completely
unsupported allegations
of fraud” at [15]. It was appropriate for the
respondent to respond.
(4) The costs sought are in a sum of $6,886.23; which whilst not minimal are
proportionate to the importance and complexity of the
proceedings:
Act. On the one hand, we found in the Appeal Decision that the appeal did not
raise issues of principle or public importance,
insofar as the central issue was
concerned, regarding the duty of a recipient of a summons to make enquiries to a
third party or
take further steps to obtain custody or control of documents
sought. On the other hand, the scandalous nature of some of the
appellant’s
submissions required responses and the appeal could not be
described as trivial.
(5) It is in the interests of justice to bring these proceedings to an end and
not risk further appeals in relation to a cost assessment
process. This avoids
future “expense, delay and aggravation”:
respect of the quantification of the lump sum order, we are satisfied as
(1) It was reasonable for the respondent to use the services of junior and
senior practitioners and the charge out rates guided by
the Attorney-General's
scale appear to us to be reasonable.
(2) The work carried out is, largely, identified.
(3) Whilst we note that the appellant objected to the Appeal Panel dispensing
with a hearing on this matter and it is conceivable
that the appellant might
have at a hearing said more on the reasonableness of the quantum in relation to
certain items in the cost
schedule, this is naturally accommodated by the
discount we propose to apply to the respondent’s cost application, as
(4) In respect of the work for which costs are sought, it is within the bounds
of work and time taken that would reasonably be expected,
including in
circumstances where serious (albeit unfounded) allegations were made by the
appellant against some of the practitioners.
we understand the respondent’s position from the schedule of costs it
relied on, it has reduced the actual costs claimed
which reflect, in a way,
party and party costs as opposed to indemnity costs. We regard that approach as
reasonable. In addition,
as was the case in
, we have before us
detail as to the discounts applied in the assessment of costs.
Nevertheless,
as highlighted in
, the adoption of a broad brush approach is
appropriate, and it is unnecessary to accept the amount and all the details as
by the respondent.
will therefore apply a further discount of 35% to take account of:
(1) the costs sought for the overall conduct of the appellant in reliance on
s 36 of the NCAT Act which we have not accepted;
(2) contingencies arising on a potential cost assessment of the claimed costs;
(3) proportionality to the importance and complexity of the proceedings.
Accordingly,
the amount of the lump sum costs order shall be 65% of $6,886.23, namely,
our view, the appellant should pay the costs of the respondent fixed in the sum
of $4,476.05 within 28 days.
(1) In accordance with
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), a hearing in relation to the application for costs is
dispensed with.
(2) The recusal application is refused.
(3) The application pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW) seeking an amendment to the respondent’s submissions
requiring the addition of the names of the solicitors and their
signatures is
(4) The appellant’s application pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) is dismissed.
(5) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal
including in respect of the appellant’s stay application
in the fixed
amount of $4,476.05 within 28 days.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (453 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter