URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2020/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v AVIS [2020] NSWNMPSC 2 (17 January 2020)
Our Ref: 3615/20
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) to hold an Inquiry into a
complaint in relation to:
Mr Shaun Robert Avis NMW0001885266
Dates of Inquiry:
11 December 2019
12 December 2019
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul
Dr Rose Leontini Dr Gerda Tolhurst Mr Ronald Wilson
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Feneil Shah, Legal Officer
Appearance for Mr Shaun Robert Avis:
Ms Katherine Doust, New South Wales Nurses and Midwives Association
Decision date:
17 January 2020
The Committee made a finding of unsatisfactory conduct and reprimanded
practitioner.
Publication of decision:
No non-publication directions have been
Introduction
For about four hours from 10.30am on 21 March 2016 Sean Robert Avis was the
registered nurse caring for an 18 month old boy in the
paediatric section of the
emergency department at a public hospital.
On the decision of the treating medical practitioner the young boy was
discharged at about 2.00pm on that day and left hospital shortly
afterwards. Sadly, the child’s condition deteriorated overnight. He was
brought to the hospital by ambulance, could not
be resuscitated and died about
midday on 22 March 2016.
The coroner determined the cause and manner of death was Septicaemia due to
Streptococcal infection upon the failure by the treating
specialist in the
emergency department on 21
March 2016 to recognise the signs of
toxicity caused by a possible sepsis, to investigate the possibility of sepsis,
and to administer
antibiotics
. The death necessarily
and appropriately focused attention on all of those involved in his care from
the time he entered the hospital
at about 10.00am, including on Mr Avis.
In our view aspects of the care provided by Mr Avis fell significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a nurse of his training
and experience at the
time. Today, Mr Avis presents as having learned from those events and, in our
judgment has insight into to
his weaknesses that led to his unsatisfactory
professional conduct. In our view, he does not now pose any risk to the health
safety of the public and we do not see the need for any protective orders
other than to reprimand him.
The Complaint
These proceedings commenced by way of a Complaint made
by the Health Care Complaints Commission on 7 August 2019. In summary, the
Commission makes three broad complaints about the care afforded by Mr Avis to
the young boy:
undertake timely assessments;
inadequate care
following the observation of a rash on the torso of the young boy; and
record keeping.
Each aspect is particularised in the Complaint (attached, formal parts
Our task is to enquire into the circumstances and decide whether the Complaint,
in its parts or overall, amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. While
aspects of Mr Avis’s conduct were unsatisfactory, no one aspect
particularised was significantly
below the standard reasonably expected.
However, and viewed overall, in the three or four hours the young
Exhibit 4, Tab 71, page 23.
boy was under his care, Mr Avis’s conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Our inquiry
We undertook our inquiry over two days on 11 and 12
December 2019. The Health Care Complaints Commission was represented by Mr
Shah from the Commission. Mr Avis was represented by Katherine Doust from
the NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association. As permitted
by s170 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(the National Law) we
undertook our inquiry at the same time as an inquiry into the care provided by
another nurse at the hospital.
That nurse had undertaken the triage of the young
boy when he first arrived in the emergency department. It was appropriate that
the inquiries proceeded together as the background information was the same and
some of the evidence given by each nurse was useful
in the other inquiry.
At an earlier stage in the proceedings an order had been made prohibiting the
publication of information that would lead to the identification
of the young
boy. Mr Shah advised us that the family of the young boy did not seek the
continuation of that order. He requested that
the order be vacated. Ms Doust did
not oppose the request. We revoked the order.
At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Shah provided us with registration
certificates for Mr Avis and the other practitioner (Exhibit
1 and Exhibit
The Commission also provided us with two folders of material containing a
comprehensive and thorough collection of material relevant
to our inquiry
(Exhibit 3 and Exhibit 4), being:
report by the Executive Director of Medical Services of the Illawarra Shoalhaven
Health District;
from the child’s mother and father, along with statements from staff at
the hospital and one from the triage nurse;
correspondence
between the Commission and Mr Avis;
opinion and reports from Ms Rebekah Middleton as an expert engaged by the
Commission;
policies applicable to the hospital;
patient records; and
relating to the inquest.
On behalf of Mr Avis, Ms Doust provided us with a folder of material containing
Mr Avis’s statement of 17 October 2019, a curriculum
vitae, a record of
continuing professional development and three referee reports being from the
Nurse Unit Manager, a colleague and
a medical practitioner all who have been
working with him at least since the incident (Exhibit D). Mr Avis continues to
work at the
district hospital as a registered nurse in the emergency
department.
Ms Doust also provided a copy of his Graduate Certificate of Paediatric Nursing
Studies awarded 27 July 2018 (Exhibit E), the enrolment
for the course he is
undertaking at the University of Queensland (Exhibit F), a
certificate of attendance at a course on Clinical Communication with
documentation provided by the NSW Nurses and Midwives’
Association
(Exhibit G), the award of the Graduate Diploma in Public Health and Tropical
Medicine on 9 March 2018 (Exhibit H), a
document from the University of
Queensland setting out the standards to be met in the Master of Nurse
Practitioner Studies being
undertaken by Mr Avis (Exhibit J), and a record of
the work he had undertaken relevant to that course of study (Exhibit K).
The material provided by the Commission and Mr Avis had relevance to our inquiry
and was received without objection. There was little
dispute between the parties
provided. However there
was dispute about whether any of Mr Avis’s care
was significantly below the standard reasonably expected.
Mr Avis gave evidence as did the other nurse. We also heard from Rebekah
Middleton, called by the Commission as an expert. Ms Middleton
had prepared a
detailed and thorough report, supplemented by her responses to further questions
asked by the Commission. It was apparent
from her reports and responses that Ms
Middleton had given careful consideration to the information provided by the
Commission about
what had happened on 21
March 2016 and the care
provided by Ms Mason.
Ms Middleton gave evidence after Mr Avis and the other nurse and we were able to
ask her about some of the evidence they had given.
Ms Middleton was critical of
various aspects of Mr Avis’s conduct and also of the practices then in
place at the emergency
department of the hospital. It remains our task to assess
whether Mr Avis’s conduct fell significantly below the standard reasonably
Some time was taken up during the hearing in determining what documents and
protocols were in place at the emergency department at
Ultimately it was not necessary that we come to a final conclusion on the detail
of those matters. The Complaint made by the Commission
was based on Mr Avis
having knowledge of the policies and protocols, rather than those policies and
protocols in fact being in operation
in the emergency department at the
The events of 21 March 2016
By way of background - the mother was a registered nurse
and was a nurse at the hospital. She was due to commence a night shift later
that day. It seems she had come into hospital to tell the Nurse Unit Manager
that she would not be able to do her shift because her
child was ill. She was on
her way to see her general practitioner but the NUM suggested that the child
could be seen by one of the
doctors. During the conversation the child began to
shake, perhaps with rigors. The mother then accepted the NUM’s offer to
have the child seen by a doctor at the hospital, and she went to the emergency
department shortly after 10am.
In determining what happened it is useful to review the events against the
particulars as set out in the Complaint, and using that
1 - Failure to attend to timely assessments, three
first assessment until about 11.00am
The triage nurse had concluded her triage of the young boy shortly after 10:15
and the boy had been moved to the paediatric bay of
the emergency department. Mr
Avis arrived for his shift in the paediatric bay of the emergency department at
10.30am. As the other
nurses were occupied with some patients in the
resuscitation bay he did not receive a handover.
When he arrived in the paediatric bay he saw that the boy was being breastfed.
He recognised the mother as a nurse from the hospital
and also as the mother of
a friend of his. There were two other children in the four bed paediatric bay.
Mr Avis says that he asked
the mother if they were all right and she said the
child was not feeling well.
When speaking to her Mr Avis reviewed the Emergency Documentation entry that had
been made by the triage nurse at 10:15:
Triage SDMH
Triage Presenting Information :
lethargic, pale
and febile, restless overnight. not tolerating food but been drinking water and
breast milk. Wet nappies. vomited
post paracetamol 01.00. shaky limbs and mucosy
vomit at triage.
At that stage he did not look at the Vital Signs entries, but did read that the
boy had been allocated triage category 3, had a peripheral
pulse rate of 173 and
the child’s temperature was 38.9 degrees. Mr Avis said he understood the
information in the Triage Presenting
Information section as being a report of
what the mother had told the triage nurse.
The criticism made by the Commission is that although Mr Avis had that
information shortly after 10:30 he delayed his first assessment
until about
Mr Avis said that he made a brief assessment immediately upon arrival in the
paediatric bay by reviewing the triage notes, seeing
the peripheral pulse rate
of 173 beats per minute, the temperature of 38.9 and asking the mother if she
and the child were all right.
He also took account of the mother wanting to
continue to breastfeed the child, and he was aware the child had a mucosy vomit
Mr Avis said he knew the mother as a nurse at the hospital, and also socially
through a friend. That connection may have had an impact
Mr Avis responded to her, perhaps leading to miscommunication or a false sense
of stability in the child’s health, and less
urgency in his
observations.
There are occasions, which can’t be avoided, when practitioners will need
to attend those with whom they have some connection
other than simply as
Exhibit 4, Tab 70, page 2, as it
nurse and patient, whether that be as friends, or neighbours, or through
business, or a family connection. In those cases practitioners
will need to be
aware of the possible effect of the nature of that other familiarity, and adjust
their conduct to ensure they maintain
an appropriate, dispassionate, and purely
professional nurse/patient relationship.
Mr Avis says he intended to review the other two patients in the paediatric bay
of the emergency department (both had also been assessed
at triage category 3),
before returning to the mother and child. He asked if that would be all right
and the mother said it would
be. When we asked about the purpose of that
question Mr Avis said he was not seeking the permission of the mother but rather
what he was proposing to do, assessing her response and reassuring
her that he would return. He said he made the statement in a way
to leave it
open for her to raise any concerns.
While assessing the other two patients a fourth child was allocated to the
paediatric bay. Mr Avis was advised the new patient was
stable so he continued
to complete the assessment of the other two children and then returned before
11:00 to undertake his assessment.
Mr Avis says he proceeded by way of an A-G
assessment and recorded his findings in the clinical notes.
The notes record an oxygen delivery entry in the register at 11:04, which is
consistent with the A-G assessment having been commenced
shortly before 11:00
and concluding about that time. Mr Avis believes these two assessments, taken
together were reasonable and not
delayed given that he needed to respond to two
other children with the same triage category.
Ms Middleton expressed strong criticism of Mr Avis’s failure to assess the
child within 30 minutes of the triage. She made
this criticism on the basis that
a pulse of 173 BPM was a red flag under the Between The Flag policy, which
required an assessment
be made within 30 minutes. Based on information before
her she assessed the delay at 50 minutes. That length of time appears to be
response to that proposition put by the Commission in the letter of instructions
of 19 October 2018 (Exhibit 3, Tab 32, page 13).
It appears from the records that Mr Avis had finished his assessment by 11:04
being the time when the results were entered into the
clinical record. On the
basis the A-G assessment took about 10 minutes (including giving the child 2mg
Zofran and applying a urine
bag) we find he commenced the assessment about
10:55, being 40 minutes after the triage assessment at 10:15.
In criticising Mr Avis Ms Middleton made reference to the Between The Flags
requirements that the child should have been checked
within 30 minutes given the
heart rate of 173 BPM was in the red zone. The Between The Flags policy is also
an aspect of a criticism
by the Commission of Mr Avis’s failure to take
vital signs every 30 minutes from 11:04am until 13.06am (see below).
Mr Avis gave evidence that he was aware of the Between The Flags policy. He said
he had received training, but the system had not
yet been rolled out within the
emergency department as a standard operating procedure.
Considering the evidence from Mr Avis and the triage nurse (before us and before
the coroner), and having reviewed the correspondence
from Illawarra Shoalhaven
Local Health District on the topic, we have come to the conclusion that the
Between The Flags policy and
the related protocols was not the standard
operating procedure within the emergency department at the time. Those working
emergency department had access to the relevant documents in electronic
form, but their use was not mandated. The practice in the
emergency department
at the time was to continue to use the already existing systems.
The Commission does not put its case on the basis that the Between The Flags
policy was the procedure within the emergency department
at that time. Rather
the allegation is that Mr Avis being aware of those requirements ought to have
given consideration to them and
been more swift in making his initial assessment
and his other assessments throughout the following period.
Mr Avis was aware that the child’s heart rate was at a level that required
regular and close monitoring. Mr Avis took vital
signs about hourly in the
period until about 1:00. Mr Avis says that hourly was the expected and required
frequency in accordance
with the practice then current in the emergency
department, and he says he met that requirement.
His view was that even though some of the Between The Flags material was
available within the emergency department and he was aware
of it, it was not
appropriate for him to make use of it on an individual basis but instead to
follow the existing procedures of the
emergency department. To act alone may
have put him in conflict with what others were doing, could create confusion,
and perhaps
lead to errors. There is some merit in that observation.
b) between 11:04 and 13:06 failing to assess the child’s
vital signs every 30 minutes when the heart rate and temperature were
“between the flags”
Mr Avis says that the frequency of assessments for
heart rate and temperature were at 10:15 by the triage nurse, then by him at
12:16, 12:57 and 13.29. he says these assessments were in line with the
current practice of at least hourly. He also said the Between
The Flags protocol
was not then in place in the emergency department. He acknowledged he was aware
that the policy was operating
in the wards, but was not yet operating in the
emergency department.
c) failing to assess and document the child’s vital signs
after about 13:29
Mr Avis did not undertake any vital signs observations
after 13.29, though he made an observation of “temp decreasing”
13.31. The Complaint is that it was appropriate for Mr Avis to continue to make
vital sign observations every 30 minutes until
the child had been discharged and
had left the hospital.
In the mother’s statement she said to Mr Avis (at about 13:30) that she
had a concern about her son’s heart rate and
temperature. Mr Avis said he
would talk to the medical practitioner, and he did so, but he did not make any
further observations
or take vital signs.
Mr Avis says that at about 13:30 he had a discussion with the treating medical
practitioner who said he might be discharging the
child. Mr Avis accepts that
there was no decision to discharge the child, but just an indication from the
treating medical practitioner.
That discharge decision was not implemented until
On the Between The Flags protocol vital signs should have been taken within 30
minutes, as the heart rate of 158 BPM at 13:29 was
not ‘between the
flags’. The practice in the emergency department was to do so at least
every hour. On that measure Mr
Avis was within time, given the departure by
14:30. But that is not the point.
The criticism is made on the basis that once Mr Avis became aware at about 13:30
that the child was likely to be discharged he then
ceased any ongoing proper
care of the child other than to provide a report to the treating medical
practitioner at about 14:00. Mr
Avis explained that at the time the practice was
not to continue usual observations once a patient was to be discharged. However
he was not justifying the practice.
Mr Avis said that it was at the time, and continues to be inappropriate for a
nurse to cease care of a patient simply on the expectation
of imminent
discharge. He acknowledged that he should have continued to take observations at
an appropriate frequency so long as
the child was still in the hospital.
2 - Inadequate further care upon observation of a rash at about
Mr Avis observed a rash on the torso of the child at
further discussed below). He reported the rash to the treating medical
practitioner. Mr Avis told us that the treating medical practitioner
said it was
a “viral rash” and that a discharge was anticipated. Even though
this was a new observation Mr Avis did not
make any further observation of the
rash or make observations of any other kind. He took that approach on the basis
he had made a
report to the treating medical practitioner and he anticipated the
child was to be discharged.
Mr Avis acknowledges and accepts that he should have continued to make
observations until the child had left the hospital. The rash
observation. By way of explanation, but not justification, he said it was the
practice within the emergency department
at that time for the nursing staff to
cease observations once a decision to discharge had been made. When asked if
that was an appropriate
practice Mr Avis said it was not. He said care should
continue to be provided until the patient has left the hospital, and this was
even if a decision had been made to discharge the patient. It was
his view that a nurse continued to have a professional obligation to care for
the patient until departure from the hospital.
3 - Inadequate record keeping
The Commission makes a number of criticisms of Mr
Avis’s record keeping.
Not using the Between The Flags and the SPOC systems for documentation of the
child’s care and treatment - This is factually
correct though Mr Avis says
that those systems were not then in place within the emergency department and he
had not been required
to use them. Had he used them he would have been on his
own in the emergency department in doing so. That may have caused other problems
and perhaps been dangerous.
As discussed above, we have come to the conclusion that the Between The Flags
and the SPOC systems of documentation were not the
standard operating procedure
in the emergency department. Although access was available in electronic form
the default procedure
was to use the existing system of clinical record
keeping. Some education had occurred, however a mandated adherence to the
was not in place at the time, for whatever reason.
Recording “cap refill good” without recording time for the refill -
Mr Avis accepts this criticism and says he now always
records an objective
measurement. He accepts and understands that a general description like
“cap refill good” is unhelpful
as it is liable to be misunderstood
by others and is of little utility. By way of explanation he says entries of
that kind were usual
practice within the emergency department and were
understood, and that is why he used them. This information was confirmed by the
triage nurse.
Recording “non-blanching” for the rash when it was blanching –
Mr Avis says that the rash he observed at about
13:30 was blanching and he made
a mistake when he recorded it as non-blanching (exhibit D, Tab 70, page 4).
He acknowledges the mistake and that he failed to correct the entry.
We do not know, and cannot now determine, whether the rash, at that time, was
blanching or non-blanching. Mr Avis says it was blanching.
Although the mother
saw Mr Avis test the rash she says she did not have the knowledge to conclude
what sort of rash it was (Exhibit
3, Tab 8, paragraphs 3 and 4). At 14:31 the
treating medical practitioner made a summary entry in the notes and recorded
was noticed that he developed maculopapular rash on the
torso”. This appears to be a reference to his observation of the rash
(Exhibit 3, Tab 8, paragraph 5). The finding by the coroner as to the cause of
death of the boy suggests the rash might have been
non-blanching. The Complaint
is not one of mis-diagnosis. In any event, Mr Avis admits that he made a mistake
in recording “non-blanching”
when he meant to record blanching.
It is likely that Mr Avis was not prompted to amend the entry given that he
appears not to have undertaken any work or made any observation
that would have
required him to make an entry on the progress notes, his last entry being
13:33. Within the progress notes there are examples of where Mr Avis has amended
or supplements his earlier notes.
After about 13:33 making no further record of observations about the rash - Mr
Avis agrees he made no entries after that time. This
may have been caused by him
following the practice of treating a patient as not requiring further care once
discharge was likely.
He did make some casual observations of the mother and
child after 13:33, but made no written notes of those observations as such.
had some discussions with the medical practitioner, but did not record any of
those interactions.
Using terms such as “fever increasing”, “picking up”,
“looks well now”, “temp decreasing”
Commission criticises these notes by Mr Avis as lacking clear and objective
information. That is no doubt correct and
Mr Avis agreed. His only explanation
for his behaviour is that terms of that kind were accepted and commonly used,
and the clinicians
in the emergency department understood their meaning.
Not using the A-G format for assessments other than the initial assessment
– The Commission criticises Mr Avis for not using
the A-G format for all
his assessments but only for his assessment entered in the progress notes at
11:15. The Commission referred
to NSW Health policy PD 2013_049. That policy is
related to the Between The Flags protocol. As discussed above the Between The
protocol was not in operation in the emergency department at this
Mr Avis says it was his practice and the usual practice within the emergency
department at the time to follow the A-G format on initial
assessment and then
only again upon a significant change in presentation. He says he was following
that practice, as it was the practice
that had been demonstrated to him is his
time in the emergency department. He says he now routinely follows the A-G
format and always
does so as required by policy.
Failure to record significant clinical information
The Commission says that Mr Avis should have recorded
some information that he did not record: the concerns expressed by the mother;
the advice given to the mother; the information conveyed between Mr Avis and the
treating medical practitioner; and the details of
the child’s
Mr Avis acknowledges that he could have recorded that information, if there was
any to record. Mr Avis agrees he did not document
his relevant interactions with
the mother, although he says she expressed no concerns. He had not provided any
specific advice to
the mother so there was nothing to record. He did tell her to
It was not his practice at that time to make notes of information conveyed to
the treating medical practitioner as he assumed the
treating medical
practitioner would be reviewing the clinical notes that contained the
information. He did not record any details
of the child’s discharge, as he
not present at the time. He only saw the mother and child again as they were
walking out of the emergency department after they had
left the paediatric
Was there unsatisfactory professional conduct?
In assessing whether Mr Avis’s care of the child
amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct we are to consider whether
conduct demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, and care
exercised, by him in the practice of nursing was significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
Our consideration of these issues was greatly assisted by the submissions made
by Mr Shah and Ms Doust. In addition to providing
us with comprehensive written
submissions overnight they helpfully participated in detailed discussion with us
evidence, the findings to make and any appropriate
protective orders.
Mr Avis gained first registration in February 2014. All of his work experience
as a registered nurse to March 2016 was within the
emergency department of the
hospital. Mr Avis said he was doing things the way they were done in the
emergency department and was
following its procedures and practices. His
experience was only in the one department. He had not been working long enough
aware that things can be done differently.
His limited experience and learning from those around him goes some way to
explaining his conduct - not being guided by the Between
The Flags protocols,
using descriptive rather than objective terms in the clinical notes, the
frequency at which he was undertaking
observations, using the A-G assessment
only on the first occasion, and the practice of ceasing observations once the
patient would
likely be discharged. None of that is satisfactory.
It is unfortunate that Mr Avis learned these practices from his time within the
emergency department. He said he saw himself as a
junior in the department and
was no doubt taking the approach of learning and developing by doing what those
more senior to him were
On the other hand, having recently completed his training he might be expected
to have a more evidence based attitude to nursing.
Mr Avis had some training in
the Between The Flags protocols and was aware of its operation throughout the
rest of the hospital.
That training might have been expected to have prompted
him to act with more urgency even though not following it precisely or using
specified documents.
Even allowing for Mr Avis’s limited experience there are aspects of his
conduct that are of concern. There was delay in making
an initial A-G
assessment. His earlier brief observations did not amount to a useful
assessment. We do not have any information about
the two other children in the
paediatric bay. But we do know that Mr Avis had a friendly connection with the
mother and was aware
she was a registered nurse and worked at the
hospital. That may have led him to be a little casual in his initial assessment.
When the child was breast feeding may have been
a good time to make some
observations, as the child would have been relaxed.
Even though it may have been the practice to cease observations once discharge
was on the horizon, the occurrence of the rash, being
a new event, should have
prompted Mr Avis to make further observations until the discharge had taken
Though there may have been a practice of descriptive terms rather than objective
measurement, some of Mr Avis’s record keeping
is difficult to defend. For
example an observation at 13:06 of temperature being “Fever ... still
increasing” is of little
or no utility. It is not even clear how he made
that assessment. Similarly, his use of “fever increasing” and
decreasing” have no real meaning even allowing for a practice
of not using objective terms. There was a lack of care in making
entries of this
kind. The entry of “non-blanching” was a frank error.
Although he did not make use of the A-G format in each observation we are of the
view that, putting to one side the descriptive observations,
his entries within
the clinical notes are reasonable.
Even though we understand the reason he did not record observations after the
time he thought discharge was imminent, he failed to
make a note of even the
fact of his report to the treating medical practitioner. Mr Avis could and
should have made brief reference
to his discussions with the mother and the
treating medical practitioner.
Notes such as “mother does/does not have concerns”, “informed
doctor of observations”, and “mother
asked to follow doctor’s
instructions and return if concerned”, would have been useful. Over and
above being a simple
record of events making the notes would have required Mr
Avis to reflect on those interactions and been a prompt for him to consider
treatment and the way in which he was working with the rest of the
department.
We do not consider that there is anything in our observations that is not
reasonable to expect of a practitioner of Mr Avis’s
training and
experience. In general terms there is nothing obvious that would have prevented
Mr Avis from doing better the things
of which he is criticised. Indeed, Mr Avis,
to his credit, offers no excuses and accepts that he could and should have done
things at the time. It is true that the poor practices within the
emergency department led him astray but that does not explain away
Looking at all of the circumstances from the time of Mr Avis first attended the
paediatric bay until the departure of the mother
and child from the emergency
department his conduct fell substantially below the standard reasonably
expected. We reach that conclusion
taking account of his limited experience.
This is not a case where there was one aspect of his conduct which was
significantly below what is to be expected, but rather it
is the accumulation
his conduct over the period which leads to our conclusion: the brief initial
assessment and the delayed full assessment; the time
between taking vital signs
given the heart rate and temperature; the failure to undertake a follow up
observation of the rash; the
generic and descriptive entries in the clinical
notes; and the lack of even a brief note of the interactions with the mother and
the treating medical practitioner.
Taken overall we have decided Mr Avis’s conduct in his care of the young
boy, as described above, amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Protective orders
Having found the subject matter of the Complaint to
have been proved we now consider whether it is appropriate for us to make any
protective orders in the protection of the health and safety of the public.
Whilst our assessment of unsatisfactory professional
conduct is made at the time
of the events we consider protective orders in the present context.
We wish to comment on one aspect of the submissions made by Ms Doust concerning
protective orders. That in determining the orders
to be made we could take into
account a possible adverse affect on Mr Avis’s ability to progress in his
course at the University
of Queensland. The submission was not advanced
forcefully but was raised as a factor to be considered. No evidence was provided
demonstrate that potential adverse impact on
In our view the potential adverse effect of any protective order on a
practitioner is not a factor that can determine the protective
orders to be
made. Section 3A of the National Law requires us to give paramount importance to
the protection of the health and safety
of the public. It will invariably be the
case that a protective order may have some adverse impact on the practitioner.
To give consideration
to that possible impact would undermine the legislative
intention to give paramount importance to the protection of the health and
safety of the public. We have not given that submission any consideration in
deciding protective orders.
It is apparent that Mr Avis has learned from his experience. He has changed the
way he works. He is clearly dedicated to the practice
of nursing and has
continued his studies to develop his skills. In 2017 he completed a Graduate
Diploma in Public Health Tropical
Medicine and in 2018 he completed a Graduate
Certificate of Paediatric Emergency Nursing. He is presently undertaking a
Nurse Practitioner course through the University of Queensland. His
study and learning is to the improvement in his practice of nursing
benefit to the public. He takes the time to pass on his new knowledge and
education to his colleagues. He has used the present
circumstances as a case
study on the use of the Between The Flags chart and to increase compliance with
discharge checklists for
medical nursing teams.
When answering questions Mr Avis readily accepted responsibility for his
mistakes. He says he has learned from his errors and has
changed his
practice. He now records objective information and does not use descriptive
terms at all. When he is involved in discharge he now
makes a note in the
clinical records. He now uses the PADOC (Paediatric Department Observation
Chart) documentation template which
provides guidance for a comprehensive A-G
assessment and highlights observations that fall outside the flags. In answering
his errors in the past, and said he had gained a great deal from
his ongoing
These events occurred early in his career when he may have been more susceptible
to copying poor practice, an understandable weakness
of an enthusiastic new
graduate. He says he is now more confident in his practice as a nurse. He
readily accepts his responsibilities
extend from the time of first contact with
the patient though to the time they actually leave the hospital. He does no
assume that
his work ends when he reports to his colleagues.
Mr Avis has the ongoing support of the Nursing Unit Manager of the emergency
department where he still works, the respect of his
colleagues, and the approval
of a visiting medical officer working within the emergency department. Mr Avis
wishes to be a nurse
practitioner and is working hard to achieve that goal.
We are satisfied that Mr Avis is a safe practitioner and well able to practice
in a way that protects the health and safety of the
public. We believe he has a
sound future and is worthy of the encouragement evidenced in the support he has
from his referees.
Nevertheless his care of the young boy amounted, in the way we have described,
to unsatisfactory professional conduct. It is important
that our decision is
brought home to Mr Avis. This is not only for his benefit but is also a
demonstration for other nurses of what
is expected of them. Perhaps most
importantly, there is value in the public being aware that complaints of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct are investigated and action is taken with
paramount importance given to the protection of the health and safety of the
Determination and Orders
In our view it is appropriate that we reprimand Mr Avis
for his conduct in the care of the young boy on 21 March 2016. It is not
appropriate
or necessary that we make any other protective order.
Appeal and review rights
Mr Shaun Robert Avis has the right to appeal this
decision to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Distribution of decision
We provide a copy of this written statement of our
decision to:
Shaun Robert Avis,
Health Care Complaints Commission,
National Board, and
parents of the boy
Chairperson
Date: 17 January 2020
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (348 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter