URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2017/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Pandya and Prasad [2017] NSWNMPSC 2 (31 January 2017)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
HARIDAVAN ASHOKBHAI PANDYA
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001367352 (NSW)
SUMINTRA PRASAD
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001304942 (NSW)
STATEMENT OF DECISION
NON-DISCLOSURE DIRECTIONS APPLY
[8] and [14]
________________________________________________________________
Citation: Health Care Complaints Commission v Pandya and Prasad
Parties: Health Care Complaints Commission
represented by Feneil Shah
of the Health Care Complaints Commission.
Haridavan Pandya
represented by Matthew Byrne NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association.
Sumintra Prasad
represented by Patricia Robertson NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association.
Mark Paul (Chairperson)
Anne Walsh (Nurse Member)
Babette Smith (Lay Member)
: 6, 7 and 8 December 2016
31 January 2017
Exercise Of Powers:
Haridavan Pandya is
reprimanded. His registration is subject to conditions relating to practice,
supervision and education
Exercise Of Powers:
Sumintra Prasad is
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law) – s139B(1)(a), s170, s170E, and clause 7 of
Schedule 5D
Overview of events
1. At about 3.00 pm on Friday 28 February 2014 a visitor
arrived at Bungarribee House asking to see her husband who had been admitted
the Acute Ward of the mental health facility of Western Sydney Local Health
District the day before.
2. As RN Sumintra Prasad was returning from the
handover she responded to the request, and went to look for the patient, but did
find him in his room or the other places she looked. She asked a colleague
to check the bathroom of the patient’s room, and
he did so, only to find
the patient collapsed on the floor, apparently having taken his own life. The
alarm was raised but the patient
could not be resuscitated.
3. RN Harivadan
Pandya had been assigned to look after the patient during that shift, but he had
departed the ward about half an hour
beforehand to travel to another facility to
commence another shift.
4. Upon RN Pandya’s early departure RN Prasad
had picked up the behavioural observation of the patient that was due at 2.40
pm, being just before she went to handover at about 2.45 pm.
5. The manner
and cause of the death of the patient was a matter for the coroner. The task of
this Professional Standards Committee
is to inquire into the conduct of RN
Prasad and RN Pandya during their shifts that day and the care exercised by them
towards the
6. The care exercised by RN Pandya fell significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience, and we have found unsatisfactory professional
conduct. We have decided to reprimand RN Pandya, place
restrictions on his
employment, require supervision and that he undertake some further
7. The care exercised by RN Prasad in leaving for handover fell
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience. We have found unsatisfactory
professional conduct, and have cautioned RN Prasad.
Whilst there were
weaknesses in the other aspects of RN Prasad’s conduct we did not find
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
The proceedings
directions hearing the Chair of the Committee had made an order under clause
7(1)(b)(iv) of Schedule 5D of the National
Law directing that the name of the
patient and any information that would identify the patient not be published.
That order was
confirmed at the commencement of the hearing and continues. The
patient is referred to as Patient A.
9. The proceedings were heard on 6, 7
and 8 December 2016. By s170 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
National Law) we were able to inquire into the complaints concerning
RN Prasad and RN Pandya at the same time (the ‘Pandya
Complaint’ and
the ‘Prasad Complaint’). It was convenient that both matters be
heard together. The inquiries
concerned the one patient over the course of a
shift when both were rostered for duty in the Acute Ward.
10. The Health Care
Complaints Commission was the Complainant in each case, and both complaints were
dated 10 June 2016.
11. Mr Feneil Shah appeared for the Health Care
Complaints Commission. Mr Matthew Byrne of the NSW Nurses and Midwives
Association’
represented RN Harivadan Pandya. Ms Patricia Robertson of
the NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association represented RN Sumintra
12. At the commencement of our inquiry the Commission handed up
amended particulars of the Pandya Complaint deleting some of the particulars
amending others. There was no objection to our inquiry proceeding on the basis
of the amendments. The amended Pandya Complaint
was added to Tab 1 of the two
volumes of documents provided by the Commission in support of both complaints.
We received the material
without any objection, and the volumes were marked
13. At the commencement of the hearing the Commission handed up
a further statement from Ms Nazma Khan which was added to HCCC1 as
14. Also handed up was an email attaching the Level 3 Behavioural Assessment
and Observation sheets for the three other patients allocated
to the care of RN
Pandya on that shift in addition to Patient A. That material was added as Tab
20A to HCCC1. A direction was made
under clause 7(1)(b)(iv) of Schedule 5D of
the National Law directing that the name of those patients and any information
identify the patients not be published.
15. The material
produced by the Commission included statements that had been provided to the
police for the coronial investigation,
transcripts of interviews with the Human
Resources Department of Western Sydney Local Health District and also the
responses in correspondence
to questions asked by the Commission, sometimes
answered directly by the individuals and on occasions through a representative.
16. The information was useful and of assistance. However, we do not take
much from any variations and gaps in the versions of events
given by the
individuals. The information was collected in different circumstances and for
different purposes, with the questions
being asked in different contexts. We do
not draw any adverse inferences from those apparent inconsistencies.
received, without objection, a folder of material on behalf of RN Prasad, marked
SP 1. Ms Robertson also handed up some material
explaining the source of
photographs of the Acute Unit and relating to a referee report by Mr Chy Ong a
Nurse Unit Manager at Bungarribee
House – added to SP-1.
18. Mr Byrne
provided a folder of material which we received without objection and marked
HP1. Within the bundle at Tab 10 was an
extract from the Public Health System
Nurses and Midwives (State) Award 2015. During the course of the hearing Mr
Byrne supplemented
that item by the 2011 version of the Award from 2011 as was
in operation at the time of the events being considered – all accepted,
without objection, and marked “HP2.
19. At the commencement of our
inquiry we were advised that a proposed witness, Ms Nazma Khan the Team Leader
on the relevant day,
had suffered chest pains, collapsed outside the hearing
room and had been taken by ambulance to hospital for assessment and observation.
Ms Khan was unable to attend the hearing. No application was made by any of the
parties for an adjournment of the proceedings.
Within the material provided by
the Commission were a number of statements of Ms Khan and related correspondence
(Tabs 21 to 26,
and 25A of HCCC-1). Where information provided by Ms Khan was
in conflict with other materials and oral evidence we exercised caution,
only because Ms Khan was unavailable for cross-examination to be tested on those
20. In addition to the documents received we heard evidence from Mr
Arthur Medida, Ms Christine Muller as the Commission’s expert,
Sumithira Joseph, Mrs Dhanasagree Naik (by telephone) as a referee for RN
Pandya, and Mr Chy Ong (by telephone) as a referee for
RN Prasad. RN
Pandya and RN Prasad also gave evidence.
21. Ms Joseph referred to a General
Information policy document of Western Sydney Local Health District which she
said required that
staff must obtain permission before proceeding on meal
breaks, or completion of duty, or to leave the ward for any reason. The
was later provided to us and was received, without objection, and
marked HCCC2.
22. The parties took no objection to us proceeding on the basis
that we consider, at the one time, whether the either complaint amounted
unsatisfactory professional conduct and if so then proceeding to give
consideration to the exercise of our powers under s146B
of the National Law.
23. At the conclusion of the evidence Mr Shah made oral submissions
concerning the complaint against RN Pandya.
24. Mr Shah handed up proposed
protective orders with respect to RN Pandya and RN Prasad.
25. Mr Byrne
made oral submissions on behalf of RN Pandya, but we did not have sufficient
time to receive all the submissions during
the hearing.
conclusion of the hearing day Mr Byrne wished to consider whether he would make
further submissions in respect of some
aspects of the complaint against RN
Pandya and also in respect of the proposed protective orders.
27. The Chair
of the Committee made the following directions, with the agreement of the
• the Commission to file and serve written submissions in
respect of the Prasad Complaint on Monday, 12 December 2016;
Byrne to file and serve any written further submissions in respect of the Pandya
Complaint and also the proposed protective
orders by Tuesday, 13 December
• Ms Robertson to file and serve written submissions in respect
of the Prasad Complaint and also the proposed protective orders
by Tuesday, 13
December 2016; and
• the Commission to file and serve any responses to
those submissions by Wednesday 14 December 2016.
28. Those submissions were
received and have been considered.
Commission’s application to
29. Immediately after the lunch adjournment on Tuesday, 6 December Mr
Shah made an application that the inquiry could not continue
unless two members
of the Committee, Babette Smith and Michael Hagarty, recuse themselves. The
application was based on apprehension
of bias, in circumstances where Ms Smith
was a member of a Tribunal in proceedings before the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
and in those proceedings Michael Hagarty had been a
witness called on behalf of a respondent to a complaint brought by the
Commission.
Mr Shah had instructed counsel in those proceedings. The
Commission’s submissions to the Tribunal had contained particular
criticism of the evidence given by Mr Hagarty. Although the hearing had
concluded, the Tribunal was yet to publish its decision.
30. Mr Shah
acknowledged that at the commencement of the hearing earlier that morning the
Chair had drawn to the attention of the
parties that Mr Hagarty had been a
witness in NCAT proceedings where Ms Smith was a member of the Tribunal. No
objection had been
raised. Mr Shah said he had since taken further instructions
in particular with respect to the written submissions in the
proceedings.
31. The factual basis of the application was accepted by the
Committee and was not contested by Ms Robertson or Mr Byrne. Their concerns
were with the possible disruption or delay to our inquiry. Ms Robertson
tendered (marked as SP2) an email from Mr Shah of the previous
week that had
dealt, in general terms, with conflict concerns. No issue of recusal had been
raised. Mr Shah said that if Mr Hagarty
were to recuse himself then the
application with respect to Ms Smith would be withdrawn as having no basis. Mr
Shah said the application
was in respect of an apprehension of bias, not actual
bias. He emphasised that the application did not involve any prediction about
how either of the Committee members would in fact approach their task. We
adjourned to consider the application.
32. Ultimately it was not necessary
for us to determine the application. During the adjournment Mr Hagarty vacated
his office as
a member of the Committee.
33. Section 170E of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National (NSW) provides that if one of the members
constituting a committee
vacates office for any reason before the inquiry is
completed then the inquiry may be continued and a determination made by the
members of the Committee. On that basis our inquiry was able to
continue even though one member had vacated office.
34. As set out above, the Committee received written material on
behalf of the parties and also heard oral evidence. By clause 2
of 5D of the
National Law we were able to receive all that material as evidence, and did
35. The relevant legal principles that guide the Committee are
well-established and were not contested: applying the civil standard
considering Briginshaw; what is to be reasonably expected of a practitioner; the
protective rather than the punitive function
of a Professional Standards
Committee; the significant trust placed by patients in practitioners; and the
importance of protecting
the public.
36. Rather than proceed by way of
summarising the documents and the oral evidence we find it convenient to
consider the evidence with
reference to the two complaints and the particulars
provided. We commence with the complaint against RN Pandya, as he was the nurse
who was specifically allocated to look after Patient A on the day in
Complaint against RN Pandya
37. The complaint against RN Pandya
concerns his conduct during the shift that he worked at Bungarribee House on
28 February 2014.
There are five parts of the complaint of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a) of the National Law: not notifying
or giving advance notice of early departure; leaving early; no handover; not
undertaking observations; and, not keeping proper records.
38. The Commission
submitted (and similarly for RN Prasad) that each of the parts on their own
could amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct and that the Pandya
Complaint could be made out upon one or more of the particulars being found to
be unsatisfactory professional
conduct. We agree with that approach. The parts
of the Pandya Complaint are essentially distinct matters, each standing alone
though the events occur on the same shift and in some respects rely on the
same facts. We deal with each in turn.
Part 1 of the Pandya Complaint
– failing to give early advice to the team leader of an early
39. RN Pandya admitted in his statement and when giving evidence
that he had not advised the Team Leader at the start of his shift
that he was
leaving early. The circumstances of him coming to work that shift require some
explanation in order to place his conduct
in context. The background is also
relevant to other aspects of the Pandya Complaint.
40. RN Pandya was employed
within Western Sydney Local Health District and most often worked at Cumberland
Hospital. He was due to
start his routine shift at Cumberland Hospital campus
at 2.30pm on 28 February 2014. He had been requested to first undertake a
at Bungarribee House at Blacktown Hospital commencing at 7.00am and ordinarily
to conclude at 3:30pm, and he was therefore
working a double shift. The shift
at Bungarribee House was to be counted as an overtime shift.
41. RN Pandya
said he had often worked double shifts before but usually both shifts were on
the Cumberland Hospital campus. RN Pandya
had only worked once before at
Bungarribee House, about a year earlier. He had previously undertaken a few
shifts at the Short Stay
Unit located adjacent to Bungarribee House. Depending
on traffic the time to travel between Bungarribee House and Cumberland Hospital
was anywhere from 20 to 40 minutes.
42. He said it was his understanding and
accepted practice that a nurse rostered to an overtime shift before their
ordinary shift
would leave the prior overtime shift early in order to arrive on
time for their regular shift. What shifts were to be worked were
arranged by
those who looked after the rosters across the whole of the Western Sydney Local
Health District. RN Pandya assumed that
when he was rostered for the overtime
shift at Bungarribee House that those at Bungarribee House would have been told
that it was
an overtime shift for him and that he would therefore be leaving
early in order to start his ordinary shift on time at 3:30pm.
43. There was
no evidence about whether those working at Bungarribee House on that day were
aware that RN Pandya was to work a second
shift at Cumberland Hospital and would
be leaving at 2.30pm rather than working through to 3.30pm. There was no
evidence that RN
Khan was aware, and much to suggest she was not aware.
Certainly RN Pandya did not tell RN Kahn either at the commencement of his
or during the initial handover meeting that he would be leaving at
44. RN Pandya said that he spoke to Ms Khan at about 11.00am asking
whether he could depart earlier, at 2.15pm. Ms Khan was not happy
request and RN Pandya said that Ms Khan replied it would be all right if he
arrived at 3.00. RN Pandya took that as confirmation
or approval for him to
leave at about 2.30 being sufficient time to arrive at Cumberland Hospital at
45. The material from Ms Khan is that the conversation did not take
place at 11.00am but at around 1.00pm, after the lunch break.
Her recollection
of what she said was that it would be all right if he left at 3.00pm. The ward
was busy, and by 3:00pm the handover
would then have taken place and the staff
for the next shift would be on the floor.
46. Any conversation about
leaving early, whether departing at 2:15pm or 2:30pm, should have taken place at
the commencement of the
shift. In our view it was the professional obligation
of RN Pandya to tell RN Khan at the commencement of his shift or during the
handover meeting if there was any issue that could affect the performance of his
duties over the shift. He was wrong to proceed
on the assumption that somehow
Ms Khan would have been told by somebody that the rostering arrangements meant
that he would have
to leave at 2.30pm. When pressed on why he did not say
anything he said he had thought things were busy in the meeting and at the
commencement of the shift, so he didn’t raise the point, then it slipped
his mind, but then he found a moment at about 11.00am
to talk to her. Indeed,
RN Pandya’s motivation for speaking to RN Khan was his request to leave
earlier than 2:30pm, being
2:15pm, in that he believed she was already aware he
would be leaving at 2:30pm.
47. These confusions in communication amply
demonstrate the critical importance of RN Pandya informing Ms Khan at the
commencement
of the shift. Had he done so there would be no ambiguity, and all
who were working on that shift would have known from the outset
what would be
required in order to deal with RN Pandya leaving early, at whatever time that
was. Resources could be organised across
the shift and the other nurses would
know what tasks they might have to take on, and when.
48. Ms Muller was of
the opinion that RN Pandya’s failure to inform RN Khan at the start of his
shift fell below the standard
reasonably expected, but his conduct did not
invite her strong criticism (HCCC-1, Tab 63, page 10).
49. When giving
evidence RN Pandya gave the impression that he saw the overtime shift as a
secondary or fill-in shift, that he was
somehow helping out or doing a favour,
and that he did not approach the shift as he would an ordinary shift. He was
simply working
an extra shift because he had been requested to do so, and it
wasn’t for him to be concerned about the implications of his
time, and the travel time to commence his usual shift. He appeared to take a
casual approach to the shift, and we believe
that lead to him not thinking it
was important to inform RN Kahn as he would have done if working a usual shift.
In our view, it
is this additional aspect of RN Khan’s attitude to the
shift that leads us to a conclusion that his conduct fell significantly
what was reasonably expected, and amounts to unsatisfactory professional
Part 2 of the Pandya Complaint – acting inappropriately in
leaving the unit at approximately 14:35 hours on 28 February
50. In support the Commission provided details of the circumstances of
RN Pandya’s departure: that he had not obtained consent
to leave the unit
at the time that he was completing his shift; that he hadn’t checked that
the team leader was satisfied with
arrangements in place at that time, that he
had not conducted a proper handover of his allocated patients; that he left the
short staffed; and that he had not completed his behavioural observations
for the patient.
51. It was readily accepted by RN Pandya that a nurse should
not depart the shift without telling the team leader or nurse in charge.
what is required of the Western Sydney Local Health District General Information
policy (HCCC-2, page 8 of 15). Nurses can
be expected to meet the requirements
of policies that govern the way in which they are to carry out their duties. RN
Pandya accepted
he did not obtain permission to leave at the time he was
52. Even allowing for RN Pandya believing he had earlier been given
approval to leave at 2.30pm he should still have spoken to RN
Khan just before
he left. RN Pandya accepted that if he had been asked by RN Khan to remain then
his obligation would have been to
do so, even if that meant arriving late at
Cumberland Hospital.
53. RN Pandya says that after telling one of the other
RNs that he was departing he notified RN Khan that he was leaving the unit,
offered the security passes and was asked to give them to the medications nurse.
However there is no information from RN Khan
to suggest that she took that
conversation as an indication that he was leaving at that moment, and RN Pandya
did not say that was
what he said. That was the time when he should have
explicitly stated what he was doing, and he did not.
54. At about this time
the shift was busy, as nurses were occupied with another admission and
supervising a person who had been brought
in by the police. RN Khan had just
returned from making enquiries about the availability of nurses from the nearby
Short Stay Unit,
and the handover was about to start for the next shift. Had RN
Khan known at the moment of RN Pandya offering the security pass
that he was
Ward, that she would have requested that
he stay. That she did not, supports
the conclusion that RN Khan was not aware, even from the earlier conversation,
that he was leaving
at that moment.
55. RN Pandya did not check with RN
Khan at the time he was to leave that she was satisfied arrangements were in
place for the care
of the patients. In addition to any ordinary obligation to
have that conversation the Bungarribee House policy and procedure document
72 of HCCC 1, paragraph 3.1.7) required that happen.
56. Although RN Pandya
had not received a briefing on the day about Bungarrabee House procedures, and
may not have received one when
he was there a year earlier, he did say that the
procedures were much the same as those under which he worked at Cumberland
particularly with respect to patient care.
57. RH Pandya left
without giving a proper handover. He did no more than tell RN Tint that his
patients were in from the courtyard
and all fine. RN Tint did not realise this
was a handover. RN Pandya did not give the handover he would have had he stayed
participated in the usual handover on the arrival of the next shift. It was
an inadequate handover, prompted by his desire to leave
as quickly as possible.
He had wanted to leave at 2:15pm, it was now about 2:30pm and he wanted to
travel to his usual shift as
soon as he could. His desire to depart overtook
his obligations to his patients.
58. There is a requirement under the
Bungarrabee House policy that ‘two nursing staff are continuously
available to provide
supervision to Acute clients between 0700 hours and 2300
hours’. There was considerable evidence and submissions on behalf
RN Pandya and RN Prasad as to what the policy meant in practice and how it was
to be followed. Issues that were raised included:
did ‘continuously
available’ mean physically on the floor, and not in the fishbowl
observation area; could a nurse be
momentarily or briefly involved in another
59. Without seeking to resolve those issues we are of the view that
RN Pandya believed when he departed that there were at least two
nursing staff
available on the ward available to provide supervision. That belief was formed
without reference to the policy, and
as discussed above he should have checked
with RN Khan before leaving.
60. It was one of RN Pandya’s
obligations during the shift to make observations of behaviour of each of the
patients allocated
to him and completes the behavioural observation chart. RN
Pandya admits he did not do so, although he does say he made some observations.
He was working in an acute ward. All of his patients required Level 3
observations, meaning that they were to be observed every
20 minutes. That was
to be an active observation to determine the patients attitude such as whether
they were threatening or agitated
or anxious or labile or settled or sleeping.
What might constitute a satisfactory observation will depend on the
circumstances but
it is apparent that the observation is to be more than simply
ticking a checklist. There should be some active assessment and some
of judgment.
61. There is a form to be used that permits a tick to be made to
confirm the behavioural observation and to be signed by the nurse
(HCCC-1, Tab
20A for three of the patients, and within the clinical notes at Tab 69 for
Patient A). At the time of his departure
RN Pandya had not completed the
observations due at about 14.00 and 14.20. Given that RN Pandya had to complete
four observations
every 20 minutes it would not be possible to do them all at
the same time at exactly 14.00. Each observation might vary in length.
Sometimes it is necessary to speak to the patient to form a judgment about the
behaviour. So necessarily the observations will
be taken at about the required
time but certainly with a 20-minute frequency.
62. RN Pandya gave no reason
for not completing the observations on the chart other than doing so slipped his
mind. He says that
he had in fact made the observations of Patient A because he
saw him in the courtyard ‘at about those times’.
63. For the
reasons explained further below concerning RN Pandya we think it unlikely that
Patient A was in the courtyard for any
longer than a brief period of time. Any
engagement Patient A had in the courtyard was with another patient and not
directly with
RN Pandya as part of an observation.
64. It is important that
the observations be made at the frequency required and that the record is made
at the time of the observations.
There is no adequate explanation for why RN
Pandya could not complete the observations. It may have been that from about
he was focused on departing as quickly as possible and he was no longer
attending to what he should be doing as a nurse during the
remainder of his
65. RN Pandya had observation sheets for his three other patients and
we were told that those sheets were all kept in a folder. It
was open to RN
Pandya to carry the folder with him or to leave it at the nurses’ station.
Either way he certainly had the opportunity
to complete the observation sheets
for his four patients but he did not do so. If he had to leave without
completing the observation
sheets he ought to have told somebody that he had not
done so before he left.
66. Taking account of all of these matters we are of
the view that as alleged in Part 2 of the Pandya Complaint RN Pandya acted
inappropriately
when he left the unit. His conduct was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of his level of training
experience. If it be necessary to do so we make the same finding in respect of
both the inadequate handover and the failure
to complete the observations
The issue of the handover also arises under Part 3 of the Pandya
Part 3 of the Pandya Complaint – failure of
67. The third part relates to the inadequacy of the hand over. In
giving evidence RN Pandya agreed that he had failed to give any
or any adequate
hand over in respect of his allocated patients including Patient A. He
acknowledged that he hadn’t spoken
to another nurse about his patients
prior to handover; hadn’t discussed the patients individually but only
collectively; had
not informed RN Tint about the patients’ mental state or
behaviour; said nothing about actions or assessments required for
his patients;
did not check that RN Tint was taking over the responsibility for his patients
(which was contrary to policy, HCCC-1,
Tab 76); failed to have a joint visual
identification of the allocated patients with RN Tint (which was required by the
policy HCCC-1,
Tab 73); and, failed to tell RN Tint that he had not read and was
unable to find Patient A’s clinical file throughout his shift.
68. The hand over is a critical component of patient care. Nurses have an
obligation to look after their patients and that includes
making sure that any
care that is to follow takes account of the care that has previously been
provided. Continuity of care is supported
by handover. There is no explanation
for RN Pandya not undertaking a proper handover other than that his mind was
focused on leaving
early to start his next shift. RN Pandya’s brief and
informal comment to RN Tint as he was in the process of walking out was
unsatisfactory.
69. In failing to undertake a handover in the circumstances
described we are of the view that RN Pandya’s conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Part 4 of the Pandya Complaint –
failure to make the required behavioural observations
70. RN Pandya
acknowledged that he did not undertake the observations of Patient A due at 1400
and 1420 hours. By way of explanation
he said that he saw Patient A in the
courtyard at about these times.
71. Whilst it is possible that the patient
was in the courtyard for some time in that period we believe it would only have
been briefly
and certainly not for the 20 minutes or so that would have been
required to bridge the two times for the observations. As discussed
below there
is evidence that RN Pandya saw Patient A in his room at about 14.00 and also at
72. RN Pandya might have seen Patient A in the courtyard but in our
view he did not make any behavioural observations as required.
Had he been
conscious of making behavioural observations of the patient that would no doubt
have prompted him to record those observations,
but he did not do so. In our
view he did not consciously think about the patient. There was no evidence of
any exercise by him
of clinical thinking or clinical reasoning in relation to
whatever visual observation was made of Patient A in the courtyard. There
no evidence of any patient centred care in his observations. Behavioural
observations should not fall to chance encounters.
73. When giving evidence
of his reflections in relation to these incidents RN Pandya’s main thought
was that he was now very
focused about record keeping and lapses in his
documentation. He saw his failing to be mainly a matter of record keeping,
than also a failure to undertake the observations in a patient focussed
74. There is little value in the recording of a behavioural
observation if the behavioural observation was not made with thought and
All of the patients in the acute ward had been assessed as having a higher risk
of self-harm and therefore requiring regular
behavioural observations. Ms
Muller gave evidence that the risk of self-harm was elevated for Patient A as he
had recently been
admitted to the ward, and had just been told that he was to be
an involuntary patient.
75. When giving evidence RN Pandya did not
demonstrate a thoughtful understanding of the need for the behavioural
observations, and
the importance of those assessments as a critical component in
patient care. In our view RN Pandya undertook the behavioural observations
perfunctory manner and in doing so missed the utility and value of making the
observations.
76. In failing to carry out proper observations at 14.00 and
14.20 we are of the view that RN Pandya’s conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Part 5 of the Pandya Complaint –
not keeping clinical notes
77. The fifth aspect of the Pandya Complaint is
that RN Pandya did not keep adequate documentation of his care of Patient A, in
he did not document any entry in the clinical notes; did not record any
physical observations; and did not record the observations
of Patient A at 14.00
and 14.20 hours (to the extent he made those observations as he said he had).
When RN Pandya left the ward
the only records he had made concerning Patient A
for the whole shift were the ticks and signatures on the patient observation
through to 13:40.
78. RN Pandya said he had not been able to find the
clinical notes. Apparently he had made some efforts to find the notes. It is
likely that the notes were with the medical practitioners for much of the shift.
79. In our assessment his searches and inquiries were inadequate. Whilst his
lack of familiarity may be some explanation for not knowing
where to go to look
for the clinical notes, we are of the view that RN Pandya believed he could not
be expected to make a thorough
was not his regular work environment.
80. What is of concern to us is that he
was not prompted at some stage during the shift to make some clinical note
entries on another
piece of paper or add that material to the clinical notes
later on. There was nothing to suggest that RN Pandya was concerned about
being able to find the clinical notes. It was as if he had no responsibility to
doing anything in particular in the absence
of the notes being available and
nobody giving him direction to do otherwise. We are of the view that his
conduct fell significantly
below the standard reasonably expected and was
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
81. Overall we are of the view that RN
Pandya’s conduct on 28 February 2014 and the care he exercised
towards the patient on
that day fell significantly below the standard reasonably
to be expected of a practitioner with his level of training and experience
respect of each of the five parts of the Pandya Complaint.
Consideration
– RN Pandya
82. Having made a finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct with respect to RN Pandya we now consider whether and what action
to be taken under s146B of the National Law in order to protect the public. Our
concern about his conduct during the shift
on 28 February 2014 revolves around
his attitude to the shift. In our view RN Pandya treated the shift as somehow
subsidiary or
secondary to his main shift at Cumberland Hospital, and that he
was just filling in to help out.
83. That attitude meant that he did not
approach his shift as he might approach his other shifts with the intention of
doing everything
as well as required of an RN on any shift. He was reticent in
speaking to Ms Khan about his early departure. When he did speak
to her later
in the shift he did not communicate clearly so as to assist RN Khan in carrying
out her tasks. Towards the end of his
shift he stopped making observations of
his patients and then left in a rush without undertaking the usual handover.
Although he
left an hour early he was paid for the full shift and received that
payment without making a correction. It was as if he wanted
to get in and get
out as quickly as possible, attract no attention, do the basic work and leave it
to the regulars to look after
what needed to be done.
84. There was no
allegation made that RN Pandya’s work was not up to standard when doing
his ordinary shifts. That he wanted
to leave early to commence his ordinary
shift on time suggests that he had greater loyalty and dedication to his
ordinary shift than
to the overtime shift. Whatever might be the difficulties
of rostering and having sufficient nurses to cover a shift, it should
case that a registered nurse would take the attitude that one shift is less or
more important than another.
85. In our view RN Pandya undertook his shift
in a basic routine manner, going through the motions, rather than engaging with
patients and his work colleagues. RN Pandya’s evidence, both by way
of his statement, HP1 Tab 1, and at the hearing did not
demonstrate any
understanding of how it might have been that working an overtime and double
shift may have affected his attitude
to his work. In our view RN Pandya should
not work two consecutive shifts.
86. Although RN Pandya is an experienced
mental health nurse the care that he provided on the day and his interactions
with the team
leader and his colleagues showed weaknesses in his practice. We
believe he should not be working except under supervision.
87. The Commission
put forward proposed protective orders. Two of the proposed conditions included
that an employer and a supervisor
agree in writing to report any ‘unsafe
practice’. Whilst reporting a breach of conditions is pertinent, we would
impose on an employer or supervisor an additional or available obligation to
make a report of a similar kind as already exists under
the National Law.
88. In response to the orders proposed by the Commission Mr Byrne submitted
that whilst the orders were a matter for the Committee
there was no need to
restrict RN Pandya from practising through an agency, and that if any
supervision was required a period of three
months was appropriate.
the conditions we will impose requires RN Pandya to provide a copy of our
decision to his employers. Doing so will necessarily
result in those employers
seeing the decision in respect of RN Prasad, a consequence of both matters being
heard together. Our decision
is public in any event.
90. For the reasons
above we believe RN Pandya should be restricted from practising in a way that
would permit double shifts, or working
for more than one employer where there is
a risk of competing shift arrangements. RN Pandya did not demonstrate that he
to lead a shift or team. Some general and specific supervision is
required to confirm RN Pandya’s attitude to work. A minimum
of 12 months
will allow a period for his conduct and performance to be viewed, and with time
for guidance and review. Further education
will assist in reinforcing the
particular issues that arise in providing mental health nursing services,
particularly the function
and importance of observations and record
complaint against RN Prasad
91. The complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct
against RN Prasad is that her conduct and the care she exercised on 28 February
2014 was significantly below the standard reasonably expected (as provided in
s193B(1)(a) of the National Law). RN Prasad was working
the same shift as RN
Pandya and had been allocated three patients.
Part 1 of the Prasad Complaint
– inappropriately signing observations
92. The first part of the
complaint is that RN Prasad inappropriately signed the behavioural observations
records for Patient A at
1400 hours, 1420 hours and 1440 hours when she did not
have any direct contact or interaction with the patient at those times and
she signed the entries for 1400 hours and 1420 hours at about 1440
93. We heard evidence from RN Prasad about her conduct and the care
provided during the shift. RN Prasad acknowledged that she signed
observations chart in respect of Patient A for 14:00 and 14:20 at about 14:40.
She was prompted to do so upon the departure
of RN Pandya. She was about to go
to the handover at 2:30pm but once she saw that RN Pandya had left she thought
it was better to
remain on the floor within the acute ward and delay
94. When she picked up the observation charts for her own patients
she also took the observation charts for the four patients of RN
Pandya. She
did so having some knowledge of observations for Patient A at 14:00 and 14:20,
for which there were no entries, and
she decided on her own initiative to
complete the entries.
95. Two of RN Prasad’s patients were in rooms on
either side of Patient A’s room. One of her patients required particular
care and attention in her room and so RN Prasad had spent more time in that area
of the ward that might otherwise have been the case.
In doing so she said she
had seen and observed Patient A on a number of occasions and in particular at
14:00 and 14:20 when she
was undertaking observations of her own patients on
either side of his room.
96. She acknowledged that the observations she made
of Patient A at those times were not as thorough in the same way that she
undertakes observations. Nevertheless she believed that she had taken
the time to sufficiently observe Patient A at 14:00 and 14:20
that she felt able
to make the entries in the observation chart and sign as having made the
observations.
97. RN Prasad was confident that she had seen Patient A at
patients in rooms on either side of Patient A and she had spent some time in
that area of the ward. She agreed it was possible
that Patient A had left his
room and visited the courtyard and returned but she did not see that happen. We
have concluded that
Patient A was in his room at about 14:00 and 14:20, and that
if he left his room to go to the courtyard and was seen by RN Pandya,
only for a short period.
98. That RN Pandya felt she was in a position to
complete and sign the observation chart entries for 14:00 and 14:20 might
she was doing so in a routine way simply to complete the form rather
than as being an accurate record of what she had assessed from
her observations
at the time she had made them. When questioned about her observations of
Patient A at 14:00 and 14:20 she was able
to provide some detail. Whilst those
observations might not have been to the appropriate standard, we accept RN
Prasad when she
says that she made the entries having thought about what she had
observed a short time beforehand and not in a routine or unthinking
manner. She
said she had spoken to Patient A during the shift and had some rapport with him.
Had RN Prasad not shown that willingness
to help and not bothered to complete
the entries then there would be no basis to this part of the
99. Neither RN Pandya nor anybody else had asked her to undertake
the observations for Patient A at 14:40, but she realised that the
observation
needed to be done. Whilst it would have been preferable that she had added a
notation to the observation charts of the
circumstances in which she had made
the observations and recorded them, her failure to do so does not lead to the
conclusion that
her conduct fell significantly below the standard
100. RN Prasad made her own observations of Patient A at 14:40.
Although she did not go into the room she said she did observe carefully
and long enough to make an assessment of his behaviour and that he was
“settled”. She said he was sitting on
the bed looking across the
room to the wall and appeared to her to be settled. She did not engage him in
conversation having made
a judgment that he did not wish to be
101. In the context of RN Prasad having voluntarily picked up RN
Pandya’s patients at least for the purposes of making observations
14:40, and given that she had made earlier observations of Patient A over and
above merely sighting him, we do not believe her
conduct in respect of the
observation at 14:40 was significantly below the standard reasonably
102. We observe that had RN Prasad made the observations of Patient
A at 14:00 and 14:20 in a more considered way then she may have
noticed that he
had been sitting on the bed for perhaps 45 minutes. When she then saw the
patient at 14:40 she may have paused and
considered it was necessary to
undertake a more thorough observation and engagement with the patient than she
did at the time. Given
that she had received no information about the patient
from anybody, knew nothing other than her passing observations of the patient
during her shift, and had received no handover, it would have been better had
she approached the observation at 14:40 as being her
first observation of the
patient and one that was done with more specific thought than subsequent
observations. These may be criticisms
of RN Prasad but those criticisms do not
lead to the conclusion that her conduct with respect to signing the observation
the manner that she did fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected.
Part 2 of the Prasad Complaint – leaving the
103. The second aspect against RN Prasad is that she inappropriately
left the floor at about 14:45 to go to handover when she ought
to have been
aware there were insufficient staff on the floor, she did not wait to ensure
there was sufficient staff in the unit,
and there was little knowledge or
information about Patient A’s status apart from her observation at
104. Paragraph 3.1.7 of the Bungarribee House policies and procedures
(Tab 72) provides that two nursing staff should be continuously
available to
provide supervision to acute patients. The policy also states that it was the
responsibility of the individual nursing
staff to liaise with the team leader
for the provision of relief for the periods of absence prior to those periods of
absence occurring.
105. RN Prasad was conscious of the need to ensure that
there was adequate supervision within the acute ward before she went to
She delayed the 2:30pm handover then took responsibility for RN
Pandya’s patients and remained within the ward.
106. Ms Robertson and
Mr Byrne both drew our attention to the provisions of the Nurses Award with
respect to staffing ratios. It
is not our function to determine whether there
was or was not, at a particular time or for a particular period, a breach of the
of the award as to staffing and if so who was responsible for that
breach. We accept that the ward was busy that day. RN Pandya
knew it was busy.
Any non-compliance with the award do not explain RN Pandya’s conduct. For
a number of reasons a nursing
unit manager was not allocated and Ms Khan was
assuming that role in addition to being team leader. There had been four
and one case of the police bringing a person directly to the ward
rather than through the emergency department.
107. RN Khan had heard at about
lunchtime that there were no patients in the Short Stay Unit and she went to ask
Mr Medida to send
some of the available nurses to assist. RN Khan understood Mr
Medida to say that he would send the nurses immediately, but Mr Medida
that he had said he would send the nurses when available, after completing notes
etc. RN Pandya had left at 2:30pm with
RN Khan believing that he would be
remaining until at least 3:00pm.
108. The evidence we have is that from about
2:30pm through to 3:00pm when the afternoon shift began to arrive and RN Pandya
were as follows. RN Tint had been allocated four patients and had been
looking after them. At about this time she was involved
in admission. RN
Griffiths also had responsibility for four patients but at that time was also
observing a patient that had been
brought by the police, and may have been
involved with the police at different times. That patient was in a room within
RN Griffiths had to make regular and brief observations of the
patient but was not to remain in the room with the patient. RN Labo
charge of medications and may have been within the ward, but sometimes not.
109. RN Prasad gave evidence that when she left the floor to go to the
handover she thought that RN Tint, RN Griffiths and RN Labo
were on the floor as
they had been throughout the shift, but she did not check. Even though they may
have been involved in other
tasks RN Prasad appears to have assumed that the
three of them were available and on the floor.
110. RN Prasad had delayed
handover so that she could attend to her own patients and those of RN Pandya at
2:40pm all of whom she
observed to be settled. She was about to attend the
handover of her patients for the afternoon shift. RN Prasad also believed from
what she had been told by RN Khan that some nurses were arriving from the short
111. The situation was that of a busy ward, with competing
demands, and efforts being made to find more staff, all happening just
handover was to commence. It is also significant that just the day before Nurse
Manager Sumithira Joseph had sent an email to
all staff saying she had observed
no nurses to be on the floor and patients being unsupervised during the
handover, and that conduct
was unacceptable. The lack of cover appears to have
been understood by RN Prasad. When interviewed she had commented on the
in being short staffed (HCCC-1, Tab 57, page 32).
Prasad’s statement (SP-1, Tab 1, para 12) is that she told RN Khan that
she was going to handover. Apparently RN Tint
and RN Lobo were standing nearby,
but there is no evidence of RN Prasad checking with them, or saying to RN Khan
that she was expecting
them to provide cover on the ward.
Bungarribee House policy requires that before leaving all staff liaise with the
Team Leader as to available cover. On the
evidence RN Prasad left for the
handover before confirming there was available cover. Has she said to RN Khan
that she was relying
on RN Tint, RN Lobo and RN Griffiths for cover then that
conversation would have brought to light whether there was sufficient cover
114. RN Prasad has significant experience working at Bungarribee House.
Given the recent history of concern about cover during handover,
Prasad’s own view about there being insufficient staff for the required
tasks, the ward being busy, RN Pandya having left,
and the relief staff not
having arrived, RN Prasad should not have left for the handover without first
checking that there would
be at least two staff on the ward to supervise the
115. It is possible that at moments during the handover there
were those two staff on the ward, but that would have been by happenstance
rather than planning. RN Prasad had a responsibility to check there was
adequate relief before she left, but she did not do so.
116. In those
circumstances we are of the view that her conduct in leaving the ward at that
time was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected.
Prasad Complaint – locating Patient A
117. Part 3 of the complaint is
that when RN Prasad went to look for Patient A she exercised poor judgment in
not searching the bathroom
attached to his room.
118. RN Prasad was returning
from the handover at about 3:00pm when the wife of Patient A caught her
attention and asked to see her
husband. RN Prasad then went to look for him.
119. The evidence is that RN Prasad went to his room, looked in the doorway
but did not see him. She then walked away from the room
interview rooms to see if he was seeing one of the doctors. As she looked in
the interview room she asked
RN Griffiths, who was nearby, to go back to the
patient’s room and check the bathroom. When RN Griffiths arrived he found
collapsed on the floor. The alarm was raised but he could not be
resuscitated.
120. The time between RN Prasad stepping away from the
patent’s room and when RN Griffiths arrived and entered the bathroom
only a few moments.
121. Ms Muller gave evidence that the risk of self-harm
or an attempt is greatest in the first week of admission and particularly
patient is told they are to remain within an acute ward. The patient had seen a
doctor at around about lunchtime and had
been told that he would be staying in
the acute ward. That information was within the clinical notes but there is no
evidence that
RN Prasad had been made aware of that decision.
122. Based on
the information RN Prasad had about the patient and taking account of her
observation of him at 14:40 it was not unreasonable
of her to look for the
patient in the way that she did. Although a nurse on a shift is never off duty
it needs to be acknowledged
that RN Prasad had just returned from handover when
she responded to the wife’s request. RN Prasad had no reason to suspect
that anything might be amiss, or there was some urgency. She was also aware
that there were nurses on the ward with care of the
patients while she was at
123. What she said she was doing was simply looking for the patient
where she believed he was most likely to be. She thought that
if he was not in
his room, where she had last seen him, then he was most likely seeing a doctor
in one of the interview rooms. It
is not that she ceased to look for him, but
continued to do so, and asked another nurse to assist. That she did not walk
room and check the bathroom was not because of any reticence about
entering a patient’s bathroom. She had done so often in
the past with all
patients, male and female. It was not that she decided not to check the
bathroom, but that she thought he was
more likely to be elsewhere.
was no evidence, one way or the other, as to whether, had RN Prasad entered the
bathroom, the outcome would have been different.
125. Her conduct might not
have been the best decision, but we do not find her decision to have been
significantly below the standard
reasonably expected.
Part 4 of the Prasad
Complaint – inadequate understanding
126. When interviewed by the Human
Resources Manager of Western Sydney Local Health District, on 31 July 2014, RN
Prasad said of Patient
A that he was “not mentally unwell or
anything”. The complaint is that in the use of that phrase she displayed
an inadequate
understanding for a mental health nurse in a mental health
facility of mental illness for those admitted involuntarily, and suffering
episode psychosis, and having an increased risk of suicide.
127. Those words,
standing on their own, could well suggest such a lack of understanding. RN
Prasad gave evidence and was cross examined
involuntarily admitted to an acute ward like Bungarribee House. RN Prasad did
not give an explanation
or explain her understanding to the standard of that
provided by Ms Muller. We were nevertheless impressed with her empathetic
understanding
of the situation of the patients in her care, that they were at
risk of suicide and that there were factors and circumstances, which
that the risk would vary and it was necessary that she be alive to those
variations.
128. In the evidence she gave about the interview, RN Prasad said
she was seeking to explain why her first thought was not to enter
the bathroom
but instead go to the interview room when looking for the patient.
we read the transcript of the interview we can see that RN Prasad was trying to
explain in her own way that there wasn’t
anything in particular with
respect to Patient A at that time that would have prompted her to think that
there would have been such
a change in the patient from observation of him at
14:40 that he may be in the bathroom and attempting selfharm. Her reference to
the patient as being healthy and “not looking unwell” can be seen as
her way of saying that there was not a heightened
risk of suicide over and above
the ever present risk of a patient assessed for level 3 observations.
do not know that much can be drawn from those few words in a long and detailed
interview more than two years ago as saying
anything about RN Prasad’s
present understanding of these issues. Mr Ong gave evidence in support of her
work as a mental
health nurse. It is our assessment of the evidence that she
gave at the hearing that she has a satisfactory understanding of mental
issues for patients involuntarily admitted under the Mental Health Act, the
increased and changeable suicide risk of patients
experiencing a first episode
psychosis, the increased risk of patients who are unwilling to engage in
treatment and the increased
suicide risk of patients with reported change from
agitation to isolative behaviour.
131. Overall we have come to the conclusion
that this aspect of the Prasad Complaint is not made out as particularised and
no finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct in that
Consideration – RN Prasad
132. The Commission’s
proposed protective orders were premised on findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in all aspects.
Of the complaint against RN Prasad we only
found unsatisfactory professional conduct in leaving the floor. Our
consideration of
our exercise of powers under s146A and 146B of the National Law
arises upon our finding.
133. Our concern with RN Prasad is that she
stepped back from her obligation to ensure there was adequate cover before
leaving for
handover. Her departure from the floor was her response to dealing
with her competing demands at that time, and she was conscious
of trying to meet
her obligations for all the patients. But she failed in not confirming her
assumptions about sufficient cover
in the unit, not checking with the Team
Leader, and not reporting that her observations of Patient A had not been
undertaken in the
usual way. Her motivations in completing the earlier
observations and picking up the next observation were to contribute and assist.
When giving evidence RN Prasad showed a positive attitude to her work. We do
not believe she will make a mistake of this kind again.
In our view the public
interest will be protected, and RN Prasad will respond, to a caution that she
watches to ensure that her
willingness to assist takes account of what is
happening on the shift and is not narrowed by what she is doing
Exercise of Powers
With respect to RN Pandya
1. We reprimand
Haridavan Pandya.
2. RN Pandya must not engage with an agency for the
purposes of nursing.
3. PN Pandya must not be in charge of a shift, ward or
unit, including as a Team Leader.
4. RN Pandya must not work two consecutive
5. RN Pandya must only be employed as a nurse in circumstances where
the employer has agreed in writing to notify the Nursing and
Midwifery Council
of New South Wales of any breach of the conditions and exchange information with
the Council related to compliance
with the conditions.
6. Within 30 days of
the Committee’s decision, RN Pandya must provide written evidence to the
Nursing and Midwifery Council
of New South Wales that he has provided a copy of
these conditions and the Committee’s decision to all current nursing
and provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with
each employer’s name and contact details.
7. Within 28 days of the
Committee’s decision, RN Pandya must practise under the direct or indirect
the supervision of a registered
nurse (Division 1) who does not have any
conditions on their practice. The supervisor must be on-site and working in
close proximity
within a ward or unit with the registrant, and be able to
oversee and provide advice about the registrant’s practice when
8. Within 28 days of the Committee’s decision, RN Pandya
must commence being supervised by a clinical nurse consultant (or equivalent)
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales who has agreed
to oversee supervision and designate supervisors
as referred to above, for a
minimum of 12 months. RN Pandya must:
a. Provide the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW with the name, contact details and résumé of the
clinical nurse
consultant who works on the same premises as the nurse within two
weeks of commencing a clinical role.
b. Arrange the meetings with the
clinical nurse consultant in person weekly.
c. Authorise the clinical nurse
consultant in writing to:
i. notify the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW
of any breach of the conditions;
ii. inform the Nursing and Midwifery Council
of NSW if there are any concerns relevant to his performance as a registered
iii. inform the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of any failure by
him to attend a meeting with the clinical nurse consultant,
of any termination
of supervision, or any other matter the clinical nurse consultant considers
appropriate; and
iv. provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with a
copy of the conditions signed by him and by the clinical nurse consultant
indicating awareness of the conditions and authorisation.
d. Discuss with the
clinical nurse consultant at the meetings the following:
i. his understanding
of mental health risk and acuity in mental health patients;
ii. his practice
of observing mental health patients;
iii. his communication with team leaders
and other senior nursing staff concerning his patients;
iv. his communication
during handover;
v. his record keeping in patient observation charts and
clinical files;
vi. any other issues he or the clinical nurse consultant
consider important concerning his performance as a registered
e. Provide his clinical nurse consultant with a copy of the
Committee’s reasons for decision and a copy of the registration
conditions.
f. Arrange for the clinical nurse consultant to provide a written
report to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW at three monthly
(or earlier if the clinical nurse consultant considers it necessary) from the
date of the first meeting about:
i. the issues discussed at the
ii. The plan agreed upon between the practitioner and the clinical
nurse consultant to address any issues listed in 8(d) and the outcome
agreed plan;
iii. any other issue the clinical nurse consultant considers
relevant to report to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW about
performance as a registered nurse.
9. Within 20 days of the end of each
current CPD period RN Pandya must confirm in writing to the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of
NSW that at least 10 of the CPD points he has undertaken
are in the mental health field including some from the online Mental Health
10. Sections 125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law 2009 are to apply should RN Pandya’s principal place
practice be anywhere in Australia other than in New South Wales, so that the
appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia.
11. The Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW is the
appropriate review body for the purposes of Division 8 of the Health
Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW).
With respect to RN Prasad:
caution RN Sumintra Prasad
Chairperson
Date: 31/01/2017
------------------
Our attention was drawn to
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
comments of Basten JA at [43] concerning findings in relation to particulars of
complaints.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (567 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter