URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/588.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Jones [2025] NSWPIC 588; (3 November 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Jones [2025] NSWPIC 588
Jonathon Jones
AAI Limited t/as GIO
Philip Carr
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; settlement
approval; claimant was working at the time of the accident; claimant is aware no
entitlement to future statutory benefits
once settlement is approved; settlement
complies with clause 7.37 of the Motor Accident Injuries Guidelines (version
– settlement approved in the amount of $300,000,
consisting of nil NEL, past economic loss of $25,000.00, and future economic
loss of $275,000.00 by way of a buffer; less $18,238.29 for statutory benefits
paid by the insurer.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
proposed settlement of $300,000 is approved under sub s 6.23(2)(b) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
2017 (MAI Act).
to s 3.40(1)(b) of the MAI Act, the insurer is entitled to deduct the sum of
$18,238.29 from the proposed settlement sum
by way of recovery for weekly
payments of statutory benefits paid to the claimant under Division
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
claimant was involved in a motorbike accident on 10 April 2024 and is now
years of age.
claimant suffered fractured injuries to both left and right wrists,
(a) a minimal displaced fracture from the medial aspect of right radius and a
fracture through the dorsal aspect of the hamate of
the right wrist, and
(b) a severely comminuted fracture of the left distal radius of the left wrist
claimant is right hand dominant and continues to experience pain in his left
claimant has made a claim for common law damages.
insurer has accepted liability for the claim (p 15).
THE ACCIDENT
accident occurred at the roundabout situated at Suttor Street and Bradwardine
Road, West Bathurst, NSW (the accident). The claimant
was riding his Yamaha
motorcycle.
claimant was travelling east along Suttor Street when he slowed down to enter
the roundabout, however the driver of the insured
vehicle failed to give way to
the claimant. The insured vehicle collided with the nearside of the
claimant’s motorcycle and
caused him to come off his motorcycle.
claimant was transported via ambulance to the Bathurst Base Hospital (the
The claimant’s personal circumstances
claimant is currently 37 years of age.
the time of the accident the claimant was employed as a labourer in a full-time
position at Beaver Truss Frames Windows, the claimant
having started working
with his employer on
30 November 2025 (p 542).
claimant was assessed by Dr Robyn Mitchell, for the insurer, who assessed the
claimant at 2% whole person impairment (WPI).
claimant was informed by the insurer his accident-related permanent impairment
was not greater than 10% and that he was not entitled
to compensation for
non-economic loss (NEL) (p 534ff).
claimant is entitled to damages for past-economic loss (PEL) and future economic
loss (FEL).
claimant was certified fit for full time employment on 6 March 2025.
claimant has not received Centrelink benefits for this claim (p
The claimant’s injuries
claimant sustained the following injuries in the accident:
(a) a comminuted fracture of left distal radius, and
(b) a fracture of right distal radius.
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
Ambulance records
the accident the claimant was transported by ambulance to the
Bathurst Hospital
claimant was admitted under the care of Dr Sam Kwa (orthopaedic surgeon).
11 April 2024 the claimant underwent emergency surgery, namely, a left wrist
open reduction and internal fixation and his right
wrist was managed
non-operatively with a splint (p 112).
were no post-operative complications, and the claimant was discharged from the
hospital on 12 April 2024 and was requested to
follow up the fracture clinic at
the Orange Health Service (pp 113 and 191).
General Practitioner - Dr Rafiqur Rahman
claimant first saw his general practitioner (GP) following the accident on 7 May
2024 (p 301).
claimant was certified unfit for work from 7 May 2024 to 18 June 2025.
claimant was certified fit for work for four hours per day four days per week,
18 June 2024.
25 June 2024 the claimant was certified fit for work for five hours per day for
four days per week (pp 266 and 303).
20 August 2024 the claimant was certified fit for work for six hours per day for
four days per week (pp 276 and 305).
11 September 2024 the claimant was certified fit for work for six hours per day
for five days per week (p 418).
1 October 2024 the claimant was certified as having no capacity for any work for
two weeks due to the removal of the hardware from
his left wrist by Dr Kwa (pp
282 and 443).
15 October 2024 the claimant was certified fit for work for six hours per day
for four days per week (pp 285 and 307).
claimant was certified fit for full time employment on 6 March 2025, as
indicated above.
Specialist Reports
Dr Samuel Kwa (orthopaedic surgeon)
17 September 2024 Dr Kwa provided a report to the claimant’s GP and
“... John was involved in a motor vehicle accident
in April. He was on a motorbike and was T-boned by another vehicle. He suffered
fractures to both wrists. The right one did not require surgery and was treated
in a splint. The left one was severely comminuted
and required a spanning plate.
He was reviewed in fracture clinic in Orange initially. However as he was from
Windradyne he was also
then followed up for further x-rays at Bathurst fracture
clinic. The plan was for removal of the spanning plate at 3 months post
A RFA form was filled out but apparently this was done in Bathurst and submitted
and no further action occurred. John states
that everything is going well. He
has no problems of his right hand. The left hand he feels is moving well he can
move his fingers
the only issue is that he cannot move his wrist. He did have
tingling in his index and middle fingers initially on the left hand
but this has
now settled. I have ordered an x-ray recently that shows the distal radius
fracture is fully united in an excellent
position. He is currently working light
duties. He is making fly screens for windows and doors.
Jonathon requires removal of the spanning plate so he can regain motion of
his wrist. This will require day surgery and general anaesthetic.
Once removed
he will need to start range of movement exercises and mobilisation of the wrist
with a hand therapist. I would suggest
he sees Bridget Evans in Bathurst. It
will still take a few months to regain range of movement. There are also two
small K-wires
that will also need removal as well. We should proceed as soon as
possible for this to occur ... (p 144).”
25 September 2024 the claimant underwent surgery for the removal of the hardware
(including plate, pins, screws and internal fixation)
from his left wrist (pp
146 - 147).
25 October 2025 Dr Kwa provided a report to the claimant’s GP and
“Jonathan was seen today now a month post removal of the spanning
plate from his left wrist. He feels everything is going well.
He has gone back
to work on a casual basis 4 days a week 6 hours a day putting some fly screens
into doors and is coping with this.
He has some ulnar wrist pain first thing in
the morning but as the day progresses this disappears. He is attending hand
Physical examination shows full pronation and supination with no pain. Dorsi
flexion is to 30 degrees palmar flexion to 15. He can
make a full fist.
He is making good progress. I am happy for him to gradually increase work
activities as tolerated and he can progress in his hand
therapy and
strengthening work as tolerated as well. Will leave him in your care but be
happy to review him again as required (p
1 July 2025 Dr Kwa provided a report to the insurer that
“Thank you for your request for further information
in relation to Mr Jonathan Jones. Please note that I have not seen him for
months now. In relation to your questions:
It is highly likely that he will develop post-traumatic arthritis in relation to
his left wrist injury. This was an intra-articular
fracture. As to whether this
will require further surgical intervention is difficult to predict.
is much less likely he will develop post-traumatic arthritis in relation to his
right wrist injury.
The long-term prognosis is favourable for the above-mentioned injuries although
more so for the right wrist than the left (p
Bathurst Hand Therapy
claimant attended at the Bathurst Hand Therapy clinic (the clinic) for treatment
of his left wrist following the removal of the
hardware. (pp 149 and 443).
23 January 2025 the clinic noted the following:
“Pt reports
increased use of affected hand at work. Movement much better. Pt notes lifting
above shoulder height exacerbates
pain. Pt reports being able to tolerate 10kg.
Symptoms seem to be on ulnar side of wrist predominately.
Pt reports improvement in ROM since last appt. Pt reports new orthosis is
effective in reducing pain and improving ROM. Pt reports
wearing orthosis for 20
mins every so often, when about. Pt denies any colour changes or numbness in
hand whilst wearing orthosis
18 February 2025 the clinic certified the claimant as fit to resume regular
duties and encouraged him to focus on a strengthening
program (p 153).
2 April 2025 the clinic noted the following:
“Reports L wrist
pain is â†“. Describes L wrist as feeling ‘tired’.
Reports difficulty with weight
bearing through L wrist and altered movement
compared to R. Experiences â†“ ROM (flex). Reports occasional
pain dorsum L hand. Pt continues to carry heavy objects and coping with
this (p 473).”
Insurer’s IME – Dr Robin Mitchell – dated 15 April
insurer obtained a report from Dr Mitchell (occupational physician) to review
and assess the claimant at his rooms in Syndey on
9 April 2025.
Mitchell made the following observations:
(a) the claimant continues to experience pain in both wrists, the left side is
more significant than the right side (p 490);
(b) the claimant’s symptoms are aggravated after arduous or prolonged hand
gripping activities or awkward or repeated movements
(c) the symptoms have been stable for six months (p 490);
(d) the claimant can manage the following activities within the following time
(i) sitting for four hours;
(ii) standing for eight hours;
(iii) walking for five km;
(iv) lifting up to 35kg, and
(v) driving for up to four hours (p 490).
(e) the claimant’s grip strength was lower in his left wrist compared to
the right wrist (p 492);
(f) he opined the claimant has:
“made a good recovery from the fracture injuries sustained to both the
left and right wrists in the subject injury of 10 April
2024, which included a
minimally displaced fracture from the medial aspect of the right radius and a
fracture through the dorsal
aspect of the hamate of the right wrist, together
with a comminuted fracture of the left distal radius (p 493);”
(g) the claimant’s prognosis was identified as good;
(h) in respect of the claimant’s work capacity he expressed the opinion
“... has, in my opinion, a current capacity for suitable work that
would avoid any aggravation of the reported symptoms and,
providing the
following precautions were available, he should be able to manage such work on a
full-time basis:
any sustained
arduous hand gripping activity, particularly if awkward
or repeated,
should be managed with frequent micro pause breaks during which the forearm and
hand muscles should be relaxed or gently
stretched out to avoid the development
of any cumulative tightness that could otherwise result in avoidable fatigue
discomfort (p
(i) there was no indication that the claimant should require any future
treatment of any nature (p 496);
(j) with a full range of movement in both wrists there was 0% WPI, with skin
scarring the claimant had 2% WPI using the TEMSKI scale
(p 496), and
(k) the claimant “should be able to manage” his pre-injury duties on
a full-time basis (p 497).
ECONOMIC LOSS CLAIM
Past-economic loss (PEL)
the time of the accident the claimant was employed as a full-time labourer
receiving weekly income of $879.32.
June 2024 the claimant returned to light duties undertaking five hours per day
for four days per week.
March 2025 the claimant returned to his pre-injury duties.
insurer assessed the claimant’s past wage loss, utilising the
claimant’s GP certificates of work capacity to assess
the claimant’s
loss for PEL in the sum of $18,280.60 (pp 2 and 3).
insurer has also allowed further amounts for past-loss of superannuation and
components of $3,800, rounding up to a total PEL component of
$25,000 (p 3).
Future economic loss (FEL)
insurer allowed a future loss of earning capacity of $250 per week to age 67,
with a reduction for vicissitudes of 15%, totalling
$200,000 (rounded up from
$199,129.50).
insurer has offered various sums for PEL and FEL to the claimant as
(a) on 19 August 2025 - $165,000 (the first settlement offer);
(b) on 4 September 2025 - $225,000 (the revised offer of settlement) (p 5),
(c) on 8 October 2025 - $300,000 (increasing the FEL component to $275,000)
– (the final settlement offer) (p 557).
revised offer of settlement was made following discussions with the claimant,
undertaken after the first settlement offer was
made, about the impact of the
accident on his work and his future work intentions in the event his employer
closed its business in
the short to medium term.
final settlement offer was made following the preliminary conference on 8
October 2025, after I made several observations about
the adequacy of the
revised offer of settlement (see paragraphs 60 and 61 below).
say more about the final settlement offer below.
THE STATUTORY
14D(3)(b) of the
Personal Injury Commission Regulation 2020
provides that the
MAI Act and the Motor Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines) apply to this
application.
have considered the relevant legislation, guidelines and procedural directions,
as identified below, in making my decision.
3.40(1)(b) of the MAI Act provides:
“3.40 Effect of recovery
of damages on statutory benefits
(1) If a person (‘the claimant’) recovers damages in respect of
the death of or injury to a person caused by the fault
of the owner or driver of
a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle then (except to the
extent that subsection (2) or
(3) covers the case)
(b) the amount of any statutory benefits already paid under Division 3.3 in
respect of the injury concerned is to be deducted from
the damages (awarded or
otherwise paid as a lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the
statutory benefits.”
6.23 of the MAI Act states:
"6.23 Restrictions on settlement of
claim for damages
(1) (repealed).
(2) A claim for damages cannot be settled unless -
(a) the claimant is represented in respect of the claim by an Australian legal
practitioner, or
(b) the proposed settlement is approved by the Commission.
(3) The Commission is not to approve the settlement of a claim unless
satisfied that the settlement complies with any applicable
requirements of or
made under this Act or the Motor Accident Guidelines."
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
Personal Injury Commission Rules
"95 Application
for approval of Damages settlement
(1) If a claimant, who is not represented by an Australian legal
practitioner, and an insurer have agreed to a proposed damages settlement,
insurer must lodge an application for approval of a damages settlement under
section 6.23 of the MAI Act, on behalf of both the
claimant and the insurer,
within 7 days of reaching the agreement.
(2) (Repealed)."
The Guidelines (Version 9.3)
7.37 of the Guidelines provides:
"Under section 6.23(3) of the Act,
before the Personal Injury Commission may approve the settlement of a claim for
damages, it must
be satisfied that:
(a) the proposed settlement satisfies the timing requirements in section
6.23(1) of the Act [since repealed];
(b) the proposed settlement is just, fair and reasonable and within the range
of likely potential damages assessments for the claim
were the matter to be
assessed by the Commission, taking into account the nature and extent of the
claim and the injuries, disabilities,
impairments and losses sustained by the
claimant, and taking into account any proposed reductions or deductions in the
proposed settlement;
(c) the claimant understands that they are entitled to be represented in
respect of the claim by an Australian legal practitioner,
(d) the claimant understands the nature and effect of the proposed settlement
and is willing to accept the proposed settlement."
The Commission’s Procedural Directions
10 of the Commission's Procedural Direction MA3 provides the Application must
(a) a deed of release;
(b) the amount of the proposed damages settlement, including a breakdown of the
amount allowed for each head of damage and how each
amount allowed has been
calculated;
(c) the amount of any reductions in the proposed damages settlement including
for contributory negligence or any other reduction,
including brief reasons for
that reduction and how any reductions have been calculated;
(d) the amount of any advance payments that the insurer has made in advance of
the settlement and the dates of those advance payments,
including brief reasons
explaining why those advanced payments were made, and
(e) the evidence, documents and materials relevant to an assessment of the
damages settlement including liability notices.
reviewing the Application and its supporting documentation including the
executed amended deed for the final settlement offer
(pp 558-559). I am
satisfied it complies with cl 10 of the Commission's Procedural Direction MA3,
as the Application includes details:
(a) of the amount of the proposed settlement and a breakdown of the amount
allowed for each head of damage (p 557), and
(b) an executed settlement deed dated 20 October 2025, which identifies the
total amount provided for the settlement and deductions
sought to be made from
the settlement (p 557 - 558)
THE SETTLEMENT APPROVAL CONFERENCES
8 October 2025
matter was listed for an MS Teams settlement approval conference on 8 October
claimant provided responses to several questions posed by me as
(a) he has been employed in labouring roles, since leaving high school;
(b) he identified he was considering changing occupations from his current
position as a labourer to being a truck driver, when his
current employer
intends to close its business in the short to medium term;
(c) he uses his left hand to drive and change gears when driving a truck/car
(despite being right hand dominant);
(d) his current pain levels, after work each day for his left wrist, he
self-rates at seven (on a scale of 0–10);
(e) at the end of a working day he generally uses a compression brace and heat
pack on his left wrist, to reduce his pain levels.
The pain will generally
subside between half an hour and an hour. I noted that he was wearing a hand
brace on his left wrist during
the conference – which he showed me during
the conference when discussing the use of the compression brace after work;
(f) his right wrist is usually pain free at the end of a working day;
(g) he does not experience pain in his wrists when driving a manual car, but
when driving his motorbike there is pain in his left
(h) for work, currently the trips he undertakes are short trips, generally to
and from home to work, he usually drives a manual vehicle.
The work vehicle is
currently a ute, which causes him no challenges;
(i) he does not currently drive a truck for work. However, if in the future he
works as a truck driver (which is his stated intention,
when his current
employer closes in the short to medium term) he has no appreciation of how that
wrist e.g. gear changing and the impact this
may have, if any, on his pain levels;
(j) his intention if he pursues a truck driving career, as stated, is to drive a
local gravel truck. He stated that he wanted to
“do a less physical
job.” However, the claimant has no appreciation of the impact of working
as a truck driver may have
on his pain levels or more generally. For instance,
he was unable to describe the actions required when opening the tail gates of
gravel truck or his capacity to engage with the mechanical elements such as
operating the hydraulic levers for a gravel truck etc,
but suspects there would
be not much of an impact on his current left wrist pain levels, and
(k) he relies on his left wrist more when carrying heavy weighted items in his
current work role, which involves the carrying and
installation of door frames
with double glazed glass, weighing between 20 and 30kg–“my left
wrist carries more weight
than my right one.”
the matters canvassed above in paragraph 59 with the claimant, I expressed
reservations about the revised offer of settlement
(totalling $225,000) and
invited the insurer to reconsider that offer. I made the observation that I was
not satisfied on the medical
evidence, also noting there was some risk the
claimant may need to retire early following the development of post-traumatic
in his left wrist and noting the cautious words adopted by Dr Mitchell
that the claimant “should be able to manage full time
duties”, that the revised offer of settlement of $225,000 was just, fair
and reasonable having regard to the extent
of the claimant’s injuries and
his current pain levels.
expressed the view that a FEL component of $275,000 would be an appropriate
amount as a buffer for the future risks facing the claimant
relating to his left
the circumstances, I requested the insurer reconsider its settlement offer.
matter was stood over to permit the parties an opportunity to further consider
their settlement position in respect of the FEL
component for the settlement and
if appropriate file an updated settlement deed and amended
submissions.
22 October 2025
matter was relisted for a further MS Teams conference on 22 October 2025.
insurer increased its revised offer of settlement to an amount of $300,000
(increasing the FEL component to $275,000) and has
filed amended submissions (p
557) and a revised signed deed of settlement dated 20 October 2025 (pp 558 -
discussed the final offer of settlement with the claimant, who has accepted it
and understands this settlement will resolve his
claims dispute with the insurer
in respect of his NEL, PEL and FEL.
claimant acknowledged he was aware he could retain a legal practitioner to
assist him with his claim but has declined to do so.
claimant is aware that the settlement is a final resolution of his claim for
damages arising from the accident with the insurer.
claimant had previously indicated (on 8 October 2025) what level of pain he
experiences and the impact the accident has had on
his left wrist, which are
identified above.
claimant also understands that the insurer will deduct from the settlement an
amount of $18,238.29 for past statutory benefits
paid by the insurer.
insurer has confirmed there is no deduction to be made to Centrelink.
indicated to the parties that I was satisfied that the settlement offer was
appropriate and would approve the settlement.
SHOULD I APPROVE
THE SETTLEMENT?
considering the provisions of s 6.23 of the MAI Act and cl 7.38 of the
Guidelines along with the rules and practice directions
of the Commission, in
deciding whether to approve or not approve the claimant’s settlement, I
need to consider whether:
(a) the amount of the settlement is just, fair and reasonable (appropriateness),
(b) the claimant understands the settlement and its terms and the effect of the
settlement in ending her claim for damages (the claimant’s
understanding).
Appropriateness
RACQ Insurance Limited v Motor Accidents Authority of NSW (No 2)
NSW SC 1126
, the Court stated, when considering the issue of an appropriate
damages award:
"It is a relationship of the award to the injury and
its consequences ... which is to be proportionate ... It is not a matter to be
resolved by reference to some norm or standard supposedly to be derived from a
consideration of amounts awarded in a number of other
specific cases ... The
principle to be followed ... is that the amount of damages must be fair and
reasonable compensation for the
injuries received and disabilities caused. It is
to be proportionate to the situation of the claimant ... and not to the
of other parties in other actions, even if some similarity between
their situations may be supposed to be seen. The judgment of a
Court awarding
damages is not to be overborne by what other minds have judged right and proper
for other situations. It may be granted
that a judge who is making such
assessment will be aware of and give weight to current general ideas of fairness
and moderation.
But this general awareness is quite a different thing ...The
awareness must be a product of general experience and not formed ad
process of considering particular cases and endeavouring ... to allow for
differences between the circumstances of other
cases and the circumstances of
the case in hand [
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
(1968) 119 CLR 118
per Barwick CJ, Kitto and Menzies JJ at paragraph 11].”
amount of the offer of settlement that I am asked to approve comprises a sum of
$300,000 for both PEL and FEL.
am satisfied that the amount of $300,000 is a just, fair and reasonable
settlement of the claimant's common law claim considering
all the legislation,
circumstances and materials, particularly the matters I conveyed to the insurer
on 8 October 2025 about the
revised settlement offer, which were subsequently
reflected in the final settlement offer.
The claimant’s
understanding
am satisfied the claimant understands this settlement will be a final resolution
of his claim and that he can make no further claim
for damages for economic or
non-economic loss arising out of the accident and that he wants to accept the
final settlement offer
made by the insurer.
claimant is also aware and understands that the insurer will deduct from the
settlement amount of $18,238.29 for past-statutory
benefits paid by the insurer.
approve the settlement.
DETERMINATION
settlement of $300,000 is approved pursuant to sub s 6.23(2)(b) of the MAI
to s 3.40(1)(b) of the MAI Act, the insurer is entitled to deduct the sum of
$18,238.29 from the proposed settlement sum
by way of recovery for weekly
payments of statutory benefits paid to the claimant under Division
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (472 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter