URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2007/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Daniew [2007] NSWPB 5 (14 November 2007)
[2007] NSWPB 5
14 November 2007
Kym Ayscough v Shelley Anne Daniew
The complaint of professional misconduct concerned the dispensing of a
drug of addiction, morphine tartrate ampoules 120mg/1.5mL by
the pharmacist on
or about 29 September 2004, for Mr Wayne Ritchie on a prescription written by Dr
Garry Gow. The pharmacist was
employed at the relevant time as the pharmacist
in charge and is an experienced pharmacist with no prior disciplinary history.
after the morphine tartrate ampoules were dispensed by the pharmacist,
Mr Ritchie self injected an ampoule and died. The direct
cause of death was a
morphine overdose.
The complaint alleged that the morphine tartrate ampoules had been
dispensed in circumstances where this was the first occasion in
which a drug of
addiction had been dispensed for Mr Ritchie at the pharmacy. Mr Ritchie was
known to the pharmacist. It was alleged
that the pharmacist failed to make
appropriate inquiries of the prescriber, Dr Gow and of Mr Ritchie and that
contrary to clause
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
pharmacist supplied the morphine tartrate ampoules in an excessive quantity that
did not accord with appropriate recognised
therapeutic standards. The
pharmacist admitted the particulars of the complaint save for particular 4(f).
There is evidence that 5mg to
20mg is the usual dose which may need to be adjusted according to the responses
and tolerances of the
patient. There was no evidence as to the use and
tolerance of Mr Ritchie for this particular drug.
The Committee is satisfied
that the subject matter of the complaint is proven including particular
The risk of the pharmacist
re-offending is remote but the Committee has concerns about what the pharmacist
understands is her role
in dispensing drugs of addiction. The respondent’s
demeanour in giving evidence showed that she genuinely regretted her actions
their outcome.
The lack of face to face
continuing professional education has had a detrimental effect on her
professional performance and her understanding
of what is expected of her in
such circumstances.
The pharmacist is cautioned,
required to maintain professional memberships for a period of 3 years, required
to undertake educative
requirements and for a period of 18 months use the
services of an experienced pharmacist, approved by the Board as a mentor. The
mentor is to provide a report to the Board following each meeting with the
pharmacist. The cost of complying with these orders is
to be met by the
pharmacist.
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee ("The Committee") held on 24
July 2007 into a complaint of professional misconduct
made under the provisions
Pharmacy Act 1964
") by Kym Ayscough, Registrar, Pharmacy
Board of New South Wales, Nominal Complainant against Shelley Anne Daniew, being
a Pharmacist
registered in this State.
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
The Respondent was at all relevant times,
an employed pharmacist in charge at Figtree Plaza Chemist at 5 Bellevue Road,
the State of New South Wales.
or about 29 September 2004 the Respondent dispensed a drug of addiction, namely
five (5) Morphine Tartrate ampoules 120 mg/1.5
mL for Mr. Wayne Ritchie on a
prescription written by Dr Garry Gow for the treatment of chronic back pain.
On the evening of 3 October 2004, Mr.
Ritchie self-injected one ampoule of 120mg morphine tartrate from the medication
dispensed by
the Respondent and on the morning of 4 October 2004 Mr. Ritchie
died. The direct cause of death was a drug, namely morphine
The supply of the morphine
tartrate ampoules referred to in paragraph 3 above was made by the Respondent in
the following circumstances:
The dispensing
on or about 29 September 2004 was the first occasion on
morphine ampoules or any drug of
addiction had been dispensed for Mr. Ritchie at Figtree Plaza
Mr. Ritchie had presented a
prescription from Dr Gow for dispensing;
Mr. Ritchie was personally known to
the pharmacist.
The Respondent knew or
ought to have known that the prescription was for a potent and potentially
dangerous narcotic, which required
particular care in
dispensing.
The Respondent failed to make
proper enquiries of the prescriber, Dr Gow, to verify the strength of the
ampoules prescribed.
The Respondent failed
to verify the range of dosages of morphine ampoules that could be supplied to
Mr. Ritchie.
The Respondent failed to make
proper enquiries of Mr. Ritchie to ascertain his history of morphine use
including frequency and dosage.
Contrary to
clause 109 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Respondent supplied the morphine tartrate ampoules in excessive quantity that
did not accord with the appropriate recognised
therapeutic standards.
In evidence were many documents including significantly, three statements by
the Respondent, the first two of which were made much
closer to the incident and
the last of which was made on or about the 13 July 2007. Also in evidence was
the report from the coroner
in relation to the death of Mr Ritchie, forensic
evidence about the amount of the drug found in Mr Ritchie’s body at the
of death, Peer Review reports prepared for the complainant and for the
Respondent, a newspaper clipping from the Sunday Telegraph
and a reference for
the Respondent from Ms Batia which was not dated and which was not accompanied
by a letter requesting it.
The forensic evidence admitted after objection, sets out an opinion that the
deceased’s blood morphine concentration was just
over four times the mean
concentration found in morphine-related deaths and that the blood concentration
of morphine, together with
a compromised respiratory condition (early
broncho-pneumonia) would have lead to Mr Ritchie’s death.
The Respondent’s Counsel indicated to the Committee that the Respondent
did not wish to give evidence. The Committee indicated
to Mr. Wilson that it
wished to hear from the Respondent.
The Committee acknowledges that the Respondent has lived through a number of
Court proceedings arising out of the death of Mr. Ritchie.
Those proceedings
have been a committal in criminal proceedings, civil proceedings and proceedings
involving the estate of the deceased.
The Committee acknowledges that living
through these exhaustive enquiries would have brought enormous pressure to bear
Respondent. Notwithstanding that, the Committee felt it was important
to hear from the Respondent. These proceedings relate to the
Respondent’s
professional conduct as a pharmacist and as a consequence of that, relate to the
wider community and the profession
as a whole.
The Respondent admitted the particulars of the Complaint, except for
particular 4(f). This particular is set out above and relates
to the Respondent
supplying the Schedule 8 drug in an excessive quantity that did not accord with
the appropriate recognised therapeutic
standards. This denial is and was of
concern to the Committee. The Respondent’s position in relation to this
particular was
that she dispensed the prescription as prescribed by Dr. Gow. We
shall refer to that again later.
In terms of other evidence, Counsel for the Complainant highlighted the fact
that two other statements made by the Respondent in relation
to the death of Mr
Ritchie made much earlier were inconsistent with the statement apparently made
on 13 July 2007 and signed on
the day of these proceedings. This recent
statement referred to the Respondent having had discussions with the deceased,
given rise to her understanding or impression from him that he had
been using narcotic drugs. The earlier statements made on 13
October 2004 and
11 July 2005 did not refer to the discussions the Respondent alleges she had
with Mr Ritchie at the time the drugs
were dispensed.
The Respondent said, when asked about her obligations in dispensing:
But then the doctor should have ascertained what was right for that
patient and then I am ultimately responsible for it after that.
She said that her understanding of her obligations in respect of Schedule 8
drugs, was the same at the time of this hearing as it
was in September 2004.
However, she said she would be very particular now. She said:
I would double check double check double check now.
What would you double check?
Perhaps you could be more precise as to the nature of the matters that
you say you would now double check.
I would double check with the doctor on the Schedule 8 drugs.
What would you double check?
Firstly that he has written it and that he is happy with the
And that’s not something you would have done in September 2004?
Is that right?
Not the double check. No.
And is it the case that in September 2004 you took the view that if
the doctor had written the prescription and the prescription was
legible and
appeared to be legitimate, your responsibility lay only in dispensing what was
written on the script?
No. I spoke with him about it.
She said she did not discuss the quantity and purpose of the Schedule 8
medication she was dispensing with the doctor but that she
did with Mr Ritchie
and that she was satisfied he knew what he was doing.
The Respondent was asked:
Is it your evidence that the information from Mr Ritchie that he had
been using narcotics before was sufficient to satisfy your professional
obligation to determine the appropriateness of the quantity of morphine
dispensed?"
I thought so at the time.
Do you think so now?
What do you think now?
Now I would be checking with the doctor.
She said she had dispensed morphine tartrate ampoules 120mg prior to 24
September to a terminal cancer patient. She said the deceased
was quite short
with her, that he was a regular user, had a tolerance to it and that the doctor
had instructed him on what he was
to do and how much he was to use. The
Respondent said that is what he told her. She also said she believed there was
no real recognised
quantity for this Schedule 8 drug to be dispensed. She said
most of the reference books say there is no real recognised standard
somebody who is tolerant to morphine.
The Committee views the evidence contained in the statement dated 13 July
2007 and signed on the day of hearing by the Respondent
Respondent’s oral evidence about her discussions with Mr Ritchie that he
had been a regular user of narcotic drugs,
with scepticism. This surely would
have been a matter that the Respondent would have raised sooner rather than
later. The Respondent
said she did not think the deceased was going to be using
all of the 120mg dose. She conceded that she did not know on what basis
said that the 120mg for a chronic user was a fairly standard dose. She
insisted, however, that she had discussions with the
deceased. She said she did
turn her mind to the amount prescribed and whether or not it was appropriate,
but she agreed:
But not enough, obviously.
The Respondent said that she accepted that a dose of 120mg of morphine
tartrate was an excessive dose for any person. The Respondent
It is pretty obvious, a man died.
The Respondent’s attention was directed to MIMS in relation to the
recommended dose and the fact that it may need to be adjusted
according to the
response and tolerance of the patient. When asked:
Do you seek to give evidence to this Committee that statement in MIMS
and tolerance
justifies the dispensing of 120mg?
I am sorry?
You see, you just relied upon Dr. Gow, didn’t you?
If you say so.
I am sorry. Is that correct, Ms Daniew?
The Respondent maintained that she had discussions with the deceased. She
thought he was a regular user. He knew and discussed with
the doctor what dosage
he was to be using from that ampoule. She said she thinks he lied to her and he
lied to the doctor. She
said that she understood he was actually going away,
that he suffered from chronic back pain, severe pain. She said he had not got
that drug from that pharmacy before but she did not believe for a minute that
pharmacy was the only pharmacy that he went to. He
told her that he needed her
to get some syringes to go with the drug. He told her what he wanted. She did
not have them but said
that she would get them for him the next day. However, he
returned to say that he had picked them up anyway from somewhere else.
she did not think he was going to be injecting the whole ampoule. She said he
told her he knew what he was doing.
She told the Committee that she was not a member of the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia and she could not remember when she stopped
it. She said
that she stopped it due to expense. She said that she has no intentions of
becoming a member and that she could not
actually remember the last time she
attended a continuing professional education session that required face to face
others. She said she could not remember whether it was in the last
five years, she could not remember the topic and that she does
practice of attending continuing education that requires her to attend at a
location face to face. She says she maintains
her professional knowledge by
reading and that she does not keep a tally of the number of hours of
professional education.
The Committee had the opportunity to observe the Respondent in the witness
box. Her presentation was flat and sorrowful at times
and appeared to be
irritated at others. It is the opinion of the Committee that the Respondent
regrets her actions and the outcome
of them. There is no doubt about that in
the opinion of the Committee. However, the Committee continues to have concerns
or not the Respondent accepts her professional position so far as
it relates to her obligations regarding dispensing of Schedule
The Committee accepts the Respondent had some conversation with the deceased
in relation to the drug. However, it does not accept
that she had any
appropriate conversation with him, including counselling in regard to the dosage
and quantity of it. The Respondent
said that Mr Ritchie was not a friendly guy
and that she thought that he lied to her and to the doctor. He may well have
been difficult
with the Respondent. That does not excuse the Respondent’s
apparent lack of following an appropriate and careful procedure
dispensing of the drug to ensure that it was dispensed in an appropriate
quantity and dose for his particular circumstances.
Mr Mahoney, retained by the Respondent, said:
It is an accepted practice that a supply of morphine tartrate 120mg
injections would be for administration by the prescriber on a
needs basis, at
the prescriber’s discretion. For this reason, it is rare for a
prescription for this product to carry any
directions. It is incumbent on the
pharmacist to counsel the patient on the need to take the product to the
prescriber, and explain
the reasons.
Mr Regoli, retained by the Complainant, considers the actions by the
Respondent to be a complete abdication of her professional obligations.
The Respondent came to this Committee hearing admitting misconduct but not
admitting to particular 4(f). This action is, in the opinion
of the Committee,
an indication that there continues to be a fundamental flaw in the
Respondent’s understanding of her obligations.
The evidence is clear on
this particular. There is evidence before this Committee that 5mg to 20mg is the
usual dose which may need
to be adjusted according to the responses and
tolerances of the patient. There is absent any evidence as to the use and
of this patient for this particular drug. Mr Regoli’s evidence
was not challenged.
Having regard to the totality of evidence through documents and oral
testimony, the Committee is satisfied that the subject matter
of the Complaint
is proved, including particular 4(f).
The Committee has a responsibility to protect the public from there being a
repeat of actions of this nature, thereby putting members
of the public in
danger. The Committee also has a responsibility to have regard to the
reputation of the pharmacy profession and
to let other pharmacists know that
these actions will not be tolerated. While it appears this particular incident
was isolated,
it has been one isolated incident with the most disastrous
The Committee accepts that the risk of the Respondent re-offending is remote
but continues to have concerns about what the Respondent
accepts as her true
role in dispensing Schedule 8 drugs. The Respondent said that she read
publications but did not remember the
last time she attended a continuing
professional education session that required face to face contact with others.
The Committee
takes the view that this has had a detrimental effect upon her
professional performance and general understanding of what is expected
and actually what other pharmacists are doing in similar circumstances. The
Committee considers therefore that reasonably
extensive continuing pharmacy
education including face to face contact with other pharmacists and the
assistance of a mentor is warranted
in this particular case even though the
Respondent’s case appears to be that she is working two days a week
maximum. The
Committee accepts that the Respondent is a professional of many
years experience and one who has no doubt served the profession and
well over her 31 years since registration. The Committee notes that the
Respondent has not come to adverse attention
of the Board over the years save
for this incident.
The Committee agrees that removal of the Respondent’s name from the
register or even the suspension of her from practice for
a period is not
warranted. However ,the Committee takes the view that a caution is warranted,
as is the need to maintain professional
membership with the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia and to embark on some substantial continuing pharmacy
education that requires
face to face contact with members of the profession as
referred to earlier.
Accordingly, having been satisfied that the particulars have been proved in
totality, the Committee makes the finding of professional
misconduct and makes
the following Orders:
The Respondent is cautioned against
ignoring her legal and professional obligations in the dispensing of drugs of
addiction ordered
on the prescription of a medical practitioner – in
particular, the need to exercise professional judgment to satisfy herself
each occasion that the medication ordered is in a quantity and for a purpose in
accordance with recognised therapeutic standards.
The Respondent is to do all things
necessary to obtain and/or maintain a professional membership with the
Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia for a period of three years following the
date of these Orders. The Respondent is to submit to the Board, on an annual
basis, evidence of her continuing professional membership.
For a period of 18 months from the date
of these Orders, the Respondent is to use the services of an experienced
pharmacist, approved
by the Board, as a Mentor. The Respondent is to agree to
the mentor visiting her at a mutually suitable time at a mutually suitable
on at least six occasions during that 18 month period. The mentor is to provide
a report to the Board of the issues discussed
at each visit within 1 month of
each visit taking place.
The Respondent is to complete for the
years 2008, 2009 and 2010 at least 30 hours of continuing professional education
(CPE), of which
at least 15 hours of each year is to be lecture, seminar,
workshop or other contact activity. At the conclusion of each year, the
Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy Board copies of documents evidencing the
CPE she has completed during that year.
The Respondent is to undertake the
courses "Drugs of Abuse & Misuse I and II" offered by the Australian College
of Pharmacy Practice
and Management. Evidence of her satisfactory completion of
that course is to be furnished to the Board by 31 December 2008.
The cost of complying with these Orders is to be met by the
Respondent.
AMENDED ORDERS - 13 February 2008
At the meeting held 13 February 2008 the Board considered advice that Ms
Daniew has recently resigned from her position as an employed
pharmacist and has
no plans to continue working in pharmacy for the foreseeable future. As she is
not presently practising as a pharmacist,
Ms Daniew requested that the Board
amend its orders with respect to professional membership and using the services
of an experienced
pharmacist, approved by the Board, as a Mentor so that those
orders will only apply if and when she resumes practice as a pharmacist.
Noting that Ms Daniew continues to be registered as a pharmacist, the Board
did not agree to vary the order with respect to professional
membership.
Noting that Ms Daniew is not practising as a pharmacist the Board did agree
to vary the order with respect to using the services of
a Mentor and directed
that the following orders be substituted for the previous:
The Respondent is cautioned against
ignoring her legal and professional obligations in the dispensing of drugs of
addiction ordered
on the prescription of a medical practitioner – in
particular, the need to exercise professional judgment to satisfy herself
each occasion that the medication ordered is in a quantity and for a purpose in
accordance with recognised therapeutic standards.
The Respondent is to do all things
necessary to obtain and/or maintain a professional membership with the
Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia for a period of three years following the
date of these Orders. The Respondent is to submit to the Board, on an annual
basis, evidence of her continuing professional membership.
Should the Respondent resume pharmacy
practice at any time, the respondent is to notify the Board of that resumption
of practice within
one month. For a period of 18 months from the date of
resumption of practice, the Respondent is to use the services of an experienced
pharmacist, approved by the Board, as a Mentor. The Respondent is to agree to
the mentor visiting her at a mutually suitable time
at a mutually suitable venue
on at least six occasions during that 18 month period. The mentor is to provide
a report to the Board
of the issues discussed at each visit within 1 month of
each visit taking place.
The Respondent is to complete for the
years 2008, 2009 and 2010 at least 30 hours of continuing professional education
(CPE), of which
at least 15 hours of each year is to be lecture, seminar,
workshop or other contact activity. At the conclusion of each year, the
Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy Board copies of documents evidencing the
CPE she has completed during that year.
The Respondent is to undertake the
courses "Drugs of Abuse & Misuse I and II" offered by the Australian College
of Pharmacy Practice
and Management. Evidence of her satisfactory completion of
that course is to be furnished to the Board by 31 December
The cost of complying with these Orders is to be met by the Respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter