URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AOJ v NSW Trustee and Guardian [2013] NSWADTAP 38 (2 August 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
AOJ v NSW Trustee and Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 38
Hearing Date(s):
30 May 2013
Decision Date:
02 August 2013
Appeal Panel - External
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
Ms S Leal, Judicial Member
Dr B Field, Non-judicial Member
1. The order of the Guardianship Tribunal committing the management of
AOL's estate to the NSW Trustee is affirmed.
2. Leave is refused for the
appeal to be made on any ground other than a question of law.
Catchwords:
APPEAL - discretion to appoint suitable person or NSW Trustee as financial
manager - whether discretion exercised lawfully - whether
facts supported
finding of 'major' conflict of interest
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
House v King
[1936] HCA 40
[2000] NSWSC 1052
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; ex parte
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR 13
[2000] NSWSC 886
[2001] NSWSC 146
SH v Protective Commissioner
[2006] NSWADTAP 4
Principal judgment
AOJ (Appellant)
NSW Trustee and Guardian (First Respondent)
(Second Respondent)
AOL (Third Respondent)
Guardianship Tribunal
(Decision maker)
Representation
M McCall (Appellant)
S Gardiner (Third Respondent)
- Solicitors:
G Kee, APJ Law (Appellant)
No appearance (First Respondent)
appearance (Second Respondent)
James McCaffrey and Associates (for GAL - L
Fisher - for Third Respondent)
A Sprouster, legal officer (Guardianship
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Guardianship Tribunal
- Date of Decision:
21 November 2012
- Citation:
2012/1329; 2012/8147
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Guardianship Tribunal made a guardianship order and a financial management order
in relation to AOL, an 89 year old woman, and
appointed the NSW Trustee as her
financial manager. Her son, AOJ, has not challenged the making of either of the
orders but has appealed
against the decision to appoint the NSW Trustee. He put
himself forward as a suitable financial manager but the Guardianship Tribunal
decided that he had a major financial conflict of interest with his mother.
our view, the Guardianship Tribunal did not make any error of law when deciding
who to appoint as financial manager nor should
leave be given for AOJ to appeal
against the merits of the Guardianship Tribunal's decision. The Guardianship
Tribunal made factual
findings based on probative evidence and exercised its
discretion taking into account all relevant considerations.
and her son AOJ are equal partners in a farming business which is run by AOJ. At
the time the Guardianship Tribunal made its decisions
AOL had been living with
her daughter AOK in a rural town for about three years. AOK had raised the
possibility that her mother may
need to be moved to an aged care facility which
would require the payment of a substantial bond. AOJ wanted AOL to return to the
farm and live with him. The Guardianship Tribunal described the siblings, AOJ
and AOK, as having an extremely negative relationship.
Administrative Decisions Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this external appeal:
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
s 67A(1)(e)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
), s 118A and
SH v Protective Commissioner
[2006] NSWADTAP 4
to [13]. An appeal
may be made as of right on a question of law and, with leave, on any other
, s 118B(1). AOJ identified five "questions of law" but
submitted that if any of those grounds were found not to constitute questions
law, leave was sought to appeal on "any other ground".
appellant, AOJ, was represented by counsel. We appointed a guardian ad litem
(GAL) to represent his mother, AOL:
, s 71(4). The GAL instructed
solicitors and counsel who adopted the appellant's submissions. AOL's daughter,
AOK, was the original
applicant for a guardianship and a financial management
order. She was a party to the appeal but chose not to appear. The Guardianship
Tribunal elected to be a party and, in accordance with the principles in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
at 35, its role is limited to making submissions in relation to the
powers and procedures of the Guardianship Tribunal:
, s 67(2B).
Legal framework
making a financial management order, the Guardianship Tribunal must be
satisfied, under
Guardianship Act
(1) the person
is not capable of managing his or her financial affairs, and
(2) there is a
need for another person to manage those affairs on the person's behalf, and
(3) it is in
the person's best interests that the order be made.
was no dispute about the Tribunal's finding that a financial management order
should be made. AOJ challenged the Guardianship
Tribunal's decision to commit
the management of AOL's estate to the NSW Trustee.
Section 25M
If the Tribunal makes a financial management order in respect of
the estate (or part of the estate) of a person, the Tribunal may,
(a) appoint a suitable person as manager of that estate, or
(b) commit the management of that estate to the NSW Trustee.
exercising functions under the
Guardianship Act
has a duty to observe the
principles in
including that the welfare and interests of the affected
person are given paramount consideration.
Tribunal's decision
Guardianship Tribunal summarised the law in relation to the appointment of a
financial manager in the following terms:
Who should be appointed financial manager?
The Tribunal needed to consider whether it could appoint a suitable person to
the role of financial manager and otherwise needed to
appoint the NSW trustee.
This issue needed to be determined in accordance with [AOL's] best interests.
The Tribunal has a broad discretion
here. It needed to take into account all
relevant circumstances and could be guided by the principles in
Guardianship Act
Holt v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
SH v Protective Commissioner
[2006] ADTAP 22;
LA v Protective
Commissioner
[2004] NSWADTAP 39.)
While there is no absolute bar on appointing a financial manager who has a
conflict of interest, it is an issue that the Court of
Appeal has said should be
approached carefully and that ordinarily a person with a conflict of interest
would not be appointed (
Holt v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR
at 242. See also
, Supreme Court Protective Division,
unreported, Hodgson J, 31 March 1994,
[2000] NSWSC 886
[2000] NSWSC 721.
Guardianship Tribunal went on to consider whether AOJ should be appointed as
financial manager:
[AOJ] has the advantages of knowing his mother's finances very well
and has her confidence in relation to financial matters. However,
interconnectedness of [AOL's] and [AOJ's] affairs created a major issue of
conflict of interest. This was especially so in view
of the spending issues that
may arise over time from decisions of the guardian about accommodation and
the Guardianship Tribunal sought to allay AOJ's concerns about the NSW Trustee
managing his mother's interests in the farming
business. Ms Drew, a manager at
the NSW Trustee's office, gave evidence that the Trustee would seek to
understand the history of
the business arrangements and then establish an
agreement with AOJ about how the farm would operate in the future. If good
arrangements
were in place for the running of the properties, the Trustee would
leave those in place.
Grounds of appeal
grounds of appeal were listed in the Amended Notice of Appeal. A sixth was added
in the written submissions. In summary, the
grounds of appeal on a question of
law were that the Guardianship Tribunal:
(1) misdirected
itself in relation to the correct legal test to be applied when it stated that
"ordinarily a person with a conflict
of interest would not be appointed" as a
financial manager;
(2) erred by
characterising the appellant's conflict of interest as "major" with the effect
that it prohibited his appointment as
financial manager;
excessively on the perceived conflict of interest and failed to consider other
relevant factors;
(4) failed to
take into account a material consideration being the previous appointment of the
Public Guardian;
(5) failed to
observe the principles in
Guardianship Act
(6) failed to
consider making a 12-month financial management order and reviewing the
appointment after that time.
1, 3, 4 and the second proposition in ground 2 [ground 2(b)] relate to the
exercise of the discretion in
to appoint a "suitable person" or the NSW
Trustee as financial manager. Those grounds raise questions of law.
fifth ground is that the Tribunal failed to observe the principles in
Guardianship Act
when exercising the discretion in
That ground
also identifies a question of law and will be addressed separately.
first proposition in the second ground of appeal [ground 2(a)] relates to a
finding of fact. Whether or not a conflict of interest
can be characterised as
"major" is a matter of judgment based on the evidence. It is only where there is
no evidence at all on which
a 'primary finding of fact' could be based, that
there is an error of law:
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
at 155-156. Similarly, the sixth ground of appeal does not identify a
question of law. This ground goes to the merits of the Guardianship
decision to make the order that it did rather than some other order. We will
consider the first proposition in ground
2 and ground 6 when we determine
whether to give leave for the appeal to proceed on any ground other than a
question of law.
Grounds 1, 2(b) and 3
first ground of appeal is, in effect, that the Tribunal relied too heavily on
the proposition that "ordinarily a person with a
conflict of interest would not
be appointed" and did not go on to consider other relevant matters. That is how
the third ground is
expressed and we cannot identify any practical difference
between the two grounds.
1, 2(b) and 3 rely on the decision of Kirby P in
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
at 241-243. That case interpreted a now
repealed provision which was essentially the same as
The parties urged
Kirby P to provide guidelines to assist decision makers in future cases to
decide who to appoint as financial manager.
Kirby P did not think it appropriate
to confine that discretion by "rigid rules or even 'guidelines' expressed in
general terms."
The President made the point that the only guideline when
exercising a discretionary power, is to consider all relevant circumstances.
P went on at p 241 and 242 to set out some of the circumstances which may be
relevant in a particular case. His Honour described
the points he made as a
"framework" or a "checklist of considerations to be kept in mind." Kirby P noted
that the exercise of a discretion
is involved. Because that discretion is
exercised in the context of a protective jurisdiction, the "abiding rule" is the
achievement
of the best interests of the person concerned.
following passage in Kirby P's judgment, at 242, was the focus of this
5 Ordinarily, a person who would face a conflict of interest and
duty would not be appointed a manager of a protected person's estate.
in some family situations, inter-related property interests may present such
conflicts. Sometimes they will be more apparent
than real. They do not
necessarily present an absolute bar to appointment as a manager for otherwise
this would exclude from consideration
a range of family members in every other
way appropriate;
Guardianship Tribunal echoed these words in the paragraph quoted above at [9].
Kirby P went on to list some of the competing advantages
and disadvantages of
appointing a family member or the NSW Trustee.
for the appellant submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal failed to determine
whether any conflict of interest was "more
apparent than real" and failed to
take into account the family's circumstances. Those circumstances include the
special characteristics
of AOJ who has the day-to-day conduct of the farming
business. It was submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal needed to go further
than making a finding that the financial affairs of the appellant and his mother
were intertwined. That fact alone was said not to
support a finding that there
was a 'major' conflict of interest warranting the appointment of the NSW
for AOL supported the appeal and adopted the submissions made by the appellant's
counsel. He said that the error of law was
clear and that the Guardianship
Tribunal had misdirected itself when applying
When a conflict of interest
is asserted the Guardianship Tribunal must determine whether the conflict is
apparent or real. The Guardianship
Tribunal did not do so in this case.
Consideration of grounds 1, 2(b) and 3
words of Kirby P in
are not a substitute for the statutory
discretion in
Failing to refer to or rigidly apply the 'guidelines' in
that case does not constitute an error of law. When determining whether
decision maker has made an error of law in the process of exercising a
discretion, the principles articulated by Evatt and McTiernan
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505 still apply:
If the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous
or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the
facts, if he
does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination
should be reviewed and the appellate
court may exercise its own discretion in
substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so.
Guardianship Tribunal acknowledged that there was no absolute bar to appointing
a family member who has a conflict of interest
but that the issue should be
approached carefully. The Guardianship Tribunal expressly took into account the
fact that AOJ had the
advantage of knowing his mother's finances very well and
having her confidence in relation to financial matters. But the Guardianship
Tribunal found, by implication, that the conflict of interest outweighed all
other considerations. While not using the words "apparent"
or "real", the
Guardianship Tribunal was satisfied that the conflict of interest was
significant enough to justify the appointment
of the NSW Trustee. Whether there
was enough probative evidence to support that finding is not a question of law
and will be considered
when determining whether leave should be granted to
appeal on "other grounds".
Ground 4 - existence of a guardian
fourth ground of appeal was that the Guardianship Tribunal erred by failing to
take into account the fact that a guardianship
order had been made appointing
the Public Guardian and the effect of that order. The appellant's solicitor
hypothesised that the
effect of that appointment was that if AOL needed funds
for accommodation or services and the appellant refused to provide those
the guardian could apply for the NSW Trustee to be appointed as manager. This
was described as an "independent safeguard"
to ensure that the Guardianship
Tribunal's future concerns about the appellant's conduct did not become a
Tribunal will only make an error of law by failing to take into account a
relevant consideration if that consideration is a consideration
Tribunal is bound to take into account:
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24.
Whether or not a
decision maker is bound to take into account or ignore any particular matter is
to be determined from the "subject-matter,
scope and purpose" of the legislative
Peko Wallsend
, per Mason J at 39-40. There is nothing in the
legislative scheme currently before us which suggests that the consequences of
the Public Guardian to make lifestyle decisions is a consideration
that the Guardianship Tribunal is bound to take into account when
determining
whom to appoint as financial manager.
Ground 5 - failing to observe the principles in
Guardianship Act
states that:
It is the duty of everyone exercising functions under this Act with
respect to persons who have disabilities to observe the following
principles:
(a) the welfare and interests of such persons should be given paramount
consideration,
(b) the freedom of decision and freedom of action of such persons should be
restricted as little as possible,
(c) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to live a normal
life in the community,
(d) the views of such persons in relation to the exercise of those functions
should be taken into consideration,
(e) the importance of preserving the family relationships and the cultural
and linguistic environments of such persons should be recognised,
(f) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to be self-reliant
in matters relating to their personal, domestic and
financial affairs,
(g) such persons should be protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation,
(h) the community should be encouraged to apply and promote these
principles.
appellant submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal failed to "adhere" to these
general principles. The decision to appoint the
NSW Trustee was said to be
inconsistent with the principles in
, (c), (d), (e) and (f). For example,
AOL expressed the view that by AOJ managing her financial affairs, that outcome
would, in AOJ's
opinion, preserve family relationships and assist AOL to be
self-reliant.
Tribunal expressly referred to the principles in
when describing the task of
determining who to appoint as financial manager:
The Tribunal has a broad discretion here. It needed to take into
account all relevant circumstances and could be guided by the principles
Guardianship Act
Tribunal acknowledged that it "could be guided" by the principles in
understand the Tribunal to mean that it would be guided by those principles if
they were relevant and consistent with AOL's best
interests. In a previous
decision, the Appeal Panel made the following observations in relation to
. . . when making a decision about whether to revoke a financial
management order, or to exercise any other function under the
Guardianship Act
a decision maker is bound to observe any relevant principle in
The decision
maker may demonstrate that he or she has observed those principles either by
referring to them expressly or by writing
reasons for decision which demonstrate
that all relevant principles have been observed.
However, the principles are not expressed in absolute terms. Phrases such as
"as little as possible" and "as far as possible" make
it clear that observing a
principle does not mean that, where a discretion exists, a decision maker must
make a particular decision:
Ms A v Public Guardian & Ors
NSWADTAP 55
(27 October 2006).
reading of the Tribunal's decision as a whole satisfies us that the Tribunal was
mindful of the principles in
when it made its decision. Those principles do
not all suggest that AOJ should have been appointed as his mother's financial
While AOL's views and the importance of preserving family relationships
may be consistent with AOJ being appointed, the Tribunal
considered that it was
in AOL's best interests to appoint an independent financial manager. That view
was based on the finding that
AOJ had a major conflict of financial interest
with his mother.
Grounds 2(a) and 6 - leave to appeal on "other grounds"
AOJ may appeal as of right on any question of law, leave is required before an
appeal on any other ground can proceed. The
does not contain any
guidance on the relevant matters to be taken into account in determining whether
leave should be granted. The
Supreme Court has provided some guidance on this
question in the cases of
[2000] NSWSC 1052
[2000] NSWSC 886
(17 August 2000). Those cases
Guardianship Act
which is the equivalent provision
in relation to appeals from Guardianship Tribunal decisions to the Supreme
, Young J observed at [10] that 'it has never been clearly
decided what the circumstances are that should lead the Court to grant
appeal under
, but went on to make a number of observations on this point:
see paras [10]-[15]. After considering the relationship between the
the Tribunal, Young J observed at [15]:
It would seem to me that
Guardianship Act
operates so
that broad questions of administration and policy and the applicability of
policy to individual cases, even if they are
not questions of law, may well be
subjects on which the Court will grant leave to appeal. On the other hand, it is
very unlikely
that the Court will grant leave to appeal when there is a problem
with a fact finding exercise unless there are clear indications
Tribunal has gone about that fact finding process in such an unorthodox manner
or in a way which is likely to produce an
unfair result so that it would be in
the interests of justice for it to be reviewed.
2(a) challenges the Tribunal's finding of fact that the appellant's conflict of
interest was "major" and that that meant he
was not a suitable person to be
appointed as financial manager. The appellant also said that the Guardianship
Tribunal did not make
clear findings about the nature and extent of the conflict
- only three lines were devoted to that issue:
[The appellant] has the advantages of knowing his mother's finances
very well and has her confidence in relation to financial matters.
However, the
interconnectedness of [AOL's and AOJ's] affairs created a major issue of
conflict of interest. This was especially so
in view of the spending issues that
may arise over time from decisions of the guardian about accommodation and
the reasons are brief, the Guardianship Tribunal also addressed the issue of
conflict of interest when deciding whom to appoint
as AOL's guardian. Those
findings are also relevant to the issue of who should be appointed as financial
[AOJ] also had a conflict of interest in that the guardian may face
choices about accommodation or services that would involve considerable
financial outlay. [AOL's] assets are largely tied up in the farming land and
business that she owns with [AOJ]. [AOJ] had written
that his mother could not
afford an accommodation bond although in the hearing he was less adamant on
this. In the hearing, he was
adamant that selling or mortgaging any of the
farming property was not an option. He said that any care costs would need to
from his mother's money. If she didn't have enough money, then he would
look after her personally. He also said that, if she needed
a full time carer,
she may be able to use any money she gets from her sister's estate.
passage summarises the following evidence beginning at page 28 of the
transcript:
Member:... Look, the other thing I just need to get you to respond
to is that if you were guardian, maybe you've got a conflict of
interest because
- and no one seems to be real keen on this idea, but if - if your mum did need
to go into some facility and there
was a big bond to be paid that the money
would have to come from somewhere and so it could put you in a conflict of
interest situation
if you were Guardian and having to make decisions about where
your mum lived when the only way to pay the bond would be to somehow
of the farm.
Appellant: Well selling the farm as far as I'm concerned is not an
Member: What about mortgaging it?
Appellant: I'm not interested in mortgaging it either. There is no mortgages
on it. We worked there all the time to - all this time
to keep it free of any
mortgages and I don't want any mortgages on at this stage.
at page 30, from line 15 of the transcript, the following exchange is
Member: If - if your mum does go to the farm and she goes downhill,
and so that she needs a very high level of professional care,
either in an aged
care facility or at the farm, so you might be faced with a choice of, I don't
know, $100,000 a year of paid care
or an aged care facility; what would you do
Appellant: We'd cross that bridge when we came to it.
Member: So can you - I mean can you see any situation where she'd need to go
to an aged care facility?
Appellant: Not at - not at the moment. When they go into those aged care
facilities you don't get one on one care.
Member: How would you organise to pay for it, if you needed the care?
Appellant: Well, it'll have to come out of what money mother's got and if
these others hadn't taken mother to the Tribunal
Member: So you wouldn't be opposed to paying for care if it came up, you
wouldn't - if it was needed?
Appellant: If mother's got the money to pay for it.
Member: And what happens if she doesn't hypothetically speaking?
Appellant: Well I'd have to look after her wouldn't I?
Member: Have to look after her why?
Appellant: (indistinct), that's what I intend to do.
are satisfied, on the basis of these exchanges, that there was probative
evidence to support the Guardianship Tribunal's finding
that AOJ had a major
conflict of financial interest with his mother. His evidence demonstrates
reluctance to use any partnership
money to pay for his mother's accommodation
bond if that became necessary. We are also not persuaded that the Guardianship
made an unfair finding or took an unorthodox approach by not taking
into account the appellant's "so-called flexibility." His lawyer
examples: the fact that after seeing Dr Williams' report the appellant agreed
that his mother needed a guardian and secondly
that when his mother did go into
an aged care facility he was able to renegotiate a bond of $250,000 down to
$170,000. The second
example is not relevant because it occurred after the
Guardianship Tribunal's hearing. The first example does not detract from AOJ's
clear evidence that rather than spend money on a bond for an aged care facility,
even if that was seen as in his mother's best interests,
AOJ would look after
her himself.
if there was some evidence to support the Guardianship Tribunal's finding of a
"major" conflict of interest, AOJ submitted that
it was unfair to make that
finding because:
(1) the issue
of costs for future accommodation was a hypothetical matter - such accommodation
may not be necessary and if it was
the cost was unknown;
appellant's interests and those of his mother largely coincide - both want to
make a profit from a farming business;
partnership had a significant amount of cash that would be available for the
payment of any bond required by an aged care
(4) AOL stood
to inherit a significant amount of money from her sister's estate; and
(5) there was
no evidence that AOJ has done anything other than act in the best interests of
his mother.
Hypothetical
or not, AOL's daughter, AOK, had foreshadowed the possibility that her mother
may need to move to an aged care facility.
Payment for that accommodation was a
real issue. Of course it was in AOJ's and AOL's best interests for the farming
business to make
a profit but if AOL needed money for accommodation it was
overwhelmingly in her interest for the money to be provided from partnership
sources if necessary. Whether or not the partnership had cash available, AOJ
indicated to the Guardianship Tribunal that an accommodation
bond would be paid,
"if mother's got the money to pay for it". The money AOL stood to inherit from
her sister is the subject of Supreme
Court proceedings. Finally, any lack of
evidence that AOJ had acted against his mother's interests does not necessarily
detract from
the evidence that she would have to spend her own money to pay for
accommodation and partnership money would not be available.
appellant submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal erred by failing to consider
making a 12-month financial management order and
reviewing the appointment after
that time. The error was said to be failing to consider that option. The
Tribunal may order that
a financial management order be reviewed within a
specified time:
Guardianship Act
Failing to consider this
option does not justify leave being granted to appeal against the merits of the
1. The order of the Guardianship Tribunal committing the management of AOL's
estate to the NSW Trustee is affirmed.
2. Leave is refused for the appeal to be made on any ground other than a
question of law.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (123 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter