URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/257.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARE v AAMI (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 257 (4 December 2020)
ARE v AAMI (Claims
Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 257
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the claimant
– collision between bicycle and vehicle - Direction for
Production issued
– statement – diagram or map - witness- legal costs
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Schedule 2 Clause 3(d) and (e)
Cases Cited
ARE – Claimant
AAMI – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
in accordance with
section 7.36(5)
Motor Accident Injuries
and clause 7.441 of the
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2(3) of
the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
AAI Limited trading as AAMI
Date of Accident
16 February 2020
DRS Reference
DRS Claims Assessor
Maurice Castagnet
Date of Decision
4 December 2020
Conference dates and time
Assessment on the papers
Claimant’s representative
Rita Furfaro of Gerard Malouf & Partners
Insurer’s representative
XYZ of Suncorp Legal
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows:
the purposes of section 3.11 the motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly
by the fault of the claimant.
For the purposes
of section 3.28 the motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault
of the claimant.
The effective
date of this decision is: 16 August 2020.
Legal costs: the
amount of the claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Accident Injuries Regulation
is $3,320 plus GST.
statement of my reasons for this determination is attached to this
certificate.
Maurice Castagnet
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(4)
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
INTRODUCTION
determination relates to a Miscellaneous Claim, and is a reviewable decision
under both:
2(3), Clause (3)(d) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Act”). The issue for determination is whether, for the purposes of
(Cessation of weekly payments to injured persons most at fault or with
minor injuries after 26 weeks), the motor accident concerned
was caused by the
fault of another person;
2(3), Clause (3)(e) of the Act. The issue for determination is whether, for the
purposes of section 3.28
(Cessation of statutory benefits after 26 weeks
to injured adult persons most at fault or to injured persons with minor
the motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of the injured
2. The claimant is a XX-year-old cyclist who suffered
significant injuries in a motor accident on 16 February 2020 on City Road,
Camperdown.
3. On 8 April 2020, the claimant lodged an Application for
Personal Injury Benefits with the relevant insurer. Personal Injury Benefits
statutory benefits that include weekly payments for loss of earnings and the
costs of reasonable and necessary treatment and
14 July 2020, the insurer issued a
Liability Notice – Benefits After 26
denying liability for any further statutory benefits on the basis that
the claimant was wholly at fault for the motor accident.
15 July 2020, the claimant sought an internal review of the insurer’s
29 July 2020, the insurer issued a
Certificate of Determination
its original decision.
5 August 2020, the claimant made an application to the Dispute Resolution
Service (DRS) seeking a review of the insurer’s
review decision.
claimant’s application has been referred to me for determination.
TELECONFERENCES
conducted two teleconferences with the parties to explore the issues in dispute
and to obtain further information.
became apparent that the NSW Police Force had further information that may
assist to determine the dispute, including records of
interviews with the
claimant, the insured driver and an independent witness.
Consequently,
I issued a Direction for Production of Documents to the NSW Police Force
pursuant to s 7.43 of the Act to obtain further
documents and information.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered the following documents:
Documents and
submissions provided in the application.
insurer’s submissions provided in the reply.
documents and submissions provided by the claimant during the assessment.
submissions provided by the insurer during the assessment.
documents received from the NSW Police Force in response to the Direction for
Production issued under s.743 of the Act, including
Body Worn Videos of
interviews with the claimant and the insured driver on the day of the motor
FACTUAL MATTERS NOT IN DISPUTE
13. It was common ground between the parties
• At about 8.45am on Sunday 16 February 2020, a collision
occurred between the claimant’s bicycle and the insured
• The collision occurred on City Road at a point near an
entrance gate into Victoria Park and virtually opposite the intersection
Road with Myrtle Street on the other side.
• The claimant’s
bicycle and the insured vehicle were both travelling in the same direction from
Newtown, northbound on
City Road towards Broadway and Glebe.
LEGISLATION
making my decision/conducting my review I have considered the following
legislation and guidelines:
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (“the Act”)
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (“the Regulation”)
Accident Guidelines 2017 (version 5, 20 December 2019)
Guidelines”)
THE CLAIMANT’S EVIDENCE
claimant has described the circumstances of the motor accident on three
occasions as follows.
Interview with Constable Fitzpatrick
16. At about
10.18am on the day of the motor accident, Constable Paige Fitzpatrick of the NSW
Police Force interviewed the claimant
while in an emergency bed at Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital.
17. Constable Fitzpatrick’s interview was recorded on
a Body Worn Video which I have viewed (the BWV interview).
relevant extracts of the claimant’s evidence from the interview is as
– Body Worn Video Transcript from 10:19:07
Police Officer:
Do you remember what lane you were travelling in?
: First, [gestures with left hand to the left] second one [gestures
with left hand to the right]
Police Officer
: Were you travelling in the first lane the whole
Police Officer
: Did you at any time veer into the second lane?
: Maybe after the traffic light I was in the second lane [gestures
with right hand straight] from the first [gestures with left hand
to the left],
from the left
Police Officer
: Ok. And did you see any cars travelling alongside you
Police Officer
: or anything like that? No, O.K.
: Just for that one car very close to myself [gestures both hands
to his right], on the right side and I tried to avoid it [gestures
both hands to
his left], she touch me.
Police Officer
: Ok so you saw the car come up to your right side,
Police Officer
: and you tried to avoid it, and that’s when the
collision happened?
Police Officer:
Yep, alright. is there anything else that you can
remember about the collision?
I [gestures with both hands] think that’s it.
Police Officer:
I think so.
Police Officer:
Alright so you’re at the traffic lights in lane
Police Officer:
And then you started riding forward
Police Officer:
And then veered into lane 2 [gestures with left hand
to the left]
It was many car [gestures with left hand to the left] in front of
the third ... there were
Police Officer:
There were cars in front of you
Yeah. There was a long queue [gestures with left hand straight]
of car, and then I just started to [gestures with right hand veering
right] [...inaudible words] of the lane
Police Officer:
O.K. So there were lots of cars in front of you in
Police Officer:
and then you got out of lane 1 [gestures with left
hand to the right] into lane 2 [gestures with left hand to the left]
Police Officer:
And kept driving [gestures with left hand to the left
again], and that’s when it happened.
Police Officer:
Ok. Alright no worries. I’ll leave it at that so
I’m gonna turn this Body Worn off.
The claim form
Application for Personal Injury Benefits
dated 8 April 2020, he said
I was riding my push bike going to work. I was in the second
lane because the first lane was occupied from a long queue of cars that
entry [sic] inside the park parking for attending gay pride event. Suddenly a
car came from my back right merging my lane and
pushed me twice on my right side
of the body and I felt [sic] on the floor and I report a lot of
The statement
a statement made on 21 July 2020, the claimant said –
was travelling along lane 2 of 4 along City Road. I note that I was never
travelling in lane 1 and was always in lane 2.
travel along City Road after as it is the route to work, and on the day of the
accident I was on my way to work. Travelling in lane
2 of 4 allows me to travel
all the way down City Road until I reach my work whereas lane 1 allows vehicles
to turn left off City
Road and is often very busy.
the location where the accident occurred, the vehicles in lane 1 were turning
into Victoria Park and traffic on that lane was slow.
insured driver was travelling in lane 3 of 4 and attempted to merge onto lane 2.
I caught a glimpse of the insured driver’s
vehicle in my right peripheral
vision as it was merging
into my lane
steered my handlebars to try and avoid the vehicle, but it was too late and the
vehicle collided into the right-hand side of my
PATHS OF TRAVEL
21. I requested the parties to provide me
with a map or diagram showing their path of travel from the traffic lights at
the intersection
of City Road with Cleveland Street and up to the location of
the collision.
claimant provided me with his path of travel on a map extracted from
google.com.
insured driver did not provide me with any map or diagram showing her path of
THE INSURED DRIVER’S EVIDENCE
Interview with
Constable Fitzpatrick
24. At about 9.37am on the day of the motor accident,
Constable Paige Fitzpatrick of the NSW Police Force interviewed the insured
driver, MB at the scene of the motor accident. The interview was also recorded
on a BWV which I have viewed.
The relevant summary of her evidence from
the interview is as follows –
a) When asked which lane she was
travelling at the time of the collision, MB, indicating with hand motions, said
that she was travelling
in the “second lane of the fourth lane.”
b) She was just travelling straight ahead and the claimant was also
just travelling ahead.
c) She saw the claimant alongside of her on the left.
He was travelling in his own lane and she was travelling in her own
d) She heard a noise when she was about 3 car lengths ahead and she
stopped, came out of her car and saw the claimant on the road.
e) The insured
said there was no damage to her car and showed Constable Fitzpatrick that the
impact with the claimant’s bicycle
caused her passenger side rear vision
mirror to be pushed inwards.
said she had no idea why the claimant fell off his bicycle. She was just
travelling straight ahead and she did not overtake.
Interview with insurer’s investigator
June 2020, MB was interviewed on the telephone by the insurer’s
investigator, Trent Southworth. The record of interview
was reproduced in a
statement which was signed by the claimant on the same day.
statement, MB described the circumstances of the motor accident as
was travelling alone heading from Newtown, going to Glebe.
recall I was travelling north on City Road in lane 2 of 3
come from Newtown and I was heading to Glebe, going through Broadway.
was going about 40k per hour at this point and I had seen the claimant pushbike
on my left when I looked in my rear vision mirror
and passenger side mirror as I
flowed straight.
recall the traffic being reasonably light and I was maintaining a safe distance
from the car ahead of me in lane 2 and flowing in
Claimant was riding in lane 1 of 3 on my left. At no stage did the Claimant ever
overtake me.
recall that at some point lane 1 was blocked with parked cars and the markets
were in the park on the left-hand side where those
cars were parked.
was always just flowing in lane 2 down City Road towards Broadway and never
changed lanes.
recall the Claimant bike being on my left in lane 1 but when lane 1 became
blocked with parked cars this is when I remember hearing
and feeling a slight
impact to my passenger side mirror and when I looked I saw that it was the
Claimant who had ridden into my side
mirror that had bent in towards the car but
it was not damaged.
this impact occurred, I had not moved out of my lane and was always just flowing
in lane 2 behind another car, so the Claimant
must have ridden into me. He has
come from either alongside or behind me and at no point was I ever going past
the Claimant.
believe this impact was somewhere near where lane 1 became blocked with parked
cars so it may have been the Claimant having to ride
around those parked cars
and he has merged out to [sic] far and hit my car. I did not hit the Claimant he
rode into me
I heard the impact, I stopped and pulled over and got out and I could see the
Claimant on the roadway, and he was bleeding everywhere
from the head. I was in
shock seeing this.
I believe the cause of the accident was the Claimant rider, riding into my
passenger side mirror and hitting my car causing him to
fall off his bike. I was
just flowing in lane 2 in
traffic. The Claimant hit me I did not hit the
was standing at the entrance gate to Victoria Park on City Road at the time of
the motor accident.
was interviewed at the scene by Constable Mitchell of the NSW Police Force.
relevant summary of his evidence from the Police Notebook is as follows
At about 8.40am, I was standing here looking into
the park, I was standing next to the stone wall driveway entrance. I then
loud thump [sic] where I looked over and saw a man who was riding a bike along
City Road fall and hit the road... I then saw
a gold sedan stop just in front
of the rider on the ground
A lady then got out of the car and walked
over the footpath saying “I didn’t see him” and “It was
an accident.
It’s not my fault.”
THE INSURER’S SUBMISSIONS
Insurer submits that the following questions need to be
(a) Did the insured change lanes on City Road?
(b) Did the claimant change lanes on City Road?
insurer describes the lanes near and at the location of the collision as
the point of collision, the lanes on City Road increase from 3 lanes to 4 lanes
with the fourth lane being introduced on the right
side of the lanes for traffic
travelling north.
2 on City Road may be described as lane 2 of 3 on City Road after Cleveland
Street and then lane 2 of 4 after the fourth lane
is introduced.
was a queue of cars in lane 1 on City Road and a parking zone commences in lane
1 on City Road at the point of collision.
insurer says that the insured agreed to provide a map of travel in a
conversation with the insurer’s solicitor on 28 October
2020 but has not
at the time of these submissions provided it. In any event, the insurer submits
that the insured has provided a
statement to Police on the date of accident and
a detailed statement to the insurer’s investigator.
insured’s lane of travel
the BWV interview the insured driver states, “
I was on the second lane
of the fourth lane
paragraph 32 of her signed statement provided to the insurer’s
investigator four months after the motor accident, the insured
stated that she
was travelling in lane 2 of 3.
insurer submits that is not inconsistent with the insured’s statement in
the BWV interview as the point of impact is roughly
located where City Road goes
from 3 lanes to 4. The insured has always maintained that she was in lane 2
which it is submitted may
be variously described as lane 2 of 3 and lane 2 of 4
depending on the section of City Road that is being discussed. It makes sense
that the insured would describe herself as travelling in lane 2 of 3 on City
Road at a point just before the point of impact.
insured does not state that she was attempting to change lanes at any point
rather the insured has consistently stated that she
was always just
flowing in lane 2
9:38:23 to 9:38:26 of the BWV interview, the insured states that she was
three cars ahead of him
” and is interrupted by the police
officer before agreeing that she was in lane 2 when she heard a noise.
9:42:58 to 9:43:01 of the BWV interview, the insured states, “
my lane, right in the middle of my lane
has been no concession by the insured to the Police nor to any other person that
she ever attempted to change lanes before the
collision occurred.
claimant provided no statement to police regarding the lane of travel of the
insured and at one point denied seeing any vehicle
The claimant’s lane of travel
the BWV interview at 10:19:10 to 10:19:13, the claimant states that he was
travelling in lane 1 and agrees with the police officer
that he said he was
travelling in the first lane and had been travelling in that lane the whole
asked by the police officer whether he may have veered into the second lane at
any time the claimant states “
” after the traffic lights
at the intersection of Cleveland Street and City Road.
10:19:33 on the BWV interview, the claimant denies that he saw any vehicle
travelling alongside him and then contradicts that statement
at 10:19:38 to
10:19:42 when he states that he tried to avoid the insured vehicle which was on
his right side.
10:20:41 to 10:20:53 on the BWV interview, the claimant states that there was a
queue of cars in lane 1 in front of him and motions
with his right hand to show
a movement of lanes from left to right.
10:20:54 to 10:21:01 on the BWV interview, the claimant agrees with the police
officer’s proposition that he observed cars
in lane 1 and got out of lane
1 into lane 2 and that is when the collision occurred.
Application for Personal Injury Benefits
dated 8 April 2020, the
claimant states in that he “
was riding in the second lane because the
first lane was occupied from a long
queue of cars
Insured vehicle “
came from the back right merging my lane and pushed me
twice on my right side of the body
his statement dated 21 July 2020 at paragraph 4, the claimant states that he
was never travelling in lane 1 and was always in lane 2
This statement is contrary to the BWV interview at 10:20:41 to 10:20:53 that the
claimant got out of lane 1 due to a queue
of cars in his lane.
map prepared by the claimant showing his alleged path of travel contradicts the
statement made by the claimant in the BWV where
the claimant stated that he was
in lane 1 and changed to lane 2 due to a long queue of cars and that is when the
collision occurred.
claimant now suggests that he never made a lane change rather lane 1 became lane
2 after the traffic lights at Cleveland Street
and the claimant had continued to
ride in the same lane from Cleveland Street to the point of impact.
statement is difficult to reconcile with the BWV interview at 10:20:41 to
10:20:53 where the claimant agrees that he got out of
lane 1 due to a queue of
insurer submits that on the other hand the insured has consistently stated that
at all material times she was in lane 2 on City
Road and did not change lanes.
Where there is no concession made by the insured that she may have changed lanes
the assessor would
not reject the evidence of the insured.
insured consistently states that the claimant was travelling alongside the
insured vehicle.
insured did not state to the police officer that she was three car lengths ahead
of the claimant when she heard the noise rather
the insured was explaining that
she was aware of the claimant beside her for three car lengths and then heard
claimant and the Insured travelling side-by-side until
the claimant veered into
lane 2 which is the consistent version provided by the insured.
assessor would reject the claimant’s map of travel as an accurate
reflection of the claimant’s path of travel because
it does not reconcile
with the claimant’s concession in the BWV interview that he observed a
queue of traffic in lane 1 in
front of him and that is what caused him to move
from lane 1 to lane 2.
THE CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS
have read and considered the claimant’s submissions. Essentially, the
claimant maintains that he was travelling in lane 2
of 4 along City Road at the
material times and never changed his lane of travel. He says that the insured
driver was travelling in
lane 3 of 4 and attempted to merge in his lane, thereby
causing the collision.
CONSIDERATION
3 of the Act is concerned with the entitlement to statutory benefits and the
circumstances in which they are payable in respect
of death or injury resulting
from a motor accident.
3.1 provides that the claimant as an injured person is entitled to payment of
statutory benefits regardless of whether he
was at fault in the motor accident.
that basis, the claimant received payment of statutory benefits of weekly
payments and treatment expenses from the insurer for
a period of 26 weeks.
the end of that period, in reliance on ss 3.11 and 3.28 of the Act, the insurer
ceased paying those benefits.
3.11 provides as follows –
Cessation of weekly payments to
injured persons most at fault or with minor injuries after 26 weeks
(1) An injured person is not entitled to weekly payments of statutory
under this Division for any period of loss of earnings or earning
that occurs more than 26 weeks after the motor accident concerned
the motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by
the fault of the person
(b) the person’s only injuries resulting from the motor
accident were minor injuries.
(2) A motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a person if the
contributory negligence of the person in relation to the motor
accident (as
referred to in section 3.38) was greater than 61%.
[emphasis added]
3.28 provides as follows –
Cessation of statutory benefits after 26 weeks to injured adult persons most
at fault or to injured persons with minor injuries
An injured person is not entitled to statutory
under this Division for treatment and care expenses incurred
more than 26 weeks after the motor accident concerned if:
the motor accident was caused wholly or
mostly by the fault of the person
and the person was over 16 years of age at
the time of the motor accident, or
(b) the person’s only injuries resulting from the motor
accident were minor injuries.
(2) A motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a person if
the contributory negligence of the person in relation to the
motor accident (as
referred to in section 3.38) was greater than 61%.
[emphasis added]
is common ground that the claimant has suffered more than minor injuries for the
purposes of the Act.
insurer submits that the central issue to be determined to establish whether the
claimant was wholly or mostly at fault for the
motor accident is whether the
claimant had changed his lane into the path of travel of the insured
driver’s vehicle or whether
the insured driver had changed her lane into
the path of travel of the claimant’s bicycle.
agree. It was for that reason that I requested the claimant and the insured
driver to provide me with a diagram or map of their
respective paths of travel
leading up to the collision.
map provided by the claimant and amplified views of it on
, I have established the relevant traffic lanes to be as
Travelling from
Newtown on City Road and coming to a set of traffic lights at the intersection
with Cleveland Street, two lanes are
provided for traffic proceeding northbound
towards Broadway and Glebe. Two other lanes are provided for traffic turning
Cleveland Street, east towards Redfern.
Immediately past
the traffic lights northbound, a lane is gradually introduced on the kerbside so
that traffic proceeding in the first
lane at the set of traffic lights
automatically continues to proceed into the second lane after the traffic lights
and traffic from
the second lane at the traffic lights continues their path of
travel into the third lane after the traffic lights.
At about 50
metres before the location of the collision, the third lane (previously the
second lane) divides to become lanes 3 and
would now be convenient to refer to the lanes after the set of traffic lights to
the point of the collision as follows: the kerb
side lane as lane 1, followed by
lanes 2, 3 and 4 with lane 4 being the closest to the median strip.
the claimant’s
diagram, he was travelling in first lane at
the set of traffic lights which automatically converts into lane 2 after the
did not change his lane and continued in the same lane up to the
point of the collision.
is consistent with his evidence in the BWV interview, the
Application
for Personal Injury Benefits
and his statement of 21 July 2020. The
insurer submits that it was not.
the insurer says in the BWV interview, the claimant said that he was travelling
in lane 1 and agrees with the police officer
that he said he was travelling in
the first lane and had been travelling in that lane the whole time. When asked
by the police officer
whether he may have veered into the second lane at any
time the claimant states “
” after the traffic lights at
the intersection of Cleveland Street and City Road.
could not see any inconsistency after viewing the interview. The first question
the claimant was asked by Constable Fitzpatrick
Do you remember which lane you were
travelling in?
”. He answered the “
using gestures with his left hand.
my view, Constable Fitzpatrick’s question can only relate to the lane of
travel at the time of the collision and the answer
was the second one, meaning
claimant was then inappropriately asked: “
Were you in the first lane
the whole time
?” when he had already answered that he was travelling
next question he was asked was “
Did you at any time veer into the
?” When asking that question, Constable Fitzpatrick
gesticulated to his left. There is no suggestion that the claimant was in
at any stage.
In my view, the use of the words “
claimant’s reply should not be taken in isolation. His reply in full is an
explanation that he was travelling
in first lane before or at the traffic lights
and that lane automatically becomes lane 2 after the lights and he continued to
in that lane. Viewing the BDV interview, it is apparent that the claimant
has a limited command of spoken English so that the hand
gestures he made added
context and meaning to his reply.
the insurer submits that in the BWV interview, the claimant denies that he saw
any vehicle travelling alongside him and
then contradicts that statement later
when he states that he tried to avoid the insured vehicle which was on his right
I disagree that there is any inconsistency when the claimant’s reply in
full is considered. The claimant answered “
” initially to
the question and upon reflection he said: “
Just for that one car very
close to myself [gestures both hands to his right], on the right side and I
tried to avoid it [gestures
both hands to his left], she touch
, the insurer submits that in the BWV interview, the claimant states that there
was a queue of cars in lane 1 in front of
him and motions with his right hand to
show a movement of lanes from left to right. Later in the interview, the
claimant agrees with
the police officer’s proposition that he observed
cars in lane 1 and got out of lane 1 into lane 2 and that is when the collision
occurred. The claimant’s evidence is consistent with the introduction of
lane 1 shortly after the Cleveland St intersection,
causing him to travel in
agree that the claimant acknowledged that he could not continue his travel in
the newly introduced lane1 on the other side of the
traffic lights because there
was a queue of cars in it. However, it does not follow from the fact that the
newly introduced lane
1 was blocked with cars that the claimant changed his lane
of travel and “got out of lane 1” or “veered”
2. These were expressions used by Constable Fitzpatrick, not the claimant. Even
with his limited command of the English
and the use of hand gestures the
claimant has in my view, consistently explained that his lane of travel at the
traffic lights allowed
him to progress naturally into lane 2 on the other side
of the traffic lights at Cleveland Street.
the same reason, I reject the remainder of the insurer’s submissions
suggesting that the claimant had changed his lane or
path of travel.
considering the totality of the evidence, I am satisfied the claimant was
travelling in lane 2 after the traffic lights to the
point of collision. He was
entitled to do because that was the natural progression of the lane in which he
was travelling before
the traffic lights. As a bicycle rider, it may make sense
that he could have moved into the newly introduced lane 1 after the traffic
lights and closer to the kerb to allow vehicle traffic to flow through. As that
lane was occupied with a queue of stationary and
parked cars, he could not. The
fact that he could not is not a reason to find, contrary to his evidence, that
the claimant had changed
his lane of travel and later “veered” into
the insurer submits that on the other hand, the insured has consistently stated
that at all material times she was in lane
2 on City Road and did not change
do not accept that submission for the reasons that follow.
have given more weight to the evidence given by the insured driver in the BDW
interview because it was contemporaneous and given
within the hour after and at
the scene of the motor accident.
the BDW interview, the insured driver said that she was travelling ahead just
like everybody else when she was intercepted by Constable
Fitzpatrick and asked:
Do you remember which
lane you were travelling at this
” With her left hand gestures pointing towards the median strip,
the insured driver counted the lanes and said: “
I was in the
second lane of the fourth lane
my view, it is apparent that she was pointing to the second lane closer to the
median strip which is in effect lane 3. The interview
was conducted at the scene
of the accident with all lanes clearly visible to her and Constable Fitzpatrick.
If the “second
lane” was in fact lane 2 and not lane 3, the insured
driver had an opportunity to point to lane 2 as she was standing right
of it throughout the interview. She did not do so.
insured driver acknowledged that she was travelling in her own lane, the
claimant was travelling in his own lane and they were
both travelling alongside
each other, “
straight ahead
just travelling
”. She said the claimant was travelling on her left. She did not
identify or suggest to Constable Fitzpatrick that this was
after the Cleveland St intersection, and before the new kerbside lane is fully
introduced, there are only 2 lanes. The lane nearest
the medium strip becomes
lane 3 after the introduction of the kerbside lane. Lane 3 then divides to
become lanes 3 and 4.
the insured driver was travelling in a lane alongside the claimant before the
intersection, then it is most likely that insured
driver was in what became lane
3 after the kerbside lane was introduced.
insured driver said to Constable Fitzpatrick that lane 1 was blocked with cars
but she did not at any time suggest that that the
claimant attempted to
“veer” into her lane or “got into” her lane from lane 1.
Indeed, it would be implausible
to suggest that the claimant would have been
able to travel “straight ahead” or just travelling ahead”
her in a lane blocked with cars.
the BWV interview, when asked whether there was any damage to her vehicle, the
insured driver said that there was no damage but
showed Constable Fitzpatrick
her rear vision mirror and demonstrated that it had been pushed inwards from the
impact of the collision.
In my view, it is highly unlikely that the
insured’s mirror would have been pushed inwards if the claimant’s
“veered” into her lane and collided with her mirror. That
motion would be more consistent with colliding with an object
that was ahead of
the vehicle at the time of the collision.
follows that I accept the claimant’s evidence that the accident happened
while the insured driver was attempting to merge
into lane 2. That movement is
consistent with the destination of the insured driver, that is, Glebe via
Broadway. Lanes 3 and 4 are
right turning lanes. Lane 1 is a left turning lane.
Lane 2 permits traffic to turn left and right or to continue across the
intersection
into Bay Street. I find that the collision occurred when the
insured driver attempted to move from lane 3 to lane 2 on City Road
is a witness who was standing near the entrance gate to Victoria Park and
looking inside the park when the collision occurred.
He heard a loud thud,
turned around and saw the claimant falling off his bicycle. He then saw the
insured driver’s vehicle
stop in front of the claimant’s bicycle and
the insured driver walked over to the footpath. Mr Watson then heard the insured
driver to say: “
I didn’t see him
an accident. It’s not my fault
therefore find that the claimant was not wholly or partly at fault for the motor
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
95. The claimant makes a claim for
his legal costs in the regulated amount.
96. The insurer opposes the
application. The insurer submits that if I affirm the insurer’s review
decision, it would not be
fair and reasonable that it bears the claimant’s
legal costs and that no amount should be allowed for the claimant’s
97. The claimant was successful in this application.
98. There is
no reason why the claimant should not be allowed his legal costs.
were two types of disputes for assessment under ss 3.11 and 3.28 of the Act. I
allow the claimant’s costs in the regulated
amounts for both types to a
total of $3,320 plus GST.
My determination of the
Miscellaneous Claim is as follows:
100. For the purposes of section 3.11 the
motor accident was not caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the
101. For the purposes of section 3.28 the motor accident was not
caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the claimant.
102. The decision takes
effect from: 16 August 2020.
103. Legal Costs: The amount of the
claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries
Regulation 2017
is $3,320 plus GST.
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (927 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter