URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KMN [2013] NSWGT 34 (19 August 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 34
(19 AUGUST 2013)
APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDER
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
19 August 2013 at Goulburn
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr John Currie
Professional Member:
Mr David Barker
Community Member:
Ms Rhonda Ansiewicz
Financial management –enduring power of
attorney in place – operation and effect of instrument – attorneys
in conflict
of interest – family agreement – whether principal had
capacity to give informed consent to family agreement –
best interests -
interim financial management order for a period of six months made pursuant to
section 25H appointing the NSW Trustee
and Guardian as financial manager
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 19 August 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Interim Financial Management
Tribunal decided to make an interim financial management order, pursuant to
section 25H
Guardianship Act 1987
, for Mrs KMN. Under that interim
financial management order the management of Mrs KMN’s estate was
committed to NSW Trustee.
The interim financial management order was made for a
period of 6 months and the hearing of the financial management application
adjourned for approximately 6 months to a date to be set by the
Recommendations
Tribunal also decided to make the following recommendations:
parties, that arrangements be made for Mrs KMN to undergo a neuropsychological
assessment and for a written report of that
assessment, incorporating an opinion
as to Mrs KMN’s capability of managing her own affairs, including her
understanding of
her current financial and other assets and how they can be
protected, to be made available to the Tribunal prior to the next hearing;
(b) to NSW Trustee, that in the course of its management of Mrs KMN’s
estate it should have due regard to, but not necessarily
be constrained by, the
terms of the Family Agreement dated 13 August 2013, the terms of which are set
out in Appendix B to these
Reasons [Appendix B withheld from
publication].
KMN is an 89-year-old woman who lives at an Aged Care Facility A at Regional
Sydney. It is reported that Mrs KMN has a cognitive
impairment due to a stroke.
However the medical and professional care evidence presented to the Tribunal as
at the commencement of
the hearing on 19 August 2013 was not conclusive as to
the existence such a disability. Mrs KMN has two children: Mrs RBO who is
married to Mr UBO and lives at Regional Sydney, and Mrs QDF who is married to Mr
SDF and lives at Eastern Sydney.
20 February 2006 Mrs KMN executed an instrument which purported to be a general
power of attorney
(“the 2006 Power of Attorney”)
. Under this
instrument Mrs KMN appointed her daughter Mrs RBO and her son in law, Mr SDF
(the husband of her daughter Mrs QDF) jointly
and severally as her attorneys,
with immediate operation. The grant of the power of attorney was unconditional.
The 2006 Power of
Attorney is not an enduring power of attorney within the
meaning of the
Powers of Attorney Act, 2003
That means of course that
the 2006 Power of Attorney ceases to be effective upon Mrs KMN ceasing to have
the mental capacity to make
such an appointment.
Tribunal understands, and it appears to be common ground, that there were
various dealings by Mr QDF and to a lesser extent by
Mrs RBO, purportedly in
exercise of their powers as attorneys of Mrs KMN. The Tribunal also understands
that Mrs KMN was, as at 5
April 2013 and at the day of the hearing, in very
substantial arrears of fees payable to the Aged Care Facility A, as well as
on those fees. It is asserted that a substantial amount of interest has
been capitalised in accordance with the terms of a Residential
Care Agreement
between Mrs KMN and the Aged Care Facility A dated 12 April
5 April 2013 the Tribunal received from Ms WAC, the Residential Services Manager
of the Aged Care Facility A, an application seeking
the appointment of a
financial manager for Mrs KMN. The Tribunal’s hearing of the application
commenced on 24 June 2013.
that date the Tribunal adjourned the hearing of the application for
approximately 8 weeks and issued directions to Mr QDF solely
and also directions
to Mr QDF and Mrs RBO as attorneys. Mr QDF solely was directed to provide copies
of specified documents relating
to dealings with Mrs KMN’s property as
well as copies of specified bank statements and identification of particular
bank accounts.
Mr QDF and Mrs RBO jointly were directed to provide the Tribunal
with copies of the 2006 Power of Attorney and any written family
evidencing the arrangement of the transfer of Mrs RBO’s Property X to Mr
13 August 2013, by way of letter to the Tribunal, Mrs KMN, Mrs RBO, Mr QDF, Mr
UBO and Mrs QDF set out the terms of a written family
agreement in respect of
Mrs KMN’s affairs
(“the Family Agreement”).
convenience of reference, the terms of the Family Agreement are set out in
Appendix B to these Reasons [Appendix B withheld from
publication].
purpose of the hearing on 19 August 2013 was to resume the adjourned hearing of
the financial management application.
WAC was replaced as the applicant by Ms KXH, the Acting Deputy Manager of the
Aged Care Facility A, who was accepted as substituted
The hearing
Guardianship Act 1987
requires that before the Tribunal makes a decision
on any application, it must bring the parties to a settlement or use its best
endeavours to do so. This is not required if the Tribunal considers that it is
not possible, or appropriate, to attempt to bring
the parties to a settlement.
At the hearing the Tribunal used its best endeavours to ascertain the issues in
dispute between the
appeared that the issues between the parties relate to the management of Mrs
KMN’s affairs by the two attorneys appointed
under the 2006 Power of
Attorney; that is Mrs RBO and Mr QDF and particularly management by Mr QDF.
However there is also a difference
of views as to whether or not Mrs KMN is
currently and for the reasonably foreseeable future capable of managing her
affairs. A related
issue is whether or not Mrs KMN currently has the legal
capacity to make any new power of attorney arrangements. The Tribunal was
to resolve these issues or to bring the parties to a settlement of
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
incapable of managing
her affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage the affairs of Mrs KMN and is it in her best
interests that a financial management order
If an order is
to be made on the basis of the answers to those questions, who should be
appointed as financial
Participation
in the hearing by Mrs KMN and her views
the commencement of the hearing the Presiding Member explained the nature of the
the procedures which would be
adopted for the conduct of the hearing and the issues which had to be
KMN indicated that she understood this explanation. Mrs KMN participated
actively in the hearing. She provided what appeared to
be a clear, cogent and
extensive statement of her views. Mrs KMN told the Tribunal that she recalled
appointing Mrs RBO and Mr QDF
as her attorneys under the 2006 Power of Attorney
but was now of the view that she would rather have her two daughters, that is
RBO and Mrs QDF, as her attorneys to make all decisions for her.
Significantly, Mrs KMN said that she hoped that her daughters would
consult with
her in relation to her affairs. Mrs KMN gave the Tribunal to understand that she
no longer wish to Mr QDF her son-in-law
to have any role in the management of
her affairs.
asked by a Tribunal Member to describe the sort of decisions she thought her
attorneys should make for her at present, Mrs KMN
said that she would like them
to make day to day decisions particularly because, in her
“I hate the thought of not being
independent”.
KMN told the Tribunal that she was very comfortable and happy at the Aged Care
Facility A and that she enjoyed the outings and
other entertainment which were
available there.
Significantly,
Mrs KMN was able to provide the Tribunal with a reasonably detailed description
of her estate. She expressed particular
affection for what she described as her
and her late husband’s superannuation and small pension. Mrs KMN
was unable to provide details of her bank account including
an approximate
balance. She said that everything was paid for by other people on her behalf.
Mrs KMN said that she had no other deposits,
shares or other investments. Mrs
KMN recalled that Property X had been leased out.
KMN also recalled signing a transfer of title document in respect of Property X.
The Tribunal was provided with a copy of a
Real Property Act
Transfer which bears a registered number by which Mrs KMN as Transferor
transfers title in the property to Mr QDF as Transferee
for consideration of
$400,000. The signature of the Transferor appears to be that of Mrs KMN. The
instrument is undated but it bears
an Office of State Revenue stamp indicating
that stamp duty on it was paid on 24 February 2013. When asked why she had
signed that
document Mrs KMN said words to the effect:
signed it I did not intend to dispose of the property to my son-in-law but I
thought there might come a day when I needed
KMN also told the Tribunal that the need for Tribunal proceedings in relation to
her affairs was a shock to her. She appeared
to have a clear understanding of
the fact that the management of her affairs was under investigation and that
these proceedings could
result in the authority to manage her affairs being
removed from her appointed attorneys. When asked what was now necessary to
issues involving management of her affairs under the 2006 Power of
Attorney, Mrs KMN said that arrangements had to be made for major
the Tribunal took to be a reference to Mr
and Mrs RBO and Mr and Mrs SDF.
Finally Mrs KMN said she did not recall anything being agreed between the
parties and did not recall
signing or agreeing to the terms of a Family
THE TRIBUNAL’S ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE AND
DETERMINATION OF THE ISSUES
Is Mrs KMN incapable of managing her affairs?
The legal principles
Supreme Court of New South Wales has provided guidance in several decisions as
to how the Tribunal should assess a person’s
capability to manage his or
her affairs.
useful discussion of the authorities was provided by Justice Campbell (as he
then was) in the case of
Re GHI (a protected person)
[2005] NSWSC 581
The approach adopted by Justice Powell in
and applied on many occasions was affirmed by Justice Campbell. In
Powell had said
is my view that a person is not shown to be incapable of managing his own
financial affairs unless, at the least, it appears:
(a) that he is incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent fashion with the
ordinary routine affairs of man; and
(b) that by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real risk
that either:
may be disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
moneys or property that he may possess may be dissipated or lost.
not sufficient in my view merely to demonstrate that the person lacks the high
level of ability needed to deal with complicated
transactions or that he does
not deal with even simple or routine transactions in the most efficient
Justice Young in the case of
(unreported, 20 March 2000),
said that dealing with the “ordinary affairs” of people does not
simply mean being able to
go to the bank and draw out housekeeping money, but
that there was an additional element, namely the ability to plan for the future
and being able to work out how one’s income will be obtained and capital
these tests the Tribunal, in considering whether the person under consideration
is capable of managing his or her affairs, will
need to assess whether that
person has difficulty in making decisions about their financial affairs at
either of two levels. The
first of these is the level of every day dealings with
money; including the person’s ability to do such things as regular
being able to calculate the correct change when making cash purchases
and their ability to make regular payments such as rental or
mortgage payments.
The second level is the level of planning for the future. As Mr Justice Young
explained this involves the person
concerned being able to understand how they
are going to generate income and how they will protect their capital.
two more recent Supreme Court decisions,
[2003] NSWSC 819
[2012] NSWSC 1006
, it has been emphasised that a body such as the Tribunal
should not be relying just on hypothetical notions such as “the ordinary
affairs of people” but should be assessing the capability of the person
concerned to deal with his or her actual assets and
to do what he or she is
proposing to do with them.
Justice White assessed the history of case law in relation to
financial management and noted that more recently Courts have tended
assessing the person’s own capacity to do what they are proposing to do.
Justice Barrett said at paragraph 26 that the task of the body
such as the Tribunal in these circumstances:
“.... is to make a judgment as to the capacity and ability of the
person concerned to cope with the ordinary routine affairs
particularly so far as they concern the person's property. ...The requisite
judgment is to be made in the light of objective
physical facts concerning the
relevant person's property, money and other assets and the way the person is
able to look after them.
If there is a lack of capacity, the reason for it does
not matter."
the case of
, as cited above,
Justice Campbell
offered a further factor which may be relevant. That is whether the person has
the ability to identify and deal appropriately
with those who may be attempting
to benefit from his or her assets, including money, through unfair dealing. His
Honour said that
this lack of skill might create a real risk that the person may
be disadvantaged, or that his or her estate might be dissipated or
that case Justice Campbell also suggested that, when determining whether a
person is incapable of managing his or her affairs,
it may be relevant also to
consider whether or not the person is willing to seek and take appropriate
advice. His Honour noted that
in general, taking advice can remove the risk that
the lack of ability will cause the person to be disadvantaged in the conduct of
his or her affairs.
as a result of the earlier authorities and these more recent cases of
the Tribunal will have regard to whether the person
concerned has the capability to manage the ordinary affairs of living in light
of their current position. It will look at the actual assets of the person
concerned, how they are proposing to manage their ordinary
affairs of living and
what they are proposing to do with their assets.
the Tribunal finds that the person under consideration:
manage their ordinary affairs of living; or
(b) does not
have a reasonably sound understanding of what their assets, liabilities and
sources of income are and for that reason
is unlikely to be able to preserve
their money or assets or is likely to be disadvantaged in their dealings;
(c) does not
have a reasonably sound understanding of the complications, pitfalls and risks
of what is proposed to be done (by themselves
or others) with their assets or
money, particularly by way of investment, and those proposals are unlikely to be
achieved or there
is a substantial risk that they will result in the
person’s assets or money being dissipated or lost; or
(d) lacks the
ability to identify situations where others may be attempting to benefit from
the person’s assets or money through
unfair dealing and this lack of
ability might create a real risk that the person will be disadvantaged or that
their money or assets
will be dissipated or lost;
Tribunal can be satisfied that the person concerned is incapable of managing
their affairs.
Additionally,
in appropriate cases, as suggested by Justice Campbell in
the Tribunal may also consider whether or not the person is willing to seek and
take appropriate advice and so minimise or remove
the risk that they will be
disadvantaged in the conduct of their affairs.
in the guardianship sense is not an element of the test for incapability for the
purposes of considering a financial management
application:
Protective Commissioner & ors
[2003] NSW ADTAP 51.
The relevant time
for considering whether a person is incapable of managing his or her affairs is
not merely the day of the hearing
but the reasonably foreseeable future. (
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
far-reaching effects of a finding of incapability.
Tribunal must always exercise care in making a finding that the person under
consideration is incapable of managing their own
affairs. That is principally
because the making of a financial management order rests upon such a finding,
subject of course to the
Tribunal also being satisfied that there is a need for
such an order and that it would be in the best interests of the person concerned
to make an order.
far-reaching effects of a financial management order have been noted by the
Courts; see particularly
David, by her Tutor The Protective Commissioner v
(1993) 30 NSWLR 417
, Court of Appeal. They are also apparent in
the legislation; see
Guardianship Act 1987
and section
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
. Subject to any exclusion of
part of the person’s estate expressed in the order, a financial management
order completely deprives
a person of the right to deal with or to make
decisions about his or her own property, including of course his or her money
and investments.
These far-reaching effects of an order are normally explained
to the parties at the commencement of a Tribunal hearing. That was
done in this
The Tribunal’s analysis and conclusions on this
its hearing on 24 June 2013 the Tribunal, as then constituted, made no finding
as to Mrs KMN’s capability of managing her
own affairs.
Tribunal had before it two items of evidence as to Mrs KMN’s cognitive
ability. The first of these was a report of a “Mini-Mental
apparently administered by a staff member at Aged Care Facility B on 21 May
2013. Mrs KMN is reported to have been alert
during the assessment. She scored
29/30 on the Test. That of itself might indicate that Mrs KMN had substantially
undiminished cognitive
ability as at the date of the assessment. The Tribunal is
aware however of a reasonably substantial body of academic commentary on
standard Mini Mental State Examination (“MMSE”) of which the
“mini-Mental Test” administered by the Aged
Care Facility B appears
to be a variety. Much of that academic commentary cautions against drawing
conclusive impressions of the
relevant person’s cognitive ability and
mental capacity based solely on the MMSE. Significantly, the Tribunal was not
with any more recent assessment in the form of an MMSE or
other item of professional evidence made available to the Tribunal on 24 June
2013 was a Health Professional Report Form dated
21 May 2013 completed by Dr Z
who has been Mrs KMN’s general practitioner since April 2011. Dr Z
reported that he has seen
Mrs KMN approximately monthly on average and last saw
her on the day of his report. Dr Z’s report has been accorded substantial
weight by the Tribunal because of Dr Z’s familiarity with Mrs KMN and
because of the analytical nature of the report. Dr Z’s
report makes a
number of significant assertions of opinion in respect of Mrs KMN:
identifies Mrs KMN as someone who has a disability, but when asked to describe
the nature of the disability Dr Z states “No”
to each of: dementia,
intellectual disability, brain injury, mental illness and “other
disability/medical condition that affects
the person’s decision-making
capacity”. Instead Dr Z describes other physical medical conditions
affecting Mrs KMN including
“some right sided weakness secondary to a
previous CVA” (which the Tribunal understands to be a reference to a
cerebrovascular
accident or stroke);
asked specifically “does the person’s disability affect their
capacity to make informed decisions about the following:”
Dr Z ticked the
“No” box for financial affairs, and also in respect of accommodation
care and services and health and
medical care;
Z’s report also refers to a “Mini Mental State Examination”
having been undertaken on 21 May 2013. The Tribunal
assumes that this is a
reference to the assessment undertaken by Aged Care Facility B, as referred to
on page 8 above;
his concluding remarks Dr Z reports that: “Patient says that she currently
manages her finances with the help of one daughter
and considers that this
system works well and she would like to continue.”
states that Mrs KMN will be capable of making a significant contribution to any
Unfortunately
no updated medical or professional care reports or any other form of
professional evidence was made available to the
Tribunal for the hearing on 19
August 2013.
two items of professional evidence referred to above, namely the assessment
undertaken by the Aged Care Facility B on 21 May 2013
and Dr Z’s report of
the same date, appear at first sight to permit a conclusion that at least at
that time Mrs KMN displayed
no overt signs of being incapable of being able to
manage her own affairs.
there are two major impediments to the Tribunal in relying on that evidence to
justify a finding that Mrs KMN is at the date
of the hearing; that is 19 August
2013; and for the reasonably foreseeable future, capable of managing her own
affairs. The first
of these problems is simply that there may have been a
deterioration in Mrs KMN’s cognitive ability in the intervening period.
The Tribunal simply does not have any proper professional evidentiary basis for
reaching a conclusion about this. The second problem
is of course that the legal
tests for incapability of managing one’s affairs are somewhat involved and
that to make a conclusive
finding on this very significant issue of Mrs
KMN’s capability the Tribunal should apply each of the tests summarised in
(i) to (iv) above on page 7.
the basis of the findings of the Tribunal on 24 June 2013 as to certain dealings
in Mrs KMN’s affairs and the account given
by Mr QDF at the current
hearing (both of which are summarised on pages 11 and 12 below) the Tribunal
cannot comfortably be satisfied
that Mrs KMN would satisfy the tests set out in
paragraphs(iii) and(iv); that is that she has a reasonably sound understanding
the complications and risks of what is proposed to be done by others, or what
has been done by others (namely one or both of her
attorneys) with her assets or
money, or that she has the ability to identify situations where others may be
attempting to benefit
from her estate by unfair dealing.
result is that the Tribunal cannot on the present state of the evidence make a
finding as to whether or not Mrs KMN is capable
of managing her affairs. A
decision on that issue cannot be taken lightly, given the significant
consequences of such a decision,
as outlined on pages 7 and 8 above.
Guardianship Act 1987
makes specific provision, in
section 25H
grant of an interim financial management order in this situation. In the words
of the section an interim financial management
order for a specified period not
exceeding six months can be made:
“pending the
Tribunal’s further consideration of the capability of the person to whom
the order relates to manage his
or her own affairs.”
the facts of current case, the availability of an interim financial management
order under
section 25H
has to be weighed against the alternative solution which
would involve recognising the 2006 Power of Attorney, supplemented by
arrangements
reflected in the Family Agreement as constituting a suitable means
of managing Mrs KMN’s affairs. In determining which of these
alternative routes it should take, the Tribunal has to be guided to some extent
by the obligations imposed by
Guardianship Act
require the Tribunal, for example, to ensure that the freedom of decision and
freedom of action of persons such as Mrs KMN
are restricted as little as
possible. However
also dictates that the paramount consideration of
the Tribunal in these circumstances must be the welfare and interests of Mrs
determining the issue then the first question is whether there is a need for
another person to manage Mrs KMN’s affairs and
whether it will be in her
best interests for a financial management order, in this case an interim order,
to be made.
Is there a need for another person to manage the
affairs of Mrs KMN and is it in her best interests that a financial management
The Tribunal’s findings as to the management of Mrs KMN’s
affairs by the appointed attorneys.
its Reasons for Decision relating to the hearing on 24 June 2013, the Tribunal
made certain findings of fact and recited certain
evidence which have a direct
bearing on this question.
Tribunal found that a property owned by Mrs KMN, being Property X had been
transferred into the name of Mr QDF. Mr QDF told the
Tribunal on that occasion
that the property was transferred to him in about April 2010.
Tribunal on that occasion observed that the Transfer instrument states a
consideration of $400,000 for this transfer. During the
hearing on 24 June 2013
the Tribunal asked Mr QDF if that amount consideration had been transferred to
Mrs KMN. Mr QDF told the Tribunal
that it had not been transferred into Mrs
KMN’s name.
QDF told the Tribunal on that occasion that the reason for the transfer of
Property X into his name was “as a result of losses
or apparent effects of
the global financial crisis which flowed on to his mother-in-law’s
assets”. That explanation was
unclear to the Tribunal as constituted on 24
June 2013 and it remains unclear to the present Tribunal. The present Tribunal
assisted in its understanding of this explanation by anything which Mr
QDF said to the Tribunal at the hearing.
24 June 2013 Mr QDF told the Tribunal that Property X had a reverse mortgage on
it which required refinancing. It was asserted
that in 2010 the reverse mortgage
had an outstanding balance of about $65,000. Mr QDF told the Tribunal on that
occasion that the
net asset was worth currently about $235,000. The Tribunal as
constituted on 24 June 2013 noted that this indicates that further
amounts have
been borrowed against the property of approximately $180,000.
QDF undertook to the Tribunal on 24 June 2013 that he would not deal with
Property X between that date and the adjourned hearing.
The Tribunal is
presently constituted accepts that it appears that Mr QDF has honoured this
undertaking.
The evidence of Mr QDF.
the hearing on 19 August 2013 the Tribunal asked Mr QDF several questions about
the advance of $130,000 which had been made by
Mr and Mrs RBO to him as the
attorney for Mrs KMN. The Tribunal accepted Mrs RBO’s assertion that the
$130,000 was comprised
of the most part of her retirement benefits. It was
apparent to the Tribunal from the evidence given by Mr and Mrs RBO that their
intention in advancing this money was that it be used to reduce the Bond payable
to the Aged Care Facility A in respect of Mrs KMN’s
accommodation.
However, Mr QDF in his testimony gave the Tribunal to understand
understanding at the time was that the advance could best be used to assist
borrowings against Property X. Mr QDF said that this
was a strategy employed to
attempt to minimise the effect of the global recession. (The Tribunal indicated
that it understood the
effects of the global recession to be at their worst in
the years 2008 and 2009 but that it accepted for the purpose of the current
proceedings that Mr QDF may have experienced the ongoing effects of the
recession in 2010); and
Mr QDF, realised that Mr and Mrs RBO’s understanding was that the money
was to be used to reduce the Bond, but Mr QDF conceded
that the money had not
been used for that at all and that it had been used for his personal benefit as
well as for the benefit of
his mother-in-law Mrs KMN. Subsequently Mr QDF
conceded that only a small proportion of the $130,000 had been used for Mrs
Should the Family Agreement be
regarded as a suitable alternative to a financial management order for managing
Mrs KMN’s affairs
and would reliance on the Family Agreement be in Mrs
KMN’s best interests?
24 June 2013 the Tribunal’s direction to Mr QDF and Mrs RBO included a
direction to provide a copy of any written family
agreement. Subsequently,
shortly before the hearing on 19 August 2013 the Family Agreement was provided
to the Tribunal.
the hearing on 19 August 2013, the Tribunal explained to the participants that
one course open to it was to allow Mrs KMN’s
affairs to be managed under
the 2006 Power of Attorney, with amended arrangements as set out in the Family
Agreement. It was explained
that this was an alternative to the making of an
interim financial management order and it was foreshadowed that the Tribunal may
well appointed NSW Trustee as financial manager under an interim order. The
Tribunal sought the response of each of the family members
present to these
alternatives.
of Mr and Mrs RBO and Mr and Mrs SDF requested the Tribunal to take the former
course; that is, to recognise the Family Agreement
as the code which would
govern the management of Mrs KMN’s affairs, as opposed to making an
interim financial management order.
Mrs RBO outlined her plans for the immediate
management of her mother’s estate which involved discharging the debts,
the sale of Property X, paying the Bond outright from the proceeds of
that sale and thereafter “streamlining management”
by having regular
costs to the State that with by direct debit and by investing the balance which
was expected to be something in
the order of $122,000, with the investment
interest used for Mrs KMN’s necessities.
KMN herself expressed a preference for what she understood to be the Family
Agreement. The Tribunal noted that in her testimony
Mrs KMN had indicated that
she could not recall signing or approving the terms of a Family Agreement. Be
that as it may, Mrs KMN
expressed a clear preference for not having her affairs
managed by an external body such as NSW Trustee.
appropriate case for the making of an interim financial management order and if
so who should be appointed as financial
Tribunal gave careful consideration to the views of the family members as
summarised above and particularly their expressed preference
for allowing Mrs
KMN’s affairs to be managed under the Family Agreement rather than by
making an interim financial management
the Tribunal found that there were several grounds for preferring the making of
an interim financial management order. In
particular, the Tribunal concluded
that the Family Agreement could not provide a completely efficacious program or
code of conduct
for the management of Mrs KMN’s affairs, and that it would
not provide the optimum protection for Mrs KMN’s interests
and welfare.
The Tribunal reach those conclusions on the following grounds:
1 and 2 of the Family Agreement appears to contemplate that it will be an
essential first step in implementing the proposed
regime of management that Mr
QDF will relinquish his appointment as attorney and that, (as stated in
paragraph 2):”Mrs KMN
is to appoint her two daughters jointly under an
Enduring Power of Attorney to jointly control their mother’s financial
affairs...”.
There are two problems here. Firstly
there is no mechanism described under which Mr QDF will relinquish his
appointment as attorney.
The Tribunal heard at the hearing that the remaining
attorney, Mrs RBO was prepared to continue to act as attorney, but no
explanation
was forthcoming as to why Mr QDF could not have relinquished his
appointment contemporaneously with execution of the Family Agreement.
this is an indication only that Mr QDF will really relinquish his appointment.
The second problem is this. Unfortunately
Mrs KMN’s capacity to execute a
further power of attorney, including an enduring power of attorney is now a live
issue, which
at present cannot be determined by the Tribunal. The
Tribunal’s reasons for making this finding a set out in more detail on
pages 9 and 10 above. That would mean that any attempt to execute an enduring
power of attorney would be subject to the difficulty
of obtaining an appropriate
certificate under
Powers of Attorney Act
from a prescribed
witness. In short a solicitor or other prescribed witness would need to be
satisfied that Mrs KMN is fully capable
of making the appointment and in all the
circumstances that may not occur. A proposal based on such an uncertain
foundation cannot
have great prospects of success and certainly cannot be
endorsed by the Tribunal.
is also a real issue as to whether Mrs KMN herself has given her informed
consent to the Family Agreement. Their evidence to
the Tribunal was to the
effect that she could not recall agreeing to its terms.
Family agreement recites in paragraph 3 that Mr QDF is presently holding
Property X “in trust for Mrs KMN”. The Tribunal
has not been given
details of how this trust was constituted or how it is evidenced. Certainly Mr
QDF neither produced nor referred
to any declaration of trust in this
5 of the Family Agreement deals with arrangements for the sale of Property X and
the use of the proceeds of sale to pay
the Bond. The proposal includes Mr QDF
paying interest on the outstanding bond until the proceeds are available to pay
off the Bond.
It is stated that Mr QDF is “agreeable to entering into a
separate agreement with the Aged Care Facility A in this regard.”
Tribunal has seen no evidence of such a proposed agreement and had nothing in
the evidence to confirm that such an arrangement
had been made.
stating these points of doubt which have arisen in the Tribunal’s
consideration and which prevent the Tribunal from endorsing
the Family Agreement
as a substitute for a financial management order, the Tribunal of course meets
no disrespect to any of the family
members involved and it appreciates the
effort which must have gone into formulating the terms of the Family Agreement.
The Tribunal
perceives that some of the steps contemplated by the Family
Agreement may well be able to be implemented even if an interim financial
management order is made and the Tribunal is prepared to recommend to the
appointed financial manager that due regard be had to the
terms of the Family
even putting to one side the doubts expressed above as to the efficacy of the
Family Agreement in the particular circumstances,
the Tribunal is satisfied that
the established facts of the case, including the findings of the Tribunal on 24
June 2013, indicate
that some external oversight of the management of Mrs
KMN’s affairs is necessary in order to preserve her best interests and
welfare and, in accordance with the principle stated in
Guardianship Act
necessary in order that Mrs KMN is protected from
exploitation. Again the Tribunal reaches this decision whilst acknowledging the
efforts made by family members in attempting to resolve these difficult issues
all these reasons the Tribunal cannot be comfortably satisfied that an
arrangement based on the existing 2006 Power of Attorney
as adjusted by the
Family Agreement and continued management of Mrs KMN’s affairs under the
Family Agreement is the course
which is in Mrs KMN’s best interests and
welfare. Conversely the Tribunal is satisfied that Mrs KMN’s best
and welfare can be catered for and her vulnerability to exploitation
best protected by the making of an interim financial management
the Tribunal makes an interim financial management order it often appoints NSW
Trustee although it will always give consideration
to appointing one or more
family members as private managers if that course would be appropriate and in
the best interests of the
person concerned, here, Mrs KMN. However, given the
Tribunal’s concerns about the proposal reflected in the Family Agreement
and the nature of Mr QDF’ actions as attorney for Mrs KMN the Tribunal was
satisfied that it will be in Mrs KMN’s best
interests for an external and
independent body to be appointed.
these reasons the Tribunal decided to commit the management of Mrs KMN’s
estate to NSW Trustee by way of an interim financial
management order for a
period of 6 months and adjourned the further hearing of this financial
management application for approximately
6 months, to a date to be set by the
Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (214 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter