URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2013/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v ABRAHAM [2013] NSWDT 2 (14 June 2013)
Dental Tribunal of New South Wales
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
HCCC v ABRAHAM [2013] NSWDT
Complainant: Health Care Complaints Commission
Respondent: Dr Adel Abraham
Mr Oscar Shub
(chairperson)
Dr Thomas Boland (dentist member)
Dr Kavita Lobo (dentist
Ms Leanne Wrightson (lay member)
Date and Place of Hearing:
28, 29 May 2013, Sydney
Date of Decision: 14 June
Decision summary: The Tribunal finds Complaints 1-5 and all the
particulars save for particular 5d established. The Tribunal finds
Respondent guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
Appearances:
Complainant: Mr A Britt instructed by Ms J
Respondent: Mr P Arblaster in respect of particular 8 of Complaint 2
instructed by Meridian Lawyers and the Respondent personally
in respect of the
remainder of the Complaints.
Catchwords:
Dentist - unsatisfactory
professional conduct, professional misconduct, inappropriate dentist/employee
relationship, aggravated indecent
assault, professional boundaries, criminal
convictions, dental assistant, breach of conditions.
Legislation
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
sections 39(2)
Health Practitioners Regulation National
Law of NSW ("National Law") section 3(2)(a) and 3A, section 55(1), 145(A),
138, 139(B),
139(E), 149(A), (B) and (C), and 144.
Section 28A
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Sex Discrimination Act
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA34
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Pillai Vs Messiter [No2]
(1984) 16 NSWLR 197
(1995) 193 CLR 501
Slezak, Dr Peter
at 80, 83 and 87
HCCC vs Dr Gow
[2008] NSWMT 2 at
HCCC vs Roopra [No1]
(2012) NSWCA 80
Lee vs HCCC
[2012] NSWCA 411
SABAG vs HCCC
[2001] NSWCA 411
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Rejfek vs McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR
Bannister vs Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
Lindsay vs HCCC
[2005] NSWCA 356
HCCC vs Sunda
[2013] NSWDT 1 at 43
Kalil vs Bray & Anor
(1977) 1 NSWLR
HCCC vs Phung (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT 1 at 60 and 68
[2013] NSWMT 3 at 39
A solicitor vs Council of NSW Law
[2004] HCA 1
HCCC vs King NSWMT
(6/2/13) at
Saville vs HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Ex Parte Tziniolis re
medical practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
(Australia) Pty Ltd vs Sprowlers
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
HCCC vs Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630
HCCC vs Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7
HCCC vs Rutner
[2009] NSWDT 2 at [14]
Gayed vs Walton
[1997] NSWSC 279
Prakash vs HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
HCCC vs Howe
[2010] NSWMT 12 at 113
Re Dr Parajul
[2010] NSWMT 113 at 31 and 32
Skinner vs Beaumont
[1974] 2 NSWLR 106
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
HCCC vs Dr Graeme Harris
[2008] NSWMT 6 at 175
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Complaints and Particulars of Complaints
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Dental Council of
New South Wales
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
HEREBY COMPLAINS
that Dr Adel Abraham of Unit 2/303 Commercial Road, Yarram Victoria 3971
the practitioner
"), being a dentist registered under the
COMPLAINT ONE
has been convicted of criminal offences
Background to Complaint
September 2010, the practitioner was charged with two counts of aggravated
indecent assault.
(i) The first offence was that:
Between 9am on 22 December 2009 and 4 pm on 18 January 2010 at [suppressed
location], the practitioner did assault (Employee A) and
at the time of the
assault committed an act of indecency on her, touching her on the shoulder and
stating "I have to go to the bathroom
and clean myself up because I've made
myself wet".
(ii) The second offence was that:
Between 9am on 22 December 2009 and 4 pm on 18 January 2010 at [suppressed
location], the practitioner did assault (Employee A) and
at the time of the
assault committed an act of indecency by touching her on her bottom immediately
after talking about sex to her.
(iii) The circumstance of aggravation for each offence was that the victim was
under the authority of the practitioner in that he
was the victim's employer and
immediate supervisor.
(iv) On 10 March 2011, the practitioner was convicted of both offences and
sentenced to a two year good behaviour bond under
section 9(1)
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
in respect of each individual
(v) The convictions and good behaviour bonds were stayed until the disposal of
an appeal against the conviction and penalties.
(vi) The practitioner was convicted of the two offences and the two year good
behaviour bonds were ordered and commenced on 23 August
2011 in the District
Court at Griffith after the withdrawal of the appeal.
September 2010, the practitioner was charged with aggravated indecent
(i) The offence of aggravated indecent assault was that:
Between 2.30pm and 3.30pm on 12 January 2010 at [suppressed location], the
practitioner did assault (Employee B) and at the time of
the assault committed
an act of indecency on her by lifting her shirt to expose her bare skin and
moving a stethoscope around her
(ii) The circumstance of aggravation for the offence were that the victim was
under the authority of the practitioner in that he
was the victim's employer and
immediate supervisor.
(iii) On 18 October 2011 the practitioner was convicted of the offence of
aggravated indecent assault and sentenced to a three year
good behaviour bond
section 9(1)
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
fined $600.
8 September 2010, the practitioner was charged with common
(i) The offence was that:
Between 4.00pm and 5.00pm on 13 January 2010 at [suppressed location], the
practitioner did assault (Employee C).
(ii) On 18 October 2011 the practitioner was convicted of the offence of common
assault and fined $480.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
23 August 2011 at the District Court at Griffith, the practitioner was convicted
of an offence of aggravated indecent assault contrary
M(1) of the
Crimes Act 1900
23 August 2011 at the District Court at Griffith , the practitioner was
convicted of an offence of aggravated indecent assault
contrary to
M(1) of the
Crimes Act 1900
18 October 2011 at Griffith Local Court, the practitioner was convicted of an
offence of aggravated indecent assault contrary to
M(1) of the
Crimes Act 1900
18 October 2011 at Griffith Local Court, the practitioner was convicted of an
offence of common assault contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning
of section 139B of the
National Law
in that he has:
(i) Engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by him in the practice
of dentistry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience;
(ii) Engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of dentistry.
Background to
Complaint Two
background for Complaint One is repeated.
practitioner was registered as a dentist in Australia in
practitioner was practising as a dentist in NSW in the period between 2009 and
approximately January 2009 until approximately 19 October 2010 the practitioner
owned and operated the [suppressed location]
Dental Centre at [suppressed
location], New South Wales.
all relevant times, the practitioner was the only dentist operating from the
[suppressed location].
December 2009 and January 2010, the practitioner licensed and operated a dental
practice at [a regional] Hospital, at [suppressed
location] in New South
22 December 2009, the practitioner employed Employee A as a dental assistant to
work with him in the dentistry practice at the
[a regional] Hospital. Employee
A was 18 years old or younger at that time. Employee A worked for the
practitioner on 5 or 6 days
in (the period 22 December 2009 to 18 January
November 2009, the practitioner employed Employee B as a dental assistant to
work with him in the dentistry practice at the [suppressed
location]. Employee
B was 18 years old or younger at that time.
7 January 2010, the practitioner employed Employee C as a dental assistant at
the [suppressed location] at [suppressed location].
Employee C was 18 years old
or younger at that time. Employee C worked for the practitioner on four
occasions from 7 January 2010
until 13 January 2010.
23 December 2009, the practitioner conducted a job interview with Prospective
Employee D for employment as a dental assistant to
work with the practitioner in
his dentistry practice.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
22 December 2009 and 18 January 2010, the practitioner engaged in inappropriate
conduct towards Employee A, a dental assistant
employed at his dental practice
at [suppressed location] Hospital, being conduct of a sexual and unwelcome
nature in that he:
(a) talked to Employee A about sex;
(b) told Employee A about his sexual experiences,
(i) that he taught a 17 year old girl who worked for him to have anal
(ii) how he has anal sex and demonstrated with his
(iii) that he loves oral sex and that "Aussie" girls had taught him a lot
(iv) that a girl asked to give him a head job in a
(v) that he had sex separately with two women who were at his place for
(vi) that when he was younger he lived in a big house where big parties
were held and he and his friends would all take girls to different
rooms to have
sex with them;
(c) asked Employee A to find him a "nice young girl to have sex
(d) talked to Employee A about using cannabis and "having really good
(e) talked to Employee A about foreplay to sexual
intercourse;
(f) stated to Employee A "All this sex talk is making me horny", then
touched her on the shoulder and stated "I have to go to the
bathroom and clean
myself up because I've made myself all wet";
(g) often closed the surgery door when he spoke to Employee A about
(h) stood close to Employee A when talking to her and placed his hand on
(i) called Employee A "baby";
(j) asked Employee A to massage him, including asking her to massage him in
return for $50;
(k) asked Employee A when she was going to marry
(l) asked Employee A about her sex life and her
(m) placed his hand on Employee A's right posterior and left it there for a
few seconds, while talking about sex;
(n) told Employee A to "go and have a quickie" with her boyfriend, and
offered to drive her home;
(o) on an occasion when Employee A complained of back pain, put his hand on
her hips, pushing on her hips and pushing on her lower-back
and tailbone for
(p) on several occasions tried to get Employee A to sit near him so that
one of her legs was inside his, so that her legs were open
around his leg, when
he examined a patient;
reason of the matters referred to in 1 (f) above, the practitioner assaulted
Employee A and committed an act of indecency on her
at the practitioner's
surgery and in circumstances where he was at the time the employer and immediate
supervisor of Employee A;
reason of the matters referred to in 1 (m) above, the practitioner assaulted
Employee A and committed an act of indecency on her
at the practitioner's
surgery and in circumstances where he was at the time the employer and immediate
supervisor of Employee A;
12 January 2010, the practitioner assaulted Employee B and committed an act of
indecency on her at the practitioner's surgery:
(a) In that the practitioner:
(i) Pulled Employee B's shirt up over her bra to expose her bare
(ii) Applied his stethoscope to her chest; and
(iii) Moved the stethoscope around on Employee B's
(b) In circumstances where the practitioner was at the
(i) The employer and immediate supervisor of Employee B; and
(ii) Providing dental services to Employee B.
7 and 13 January 2010, the practitioner engaged in inappropriate conduct towards
Employee C, a dental assistant employed at
PSDC, being conduct of a sexual and
unwelcome nature in that he:
(a) Talked about sex to Employee C;
(b) Made sexual comments to Employee C;
(c) Often touched her when he spoke to her;
(d) Asked her to massage his shoulders;
(e) Stated when he touched her "I don't know why people get offended";
(f) Put his hand on her back and said "Is this ok, I don't know why people
get offended".
13 January 2010, in the course of his practice as a dentist, the practitioner
assaulted Employee C, a dental assistant employed
at PSDC, after he offered to
provide dental services to Employee C and asked her to sit on the dental chair
at his surgery for that
purpose. After Employee C sat in the dental chair, the
practitioner administered nitrous oxide to her. The
practitioner:
(a) Held and stroked Employee C's arms which were positioned across her
upper stomach;
(b) Moved Employee C's arms down off the upper part of her
(c) Touched and poked Employee C's stomach on top of her clothes;
(d) Moved Employee C's hands away from her body to her sides;
(e) Lifted her smock exposing the bare skin of her stomach; and
(f) Touched and poked her stomach a number of times on her bare
23 December 2009, in the course of his practice as a dentist, the practitioner
conducted an interview with Prospective Employee
D for employment by him as a
dental assistant at PSDC during which the practitioner engaged in inappropriate
conduct towards Prospective
Employee D, being conduct of a sexual and unwelcome
nature in that he:
(a) Talked to Prospective Employee D continuously during the interview
(i) Having sex with his wife in the bushes outside her Christmas
(ii) How he had been with women of all ages but he liked 17 year olds the
(iii) How when he was studying at university a man had "tried to come onto"
(b) Made comments to Prospective Employee D of a personal nature, including
words to the effect of:
(i) "You have beautiful coloured eyes, they are really unusual";
(ii) "Don't be frightened by my affection I am an affectionate person
towards my staff I look after them";
(iii) "You're a good size you're not too skinny"
(iv) "Without your heels on you would be about my height" and then
requesting that she take off her shoes "to see how tall you are"
standing next to her and stating "yeah that's a better height we can't have you
being too tall";
(v) "We'll probably need to get some small gloves you've only got little
hands" while caressing her hands until she pulled it away;
(vi) "It's good you don't wear lots of jewellery" after he grabbed her
(c) Touched Prospective Employee D, including:
(i) In the middle of her back;
(ii) By grabbing her hands which were in her lap on at least two
(iii) Rubbing her hands on at least two occasions;
(iv) Grabbing her left hand and caressing it on at least two
(v) Standing over her with his arm pressed against her arm;
(vi) Touching her arm and standing close to her to his body was in contact
(vii) Rubbing her arm from time to time;
(viii) Rubbing her palm with his index finger and stating "Do you know what
that means?" and "That means I want to have sex with you";
(ix) Leaning on her and rubbing his legs against hers; and
(x) Reaching across her lap and putting his hand on her leg and rubbing it
for about 5 seconds.
(d) Leant back on the examination chair with his legs open and his body
half leaning back, sticking his crotch out to Prospective
respect of treatment provided to Patient E on 15 January 2010, the
practitioner:
(a) Failed to make any clinical note or record until 20 January
(b) Failed to make adequate clinical notes or records in that he failed to
make any record of:
(i) Presenting signs and symptoms;
(ii) Provisional diagnosis;
(iii) Administration and type of local anaesthetic;
(iv) The patient's reaction to local anaesthetic; and
(v) Follow up of the patient.
COMPLAINT THREE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 139B of the
National Law
in that he contravened a
condition to which his registration was subject.
to Complaint Three
18 February 2010, an inspector appointed under
section 153
Practice Act 2001
(now repealed) (
) ("the inspector") conducted
an inspection at the practitioner's surgery, on behalf of the NSW Dental Board
("the Board").
3 March 2010, the Board imposed conditions on the practitioner's registration,
under section 72 of the
including that the dentist
4. Only treat patients in his practice with two adult assistants (over
18 years old) being present at all times.
15 April 2010, the inspector conducted a further inspection of the
practitioner's surgery.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
15 April 2010, the practitioner contravened Condition 4 to which his
registration was subject, in that the practitioner had treated
a patient when
only one other staff member was present.
COMPLAINT FOUR
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section
139E of the
National Law
in that he has:
in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration;
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
Background for Complaint Four
background for Complaints Two and Three is repeated.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
The particulars of Complaints Two except for particular 8, and Three are
repeated and relied upon individually and cumulatively.
COMPLAINT FIVE
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a dentist within the
meaning of section 144 of the
National Law
Background for
Complaint Five
The background for Complaints One, Two and Three is
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FIVE
The particulars of Complaints One, Two except for particular 8, and Three
are repeated and relied upon individually and cumulatively.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Allegations were made to the NSW Police by a number
of employees and a potential employee in respect of allegations of sexual
by the Respondent. The NSW Police investigated these allegations and
multiple charges were laid against the Respondent. Following
hearings in
respect of the various charges, the Respondent was found guilty of the offences
and sentences were imposed in respect
of each charge on which the Respondent was
In addition, a complaint was made by Patient E alleging
improper treatment when she attended the dental surgery of the Respondent.
The Respondent graduated from Cairo University in 1966 with a degree of
Bachelor of Dental Surgery. He also has the qualification
of ADEC Australian
Dental Examining Council 1971. He holds a:
Certificate, committee on overseas professional qualifications, 1971; and
recommendation, NSW Dental Board, 1971.
The Complaints were
referred to this Tribunal by the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Current conditions on the registration status of the
On 3 March 2010, the Dental Board of NSW imposed the
following conditions:
The Dentist must:
relation to nitrous oxide:
the use of nitrous oxide;
all cylinders of that gas to the suppliers; and
the board with evidence of the return of those cylinders.
the following courses:
infection control course approved by the Board; and
Emergencies in Dental Practice Course approved by the Board.
the Board by statutory declaration that he:
viewed the Board's DVD "Medical Emergencies in Dentistry"; and
in his possession, and is familiar with the Australian and NZ infection control
standards and AS/NZS 4185 and Infection Control
Regulation of the
Practice Act 2001
treat patients in his practice with two adult assistants (over 18 years) being
present at all treatment times;
the Board immediately if he is charged with any offence and provide the Board
with copies of any CAN, Fact Sheets or Brief
of Evidence within 24 hours of
EVIDENCE OF THE COMPLAINANT
The Complainant relied on the convictions by various Courts, the
statements of employees A, B & C, the statement of Prospective
Employee D,
the statement of Patient E and statements of Witnesses F – M, the
statement and report of Dr Dalton and the report
of the peer reviewer Dr Thomas
Tseng, and the statement of Chris Peters.
Statement of Employee A
(Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 8-14)
The Complainant provided a statement by
Employee A made to NSW Police on 19 March 2010 which was to the following
She was 18 years of age.
On 22 December 2009, she
commenced working at the Dental Surgery of the Respondent which lies within the
grounds of [a regional] Hospital.
From the time that she started
working, the Respondent would talk to her about sex and other personal stuff.
He would also try and
ask her about her personal life but she would just avoid
answering him most of the time.
She only worked for the Respondent for
and therefore
everything that happened, happened within this period.
the first day at work, the Respondent asked her to go for lunch with him. She
felt uncomfortable and didn't want to go and therefore
said that she had plans
with her mother. The Respondent indicated that he was happy for her mother to
join them for lunch.
While they were having lunch, they talked in
general about the job, her interest in nursing and other general matters. At a
in time, he started a conversation about touching people and how some
people are offended easily by touching. He said things such
as he is not a
pedophile, just a very affectionate man. He also told them a story about a lady
that came into his surgery with a
little girl about 3 years old. He said that
she had beautiful long blonde hair and blue eyes, and that he gave her a hug and
mother later rang up and cancelled the next appointment.
Employee A's mother whether she minded if he touched Employee A's arm and her
mother said words to the effect that she would
not tolerate anything
inappropriate. The Respondent answered by saying that he is her boss and that
she would do what he says to
which the mother responded "within reason".
Over the time that Employee A worked for the Respondent, he would tell
her things about not liking his wife because she was fat and
ugly, and that she
does not turn him on. He also told her detailed stories about how he taught a
17 year old girl that worked for
him to have anal sex. The Respondent was so
detailed when he told her about this that he even went as far as to describe how
to put your penis in so that it doesn't hurt. He demonstrated with his
hands how to do this and went on to say that you should only
put the tip of the
penis in at first. He also told her that he had only ever made one girl come
from anal sex. He spoke about this
of the other things which the Respondent said which the witness regarded as
disgusting were that he loves oral sex and that Aussie
girls have taught him a
lot about it. He told her things about a girl asking to give him a head job in
a pool. He also gave her
a full story about a night that a lady went to his
place for dinner with another lady and he could tell she wanted to have sex with
him. He went on that later that night they went to bed and he had sex with his
companion. Thereafter he went to the other room
to have sex with the other
lady. He also told her stories about living in a big house when he was younger,
and that he and his friends
would have big parties and all take girls into
different rooms and have their way with them.
At least once he asked
Employee A to find him a nice young girl to have sex with. He also asked her
where he could find dope because
it "makes you good in bed". He told her that
it took a bit to get his penis up and went on to explain that you have to play
it a bit first.
On one occasion, he was talking about sex and said
something like "all this sex talk is making me horny". He kept talking about
and a little while later he walked up to her, touched her on the shoulder,
and said "I have to go to the bathroom and clean myself
up because I've made
myself all wet". She believed that he meant that he had been so sexually
aroused that he had ejaculated in
his pants. She was quite shocked by this and
really didn't know how to react. She just kept working and trying to pretend
he wasn't saying these things.
Employee A said that often when the
Respondent would talk about sex to her, he would close the surgery door and
would come close to
her when talking to her and put his hand on her arm. After
a short time, he started to call her baby when he spoke to her. On one
he spoke to her about her being very skinny, walked up behind her and put his
hand on her right butt cheek. He only left
it there for a few seconds but she
felt uncomfortable and felt that he should not be touching her there. After he
moved his hand
away, he just kept talking about sex.
On one occasion
when she was going for a lunch break, the Respondent told her to go and have a
"quickie" with her boyfriend.
There was one occasion when employee A
was at work and complained about pain in her back and hips, saying that she had
an orthopedic
problem. The Respondent said that he would have a look. He came
up to her, stood behind her, and put his hands on both of her hips.
to push on her hips and feel around. He did the same thing on her tailbone.
She felt really uncomfortable but didn't
feel that she could tell him to stop.
He continued this for about 30 seconds and then stepped away. Employee A
ultimately resigned
from her position.
Employee A was called to give
evidence before the tribunal. In evidence in chief she confirmed the contents
of her statement as being
true and correct.
The Respondent X-examined
Employee A. In that X-examination he raised a question to Employee A in regard
to her request to change
the venue of the Hearing by NSW Police being heard
otherwise than in [her regional town]. Employee A answered in the negative. The
Respondent asked Employee A why the matter was held in [another regional town].
In answer to that question, Employee A stated that
the Judge ruled and she was
told it was in [her regional town] and she didn’t have to attend
(Transcript page 47 lines 19-24).
In the Transcript of the Criminal trial, his
Honour Judge Bugden stated that the victim (referring to Employee A) had
requested that
the matter be heard before the Wagga Wagga District Court and not
in their hometown (Transcript Vol 2 Tab 3 page 3 lines
Statement of Witness F (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages
The Complainant provided a statement by Witness F which was to
the following effect.
She is the mother of Employee A.
December 2009, Employee A commenced working for the Respondent. They had made
plans to have lunch together and she then received
a text message from Employee
A stating that the Respondent had invited both of them to have lunch with him.
She then essentially
confirmed having been advised by Employee A of the various
incidents that had happened at work, and confirmed that Employee A advised
that she felt very uncomfortable about the behaviour of the Respondent. She did
confirm that Employee A was keen to have the
job but felt uncomfortable in the
circumstances.
She was advised by Employee A, that Employee A had been
the health services manager, she was advised of the concern by the
health services manager in regard to the Respondent. As a result
discussion, Employee A resigned from her job with the Respondent.
Witness F was not called to give evidence.
Statement of
Witness G (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 23-26)
The Complainant provided a
statement by Witness G which is to the following effect.
is the health services manager at [a regional] Hospital.
first had contact with the Respondent when he was looking to lease a dental
clinic in that region and she believes that the Respondent
commenced practice
from the [regional] dental clinic some time in December 2009.
2010, she received an email from a regional dental health nurse expressing
concern about the conduct of the Respondent towards
a number of staff members.
She was advised that the Respondent had spoken openly about sex with Employee A
while Employee A was
working for him.
this information, she was concerned about Employee A. She rang Employee A and
asked her to meet her which Employee A did
within 10 minutes.
G stated that Employee A told her that she did not feel comfortable with the
Respondent as she did not like the way he would
brush up against her and would
talk about sex all the time.
this interview and a subsequent discussion with Witness F (Employee A's mother),
she spoke to persons in the health service
and logged an incident report which
set in motion an internal investigation in relation to the matter.
Witness G was not called to give evidence.
Statement by Prospective Employee D (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages
The Complainant provided a statement by Prospective Employee D
made to the NSW Police on 7 September 2010 which is to the following
is 20 years of age.
Wednesday, 23 December 2009, she went for a job interview at the Respondent's
dental practice in [a regional town]. The job interview
was arranged by an
employment agency. She was seated in the waiting room when the Respondent came
to collect her. She was ushered
into an office which was set up with a desk on
the back wall and two chairs set up in front of it.
she walked in the door to the office, the Respondent put his hand in the middle
of her back and ushered her into the room. He
directed her to a chair which was
between the wall and his chair. The interview commenced and the Respondent
asked her to tell him
a bit about herself. After about 10 – 15 minutes,
the Respondent looked intently at her which made her feel very uncomfortable.
He said "you have beautiful coloured eyes, they are really unusual". As he was
saying this, he rolled his chair closer to hers
and was only about 30cms away.
She moved back in her chair and tried to put some distance between them. She
felt very uncomfortable
and felt that he was looking her up and down, and
"trying to come onto her". The Respondent seemed to notice that she was
uncomfortable
and said words to the effect of "don't be frightened by my
affection, I am an affectionate person towards my staff. I look after
said this, he leant further forward towards her and "grabbed" her hands which
were sitting in her lap. He rubbed her hands
a bit as though he was trying to
reassure her. He moved his hands off hers after a few seconds. There was
discussion about her
size and about her not being too skinny, and then
discussion about her height.
Respondent then commenced showing her around the premises and after ushering her
into a room he was standing by her side and grabbed
her left hand and picked it
up and looked at it. He said "we will probably need to get some small gloves
you have only got little
hands". While he was doing this, he was caressing her
hand. As soon as she felt she could, she pulled her hand away.
he asked her to take her shoes off and when she questioned whether she had to do
that, he said he simply wanted to see how tall
she was. After she took her
shoes off, he walked over to her and stood right next to her with his arm
pressed up against her arm.
Thereafter, she sat down in the chair in the
examination room to put her shoes on. The Respondent went over to the
examination
chair and lent back on it with his legs opened and his body half
leaning back. To her, it was like he was presenting, by that she
meant really
putting it out there that he was open for something sexual to happen. She felt
repulsed and uncomfortable, and wanted
to leave but didn't feel that there was a
way out. Because of the position in which he was half lying, his crotch was
very prominent
like he was sticking out there for her benefit. It looked to her
as though he had an erection, there was a bulge in his pants and
seemed to pull across the front. It was not gathered material. As soon as she
noticed that, she looked away.
then commenced talking about his wife and telling her things about the fact that
they were no longer together. He told her of
an incident at a Christmas party
where his wife came up to him and said that she wanted to have sex with him
right then and there,
and they went and had sex in the bushes. She was
embarrassed but she did not know what to say. He also started to tell her that
he had been with women of all ages but he liked 17 year olds the best. There
were several occasions when he came very close to her
and touched her arm or
stood very close to her body bringing his body into contact with hers.
they went back into the main office and the Respondent told her of an incident
when he was studying at university and a
male person tried to come on to him.
Her hands were in her lap again and he grabbed her hand, turned it over and
rubbed her palm
with his index finger. He asked her whether she knew what that
meant and although she knew what it meant she said she did not.
He told her
that that means that he wanted to have sex with her. She pulled her hand away.
then made it clear that she would get the position of employment and took his
diary to see when it would be appropriate for her
to commence working. He
placed the diary between his lap and her lap while they were sitting at chairs
very close to each other.
While he was going through the diary, he was rubbing
his leg against hers but tried to do it subtly so that in her mind it appeared
as though it wasn't intentional but she believed that he was doing it
deliberately. At around this time, he reached across her lap
and put his hand
on her leg. He rubbed her leg and yet again said something about "don't take my
affection the wrong way". He rubbed
her leg for about 5-10 seconds and then
moved his hand away. She left the premises and never accepted the position to
work for him.
Prospective Employee D was called to give evidence
before the Tribunal. In Evidence in Chief she confirmed the contents of her
as being true and correct.
Prospective Employee D was
X-examined by the Respondent. In particular, he questioned Prospective Employee
D in regard to her statement
that he stood in the surgery on her left hand side
and held her left hand. He asked what that was for, to which Prospective
D replied it was when he was checking what size gloves he would need to
order. He asked Prospective Employee D whether she was 100%
sure about the side
on which he was standing, to which she replied that she was.
Prospective
Employee D was then asked about the fact that she looked at his slacks and saw
something. He asked the witness whether
it was just vision "or whether she put
her hand to see something". By responding in the negative, she indicated that it
The Respondent then asked Prospective Employee D whether
she had heard of the word fear and flight and asked why she did not run.
referred to the fact that her answer to the court was that
scared stiff I could not run”
. (Transcript page 37 line
Prospective Employee D answered
Statement by
Witness H (Vol 1, Tab 3, page 33)
The Complainant provided a
statement by Witness H which is to the following effect.
is the mother of Prospective Employee D
around 7.45pm on 23 December 2009, following an interview by Prospective
Employee D with the Respondent, she received a telephone
call from Prospective
Employee D who started to cry and said that she didn't think she was going to be
taking the job.
H then left her home to go to Prospective Employee D's home and to talk to her.
On arrival they discussed what had happened
and Witness H said to prospective
Employee D "that doesn't sound right. You don't talk like that in an interview.
I don't think
that you are overreacting..." She was advised that the Respondent
kept talking about sex with his wife, talking about having sex
behind a bush
with his wife, that he rubbed his leg up against her leg and various other
matters that she had referred to in her
H then recorded what she had been told and attached the notes that she made to a
statement that she gave to Detective Senior
Constable Gary Tindell.
Witness H was not called to give evidence.
Statement by Employee B (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 36-41)
Complainant provided a statement by employee B made to the NSW Police on 18
January 2010 which is to the following effect.
is 17 years of age.
an interview, she was offered a position and commenced working for the
Respondent.
the first day, she states that she wasn't really shown around at all but was
thrown into doing everything. On the first or second
day, he told her that he
did not like how she was wearing her hair and liked how she had been wearing it
at the interview.
Christmas she became ill. Her parents were away at the time and she couldn't
get the Medicare card so she held off going to
the doctor. The Respondent said
that he would check her out. She allowed him to do that. In the surgery he
looked down her throat.
He wrote her a script for antibiotics and wanted her to
get penicillin shots so he could administer them to her. She went to have
script filled and then went home for the rest of the afternoon. She did go back
later to get her pay as the Respondent pays
by cheque. When she went back, he
said that she should come and lie down on the lounge. That was in the back
tearoom where they
had breaks. She laid down on her stomach and he started
massaging her back. He told her that this will help with the coughing.
undid her bra strap and used his hands and did a karate type chop motion. She
felt very uncomfortable when he was doing that
but because he was her boss she
believed that she could not do anything about it.
returned to work a couple of days after the new years break. The Respondent's
conversations were becoming more sexual in nature.
On one occasion, she was
going to take something to the post office and he said that she shouldn't go
outside as it was too hot.
He then suggested that she come over and give him a
cuddle instead. She simply ignored him.
another occasion, when she and he were alone in the afternoon, he started
telling her that when he was in Newcastle he was in his
thirties or about
twenty, he had a dental assistant who was about 17 years old, and he would have
sex with all his assistants. He
had said that one of them was a virgin and he
taught her a lot of things and that she liked it. He said that a mature person
teach a young person what to do and how to do things.
point in time, the Respondent told Employee B that he was going to Bermagui on
holiday so that he could find some 15 or 16 year
one occasion, the Respondent complained to Employee B that his neck was sore and
asked if she could give him a massage which she
refused and indicated that she
would phone a massage place.
the afternoon she wanted to get her teeth whitened. He was checking out her
teeth and how they were looking. He told her that
she needed another filling
and her teeth needed cleaning as they were really bad. She had seen that it
hurt other people when they
had their teeth cleaned. He told her that he would
put her on the "happy gas" and it would be fine. She indicated that she would
rather wait for another assistant to be at work to help out. He insisted that
there wasn't a problem and that they could do it then.
commenced using nitrous oxide. She felt very bad through the whole process and
told him that she wanted him to stop. She told
him that she was feeling very
odd and he started rubbing her arm and said "it's alright sweetheart. It's
alright darling". She
started to panic and her heart started beating really
fast. It felt like it was going to jump out of her chest. He kept cleaning
teeth and she told him to turn the gas down. She told him that her heart was
beating really fast. He pulled up her shirt over
her bra, got his stethoscope
out and listened to her heart. Following that experience, she relayed the
experience to her mother
who telephoned the Respondent and told him that
Employee B would not be returning to work.
Employee B was
called to give Evidence before the Tribunal. In Evidence in Chief she confirmed
the contents of her statement as being
true and correct.
Employee B was
X-examined by the Respondent, who asked her questions regarding the number of
times that he showed her how to put the
cartridge in the syringe to inject a
patient. Employee B responded that she did not remember. He also asked Employee
B whether her
father told her that when he came to return the key and pick up
her check, he said “this is not enough”. Employee B responded
she did not remember.
Employee B was asked whether she was sure that she
requested him to stop the gas five times. Employee B confirmed that it was five
times but stated that he did not refuse to stop but that she did not know
whether he did stop.
Employee B was asked whether the Respondent’s
Solicitor and Prosecutor asked whether the Respondent touched or played with
B’s nipples and whether she had responded negatively to that
question. Employee B confirmed that she did respond negatively
Employee B was then asked whether the Respondent had touched
her breasts to which Employee B had responded affirmatively. Employee
confirmed that she had answered affirmatively to the fact that he had touched
her breast.
Finally, the Respondent asked why Employee B thought he used
the stethoscope to which she replied her heart was beating really fast
thought she was stressed.
Statement by Witness I (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages
The Complainant provided a statement by Witness I which is to
the following effect.
is the mother of Employee B.
indicated that she was in regular contact with her daughter and from time to
time her daughter conveyed her concerns in relation
to her boss. This occurred
frequently over several months while she worked there. On one occasion,
Employee B advised Witness I
that the Respondent had suggested things to her
like that she didn't have to wear gloves when touching patients and that he
have to sterilize the equipment. She was concerned due to this being
unhygienic.
the second week that she was working at the dental centre, the Respondent said
that he was starting a practice in another regional
town and that he wanted her
to work for him there. He suggested that she accompany him to that regional
town for two days per week
and stay in a hotel with him as well as work with him
which she declined.
another occasion, she travelled with the Respondent to a dental technician in a
regional town as part of her duties. She was in
the front passenger seat and
had put on her seat belt when the Respondent reached over and removed it stating
that she didn't have
to wear it while she was with him. Witness I then
proceeded to confirm the allegations of improper behaviour by the Respondent as
set out in her statement.
Witness I was not called to give
Statement by Witness J (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages
The Complainant provided a statement by Witness J which is to
the following effect.
the father of Employee B.
January 2010, he received a phone call from his wife. She advised him Employee
B had quit her job and informed him of the incident
with the gas.
following day, Witness J proceeded to the office of the Respondent to return
Employee B's keys and after some difficulty managed
to talk to the Respondent.
He advised the Respondent of how inappropriate it was for him to have done to
Employee B what he had
done. He refused to answer and simply nodded his head up
Witness J was not called to give evidence.
Statement by Employee C (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 49-56)
Complainant provided a statement by Employee C made to the NSW Police which is
to the following effect.
an interview with the Respondent, Employee C was offered a position with the
Respondent to commence working on 7 January
2010. There was some discussion
thereafter as to whether she would be in a position to accompany him to another
rural town where
he needed on occasion. She advised the employment agency that
she was not prepared to do so and later telephoned the Respondent
directly to be
sure that he had received that information.
January 2010, she went to work at the dental clinic at 9am. She met another
staff member there who showed her how to do everything.
January 2010, Employee C arrived at work. The Respondent arrived a little after
her and opened up. Shortly after she started
working, the Respondent advised
her that she would be working by herself that day as the other employee had had
a bit of a conflict
the day before and she would not be coming back. He
indicated that the employee's father would be in to drop off the keys and pick
up her pay. He told Employee C that when he arrived she should say that he was
busy and he did not want to see him. Sometime that
morning, a man came into the
office and said that he was the employee's father and wanted to speak to the
Respondent.
some difficulty, the Respondent emerged to talk to the father who told him that
he was not at all happy with the way that his
daughter had been treated and that
that was no way to treat a girl of her age. Employee C did not hear all of it
but the father
spoke to the Respondent for about 2 minutes. The last thing that
she did hear was that the father said that he would see him in
day at lunch time her mother picked her up. She told her mother what had
happened in regard to the employee's father. By this
time Employee C was quite
worried about what was going on. There had been a few things that didn't feel
right to her. She made
comments about the way he touched her when he spoke to
her. He often invaded her personal space and things like that.
that afternoon, the Respondent called Employee C into the surgery to help him
clean it. They went into the surgery and he asked
her how long it had been
since she had had a check up. When she said it had been a while he said you
should try the gas to know
what it's like. She didn't know what to do and she
therefore agreed to do so. Almost immediately that he put the gas on to her,
she felt "drunk" and felt that she couldn’t say anything at all. She was
scared and uncomfortable but she didn't know how
she was lying there with the gas mask on the Respondent had his hand on her arm.
Her arms were crossed on the upper part of
her stomach. He moved her arms down
and poked her stomach on top of her clothes. Then he put his hand back on her
arms; he moved
her arms off her stomach and pulled up her smock, then her
t-shirt. He started to poke her stomach on her bare skin. She moved
off her and pulled her shirt back down. He then asked her how she felt and she
said she felt claustrophobic and wanted
to get out of this. He then told her
that she needed to go onto oxygen first which she did and he then ceased the gas
experience.
she got out of the chair he told her that it was okay for him to "do this,
because I'm teaching you". He put the mask on his
nose and said "you turn it
on". He gave her directions as to what to do and he told her to keep talking to
him in case he fell asleep.
He said something about the problem with the gas is
that everyone can get used to it and said that one cannot blame him because
it’s a beautiful feeling. While the Respondent was on the gas he got her
to turn it up at least twice. She thinks it started
at 7 then he got her to put
it to 8 and then 10. After about 10 to 15 minutes he told her that it was
enough and told her what to
do to turn it down.
then gathered her things, called her mother and left the premises.
commencing work for the Respondent, she found him to be someone that would often
touch her when he spoke to her, he would ask
her to massage his shoulders and
when asking he would comment
"I don’t know why people get
. On a couple of occasions he placed his hand on her back while he
was talking to her.
Employee C was called to give evidence before
the Tribunal. In Evidence in Chief, she confirmed the contents of her statement
true and correct.
Employee C was X-examined by the Respondent, who asked her to confirm her
date of birth, which she confirmed. The Respondent asked
Employee C whether she
had ever had dental treatment at a [particular] dental clinic. Employee C said
that she had never been treated
at the dental clinic referred to and in response
to the statement of a particular name which was similar to that of Employee C,
C pointed out that that was not her name and confirmed that it was not
The Respondent then asked Employee C a question in regard to a telephone
conversation between Employee C and Employee B. The Respondent
referred to the
fact that during the conversation, Employee B told Employee C why she had left
and that she was probably going to
the police. He put it to Employee C that she
was going to go to the police because Employee B was going to the police.
responded that she was going to go to the police even before she
spoke to Employee B.
The Respondent then questioned Employee C regarding her attendance at the
Court Hearing in respect of one of the Criminal Charges
against him and
submitted that she had not attended. Employee C stated that she did go to the
Court but was not called to give evidence.
Finally, the Respondent questioned Employee C regarding the happy gas and
pointed out to her that prior to giving her the happy gas,
there was a 6 year
old girl who had happy gas. He asked her whether that was correct, to which she
responded that it was. The Respondent
asked whether Employee C was forced to
have the gas, to which she responded that she did not accept and did not give
her consent
but she was ushered into the chair and felt she could not object.
(Transcript page 39-42)
Statement by Witness K (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 57-61)
The Complainant provided a statement by Witness K which is to the following
is the mother of Employee C.
went with Employee C to the interview and while Employee C was being interviewed
she sat in the waiting room. After a short period
of time she was collected
from the waiting room and shown around the premises.
she was there the Respondent asked whether it would be in order for her daughter
to go with him to another regional town, where
he practiced a couple of days a
month. Her daughter was uncomfortable with that and suggested that she
wasn’t able to do so.
That meeting concluded and Employee C was offered
the position.
particular occasion Employee C called her to collect her from work. She got
into the car and said
"we just need to leave"
the way home in the car Employee C told her mother about the happy gas incident
and that he had demonstrated on her and on himself.
She advised her mother that
she remembered that he pulled up her smock that she was wearing as well as her t
shirt and put his hand
on her tummy.
that night the Respondent attempted to contact Employee C but she refused to
take the call. Witness K then telephoned and left
a message for the Respondent
to say that she was aware of what had happened with Employee C and that she
would be reporting him.
The following day just in case he did not get the
message or was unable to read it she told him what she had said in the
Friday, 15 January, Employee C and her father attended the regional police
station where they made an official complaint regarding
Witness K was not called to give evidence.
Statement by Witness L (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 62-66)
The Complainant provided a statement by Witness L which is to the following
is a Sergeant with the NSW Police Force. She reported on the duties which she
undertook in investigating the Respondent, the
visits to his premises and the
various people that she interviewed. The information contained in her statement
was available to
the Court in the criminal hearings which followed her
investigation.
Witness L was not called to give evidence.
Statement of Witness M (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 67-68)
The Complainant provided a statement by Witness M which is to the following
a detective senior constable with the NSW Police Force. He was involved with
witness L in the investigation of the Respondent
and reported on visits to the
Respondent's premises in the company of Witness L and Dr Dalton and attached
photographs which were
before the tribunal.
Witness M was not called
to give evidence.
Statement of Patient E (Vol 1, Tab 4)
The Complainant provided a statement by Patient E dated 16 February 2010
which is to the following effect.
E advised that she had received a dental voucher from an area health service
dated 6 January 2010 for emergency dental care
and took the voucher to an
appointment with the Respondent.
her statement she complained about the lack of care shown to her when the
Respondent gave her an anaesthetic. She started to have
a reaction, a burning
sensation in her legs, her throat felt constricted and she had difficulty
she told the Respondent that she was having a reaction she asked him for help
and he stated that he was not a doctor and that
she would have to get help
also told her that she had to make a decision as to whether she wanted to have
her tooth out as he had other patients to see.
swallowed a phenergan tablet as she knew this would slow the reaction down.
went out into the waiting room and contacted her doctor, told him that she was
having trouble and he told her to go to the hospital
or go to the nearest
medical centre.
left the dental practice and tried to walk to the medical centre. Her legs
started to buckle. A lady who was a stranger put
her in her car and took her to
the nearest medical centre where she was given adrenalin and oxygen. When
stabilised they called
the ambulance and she was taken to the regional base
Respondent did not give her any of the help that she required. She also advised
that there was no dental nurse or receptionist
and that the toilet which was out
at the back of the premises was in an old bathroom and in a filthy
Patient E was not called to give evidence.
Statement of Chris Peters (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 105-114)
Complainant provided a statement by Mr Chris Peters which was to the
following effect:
employed as the Security Manager for BOC AUSTRALIA.
a request by Detective Wiggens he had one of their Customer Service Accounts
people check whether they had a customer trading
under the name Dr Adel
Abrahams. Their container holding report showed an account was opened in 1997
with the customer purchasing
a D sized bottle of Medical Grade Nitrous Oxide.
He also reported that Medical Grade Oxygen had been traded. The report
that the first of the Nitrous Oxide was delivered in January 1997 and
a bottle returned in June of 1997. The account then appears
to have lain
dormant until March 2007. In March 2007 and July 2007 one bottle of Nitrous
Oxide was traded. Again in March 2009
and March 2010 one bottle of Nitrous
Oxide was traded. The account shows that no bottles of Nitrous Oxide were
currently being held.
Chris Peters was not called to give evidence.
Statement and Report of Dr Dalton (Vol 1, Tab 3, pages 101-104 and Vol 1,
Tab 25, pages 1-17)
Complainant provided a statement by Dr Dalton to the NSW Police dated 19
February 2010 which was to the following effect:
February 2010, Dr Dalton accompanied Detective Sergeant Wiggens and Detective
Senior Constable Peveral on an inspection of the
Respondent's premises where he
remained for approximately 3 hours.
Respondent showed the inspection party through various areas of the surgery
which included two surgery rooms, a sterilising room,
laboratory, storage rooms
and staff room. A number of photographs were then taken.
Dalton requested access to the computer records of the patients of the practice
and all supply invoices and accounts of the previous
12 months. All of those
requests were allowed. Dr Dalton states that based wholly or substantially on
the above knowledge he was
of the opinion that "these Dental Surgeries were in
poor condition, the dental chair was in need of repair to the headrest, the
Oxide anaesthetic was old and in poor and unhygienic condition". There
was only one nose piece and both gas cylinders were unsecured
and free standing.
According to Dr Dalton these were a matter of concern in relation to Workcover
and OH&S matters.
the inspection no drugs or equipment were discovered that could be used in the
event of a medical emergency.
Dalton questioned the Respondent to explain his use of Nitrous Oxide gas in the
practice and was informed that the Respondent used
Nitrous Oxide while
practicing in Broken Hill and Victoria but ceased its use in 2004. He stated
that on purchasing the dental practice
he found that he had several elderly
women as patients who demanded his use of gas.
his inspection Dr Dalton noted that the Respondent used Nitrous Oxide sedation.
There were two cylinders in the front surgery,
one Oxygen and one Nitrous Oxide.
There was a mixer machine attached to facilitate the two substances being used
together. Dr Dalton
requested treatment records for certain patients and on
these being provided found them to be deficient.
In addition to the
above statement, the Complainant made available to the Tribunal a report by Dr
Dalton which had been significantly
redacted. The Tribunal therefore had
available to it only those portions of the report which had not been redacted.
The un-redacted
sections of the report were to the following effect;
Dalton's second visit to the Respondent's premises he requested to be introduced
to the two senior staff who were required by
the restrictions placed by the
Dental Board of NSW on the Respondent practicing. There was only one staff
member presented and she
did not qualify to be a staff member under the
restrictions placed on the practice. The Respondent proferred an explanation
stated that he had complied with the restrictions placed on him by the
Dental Board of NSW. Dr Dalton advised that he was not complying
restrictions and that he was to cease treating patients if two senior staff were
not present at all times. Dr Abraham then
stated that he would not always
observe the restrictions (Vol 1, Tab 25, page 6).
respect of continuing education the Respondent provided certificates and
receipts indicating that the Respondent had acted on the
requirements imposed by
the Board of NSW in respect of continuing education.
Dr Dalton then
expressed the view that the conduct of the Respondent fell below the standard
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training and experience and
invited his strong criticism
Dr Dalton was not called to give evidence.
Report of Peer Reviewer, Dr Thomas Tseng (Vol 1, Tab 23, pages
Complainant provided a report by Dr Thomas Tseng which was significantly
redacted and accordingly the tribunal had available to it
only those sections
referred to below which were to the following effect:
the two pages of Medical Records provided by Dr Abraham, I am of the opinion
that the records are significantly below the standard
expected. There is only
one entry for Patient E dated 20
January 2010 (when she was
actually seen on 15 January 2010) and the information for that visit is limited
to "013 oral examination
– limited". There is a clear lack of information
for the visit given the significant events that transpired from that visit.
notes lack any information regarding [Patient E's] presenting signs and
symptoms, a provisional diagnosis and the administration
and type of Local
Anaesthetic. There are no notes on the subsequent events that occurred or any
follow up undertaken by Dr Abraham.
also highly critical of Dr Abraham's clinical notes which were significantly
below the standard expected of a General Practitioner
Dentist especially given
the events that occurred"
Evidence of The Respondent (Vol B, Tab
The Respondent provided a statement by himself which was to the following
Respondent was born on the 26
of July 1944 and is 68 years of age.
He graduated from studies in dentistry at Cairo University and practiced
dentistry in Egypt
between 1966 and 1968. He migrated to Australia in December
has practiced as a dentist in Australia since completing his qualifying exams in
1971 other than for 2 years from June 1991 to
June 1993 when he was a dental
officer for the armed forces in Saudi Arabia. From July 1971 to February 2002,
he practiced in private
practice as well as a range of public organizations
including community health services and public hospitals.
2006 to 2009 he worked in 3 private practices located in various regional
2009 to October 2010 he practiced in a regional town until he sold the practice
in November 2010. He then returned to private
practice in Victoria.
to the events which are the subject of the complaints, he had never been to
court or been subjected to disciplinary proceedings
in the 42 years of practice.
had correspondence with the HCCC on the 24 August 2010 and the 21 December 2010,
which correspondence is to be found at volume
1 tab 6 and volume 1 tab 9 of the
Complainant's documents respectively.
correspondence set out the Respondents explanation of the circumstances of his
consultation with Patient E including:
patient records prepared on 15 and 20 January 2010;
observations in relation to Patient E's presenting
observations and response in relation to patient E's reaction to the
anaesthetic;
explanation for omitting to record all relevant information in patient treatment
notes. He stated that he was under considerable
stress at the time of the
consultation as a result of the complaints made against him by the dental nurses
(as set out in the Complaint);
regret for any distress caused to Patient E;
steps he took to make follow up enquires to satisfy himself in relation to
patient welfare.
Respondent was X-examined at some length. (Transcript pages 59 – 72, and
pages 89-118).
the Tribunal, the Respondent conceded that he had not made clinical notes other
than the invoices which referred to an oral
examination.
was X-examined as to whether after she had the reaction she took a tablet while
in the dentist's chair or in the waiting room.
He remained steadfast in his
recollection that she took a pill while in the dentist's chair.
was X-examined on his explanation to the HCCC in relation to Patient E, that he
was under stress due to the complaints being made
against him by the various
employees. He confirmed that by the date on which he examined Patient E, he was
already aware of the
fact that his employees had complained about his behaviour
and had told him that they would be going to the police to report him.
X-examination relating to a plea of guilty in respect of Employee C, the
Respondent denied that he pled guilty or that he authorised
his solicitor to
plead guilty on his behalf.
was X-examined on the letters written to Ms Ford of the HCCC and in particular
his explanations as to why he examined a patient
without complying with the
orders of the Dental Board of NSW, namely having 2 adult nurses (over the age of
18) at all times when
seeing a patient.
the Respondent was shown two Applications for Renewal of Registration (Vol 1,
Tab 29 and Vol 1 Tab 30) being in respect of
the years 2011 - 2012 and 2012 -
2013 respectively. He was asked to give an explanation as to why in respect of
questions as to
any criminal history or changed criminal history he responded in
the form "No". His explanation was that he had correspondence with
Hardman of the Australian Dental Council.
Respondent provided a reference from Fr Yostos Wasif a parish priest of St Mary
and St John The Beloved Coptic Orthodox Church
which read as follows
Abraham was one of the members of our Coptic Orthodox Church during his
practicing period [at my Parish]"
am aware of the allegations against the Respondent made by the Health Care
Complaints Commission HCCC"
have known the Respondent as a good character dealing with everyone in the
church with respect. He had no trouble with anyone
in our church during that
period when he was here at [my Parish], I have no complaint from anyone about
Fr Yostos Wasif was not called to give evidence.
ADMISSIONS MADE
The Respondent made the following admissions with respect to particulars 8 of
Complaint 2.
Respondent]
particular 8 a.
paragraph 8 b.
Submissions
Submissions by
Complainant
The Complainant handed up written submissions, spoke to
those in closing, and emailed further brief submissions to the Tribunal.
of the Complainant's written submissions are Annexure A hereto.
summary, the Complainant submitted:
In regard to the Complaint, in the
exercise of its protective jurisdiction the Tribunal is required to take into
account the maintenance
of the standards of the dental profession, the
maintenance of public confidence in the dental profession and the protection of
community. (Annexure A, paragraph 12)
In the exercise of its
protective jurisdiction the Tribunal's primary purpose is the protection of the
health and safety of the public.
(Annexure A, paragraph 13)
The Tribunal
should consider five matters bearing on protection:
need to protect the public against further misconduct by the practitioner.
need to protect the public through general deterrence (of other
practitioners).
need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional standards and
denouncing transgressions.
maintenance of public confidence in the profession.
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner.
(Annexure A, paragraph 14)
The burden of proof in the Tribunal is that which requires a reasonable
satisfaction on the balance of probabilities, having regard
to (a) the gravity
and importance of the issues to be decided, and (b) the possible consequence to
the practitioner that a finding
would be made that he or she had been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. (Annexure A, paragraph 22)
addition to the 'peer review' and other expert evidence before the Tribunal in
this inquiry, the Respondent's conduct as a registered
dental practitioner as
particularised in the Complaint, is considered by this Tribunal with two members
- as required by the National
Law - being registered dental practitioners; and
as such, the Tribunal is an 'expert tribunal' adopting the description of
professional disciplinary tribunal, by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Kalil v Bray & Anor
. [1977) 1NSWLR 256 (see
HCCC v Phung
(No.1) [2012] 1 NSWDT 1 at [60]). (Annexure A, paragraph 26)
The Complainant proceeded to make submissions in regard to
the specific evidence on which it relied as follows:
With respect to the first complaint the HCCC relies upon the
following evidence to establish the particulars of the complaint:
Certificate
of conviction Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 117-119;
Transcript Vol 2 Tab 4 at pages 6-1 0;
Court Transcript Tab 5 and Tab 6;
Certificate
of conviction Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 120-123;
Transcript Vol 2 Tab 13;
Certificate
of conviction Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 124-125;
Transcript Vol 2 Tabs 16-17;
The Tribunal can be reasonably
satisfied that the particulars of the first complaint have been established.
(Annexure A, paragraph
Complaint 2
With respect
to the second first complaint the HCCC relies upon the following evidence to
establish the particulars of the complaint:
a) The matters at 27
Particulars 1-3
b) Police Fact Sheet Vol l Tab 3 at pages
c) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 8-14 at [2], [5], [9], [10],
[11], [12], [14], [15], [16], [17], [21] and [28]
Transcript Vol 2 Tab 3 at pages 14-35
Particular 4
e) Police Fact
Sheet Vol l Tab 3 at pages 4-5
f) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 36-41 at [2], [17] and
Particular 5
g) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages
49-55 at [30]
Particular 6
e) Police Fact Sheet Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages
f) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 49-55 at
Particular 7
e) Police Fact Sheet Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 5-6
f) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 27-35 at [2], [6], [7], [8],
[9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [18] and [22]
Court Transcript Vol 2 Tab 8 at pages 1-26
Particular 8
h) Statement of Patient E Vol 1 Tab 4
i) Response of the Complainant of 24 August 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 6)
j) Response of the Complainant of 21 December 2010 (Vol 1 Tab
k) Respondent Statement and attached correspondence (Vol B Tab
1) Respondent's admissions
The Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied
that the particulars of the second complaint have been established. (Annexure
A, paragraph
Complaint 3
With respect to the
third complaint the HCCC relies upon the following evidence to establish the
particulars of the complaint:
a) Decision of the NSW Dental Board of 3
March 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 2 at p5)
b) Complainant's response (Vol 1 Tab
c) Complainant's response of 3 December 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 9);
Dalton Report Vol 1 Tab 25 at p 6
e) Dr Dalton Report Vol1 Tab 27at p
The Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the
third complaint have been established. (Annexure A, paragraph
Complaint 4
With respect to the fourth complaint the
HCCC relies upon the evidence at (29 and 31) (above)[complaints 2-3].
Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the fourth
complaint have been established. (Annexure A, paragraph
Complaint 5
With respect to the fifth complaint the
HCCC relies upon the evidence at (27, 29 and 31) (above) [complaints
The Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of
the fifth complaint have been established. (Annexure A, paragraph
The Complainant's experts were not required for cross examination. In
these circumstances the Tribunal should prima facie accept their
findings and
opinion. (Annexure A, paragraph 37)
The evidence of Employees A, B and C
and Prospective employee D should be accepted by the Tribunal. None of these
persons were cross
examined in any detail about the allegations which form part
of Complaint 2. At best their X-examination was about cursory matters
we smoke together, I held your hand for glove measurement, you did not use your
hand to determine I had an erection, I turned
off the gas etc.
simply no basis for the Tribunal to reject their evidence. (Annexure A,
paragraph 39 and 40)
The Tribunal in this matter is required to consider
whether the Tribunal accepts the evidence of the Respondent or that of the
witnesses. In making that determination as to what evidence the Tribunal
will accept or reject, the Tribunal should have regard
to three main things:
the honesty and reliability of the witness. In this context, it is appropriate
for the Tribunal to assess the demeanour of
the Respondent. That is not just
what the Respondent said but the way that he said it, and whether his evidence
contained any lies
or contradictions within it. Any lies, absence of candour or
dissembling in the Respondent's evidence is a matter of concern
the Tribunal is asked to look at whether there is consistency in the versions
that have been given, that is whether the
Respondent has on previous occasions
when he has spoken to people or made statements or given evidence, given a
version that has
been consistent, or whether he has changed his version on
occasions or on any occasion when the Respondent has been asked to give
account of himself.
third aspect is the consistency of the Respondent's conduct, that is, whether
the Respondent's behaviour at the time is consistent
with the account now being
The Respondent submits that applying the above tests to
the Respondent's evidence means that the Respondent's evidence should not
preferred to that of any other witness. Many aspects of the Respondent's account
of himself do not survive scrutiny.
As noted above 'small lies' on the
part of the Respondent are not matters that the Tribunal should dismiss lightly.
(Annexure A, paragraph
Finally, the particulars of complaints 1, 2
(but not particular 8) and 3 demonstrate that the Respondent is not a suitable
within the meaning of
National Law
. (Annexure A,
paragraph 56)
Counsel for the Complainant made submissions in reply in
regard to the exclusion of Dr Tseng's evidence, to the fact that the Respondent
was candid during X-examination and various other issues raised by the
Respondent's counsel. (Annexure A page 147 line 30 - page
In regard to Orders:
The HCCC seeks that the Tribunal cancel
the Respondent's registration pursuant to s149C(l)(b),(c) and (d) of the
National Law
. (Annexure A, paragraph 57)
In determining the
appropriate consequential orders, the paramount consideration is the protection
of the health and safety of the
public (see s3A of the
National Law
considering deregistration the Tribunal is to consider current unfitness, rather
than limiting its consideration to permanent
unfitness. (Annexure A, paragraph
The Tribunal should find that the conduct described in the
Particulars is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation of the Respondent's registration pursuant to s149C (1) (b), (c)
and/or (d). (Annexure A, paragraph 62)
Quite clearly the criminal conduct
of the Respondent is not only of a very serious nature, it also relates to his
practice as a dentist
as it provided him with a level of trust and a facade of
legitimacy. The HCCC have firmly established the conduct related to the
or purported practice of dentistry. Even if it had not occurred within this
setting, a criminal record of this nature would
prove to be a significant
barrier to registration. (Annexure A, paragraph 71)
Further, the
Respondent's conduct in respect to his employees and potential employees is
clearly sexual harassment (see
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) and 22A of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW)). As such this
conduct was both improper and unethical. (Annexure A, paragraph 73)
continuing pattern of offending behaviour precludes any suggestion of an error
being followed by remorse and insight. Had the
respondent not been reported to
the police his conduct may well have continued. (Annexure A, paragraph
As observed by Walsh JAin
Ex parte Tziniolis Re Medical
Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
"Reformation of
character and of behaviour can doubtless occur but their occurrence is not the
usual but the exceptional thing. One
cannot assume that a change has occurred
merely because some years have gone by and it is not proved
anything of a discreditable kind has occurred. If a man has
exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct and his attitudes,
must require clear proof to show that some years later he has established
himself a different man .. .In such cases it has been
frequently said that a
heavy onus lies on the applicant."
(Annexure A, paragraph 76 and
The Tribunal should be concerned that the practitioner lacked
complete insight into the impact of his conduct on the employees, and
lack of full insight meant that there was some risk of future repeat of such
conduct. (Annexure A, paragraph 78)
The Tribunal should be of the view
that the Respondent is not a suitable person to hold registration as a dentist
at the time he committed
the offences. (Annexure A, paragraph 80)
event the Tribunal were to accept the Complainant's submission that the
appropriate penalty was cancellation of the Respondent's
registration, the
Tribunal should make the following consequential orders:
Respondent should not be permitted to apply for re-registration for a period of
two years (s149C(7)).
order should be made under section 163 of the
National Law
which would
make the Tribunal the review body. (Complainant's supplementary submission
paragraph 2)
Submissions by the Respondent
Respondent handed up written submissions in respect of the Complaint relating to
Patient E and spoke to those in closing. Copies
of those submissions are
Annexure B hereto. In summary, Counsel for the Respondent submitted:
Respondent denies that he is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(Annexure B, paragraph 7)
In addition, the Respondent raised various
objections to the report of Dr Tseng which are as follows:
Counsel for
the Complainant did not indicate that the report of Dr Thomas Tseng (Tab 23) is
relied upon. Accordingly, the Complainant
does not rely upon any expert evidence
in support of its complaint that the Patient E Complaint constitutes
unsatisfactory professional
Nor should Dr Tseng's report be
relied upon by the Tribunal for the reasons outlined below.
concludes that the Respondent's records for Patient E are "significantly below
the standard expected of a general practitioner
dentist". Accordingly, the only
ground raised by Dr Tseng is pursuant to s 139B(1)(a).
Dr Tseng does not
refer to any literature or standard or publication or demonstrate the
intellectual basis for reaching that conclusion:
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
particular, he did not establish a basis for a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s 139B(1)(a) because he has
not explained how the
deficiencies he identified in the Respondent's records amount to conduct that
demonstrates the Respondent's
"knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised" is - as he concludes -"significantly below the standard reasonably
In other words, Dr Tseng has not explained how his
specialised knowledge enabled him to produce the opinion propounded, based on
observations in relation to the information within or omitted from the
treatment notes so as to produce the conclusions that he did.
circumstances, it is not possible for the Tribunal to be sure whether the
opinion is based wholly or substantially on Dr Tseng's
expert specialised
knowledge, in which case his report is, strictly speaking, not admissible but,
to the extent that it is admissible,
should not be given any
Furthermore: (a) Dr Tseng was instructed in a leading manner (Tab
22, page 2, last paragraph); (b) the report consists primarily of
observations
in relation to the contents of the treatment note and omissions from it, which
are not matters for expert opinion as
the Tribunal is perfectly capable of
making those observations; and (c) Dr Tseng does not identify the "subsequent
events" referred
to and upon which he appears to have relied in forming his
In the circumstances, Dr Tseng's report should not be given any
weight by the Tribunal in determining whether the Patient E Complaint
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Apart from Dr Tseng's general
description of the type of information that should have been included (the
particulars of which have
been admitted in any event), the Complainant has not
adduced evidence as to what specific information should have been included in
the notes for Patient E. (Annexure B, paragraphs 12-20)
Further, to the
extent that the Tribunal's findings may be informed by the contents of the
Respondent's letters, it should be noted
Respondent did not consider Patient E to be suffering from an allergic reaction
to the local anaesthetic (Tab 6, page 2 and Tab
observation should be accepted at face value in circumstances where there is no
complaint or particular asserting that he failed
to diagnose or misdiagnosed
accordingly,
even if the Respondent's treatment notes complied with particular 8 of Complaint
2, those notes would not have included
anything more than the observations set
out in his letters (Tabs 6 and 9). (Annexure B, paragraph
Having regard to the deficiencies in Dr Tseng's report and
the Complainant's failure to adduce evidence of a specific nature as to
should have been included in the treatment notes for Patient E, the Complainant
has failed to discharge its evidentiary burden
in relation to the Patient E
Complaint. (Annexure B, paragraph 25)
The Respondent has participated in
the Tribunal proceedings notwithstanding his limited legal representation and
stated lack of familiarity
with legal issues. When informed by the Tribunal that
he is entitled not to give evidence he indicated that he would do so and was
"determined" to do so. In this way, he has co-operated with the inquiry process
and thereby seeks to fulfill his obligations to the
profession. He answered
questions put to him by Members of the Tribunal and did not give evasive or
non-responsive answers. He was
similarly candid during cross-examination despite
not always being given the opportunity to complete his answers. In the
circumstances,
the Tribunal should view the Respondent as a credible witness
who, despite the nature of some of the Other Complaints, has been candid,
co-operative and committed during the proceedings which reflect positively on
his character. (Annexure B, paragraph 27)
Prior to the events the
subject of this Complaint, the Respondent had never been to Court or subjected
to disciplinary proceedings
of this nature (Tab 11, page 3 and Statement para
12). (Annexure B, paragraph 32)
The Respondent's evidence that his
"financial and emotional states (have) been destroyed" presents a strong
reminder and deterrent
against failing to comply with his professional
responsibilities in the future (Tab 11). (Annexure B, paragraph 33)
Respondent has expressed regret (Tab 6, page 2) and admitted the particulars of
the Patient E Complaint (Meridian letter 23/04/13).
(Annexure B, paragraph
The Respondent showed concern for Patient E's welfare by subsequently
treating general
practitioner, and was reassured in relation to Patient E's condition (Tab 6,
page 2). (Annexure B, paragraph 35)
The conduct occurred well over 3
years ago and there is no evidence that he has ongoing problems with record
keeping. (Annexure B,
paragraph 36)
The Respondent submits that the
evidence does not establish that the Patient E Complaint constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct,
either individually or by reason of its
cumulative effect in the sense that it should not be attributed any weight or
alter the finding that the Tribunal will otherwise make in relation
to Complaint Two having regard to the other particulars. (Annexure
B, paragraph
If a finding is made that the Respondent's conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct then, insofar as the Patient E Complaint
concerned, the Respondent submits that an order that the Respondent be cautioned
pursuant to s149A(1)(a) of the
National Law
is an adequate and
appropriate response given that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is protective
rather than punitive:
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
CLR 186. (Annexure
B, paragraph 42)
However, if Complaint Two is proved
then to the extent that such finding is based on the Patient E Complaint, the
Respondent will
submit to and cooperate with, any conditions the Tribunal might
impose on his registration; and is willing to undertake, subject
financial means, any educational courses relevant to his practice, that the
Tribunal considers necessary. (Annexure B, paragraph
In respect of
costs, counsel for the Respondent submitted that the Complaint relating to
Patient E, if the Tribunal finds that of
itself it does not constitute
unsatisfactory professional conduct or that it adds no incremental weight to the
findings in relation
to Complaint 2, then a costs order would be made against
the Complainant in favour of the Respondent in respect of that aspect of
Complaint (transcript page 141 line 47 to page 142 line 4).
The Respondent
himself did not provide written submissions but made submissions orally.
In summary the Respondent submitted:
was dissatisfied with the inspection by the Dental Board and their dealings with
infection control (transcript page 142 line 24-36).
did not examine the witnesses to any great extent because he felt that pointing
out even one lie would be sufficient and he did
not wish to humiliate them
(transcript page 142 line 43-45).
objects to the evidence of Patient A in regard to his touching and related
evidence (transcript page 144 line 44 to page 145 line
18), to the evidence of
Patient B (transcript page 145 line 26-35), Patient C (transcript page 145 line
37 to page 146 line 5), and
prospective Employee D (transcript page 146 line
regard to costs, the Respondent made submissions in relation to his financial
circumstances which he indicated were very poor (transcript
page 147 line
Reasons for Decision
The Complaint made against the Respondent
consists of five separate complaints. It was necessary for the Tribunal to
consider each
of the Complaints and the Particulars of each Complaint separately
in order to determine whether there had been unsatisfactory professional
or professional misconduct, either individually or taken together. The tribunal
therefore, sets out its reasons in respect
of each of the complaints and the
Particulars relating to them.
Complaint 1
. The Tribunal was
provided with the Certificates of Conviction (Vol 1 tab 3 pages
In the circumstances, the Tribunal found Complaint 1 and the
Particulars to Complaint 1 proven.
Complaint 2.
The Tribunal had
available to it volume 1 and 2 of the Complainant’s documents and volume A
and B of the Respondent's documents
and additional documents as tendered during
the hearing.
The Tribunal considered each of the Particulars of Complaint
2 and addresses below, each of the Particulars.
In respect of Particulars
1, 2 and 3, the Tribunal had regard to the Statement made by Employee A, Witness
F, Witness G, the evidence
given by Employee A, the evidence given by the
Respondent and the X-examination of Employee A.
The Tribunal found
Employee A to be an honest and reliable witness and accepted the evidence
contained in the statements of Witnesses
F and G and rejected the evidence of
the Respondent.
In the circumstances, the tribunal found Particulars 1,2
and 3 of Complaint 2 proven.
In respect of particular 4, the Tribunal had
available to it the Statement of Employee B, Witness I and Witness J, the
evidence given
by Employee B, the evidence given by the Respondent and the
X-examination of Employee B.
The Tribunal found Employee B to be an
honest and reliable witness and in the circumstances found Particular 4 of
Complaint 2 proven.
In respect of Particulars 5 and 6 of Complaint 2, the
tribunal had available to it the Statement of Employee C, Witnesses K and L,
evidence given by the Respondent and the X-examination of Employee
Except for Particular 5d of Complaint 2, the tribunal found
Particulars 5 and 6 proven.
In respect of Particular 7, the Tribunal had
available to it the statement of Prospective Employee D, the statement of
the evidence given by Prospective Employee D, the evidence of the
Respondent, the X-examination of Prospective Employee D.
The Tribunal
found Prospective Employee D to be an honest and reliable witness and found
Particular 7 proven.
In respect of Particular 8 of Complaint 2, the
Respondent admitted the allegations made in the Particular and accordingly, the
found these proven.
Complaint 3
. The Tribunal had
available to it the statement made by Dr Dalton (vol 1 tab 3 p 101-104), the
Conditions placed on the Respondent’s
practice by the Dental Board NSW
(vol 1 tab 2) and the report of Dr Dalton (vol 1 tab 25) which recorded the fact
of a breach of
the conditions by the Respondent. Although the Respondent sought
to explain why the Conditions had been breached, the Tribunal found
Conditions had in fact been breached, and therefore found Complaint 3
Complaint 4
. The Tribunal considered the Complaints
individually and collectively and had regard to:
fact that the Respondent was in a position of power
relatively young age of the Employees
nature of the behaviour which is the subject of the Complaint
lack of insight displayed by the Respondent and his denial of the allegations
despite guilty findings by the Court in respect
of each of Employee A, B and
Respondent’s lack of contrition
Even if Complaint 2 did not amount to professional misconduct (however the
Tribunal believes in and of itself it amounts to professional
misconduct), the
Respondent was found guilty of four charges of aggravated indecent assault and
one charge of common assault, yet
in completing the application forms for
renewal of general registration for the years 2011 and 2012, on 16/12/2011 and
respectively, in response to questions C7 and C8 relating to Criminal
history, marked the form “NO”.
Two of the convictions in respect of aggravated indecent assault were
recorded on the 23/08/2011, two convictions on the offences
of aggravated
indecent assault were recorded on the 18/10/2011 and one conviction of common
assault was recorded on 18/10/2011. In
the circumstances, the forms completed by
the respondent are blatantly incorrect and accordingly constitute a false
declaration.
In the view of the Tribunal, the convictions and the false
declaration to AHPRA constitute professional misconduct.
Having regard to the above, the Tribunal believes that the Respondent is
guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of s
139 E of the National
Complaint 5
. Having regard to the proven allegations in
Complaints 1, 2 and 3 and having regard to the fact that the Tribunal has found
Respondent guilty of professional misconduct, the Tribunal finds Complaint
5 and its Particulars, except for particular 5d, proven.
In addition, the
Tribunal had available to it the Statement of Patient E (vol 1 tab 4) and the
report of Dr Tseng (vol 1 tab 23),
the evidence given by the Respondent and the
cross-examination of the Respondent. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
treatment of
Patient E in circumstances where the patient had had a reaction
following the administration of an anaesthetic to Patient E falls
standard expected of a general practitioner especially given the events that
occurred. The response of Dr Abraham to Patient
E's reaction demonstrated a
lack of the necessary skill, care and judgement required.
dentist’s staff member is the subject of an assault in the course of
employment, such behaviour in the view of the Tribunal
might ordinarily
constitute professional misconduct. The tribunal is satisfied that the practice
of dentistry must include the relationship
between a dentist and dental
auxiliaries that assist in the delivery of dental treatment, and a failure in
that regard brings the
dental profession into disrepute.
The Tribunal
could have been more comfortable in the protection of the public if the
Respondent had demonstrated greater contrition,
insight and acceptance of the
errors committed by him, not only in respect of his relationships with staff,
but in his treatment
of Patient E, his professional responsibilities and his
failure to comply with Conditions imposed by the Dental Board
Accordingly, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the public
requires protection from the Respondent and accordingly it is the
decision of
this Tribunal that the registration of the Respondent be cancelled
If the Respondent wishes to reapply for re-registration after
a period of two (2) years, the Tribunal believes, having regard to the
of the Respondent, the inability of the Respondent to accept responsibility for
his actions, and his inability to accept
court decisions, that the registration
authority should seek to ensure that the Respondent has changed his ways and
that he can show
objective psychiatric evidence to satisfy the registering
authority that he is a fit and proper person to practice.
The role of
the Tribunal
The Tribunal accepts that its role is to provide for the
protection of the public by ensuring that only health practitioners who
suitably trained and qualified to practice in a competent and ethical manner are
registered to do so.
The standard of proof and the onus of
The standard of proof required is the civil standard, namely on
the balance of probabilities. Before the Tribunal may make an order,
be satisfied on the balance of probabilities by the evidence before it, that the
onus of proof has been discharged by the
Complainant. However, having regard
to the decision in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Tribunal must be comfortably satisfied that the Particulars of the Complaint
have been established.
The Tribunal finds that the
Respondent:
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
National Law
in that he has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in
the practice of dentistry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of dentistry;
is guilty of professional
misconduct under section 139E of the
National Law
in that he has:
in unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of
the practitioner's registration; or
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together,
amount to conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
The Tribunal makes the
following orders:
Tribunal cancels the registration of the Respondent forthwith;
Respondent shall not be entitled to apply for re-registration for a period of
two (2) years; and
Tribunal makes no order under s 163 of the
National Law
which would make
the Tribunal the review body in respect of an application for registration by
the Respondent.
The Tribunal orders that the Respondent pay the costs of the Complainant as
agreed between the parties or if agreement cannot be reached,
either party may
have the matter listed before the Tribunal to assess the costs.
Additional Comment
The Tribunal believes that in the event that an application for
re-registration is made by the Respondent, the reviewing authority
provided with professional evidence to show that the Respondent has sought
professional treatment and has changed his ways.
Agreed by Dr Thomas Boland by email dated 12
Dr Thomas Boland
Agreed by Dr Kavita Lobo by email dated 13 June
Dr Kavita Lobo
Agreed by Ms
Leanne Wrightson by email dated 13 June 2013
Date: 14 June 2013
HCCC OUTLINE OF SUBMISSION
Introduction
submissions are made on behalf of the HCCC.
HCCC reserves the right to further supplement these submissions either orally
and/or in writing at the hearing.
Adel Abraham is a registered dentist.
is an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(the “National Law”) by Ms. Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings,
Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated
11 January 2013 in relation
to a registered dentist, Adel Abraham (the Respondent).
The Complaint
Complaint consists of four complaints (Vol 1 p1-12).
First complaint is that the Respondent has been convicted of criminal
Second complaint is that the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of s139B of the National
Law in that he
(a) engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by him in the practice
of dentistry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience
(s139B(1)(a));
(b) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of dentistry (s139B(1)(l)).
Third complaint is that the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of s139B of the National
Law in that he has
contravened a condition to which his registration was subject
(s139B(1)(c)).
Fourth complaint is that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of s139E of the National Law in
that he has:
(a) engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) engaged in
more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
Fifth complaint is that the Respondent is not a suitable person within the
meaning of s144 of the National Law.
preliminary matters
Care Complaints Commission
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
HCCC v Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7
[2009] NSWDT 2 at [14]).
the exercise of its protective jurisdiction the Tribunal is required to take
into account the maintenance of the standards of the
dental profession, the
maintenance of public confidence in the dental profession and the protection of
the community (
Gayed v Walton
[1997] NSWSC 279
Prakash v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Howe
[2010] NSWMT 12 at [113]).
the exercise of its protective jurisdiction the Tribunal’s primary purpose
is the protection of the health and safety of
the public (see
[2010] NSWMT 3 at [31] and s3(2)(a) and 3A of the National
Tribunal should consider five matters bearing on protection:
(1) any need to protect the public against further misconduct by the
practitioner.
(2) the need to protect the public through general deterrence (of other
practitioners).
(3) the need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional
standards and denouncing transgressions.
(4) the maintenance of public confidence in the profession.
(5) the desirability of making available to the public any special skills
possessed by the practitioner.
Skinner v Beaumont
(1974) 2 NSWLR 106
addition, the public, and professional colleagues, must be able to repose
confidence in the medical profession. The maintenance
of professional ethical
standards requires not kindness but hardness, not flexibility but intransigence
Skinner v Beaumont
at 109D). An element of deterrence is an
assurance to the public that serious lapses in the conduct of medical
practitioners will
not be passed over or lightly put aside, but will be
appropriately dealt with (see
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34NSWLR
408 at 471B and
HCCC v Dr Graeme Harris
[2008] NSWMT 6 at
Legislative Framework
8 of the National Law deals with complaints concerning health practitioners.
144 specifies the grounds for complaints against a health practitioner. They
(a) A complaint the practitioner has, either in this
finding for an offence.
(b) A complaint the practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct.
(e) A complaint the practitioner is otherwise not a suitable person to
hold registration in the practitioner’s profession.
meaning of “criminal finding” is defined in s138 of the National Law
to include a finding that an offence has been
proved and the discharging of, or
the making of an order releasing, the offender conditionally on entering into a
good behaviour
bond for a specified period or on other conditions decided by the
139B of the National Law defines “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” of a registered health practitioner includes
a number of matter.
This section relevantly provides:
(a) Conduct that demonstrates
the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner’s profession is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
is defined in s138 of the National Law to mean “any act or
139E of the National Law “professional misconduct” to mean:
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.
Burden of proof
burden of proof in the Tribunal is that which requires a reasonable satisfaction
on the balance of probabilities, having regard
to (a) the gravity and importance
of the issues to be decided, and (b) the possible consequence to the medical
practitioner that
a finding would be made that he or she had been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct (see
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 360-363;
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
at 711-712;
Lindsay v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2005] NSWCA 356
HCCC v Sunda
NSWDT 1 at [43]).
Role of Tribunal
Tribunal’s first step is to determine whether as a matter of evidence
whether some or all of the particulars of a complaint
are made out.
Tribunal’s second step is then to determine whether the particulars as
found amount to:
(i) unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s139B of the
National Law;
(ii) professional misconduct within the meaning of s139E of the National Law;
(iii) a finding that the Respondent is not a suitable person within the meaning
of s144 of the National Law.
if the Tribunal is satisfied of the above will the Tribunal need to consider
what, if any, orders are made under ss149, 149A,
149B, and 149C of the National
addition to the ‘peer review’ and other expert evidence before the
Tribunal in this inquiry, the Respondent’s
conduct as a registered dental
practitioner as particularised in the complaints, is considered by this Tribunal
with two members—as
required by the National Law—being registered
dental practitioners; and as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
’ adopting the description of another professional
disciplinary tribunal, by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Kalil v Bray &
. [1977) 1NSWLR 256 (see
HCCC v Phung (No. 1)
[2012] 1 NSWDT 1 at
respect to the first complaint the HCCC relies upon the following evidence to
establish the particulars of the complaint:
(a) Certificate
of conviction Vol 1Tab 3 p117-119;
Transcript Vol 2 Tab 4 p6-10;
(c) District
Court Transcript Tab 5 and Tab 6;
(d) Certificate
of conviction Vol 1Tab 3 p120-123;
Transcript Vol 2 Tab 13;
(f) Certificate
of conviction Vol 1Tab 3 p124-125;
Transcript Vol 2 Tabs 16-17;
Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the first complaint
have been established.
respect to the second first complaint the HCCC relies upon the following
evidence to establish the particulars of the complaint:
(a) The matters at 27(above)
Particulars 1-3
(b) Police Fact Sheet Vol 1 Tab 3 p1-2
(c) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 8-14 at [2], [5], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [14], [15], [16], [17], [21] and [28]
(d) Court Transcript Vol 2 Tab 3 p14-35
Particular 4
(e) Police Fact Sheet Vol 1 Tab 3 p4-5
(f) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 36-41 at [2], [17] and [19]
Particular 5
(g) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 49-55 at
Particular 6
(e) Police Fact Sheet Vol 1 Tab 3 p5-6
(f) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 49-55 at
Particular 7
(e) Police Fact Sheet Vol 1 Tab 3 p5-6
(f) Police Statement Vol 1 Tab 3 at pages 27-35 at [2], [6], [7], [8], [9],
[10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [18] and [22]
(g) Court Transcript Vol 2 Tab 8 p1-26
Particular 8
(h) Statement of Patient E Vol 1 Tab 4
(i) Response of the Complainant of 24 August 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 6)
(j) Response of the Complainant of 21 December 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 9)
(k) Respondent Statement and attached correspondence (Vol B Tab 8)
(l) Respondent’s admissions
Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the second
complaint have been established.
respect to the third complaint the HCCC relies upon the following evidence to
establish the particulars of the complaint:
(a) Decision of
the NSW Dental Board of 3 March 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 2 at p5)
(b) Complainant’s
response (Vol 1 Tab 7);
(c) Complainant’s
response of 3 December 2010 (Vol 1 Tab 9);
(d) Dr Dalton
Report Vol 1 Tab 25 at p6
(e) Dr Dalton
Report Vol 1 Tab 27at p8
Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the third complaint
have been established.
respect to the fourth complaint the HCCC relies upon the evidence at (29 and
31)(above)][complaints 2-3].
Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the fourth
complaint have been established.
respect to the fifth complaint the HCCC relies upon the evidence at (27, 29 and
31)(above)[complaints 1- 2-3].
Tribunal can be reasonably satisfied that the particulars of the fifth complaint
have been established.
Complainant’s experts were not required for cross examination. In these
circumstances the Tribunal should prima facie accept
their findings and
expert opinion in respect of these matters is:
(a) In respect
to Patient E’s records the Respondent’ records are significantly
below the standard expected of a practitioner
of equivalent experience (Dr Tseng
Vol 1 Tab 23 p3); and
(b) In respect
to the breach of restrictions imposed on his practice the conduct of the
Respondent falls below the standard expected
of a practitioner of equivalent
experience (Dr Dalton Vol 1 Tab 25 p8 and Vol 1 Tab 27
evidence of Employees A, B and C and Prospective employee D should be accepted
by the Tribunal. None of these person were cross
examined in any detail about
the allegations which form part of complaint 2. At best there cross examination
was about cursory matters
i.e. did we smoke together, I held your hand for glove
measurement, you did not use your hand to determine I had an erection, I turned
off the gas etc.
is simply no basis for the Tribunal to reject their evidence.
Tribunal in this matter is required to consider whether the Tribunal accepts
the evidence of the Respondent or that of the HCCC’s
witnesses. In making
that determination as to what evidence the Tribunal will accept or reject, the
Tribunal should have regard to
three main things:
the honesty and reliability of the witness. In this context, it is appropriate
for the Tribunal to assess the demeanour of
the Respondent. That is not just
what the Respondent said but the way that he said it, and whether his evidence
contained any lies
or contradictions within it. Any lies, absence of candour or
dissembling in the Respondent’s evidence is a matter of concern
the Tribunal is asked to look at whether there is consistency in the versions
that have been given, that is whether the
Respondent has on previous occasions
when he has spoken to people or made statements or given evidence, given a
version that has
been consistent, or whether he has changed his version on
occasions or on any occasion when the Respondent has been asked to give
account of himself.
third aspect is the consistency of the Respondent’s conduct, that is,
whether the Respondent’s behaviour at the time
is consistent with the
account now being offered.
The Respondent submits that applying the above tests to the
Respondent’s evidence means that the Respondent’s evidence
not be preferred to that of any other witness. Many aspects of the
Respondent’s account of himself do not survive scrutiny.
noted above ‘small lies’ on the part of the Respondent are not
matters that the Tribunal should dismiss lightly.
In respect to the particulars of complaints 1 and 2 (in particular), the
Committee as an expert committee may form its own view
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Slezak, Dr Peter
[2011] NSWMPSC 10
Unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
is clear from the terms of s139E of the National Law that the various
particulars under Complaints Two and Three can be accumulated
in order to reach
the conclusion of professional misconduct (see
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Dr Maendel
[2013] NSWMT 3 at [39]).
NSW Court of Appeal case
Pillai v Messiter [No 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
gives assistance on the distinction between “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” and “professional misconduct”
In that case,
Kirby P noted that:
The statutory test is not met by mere
professional incompetence or by deficiencies in the practice of the profession.
Something more
is required. It includes a deliberate departure from accepted
standards or such serious negligence as, although not deliberate, to
indifference and an abuse of the privileges which accompany registration as a
medical practitioner.
Subsequently he noted comments made by Hutley JA in a journal article as
http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2007/12.html?query=%22professional%20misconduct%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%22
Professional misconduct
the eyes of the profession, to be concerned with moral delinquency of some kind
... The authorities relied on provide no
justification for the degree of
indifference to negligence and/or incompetence exhibited by the Law Society in
Kirby P then continued:
These remarks, read in their context, do not justify a conclusion that
mere negligence or incompetence amounts to “misconduct”.
would be to reverse many years of authority.
The purpose of providing such a drastic consequence is not punishment of
the practitioner as such but protection of the public. The
public needs to be
protected from seriously incompetent professional people who are ignorant of
basic rules or indifferent as to
rudimentary professional requirements. Such
people should be removed from the register or from the relevant roll of
practitioners,
at least until they can demonstrate that their disqualifying
imperfections have been removed.
determination of whether a practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct pursuant to s139B(1)(a) of the
National Law, involves an
objective assessment of the practitioner's conduct against the standard of
conduct reasonably expected
of an equivalent practitioner.
the Tribunal finds that particulars of complaint 3 are established this
automatically becomes “unsatisfactory professional
misconduct” by
reason of s139B(1)(c) of the National Law.
HCCC submits that the particulars of complaint 1 (being the conduct of criminal
convictions) and complaint 2 (but not including
particular 8) demonstrate
improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of
dentistry and are therefore
unsatisfactory professional
misconduct.
are not defined in the National Law. Assistance in determining what is meant by
” can be gained from what the High Court of
Australia said of the word “
impropriety
(1995) 193 CLR 501
at 514-515 (see
HCCC v Phung (No. 1)
[2012] 1 NSWDT at
[68]). If the Respondent’s conduct as found by the Tribunal, was not in
conformity with standards of professional
conduct and practice and as such, was
words "unethical conduct" does not bear some special or technical meaning but
are used in their ordinary meaning. Although determining
the ordinary meaning of
a word has traditionally been identified as a question of fact, there is no
clear distinction between determining
the ordinary meaning of a word and the
construction of a term whose meaning is established. The construction of a
statutory provision
will usually involve a consideration of words in their
context and the adoption of a construction that will promote the purpose
the statute, which will usually involve a question of
Unethical conduct is arguably a more serious matter than
improper conduct. Unethical is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary as meaning
both, immoral or contrary to moral precepts and secondly, as relating to a
contravention of a professional code of conduct (see
Slezak, Dr Peter
[2011] NSWMPSC 10
. The Complainant relies upon the
is also reasonable to consider the meaning of “improper conduct” and
“unethical conduct” in connection
with the objects and purpose of
the legislation generally and, to some degree, the other types of conduct set
out in section 139B
(1) of the Law and the assessment of what constitutes
improper or unethical conduct
is also made by reference to the views
of reasonable members of the profession (see
Slezak, Dr Peter
its terms, s139E refers to conduct that is of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration and
therefore concerns itself with the measure of the seriousness of that conduct.
The determination of whether conduct
amounts to professional misconduct has as
its starting point, an objective assessment of the practitioner's conduct
against the standard
“reasonably expected of an equivalent
practitioner”. When coming to a decision about whether conduct is
sufficiently serious
" to justify the sanction of de-registration,
circumstances which bear on that objective assessment of that conduct may
properly be
taken into account (see
HCCC v Dr Gow
[2008] NSWMT 2 at
Complainant submits that the particulars of complaints 1, 2 and 3 demonstrate
that the Respondent has:
(a) Engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the
practice of the
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience;
(b) Contravened a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is
subject; and
(c) Engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
the Complainant submits that both individually but also accumulatively the
particulars of complaints 1, 2 and 3 demonstrate
that the Respondent has engaged
in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or
cancellation of the practitioner’s registration; or
more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
instances are considered together, amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of
the practitioner’s
registration.
HCCC v Roopra (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT the Tribunal found that inappropriate
sexual conduct by a practitioner towards staff members constituted professional
misconduct.
the particulars of complaints 1,2 (but not partricular8) and 3 demonstrate that
the Respondent is not a suitable person within
the meaning of s144 of the
National Law.
HCCC seeks that the Tribunal cancel the Respondent’s registration pursuant
to s149C(1)(b),(c) and (d) of the National Law.
In the event the Tribunal finds the Respondent to be guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s139B of
the National Law and/or professional misconduct and then determine
not to cancel
the Respondent’s registration, the Complainant would like to be heard on
any other orders the Tribunal was considering.
149 of the National Law provides that the Tribunal may exercise any power
conferred on it by Subdivision 6 of Division 3 of
Part 8 of the National Law in
relation to a registered health practitioner if it finds the subject-matter of a
complaint against
the practitioner to have been proved or the practitioner or
student admits to it in writing to the Tribunal. The principal sections
ss149A, 149B and s149C.
determining the appropriate consequential orders, the paramount consideration is
the protection of the health and safety of the
public (see s3A of the National
Law). In considering deregistration the Tribunal is to consider current
unfitness, rather than limiting
its consideration to permanent unfitness.
the predominant consideration is the protection of the public, a decision can
only be made by reference to the facts of the
particular case and by considering
what measures are needed to ensure that the future behaviour of the particular
practitioner is
shaped in a way that is consistent with that protection (see
[2012] NSWCA 80
Tribunal should find that the conduct described in the Particulars is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of the
Respondent’s registration pursuant to s149C (1) (b), (c) and/or (d).
observed in
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
, where the court
JA) said, at 638C:
The gravity of professional misconduct is not to be measured by
reference to the worst cases, but by the extent to which it departs
proper standards. If this is not done there is a risk that the conduc
the delinquents in a profession will indirectly establish the standards applied
by the Tribunal
the degree of seriousness is sufficient to warrant suspension or deregistration
is a matter of degree and judgment (see
Sabag v Health Care Complaints
[2001] NSWCA 411
there is a finding of professional misconduct, the Tribunal has a wide
discretion in relation to disposition of the complaint.
The circumstances of the
particular case will determine the appropriate disposition (see
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
per Basten JA at [67]). A finding of
professional misconduct does not automatically lead to cancellation of a medical
practitioner's
registration. Furthermore, normally a pre-requisite for making
orders for the de-registration of a practitioner, is that it must
find that he
or she is currently unfit to practice. It is fitness at the time of the hearing,
which is of central importance (see
A Solicitor v Council of the NSW Law
[2004] HCA 1
HCCC v King
NSWMT (6/02/2013) at
[25]). It is clear that deregistration may be required in serious cases of
professional misconduct in order
to adequately achieve the objectives of
minimising the risk of recurrence and of deterring other practitioners from
engaging in such
conduct and thereby maintaining public confidence in the
profession:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3 at [32];
Saville v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 298
Prakash v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
, Santow JA at [64] and Basten JA
of the public is associated with the protection
of the profession. The
protection of the health and safety of the public encompasses a range of
considerations. First, there may
be a need to protect the public against further
misconduct by a practitioner. Second, there is a need for general deterrence.
the high professional standards of the profession must be reinforced and
transgressions must be denounced. Fourth, public confidence
in the profession
must be maintained. Fifth, it may be desirable to make available to the public
any special skills possessed by
a practitioner. It may be that the circumstances
of a particular matter require the Tribunal to give greater weight to some of
considerations, or to consider other matters bearing on the health and
safety of the public.
assessing the central question of the respondent's fitness to practice, it is
important to have regard to the steps he has taken
since this conduct
phrase ‘suitable person’ is not defined in the National Law. However
some assistance as to its meaning is provided
by section 55(1) of the
National Law
which gives the grounds upon which the National Board may
decide that an individual is not a ‘suitable person’ to hold
general registration in a health profession especially in relation to criminal
conduct (see
HCCC v Roopra
(No 1) [2012] NSWDT 5 at [325]). Those grounds
include: s 55(1)(b) –
‘having regard to the individual’s
criminal history to the extent that is relevant to the individual’s
of the profession, the individual is not, in the Board’s opinion,
an appropriate person to practice the profession or it is
not in the public
interest for the individual to practice the profession’
and s 55(1)(h)
‘in the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other
reason not a fit and proper person for general registration in
profession.’
the factors described by Basten JA in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
related to the question of character such
factors have relevance to the wider question of whether a person is suitable to
hold registration
HCCC v Roopra
(No 1) [2012] NSWDT 5 at
provided by the National Law, two members of the Tribunal are registered dental
practitioners and as such, it is an ‘
expert professional
” as another professional disciplinary tribunal was so
described by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
In considering the purpose of protective orders following a finding
that a complaint has been proved, including the element of deterrence
practitioners to recognise the importance of compliance with professional
standards and the risk of failing to do so, His
Honour Justice Basten said
The Powers of a Tribunal having two members of the...profession
should, at least in relation to professional standards be accorded
a degree of
flexibility which might not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal differently
constituted.
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
clearly the criminal conduct of the Respondent is not only of a very serious
nature, it also relates to his practice as a dentist
as it provided him with a
level of trust and a facade of legitimacy. The HCCC have firmly established the
conduct related to the
practice or purported practice of dentistry. Even if it
had not occurred within this setting, a criminal record of this nature would
prove to be a significant barrier to registration.
conduct of the Respondent demonstrated significant abuse of the power of an
adult over a child. This type of power imbalance is
akin to the power imbalance
that exists between a practitioner and a patient by virtue of that relationship.
the Respondent’s conduct in respect to his employees and potential
employees is clearly sexual harassment (see
Sex Discrimination Act
(Cth) and 22A of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW)). As such this
conduct was both improper and unethical.
continuing pattern of offending behaviour precludes any suggestion of an error
being followed by remorse and insight. Had the
respondent not been reported to
the police his conduct may well have continued.
HCCC v Roopra
(No 1) [2012] NSWDT 5 the Tribunal found that inappropriate
sexual conduct by a practitioner towards staff members constituted professional
misconduct. Although other cases might be of value as examples in indicating a
range of appropriate orders but could not be seen
as precedents (see
[2012] NSWCA 80
). Each matter requires the exercise of judgment
by the specialist tribunal (
observed by
Ex parte Tziniolis Re Medical Practitioners
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
Reformation of character and of
behaviour can doubtless occur but their occurrence is not the usual but the
exceptional thing. One
cannot assume that a change has occurred merely because
some years have gone by and it is not proved that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards
of conduct and his attitudes, it must require clear
proof to show that some
years later he has established himself a different man...In such cases it has
been frequently said that a
heavy onus lies on the applicant.
Respondent has demonstrated no such reformation. There is little material before
the Tribunal to satisfy it that there is little
or no risk of a recurrence of
further misconduct by the Respondent in respect to employees or potential
employees. In fact the Respondent
appears to deny any further wrong doing or
conviction.
Tribunal should be concerned that the practitioner lacked complete insight into
the impact of his conduct on the employees, and
such a lack of full insight
meant that there was some risk of future repeat of such
considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of its
orders and their purpose, to protect the community:
judging whether an applicant will, in the future, act differently from the past,
is not required to act on psychological theories or
analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide what a man will do and the
decision in a particular case is, to a greater or lesser extent, dependent on
the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And
in making that assessment it
may draw inferences from what he has done in the past and, in particular, what
led to his being removed
from the roll. An understanding of that may assist the
court to determine what are his standards and his understanding...
responsibility and, from this, what he is apt to do in the future. And
it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what has been done
in the past has been
sufficient to indicate his ‘probably permanent unfitness’
Ex parte Lenehan
at 422; the court will require ‘
substantial grounds’
for the conclusion that his standards have
changed or that he will act differently
.” (my emphasis)
Tribunal should be of the view that the Respondent is not a suitable person to
hold registration as a dentist at the time he committed
Complainant asks for costs. Costs generally follow the cause.
Anthony Britt
Sir Owen Dixon Chambers
29 May 2013
HCCC SUPPLEMENTARY SUBMISSION
Complainant seeks leave to make a brief supplementary
submission.
the event the Tribunal were to accept the Complainant’s submission that
the appropriate penalty was cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration,
the Tribunal should make the following consequential orders:
(a) The Respondent should not be permitted to apply for re-registration for a
period of two years (s149C(7)).
(b) No order should be made under section 163 of the National Law which would
make the Tribunal the review body.
Anthony Britt
30 May 2013
RESPONDENT: DR ADEL ABRAHAM
COMPLAINANT: HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
RESPONDENT’S OUTLINE OF SUBMISSIONS
IN RELATION TO THE PATIENT E COMPLAINT
Complaint dated 11 January 2013, the Health Care Complaints Commission
) makes five Complaints in relation to the Respondent.
Two is that the Respondent has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of s.139B of the
National Law.
8 of Complaint Two is that in respect of treatment provided to Patient E on 15
January 2010, the Respondent:
(a) failed to
make any clinical note or record until 20 January 2010;
(b) failed to
make adequate clinical notes or records in that he failed to make any record of
the various items set out in the Particular.
Patient E Complaint
submissions are limited to the Patient E Complaint insofar as it is relied upon
(by itself or cumulatively) as one of the particulars
of Complaint Two.
submissions do not address the other complaints which relate primarily to the
Respondent’s conduct towards employees (
the Other Complaints
letter dated 23 April 2013, the Respondent notified the HCCC that he admits the
particulars of the Patient E Complaint (Statement
attachment B).
the Respondent denies that he is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
the circumstances, the first issue for determination is whether the Patient E
individually
amounts to unsatisfactory conduct or whether its
cumulative effect
has that consequence.
Complaint Two is proven then the second issue is as to what orders, if any,
should be made.
Two is made pursuant to s 139B(1)(a) and (l) of the
National Law
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered health practitioner includes each of the following-
Conduct significantly below reasonable
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
... ... ...
Other improper or unethical conduct
improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of
the practitioner’s profession.
The Complainant’s evidence
his opening, counsel for the Complainant advised that the Complainant relies on
the following documents in relation to the Patient
(a) Patient E’s statement (Tab 4);
(b) The Respondent’s letter dated 24 August 2010 - Part One only (Tab
(c) The Respondent’s letter dated 21 December 2010 – from
paragraph numbered 2 on the first page to the end of that page
for the Complainant did not indicate that the report of Dr Thomas Tseng (Tab 23)
is relied upon. Accordingly, the Complainant
does not rely upon any expert
evidence in support of its complaint that the Patient E Complaint constitutes
unsatisfactory professional
should Dr Tseng’s report be relied upon by the Tribunal for the reasons
outlined below.
Tseng concludes that the Respondent’s records for Patient E are
“significantly below the standard expected of a general
practitioner
dentist”. Accordingly, the only ground raised by Dr Tseng is pursuant to
s 139B(1)(a).
Tseng does not refer to any literature or standard or publication or demonstrate
the intellectual basis for reaching that conclusion:
Makita (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
. In particular, he did not
establish a basis for a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct under s
139B(1)(a) because he
has not explained how the deficiencies he identified in
the Respondent’s records amount to conduct that demonstrates the
Respondent’s
“knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised” is - as he concludes - “significantly below the standard
reasonably expected ...”.
other words, Dr Tseng has not explained how his specialised knowledge enabled
him to produce the opinion propounded, based on his
observations in relation to
the information within or omitted from the treatment notes so as to produce the
conclusions that he did.
the circumstances, it is not possible for the Tribunal to be sure whether the
opinion is based wholly or substantially on Dr Tseng’s
expert specialised
knowledge, in which case his report is, strictly speaking, not admissible but,
to the extent that it is admissible,
should not be given any weight.
Furthermore:
(a) Dr Tseng was instructed in a leading manner (Tab 22, page 2, last
paragraph); (b) the report consists primarily of
observations in relation to the
contents of the treatment note and omissions from it, which are not matters for
expert opinion as
the Tribunal is perfectly capable of making those
observations; and (c) Dr Tseng does not identify the “subsequent
referred to and upon which he appears to have relied in forming
his opinion.
the circumstances, Dr Tseng’s report should not be given any weight by the
Tribunal in determining whether the Patient E
Complaint amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
from Dr Tseng’s
description of the type of information that
should have been included (the particulars of which have been admitted in any
the Complainant has not adduced evidence as to what
information should have been included in the notes for Patient E.
Clinic records (Tab 19) containing Patient E’s self-diagnosis, nursing
notes and notes by the treating doctor should
not be relied upon in an attempt
to determine those details. Those documents were prepared some time after
Patient E was consulted
by the Respondent, when her symptoms may have presented
differently.
does Patient E’s statement (Tab 4) assist. Her only evidence about what
she told the Respondent is that she was “having
a reaction”.
Respondent’s letters to the Complainant (Tabs 6 and 9) are the only
reliable evidence of his observations about Patient
E during the consultation.
However, those letters do not cure the Complainant’s failure to establish
what the Respondent should
have included in his treatment notes.
to the extent that the Tribunal’s findings may be informed by the contents
of the Respondent’s letters, it should
be noted that:
Respondent did not consider Patient E to be suffering from an allergic reaction
to the local anaesthetic (Tab 6, page 2 and
observation should be accepted at face value in circumstances where there is no
complaint or particular asserting that he
failed to diagnose or misdiagnosed
(c) accordingly,
even if the Respondent’s treatment notes complied with particular 8 of
Complaint 2, those notes would not have
included anything more than the
observations set out in his letters (Tabs 6 and 9).
regard to the deficiencies in Dr Tseng’s report and the
Complainant’s failure to adduce evidence of a specific
nature as to what
should have been included in the treatment notes for Patient E, the Complainant
has failed to discharge its evidentiary
burden in relation to the Patient E
The Respondent’s evidence
Respondent was born on 26 July 1944 and is 68 years of age (Statement para 1).
Respondent has participated in the Tribunal proceedings notwithstanding his
limited legal representation and stated lack of familiarity
with legal issues.
When informed by the Tribunal that he is entitled not to give evidence he
indicated that he would do so and was
“determined” to do so. In
this way, he has co-operated with the inquiry process and thereby seeks to
fulfil his obligations
to the profession. He answered questions put to him by
Members of the Tribunal and did not give evasive or non-responsive answers.
was similarly candid during cross-examination despite not always being given the
opportunity to complete his answers. In the
circumstances, the Tribunal should
view the Respondent as a credible witness who, despite the nature of some of the
Other Complaints,
has been candid, co-operative and committed during the
proceedings which reflect positively on his character.
Abraham made concessions where appropriate at the hearing. For example, he gave
evidence that his letters (Tabs 6 and 9) did not
include every detail of the
consultation. He also accepted not recalling some of the detail which, in the
circumstances, should
be viewed in a favourable light. Those circumstances are,
first, that he is 68 years of age and many of the factual issues occurred
3 years ago. Further, some of the propositions put to him during
cross-examination were liable to confuse given that they
were inconsistent with
the Complainant’s own evidence. For example, his evidence that he was
under considerable stress on the
day of the consultation due to the complaints
by the nurses was rigorously challenged – despite the Complainants own
at Tab 3 leaving no doubt that complaints had been made prior to 15
January 2010.
has been practising as a Dental Practitioner in Australia since 1971, a period
of 42 years (Statement para 6).
has practised in private practices as well as a range of public organisations
including Community Health Services and Public Hospitals
(Statement para
Respondent’s current practice is in Yarram. The practice is for sale
(Statement para 11).
to the events the subject of these Complaints, the Respondent had never been to
Court or subjected to disciplinary proceedings
of this nature (Tab 11, page 3
and Statement para 12).
Respondent’s evidence that his “financial and emotional states
(have) been destroyed” presents a strong reminder
and deterrent against
failing to comply with his professional responsibilities in the future (Tab
Respondent has expressed regret (Tab 6, page 2) and admitted the particulars of
the Patient E Complaint (Meridian letter 23/04/13).
Respondent showed concern for Patient E’s welfare by subsequently
by speaking with her
treating general practitioner, Dr Gamal Mark, and was reassured in relation to
Patient E’s condition (Tab
6, page 2).
conduct occurred well over 3 years ago and there is no evidence that he has
ongoing problems with record keeping.
Respondent’s failure to document the consultation was only partial. On
the day of the consultation, the Respondent obtained
Patient E’s details
and medical history, including allergies, medications, the reason for the visit,
prosthesis and check-list
of other medical conditions as set out in the Patient
Information Form (see Tabs 6 and 18). A computer record was also prepared
containing patient and medical details as well as the date of the visit,
identifying details of the practitioner providing the treatment
and information
Respondent partly complied with the Dental
Board of Australia’s Guidelines
on Dental Records.
the omitted information was partly recorded in other medical records. Patient
E’s statement (Tab 4) and the Respondent’s
letters (Tabs 6 and 9)
establish that Patient E contacted and discussed the issue with her general
practitioner, Dr Mark, and also
attended the Medical Centre and Hospital.
Although the Respondent’s notes were deficient, at least some of the
information
he should have noted was set out in the Medical Centre and Hospital
Respondent has given an explanation for his omission, as
(a) he has consistently explained the circumstances that
gave rise to his failure to record the details particularised in the Complaint
on the day of the consultation, namely being “very behind in my patient
list” and “flustered by the incident concerning
Patient E” and
as a result of those matters, regretfully “inadvertently failed to make a
record of Patient E’s
attendance on the 15 January 2010” (Tab 6,
page 2 and Tab 9);
(b) further, Dr Abraham stated that he was under considerable stress at the
time he treated Patient E as a result of the complaints
against him by the
dental nurses (Statement para 15).
considering the cumulative impact of the Patient E complaint, it is to be noted
that the Dental Council of New South Wales did
not impose any conditions on the
Respondent’s registration in relation to record keeping.
Conclusions
Respondent submits that the evidence does not establish that the Patient E
Complaint constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct,
either individually
or by reason of its cumulative effect in the sense that it should not be
attributed any weight or should not
alter the finding that the Tribunal will
otherwise make in relation to Complaint Two having regard to the other
particulars.
a finding is made that the Respondent’s conduct amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct then, insofar as the Patient
E Complaint is concerned, the
Respondent submits that an order that the Respondent be cautioned pursuant to
s149A(1)(a) of the
National Law
is an adequate and appropriate response
given that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is protective rather than punitive:
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
if Complaint Two is proved then to the extent that such finding is based on the
Patient E Complaint, the Respondent will
submit to and cooperate with, any
conditions the Tribunal might impose on his registration; and is willing to
undertake, subject
to his financial means, any educational courses relevant to
his practice, that the Tribunal considers necessary.
Counsel for the Respondent
in relation to the Patient E
Tel: 8915 2132
28 May 2013
The Complaint did not
read/press the inclusion of Hospital and Dental Clinic records (Tabs 20 and 21)
into evidence and they were
not admitted, but would not have assisted in any
event for the same reason.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (948 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter