URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Semic v Brighton Australia Pty Limited [2021] NSWWCCPD 5 (28 January 2021)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Semic v Brighton Australia Pty Limited
[2021] NSWWCCPD 5
Mirza Semic
RESPONDENT:
Brighton Australia Pty Limited
AAI Ltd t/as GIO
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Mr J Wynyard
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
3 August 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
28 January 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Whether the Arbitrator was correct in finding that a case of consequential
injuries allegedly resulting from a back injury which was
not in dispute had not
been made out specifically by reason of the Arbitrator’s view that the
applicant’s evidence was
unconvincing
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Larry King SC
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Ms E Grotte, counsel
NSW Compensation Lawyers
Mr W Pardy, solicitor
Hicksons Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 3 August 2020 is
INTRODUCTION
appellant worker in this appeal seeks to overturn a decision of an Arbitrator
finding that he had not made out a case of consequential
injury to his left
shoulder, right shoulder, digestive system and cardiovascular system following a
low back injury in the course
of his employment with the respondent on 12 April
2016. The occurrence of the back injury was conceded by the respondent and was
common ground in the proceedings.
the Application to Resolve a Dispute, the appellant also pleaded a claim in
respect of his lumbar spine. When the proceedings came
before the Arbitrator,
the parties, after some discussion, confined the issues by agreement to the
(a) Was the
left shoulder condition consequential upon the admitted back injury of
April 2016?
(b) Was the right shoulder condition consequential upon the admitted back
12 April 2016?
(c) Were the impairments to the digestive system and the cardiovascular
system consequential upon the admitted back injury of 12 April
appellant’s claim failed in respect of all of the alleged consequential
injuries, essentially because upon a review of the
totality of the evidence,
that is, the written witnesses’ statements of the appellant and his wife
and medical reports and
records for both parties, the Arbitrator was not
satisfied of the reliability of the appellant’s statements nor of the
of the evidence generally in important respects. For that fundamental
reason the appellant did not discharge his onus of proof.
appellant commenced employment with the respondent as a labourer and plasterer
in 2005. As abovementioned there was no dispute
that on 12 April 2016 in the
course of his employment the appellant injured his lower back. The injury was a
lifting injury.
appellant, in his first written statement, said that at the time of the injury
as well as feeling a sharp pain in his lower back,
he had pain in his right
buttock. That buttock pain persisted and he also got right leg pain which
extended to his right foot.
my impression that the common ground in respect of the back injury extended to
there being right buttock and right leg pain.
was further common ground in the proceedings that the appellant went off work
and resumed his employment on light duties, probably
on 21 April 2016. Whilst on
light duties and whilst favouring the right side of his low back he was called
upon to perform heavy
work lifting and carrying steel posts weighing about 50
kilograms. His evidence was that because of his back trouble he went about
work, with which he was familiar, in a different fashion from the way he would
have done it before his back injury. He went on
to say in respect of a lift of
one of the posts:
“... I put most of the weight on my left leg
and began to lift the steel post with my left arm in order to favour the right
side of my back and right leg. In attempting to lift the steel post in this way
and into the vertical position using my left arm,
I felt a sharp pain in my left
shoulder. I do not believe that I would have injured my left shoulder had I not
had bad back pain
and right leg nerve pain which caused me to alter the way that
I was lifting. I was unable to evenly distribute the weight amongst
and both arms in order to do the
regards the appellant’s digestive and cardiovascular symptoms, he said
that in May 2016 he began to experience increasing
reflux and heartburn which he
attributed to medication he took for pain relief, and that throughout May and
June 2016 he learned
from his general practitioner that his blood pressure had
The evidence revealed
that before April 2016 the appellant had suffered from, and been treated for,
gastro-intestinal symptoms and
high blood pressure. In respect of the former, it
is noteworthy, and was clearly regarded as significant by the Arbitrator, that
the appellant did not give a history of his pre-existing symptoms to Dr
Greenberg, a medico-legal specialist qualified in support
of his claim in
respect of consequential gastro-intestinal problems by his solicitor.
regards his right shoulder, the appellant’s evidence was that although he
was right handed, by reason of his left shoulder
injury he had to favour his
left arm and undertake even more activities with his right arm, whereby it
became painful. The evidence
of the appellant in this regard was not regarded by
the Arbitrator as showing any real precision or clarity as to what the added
strain was and when the problem came on, beyond its having taken a considerable
can be seen that the appellant’s evidence, if regarded as reliable, would
have provided a basis upon which the appellant’s
claims could have
succeeded. It was not regarded as reliable because of other evidence which it
will be necessary to discuss below
in conjunction with the written submissions
of the parties upon this appeal. Both sets of written submissions were of good
and gave much assistance.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute that the threshold requirements of
and (4) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
ON THE PAPERS
parties are in agreement that this appeal may be dealt with “on the
papers”. The appellant’s submissions in
para [3] added that if the
Presidential member of the Commission to which the appeal was allocated felt
oral submissions were necessary,
an oral hearing could take place. I have
considered the material before the Arbitrator which is of course now before me
satisfied that the matter can be dealt with without an oral
FRESH EVIDENCE
party sought to lead fresh evidence upon the appeal.
ISSUES IN DISPUTE
issues in this appeal so far as I can see derive from para [7] of the
appellant’s submissions. It is there made clear that
the appellant
challenges both the findings of the Arbitrator and his resultant award which are
particularised in paras [144] and
[145] of his reasons. They are repeated in the
Certificate of Determination to which the appellant’s submissions
refer. They are:
“The Commission finds:
[appellant] has failed to satisfy his onus of proof in his claim that the
subject injury has resulted in consequential conditions
to both shoulders, the
digestive system and the cardiovascular system.
[appellant] is accordingly unable to establish that his whole person impairment
is over 10%, and his case cannot therefore be
referred to an Approved Medical
Specialist for assessment.
The Commission orders:
(a) There is an award in favour of the respondent in respect of all
DISCUSSION OF THE EVIDENCE
reference has been made above to the appellant’s evidence in his first
statement of 22 October 2019. He made another
statement dated 11 February
and his wife, Adisa, made one
on the same day.
appellant’s second statement was largely confirmatory of his first, and
his wife’s corroborates his evidence.
Arbitrator, in my view, extracted the relevant evidence in the appellant’s
two statements in paras [14] and [15] of his
reasons, pp 3–4 thereof, and
said accurately in para [16], p 4, that the other lengthy passages of the
statements to which
he was referred and read did not add to the paragraphs he
in paras [17] and [28] of his reasons, pp 4–5, the Arbitrator performed
the same exercise in respect of the appellant’s
wife’s statement,
setting out the material parts of it in relation to the left and right shoulder
and arm allegations. However,
it should be noted that the appellant’s
wife’s corroboration of him extended to the allegations in respect of his
system and his blood pressure trouble, which was the nub of the
allegation about his cardiovascular system being the subject of injury
consequent upon his back injury.
my mind, given that, understandably, the appellant’s own evidence and that
of his wife lent support to his claim, it is important
to accept, as the
Arbitrator did, that their evidence was being put into statement form years
after the relevant events, so that
fading memory was possible, and that
notwithstanding what the Arbitrator accepted as an attempt to be frank and
comprehensive in
the evidence, there could be a subconscious desire to advance
considerations are plainly forceful common sense considerations. I agree that an
analysis of the contemporaneous medical evidence
evolving in the records and
reports over time therefore requires careful analysis and comparison with the
evidentiary statements.
relation to testing and evaluating the lay evidence against the medical evidence
and records, I should record that a well-known
line of authority including cases
Mason v Demasi
referred to the Arbitrator who took it into
As I read his reasons he
directed himself in law, consistently with those authorities, that it was to not
to be expected that medical
records created by busy practitioners would equate
to the sort of detail, as to for example how an injury happened, that would be
obtained by a legal practitioner preparing a client’s case. But at the
same time, again consistently with authority and specifically
Qannadian v
Bartter Enterprises Pty
he noted that the
authorities simply laid down an essential requirement of caution in considering
such records. They certainly do
not hold that such records are irrelevant or
never to be given any real weight. I think the Arbitrator was clearly correct in
he took from the authorities. For example, it would be an affront to common
sense if an applicant for compensation or a plaintiff
in a common law personal
injury case were to say that he had hurt his back and saw his doctor about that
injury on a particular day,
and the doctor’s records recorded absolutely
no mention of a back injury but specific mention of an injury to some other part
of the body, not to take that into account in the decision-making process. But
it would be a different thing if the injured person
were alleging in his or her
case that a back injury occurred in a particular way, and the doctor’s
notes recorded a back injury
with no mention of how it came about or a skimpy
mention of the cause, not involving the sort of detail advanced in
litigation.
Arbitrator reviewed the evidence comprehensively and accurately, setting out
important extracts from the documents at paras [12]–[74],
his reasons. After recording the submissions to him by counsel for the parties,
he returned to an analysis of the
evidence at paras [95]–[139], pp
15–20 of his reasons. Again, what there appears is comprehensive and
accurate. Accordingly,
I shall not lengthen these reasons with repetition of the
Arbitrator’s work. I think it is sufficient to say that against a
background of a claim in which the appellant carried the onus of proof, in which
the test of causation was the subject of addresses
which were not seriously
conflicting and was accurately stated by the Arbitrator in paras [90]–[92]
of his reasons, pp 14–15,
and in which it was essential that the appellant
establish that the further alleged injuries followed and were the result of his
April 2016 back injury, the medical records and reports revealing his condition
before and after that injury were of real significance.
They were so treated by
the Arbitrator. I think it is further beyond serious controversy that if the
appellant had injured his left
shoulder as alleged he would at least have made
complaints of shoulder trouble to Dr Eftekhar after it came on, and that had he
so, at least a brief note would appear in the doctor’s records at
some relevant time. The only relevant note on 21 July 2016
is inconsistent with
complaints having been made earlier, and Dr Eftekhar did not provide any
evidence to corroborate the suggestion
that there were language
difficulties.
doctor’s note of 21 July
was set out by the
Arbitrator in para [31] of his reasons, p 6 (the Arbitrator has incorrectly
referred to it as being dated 21 July
2017), and I think it is worth recanting
my decision not to duplicate his work and setting it out here, as
“Left shoulder pain stated it is related to work as
pain started when [the appellant] commenced light duties during lifting steel
which he forgot to mention”.
So far as the mechanics of the shoulder injury are concerned, this note can
be seen as a classic example of the type of medical recording
to which the
line of authority relates. There is no mention of favouring the
back and right side and modifying lifting technique because of that,
would not expect that detail and its absence is of no significance. But in his
evidentiary statements, the appellant offered
two different versions of
reporting his left shoulder pain to Dr Eftekhar, namely that he did so on a
number of occasions before
21 July, and the doctor appeared to pay no attention
because he was concentrating on the appellant’s back, and also that there
may have been language difficulties. The content of the note puts forward a
third explanation, namely forgetfulness, which is inconsistent
to the appellant’s right shoulder, given his right handedness to my mind
the assertion that he had had to use his right arm
more than usual to favour his
left arm would certainly call for detailed and compelling lay and medical
evidence. The Arbitrator
in his thorough analysis found no such evidence, and
noted that the claim in respect of the right shoulder was supported by very
experienced and able counsel for the appellant “but faintly”. That
is an entirely understandable approach from counsel
upon the evidence.
to the claim in respect of the appellant’s cardio-vascular system, it is
only necessary in my opinion to have regard to paras
[136]–[139], p 20 of
the Arbitrator’s reasons, in the context of the setting out of the blood
pressure readings and comment
upon them earlier at paras [120]–[123], pp
18–19, to conclude that the Arbitrator’s determination was correct.
leaves the evidence in relation to the claim in respect of the digestive system.
The Arbitrator, in his analysis of the evidence,
dealt with it in one paragraph,
para [135], p 20 of his reasons. The starting point was that the appellant had a
history of gastro-intestinal
problems of a continuing kind requiring treatment
with medication before his back injury of 12 April 2016. His claim that he had
suffered a consequential gastro-intestinal injury as a result of the back injury
was supported by the medico-legal reports of Dr
Greenberg. His evidence
initially suffered from a serious shortcoming in the history he was given by the
appellant when he first
examined the appellant on 8 November 2018 and reported
the following day. The history he received and recorded on p 2 of his report
“No past history of any previous gastrointestinal
problems. No past history of any abdominal
operations.”
that erroneous history was corrected, Dr Greenberg’s evidence could not be
seen as offering any rational support to the
appellant’s claim, and in his
next report of 13 November 2019, no indication is given of the doctor having
been made aware
or becoming aware of the previous history. By letter of 4
February 2020, the appellant’s solicitors must have apprised the
the appellant’s full history, because in a third report of 21 February
2020 the doctor set out a question which he
described as a “specific
enquiry”, and gave his answer as follows:
regard to the differences in symptoms pre-accident when compared to
post-accident, is it your opinion that the increase in
symptoms are [sic]
related to post-accident medication intake and whether that medication intake
(which is consequential upon his
physical injury) has materially aggravated the
pre‑existing condition.
In my opinion, the aggravation and increase in intensity of the upper
gastro-intestinal symptoms described by [the appellant] is consistent
to occur in patients who require long term medications required for pain relief
and mood disorder.
I have addressed the explanation why this occurs and refer you to my
supplementary report dated 9 November
think it is fair to say that if there were evidence of a worsening in the
appellant’s gastro- intestinal symptoms which came
on and developed
post-12 April 2016, the view expressed by Dr Greenberg in his final report when
aware of the earlier history could
be seen as providing adequate expert medical
opinion in support of the claim. It seems from the question and his answer to it
appear in that report that a relevant increase in symptoms was put to the
doctor as representing the correct factual position, and
he accepted as much.
proposition that there was a worsening of the gastro-intestinal symptoms is
therefore an assumption taken up by Dr Greenberg which
must be seen to be made
good by the evidence, and if that satisfactorily appeared upon the evidence, it
would be necessary to evaluate
Dr Greenberg’s opinion and the competing
opinion of Dr Garvey for the respondent, arriving at a judicial preference for
acceptance of one or the other, in order to resolve this claim.
there was an increase in gastro-intestinal symptoms in association with the
intake of medication for his pain was squarely enough
the evidence of the
appellant in his two written statements, with some corroboration from his wife
in her written statement. However,
in para [135] of his reasons the Arbitrator
said, amongst other things:
“... Whether that pre-existing
condition was the same as that which [the appellant] subsequently complained of
is accordingly
not adequately addressed. Dr Garvey’s opinion was that [the
appellant’s] condition was not work related, although he
too was unaware
of the pre-existing history. I am therefore not persuaded that [the appellant]
has satisfied his onus in this regard
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator’s reasons sufficiently appear above and his ultimate findings
on the strength of them are put in para [13] hereof.
SUBMISSIONS ON APPEAL
The appellant
for the appellant, in written submissions which as abovementioned I found
focussed and helpful, advanced four arguments in
elaboration of four Grounds of
first Ground of appeal was that the Arbitrator erred in overlooking material
facts or giving them too much or too little weight
when determining whether the
appellant suffered consequential injuries to his left and right shoulder.
regards the left shoulder, the written submissions acknowledged that there was
no recorded reference to pain at that site until
21 July 2016 and that when
making his note on that day Dr Eftekhar said that the appellant told him he had
forgotten to mention it
earlier. Submissions went on to mention the claim form
of 26 July 2016, Dr Tomka’s certificate of 28 September 2016, and
Dr Abraszko’s report of 8 September, although it was acknowledged in
para [17] of the written submissions that there was no
mention of left shoulder
pain there.
para [23] of the appellant’s written submissions it was put that
“... there was a contemporaneous note made by Dr Eftekhar,
very soon after
the incident involving the left shoulder.” That can only be a reference to
the note of 21 July 2016, which
was certainly contemporaneous as to what was
said on that day, but on any view must be seen as a mention of left shoulder
rather than very soon. The Arbitrator clearly had reservations about
whether a doctor such as Dr Eftekhar would accept that a patient
would forget a
problem that had continued for some weeks at least, but I do not regard that
scepticism as critical to the Arbitrator’s
far as the submissions regarding Dr Mastroianni are
I think the
significant point is that the Arbitrator was not persuaded of any force in the
doctor’s view. This was because
he was faced with an initial report from
the doctor which did not have a history implicating the existing back injury in
the subsequent
left shoulder injury by reason of the adoption of unusual
postures etc, and also with a second report which assumed that that was
non-specific terms.
appellant’s argument came down to the proposition that the
Arbitrator’s conclusion was not open to him, and that the
evidence showed
that the contrary conclusion in favour of the appellant was required.
second Ground of appeal in respect of the appellant’s shoulders was that
other probabilities overbore the Arbitrator’s
conclusion.
support of this, the appellant repeated the submissions in respect of Ground 1,
and went on that there was no other explanation
for the development of the
appellant’s right shoulder trouble than favouring his left arm. It was
submitted that the evidence
of Dr Mastroianni ought to have been accepted, and
that the Arbitrator’s view that the use of the appellant’s right
and arm was only that which would be expected of a right handed man was
misconceived upon the evidence.
third Ground of appeal relied upon by the appellant was that the approach taken
by the Arbitrator as to causation was erroneous,
and that he applied an
incorrect test to whether the appellant suffered consequential conditions in his
left shoulder, right shoulder
and digestive system and (presumably) also his
cardiovascular system.
argument came down to the submission, in para [37], that the Arbitrator directed
himself that the appellant needed to show that
he suffered injury to the left
shoulder in the way described and that “... the mechanism of injury caused
an injury to the
left shoulder.” It was put that this was not correct, and
that the appellant needed only to show that he developed symptoms
in his left
shoulder consequent upon the injury to the back. It may be doubted that there is
any distinction between these two propositions,
but if there is it must be a
distinction without a difference. Both parties in oral address to the Arbitrator
seemed to accept that
the test of causation was whether the alleged
consequential injuries resulted from the back injury, and to show that must
showing how.
fourth and final Ground of appeal was that the Arbitrator failed to consider the
appellant’s case in respect of his digestive
system as asserting an
aggravation of a pre-existing condition given the view expressed by Dr Greenberg
in his third report of 21
February 2020.
argument proceeded upon the basis that the doctor’s original incomplete
history was corrected, and that the Arbitrator
did not take account of the
evidence of an increase in the appellant’s intake of Nexium, and that the
Arbitrator’s apparent
reason for not accepting the final view expressed by
Dr Greenberg was that he had not corrected the erroneous original history when
that had happened.
The respondent
respondent’s submission in relation to the first Ground of appeal
supported the Arbitrator’s decision according to
its terms. In this
connection in para [4.5] the respondent made what I regard as an inappropriate
reference to
Devries v Australian National Railways
a decision which
is part of a long line of “demeanour” cases applicable only where
witnesses give oral evidence and can
be observed in the witness box. But that
aside, the respondent’s submissions emphasise the fact that there was no
left shoulder pain until 21 July 2016 and that that was done
according to Dr Eftekhar’s note upon the basis that the appellant
asserting he had had the pain for some time and had forgotten to mention
relation to Ground 2, again the respondent supported the Arbitrator’s
reasoning according to its terms.
far as Ground 3 is concerned, the respondent submitted that the relevant law as
to causation was understood and applied by the
Arbitrator by reference to
Kooragang Cement Pty Limited v
and that he did not
misapply the test.
as to the fourth Ground of appeal upon the Arbitrator’s decision, the
respondent made reference to the fact that the
appellant had twice given an
erroneous history to Dr Greenberg, and that otherwise his decision in relation
to the allegation of
consequential injury to the digestive system was
CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSION
I am about to say should be read in conjunction with comments made above in
passing in relation to the evidence, the Arbitrator’s
statement and
analysis of it, and the submissions of the parties.
order to overturn the decision of the Arbitrator, it is for the appellant to
show that he made relevant error of fact, law or
discretion.
I will not advert
here to the well-known authorities which provide guidance as to the exercise I
am undertaking. They were mentioned
by both parties in their submissions. It is
sufficient to say that the appellant carries the onus of showing error of one or
of those kinds, and it is not sufficient for the decision of the Arbitrator
to be disturbed on appeal that I might think that another
view was available. It
is necessary to show that the Arbitrator was wrong and that the correct view is
the other view.
part of the Arbitrator’s decision-making process involves the exercise of
a discretion. That may be left out of account.
would characterise the entirety of the Arbitrator’s decision as involving
determinations of fact. True it is that Ground 3
of the Grounds of appeal
involves an argument that there was at least to a degree error of law in not
applying the correct test of
causation, but with all respect to the careful
written submissions of the appellant, I do not think that they make that
proposition
this connection the test of causation is simply whether the alleged conditions
that were said to be consequential upon the accepted
back injury “resulted
from” the back injury in the accepted
sense. As I see it,
the case was conducted before the Arbitrator on that basis and decided by him on
that basis, and in particular
I do not think the suggested error advanced in
para [37] of the appellant’s submissions exists. The test the Arbitrator
in my opinion is the one contended for. See also para [39] above.
Accordingly,
the appeal stands or falls upon whether the factual decisions of the Arbitrator
that each of the heads of claim for consequential
injury fails was correct.
was initially troubled in respect of the Arbitrator’s decisions in respect
of the left shoulder and gastro-intestinal symptoms
upon my initial
consideration of the papers. This was because, first, the back injury
immediately extended to right buttock and leg
symptoms which could conceivably
induce the sufferer to take more strain on the left side of the torso and
shoulder. Secondly, there
was some evidence, albeit limited and unclear, about
increased ingestion of Nexium. But upon further consideration I have come to
conclusion that the Arbitrator cannot be said to have been wrong in finding
himself unpersuaded by the appellant’s case
in respect of those two
conditions.
to the left shoulder, the delay in mentioning it and the absence of any
corroboration from Dr Eftekhar of the circumstances, themselves
conflicting, in
which the appellant sought to explain the absence of the mention of the
condition in the doctor’s notes before
21 July 2016, are to my mind
matters which go against the appellant and support the Arbitrator’s
decision. Having considered
generally the Arbitrator’s disposition of this
claim, again I am not convinced that he was wrong.
to the allegation of consequential injury to the digestive tract, the evidence
there to my mind is indeed unsatisfactory and I
came to the view that the
Arbitrator’s decision was correct as he articulated it.
remaining allegations in respect of the right shoulder injury and cardiovascular
system were, in my view, correctly evaluated
and found wanting by the Arbitrator
for the reasons he gives.
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 3 August 2020 is
Larry King SC
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
28 January 2021
Semic v Brighton Australia
[2020] NSWWCC 262 (Reasons),
Appellant’s
statement, 22 October 2019, [119], [123] and [133], Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD) pp 19–20,
Appellant’s
statement, 22 October 2019, [149], ARD, p
Appellant’s
statement, 22 October 2019, [162]–[163], ARD, pp
See in particular
Reasons, [132]–[133].
ARD, pp 402–414.
[2009] NSWCA 227
See Reasons,
[99]–[100].
NSWWCCPD 50.
Appellant’s submissions,
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
352(5) of the 1998 Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.67 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter