URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1322.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kyle Anthony v State of New South Wales [2025] NSWSC 1322 (7 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Kyle Anthony v State of New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1322
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Equity - Applications List
Proceedings summarily dismissed
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE — Summary disposal — Dismissal of proceedings
— HELD — proceedings summarily dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Birth, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1995 (NSW), Part 5
Procedure Act 2005
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(NSW), rr 13.4, 14.28
Cases Cited:
Agar v Hyde (2000) 201 CLR 552;
[2000] HCA 41
Agius v New South Wales
[2001] NSWCA 371
Batistatos v Roads & Traffic Authority New South Wales
(2006) 226 CLR 256
[2006] HCA 27
Corporate Affairs Commission v Solomon
(unreported, NSWCA, Mahoney AP, 1 November 1989)
General Steel Industries Inc
v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2023] NSWCA 239
American Express Australia Limited
[2018] FCA 1790
Penthouse Publications Ltd
v McWilliam (Court of Appeal (NSW), Priestley and Meagher JJA and Wardell AJA,
15 March 1991, unrep)
Shaw v New South Wales
(2012) 219 IR 87
[2012] NSWCA
Simmons v New South Wales Trustee and Guardian
(2014) 17 BPR 33,717
[2014] NSWCA 405
Spencer v Commonwealth
(2010) 241 CLR 118
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
Young & Young v
Attorney General of New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 282
Principal judgment
The State of New South Wales (Applicant)
Kyle Anthony (Respondent)
Representation:
C Gardiner (Applicant)
K Anthony (Respondent, Self-represented)
File Number(s):
2025/00292557
Publication Restriction:
INTRODUCTION
proceedings were brought by the
, Kyle Anthony, by
filed 31 July 2025 against the defendant,
South Wales.
me is an application by
notice of motion
filed 1 October 2025 by the
State to summarily dismiss these proceedings pursuant to r 13.4 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
) or that the
summons be struck out in its entirety pursuant to r 14.28 of the UCPR.
the agreement of the parties, I have dealt with the notice of motion on the
papers without the need for a hearing. The plaintiff
is self-represented.
the reasons set out below, I have determined that the proceedings should be
summarily dismissed on the basis that no reasonable
cause of action is disclosed
by the summons and that the plaintiff should pay the State’s costs of the
proceedings. As a result,
the State’s strike out application does not
arise for determination.
RELEVANT FACTS
the summons, the plaintiff principally seeks relief to the following effect
against the State:
(1) various orders in relation to a purported trust; or
(2) in the alternative, a declaration for the “termination of the legal
entity KYLE ANTHONY YOUNG: effectively resulting in
the civil death of the legal
persona/entity”; or
(3) in the further alternative, an order that Kyle has “his God given
Christian name (Kyle Anthony) expunged/redacted on the
birth registration
statement” with the effect of “complete termination of all relations
with the Crown”.
summary, the relief claimed appears to be based on the following
contentions:
(1) By virtue of his birth, the plaintiff was granted an equitable life estate
from “the LORD/Abba”, which was innately
connected to his given
names ‘Kyle Anthony’, as distinct from any surname.
(2) The registration of his birth resulted in the imposition of legal personhood
upon him and consequently created a legal persona
‘Kyle Anthony
Young’ in which the surname and this legal entity was the property of the
(3) The only property the State had a right to register was “its legal
surname invention” and that by registering the
plaintiff’s given
names it transgressed the private intellectual property of Christ.
(4) By participating generally in civil society under the name ‘Kyle
Anthony Young’, the plaintiff had undertaken “suretyship”
that legal persona as a “registered common legal debtor/constitutor”
so that the plaintiff lost his Christian name
and his birthright inheritance
(5) Through the execution of a Deed of Election, the plaintiff seeks to transfer
trusteeship of the legal entity ‘Kyle Anthony
Young’ to the Crown
and be released from “suretyship”, meaning that the plaintiff would
be “exonerated from
all legal debts, duties and obligations that are
bestowed upon legal participants with respect to mistakenly undertaking the
of the legal persona/entity”.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Summary dismissal
court’s power to summarily dismiss proceedings is contained in r 13.4 of
the UCPR. Relevantly, rr 13.4(1) and (2) of the
UCPR provide:
13.4 Frivolous and vexatious proceedings
(1) If in any proceedings it appears to the court that in
relation to the proceedings generally or in relation to any claim for
the proceedings—
(a) the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious, or
(b) no reasonable cause of action is disclosed, or
(c) the proceedings are an abuse of the process of the court,
the court may order that the proceedings be dismissed generally or in relation
to that claim.
(2) The court may receive evidence on the hearing of an
application for an order under subrule (1).
many decades, the shorthand expression of the applicable principles for the
determination of an application to summarily dismiss
proceedings has been
described as the “
General Steel
test”, which derives from the
decision in
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
, in which it was held by Barwick CJ
at 128–9 that:
... the jurisdiction summarily to terminate an action is to be sparingly
employed and is not to be used except in a clear case where
the Court is
satisfied that it has the requisite material and the necessary assistance from
the parties to reach a definite and certain
conclusion. ...The test to be
applied has been variously expressed; “so obviously untenable that it
cannot possibly succeed”;
“manifestly groundless”; “so
manifestly faulty that it does not admit of argument”; “discloses a
which the Court is satisfied cannot succeed”; “under no
possibility can there be a good cause of action”; “be
manifest that
to allow them” (the pleadings) “to stand would involve useless
(2000) 201 CLR 552;
[2000] HCA 41
McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ commented on the
General Steel
test in the
following way at [57] (citation omitted):
... Ordinarily, a party is not to be denied the opportunity to place his or her
case before the court in the ordinary way, and after
taking advantage of the
usual interlocutory processes. The test to be applied has been expressed in
various ways, but all of the
verbal formulae which have been used are intended
to describe a high degree of certainty about the ultimate outcome of the
if it were allowed to go to trial in the ordinary way.
expression of principle was endorsed in
Batistatos v Roads & Traffic
Authority New South Wales
(2006) 226 CLR 256
[2006] HCA 27
, Gleeson CJ,
Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ at [46] (where it was also said that the
test should not be given “canonical force”) and in
Spencer v Commonwealth
(2010) 241 CLR 118
[2010] HCA 28
, French CJ and
Gummow J at [24].
Shaw v New South Wales
(2012) 219 IR 87
[2012] NSWCA 102
, Barrett JA
(with whom Beazley, McColl and Macfarlan JJA and McClellan CJ at CL agreed) at
[32] elaborated on the
General Steel
test for summary dismissal as
The question is ... whether the claims in question are so obviously untenable or
groundless that there is “a high degree of
certainty” that they will
fail if allowed to go to trial; and whether this is one of the “clearest
of cases” in
which the court may accordingly intervene to prevent the
claims being litigated.
assessment is to be made by taking the case of the party bringing the claim at
its highest, meaning that the party applying for
summary dismissal must accept
the truth of all allegations in the claim and the ranges of meaning which
assertions in the claim are
capable of bearing: see
New South Wales Trustee and Guardian
(2014) 17 BPR 33,717
[2014] NSWCA 405
Gleeson JA (with whom Beazley P and Barrett JA agreed) at [200], citing
Penthouse Publications Ltd v McWilliam
(Court of Appeal (NSW), Priestley
and Meagher JJA and Wardell AJA, 15 March 1991, unrep);
New South Wales
[2001] NSWCA 371
, Giles JA (with whom Priestley and Powell
JJA agreed) at [24].
Court of Appeal decision in
GR v Secretary, Department of Communities and
[2023] NSWCA 239
, similarly dealt with an interlocutory application
for summary dismissal, with Adamson JA observing at [123]:
... A plaintiff is not obliged to substantiate the allegations made in support
of the claim in order to resist summary dismissal
of the proceedings. Issues of
fact are pre-eminently matters for final hearing. Summary dismissal will be
refused if there is a triable
Wickstead v Browne
[1992] NSWCA 272
(1992) 30 NSWLR 1
at 11 (Handley and Cripps JJA);
[1992] NSWCA 272.
court may receive evidence on the hearing of an application for a summary
dismissal under r 13.4 of the UCPR or the strike out
of a pleading under r 14.28
of the UCPR: rr 13.4(2) and 14.28(2) of the UCPR.
exercising my discretion under r 13.4 of the UCPR, I must also have regard to
the requirements of
Civil Procedure Act 2005
overriding purpose of the CPA and the UCPR in their application to civil
proceedings in this court is to facilitate the just,
quick and cheap resolution
of the real issues in the proceedings:
of the CPA. I must seek to give
effect to that overriding purpose when I exercise any power in the CPA or the
of the CPA.
seeking to give effect to the overriding purpose, I must have regard to the
objects of the just determination of the proceedings,
the efficient disposal of
the business of the court, the efficient use of available judicial and
administrative resources, and the
timely disposal of the proceedings at a cost
affordable by the respective parties:
Circumstances in which the court may strike out
light of my conclusion that the proceedings should be summarily dismissed, it is
not necessary for me to set out the principles
in relation to striking out the
whole or any part of a pleading as contained in r 14.28(1) of the
Self-represented litigants
dealing with an application such as the present by a self-represented litigant,
I must recognise that there is a disadvantage in
relation to which I must
exercise special care to ensure that there is no viable cause of action in the
summons which would survive
if put in proper form because if it can be done I
should avoid the summary termination of the proceedings:
v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
, Kirby P (with
whom Hope and Samuels JJA agreed) at 536–7. However, in doing so, I must
have regard not only to the litigant
in person but also to the position of the
other parties and what is required in the interests of justice to prevent the
unnecessary
expenditure of both public and private resources:
American Express Australia Limited
[2018] FCA 1790
, Flick J at [60], citing
Corporate Affairs Commission v Solomon
(unreported, NSWCA, Mahoney AP, 1
November 1989).
CONSIDERATION
proceedings appear to be the second instalment of proceedings brought by the
plaintiff and determined by Kunc J on 20 March
& Young v Attorney General of New South Wales
[2024] NSWSC 282.
, the plaintiff and his brother were the moving parties. In
at [13], his Honour stated:
The “birthright estate” which appears to lie at the heart of
Shaun’s claim is not an estate known to law or equity.
It is certainly not
something which is brought into existence by the act of registration of a birth
or is evidenced by a birth certificate.
I determined
that a birth certificate, either in and of itself or by its registration, does
not create or evidence anything which
the law would recognise as a
“security”. Similarly, the Court finds that a birth certificate,
either in and of itself
or by its registration, does not create, evidence or
alter any kind of property or right in property known to Australian law, whether
in law, equity or otherwise.
the following reasons, I accept the submissions made by the State.
the relief sought in
concerned the alleged restoration of a
purported “birthright estate” said to have been
“deposited” with the
Registrar General upon the registration of the
plaintiff’s birth, the proceedings before me appear to place greater
on the return to the Crown or alleged “termination” of a
legal persona or entity said to have been created by that birth
registration.
Nonetheless, both proceedings rest on the flawed premise that the registration
of a person’s birth evidences,
creates or alters legal or equitable
property rights.
plaintiff’s primary claim for recognition of property or rights capable of
forming the subject matter of a trust cannot
be made out. As explained in
, the registration of a person’s birth under statutory
authority does not create or alter any proprietary or equitable interests,
meaning that there are no existing property or other rights that could form the
basis of the alleged trust. There is also no basis
for the contention that a
person’s surname is the property of the Crown or that the process of
registration serves to impose
legal personhood upon an individual through the
creation of a distinct and separate legal entity. As is evident, the purported
lacks any valid subject matter. Accordingly, the primary claim for relief
discloses no reasonable cause of action.
plaintiff’s first alternative claim for a declaration of a “civil
death” fails for the same reason. Even if
the concept of a “civil
death” may have existed at some point in medieval law (where a person was
banished from the realm
by common law process), there are no found examples
where it has survived to currently form part of Australian law today. Religious
themes permeate the summons. To the extent that the orders sought in the summons
rely on the medieval concept of “monastery
death” (see, for example,
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England
(3rd ed, 1768, vol 1) at
p 132 which explains such a “death” as occurring when a monk enters
a monastery), that concept
is long obsolete and has never formed part of the law
in Australia.
plaintiff’s further alternative claim, seeking to have his given names
expunged from his birth registration to effect a
“complete termination of
all relations with the Crown”, is similarly untenable. While mechanisms
exist by which a person
may lawfully change their name in Part 5 of the
Birth, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1995
(NSW), the court has no
power to “delete” a birth record. There is no legal basis for the
contention that any alteration
of the plaintiff’s birth registration
particulars could result in a termination of all relations with the Crown.
sincerely the plaintiff may hold the spiritual or moral beliefs of alleged
“rights” which are reflected in the
summons, I consider that this is
a case in which all the claims are manifestly groundless and obviously
untenable. Applying the principles
taking the plaintiff’s case at its highest and assuming the truth of all
factual assertions in the summons, the claims
nonetheless fail to disclose any
reasonable cause of action. Applying the
General Steel
test, none of the
plaintiff’s possible claims for relief are founded in Australian law and
are therefore manifestly groundless
and so obviously untenable that they cannot
possibly succeed at trial in accordance with Australian law. To adopt the words
, I have a high degree of certainty in reaching that
conclusion.
my consideration, I have taken into account that the plaintiff is
self-represented. While the court must exercise caution in summarily
proceedings brought by an unrepresented litigant as observed in
, no discernible cause of action in law or equity arises from
the pleaded facts. To allow these proceedings to continue would occasion
unnecessary expenditure of public and private resources and constitute an abuse
of process.
regard to ss 56 and 57 of the CPA, the continuation of these proceedings would
neither advance any real issue capable of resolution
at trial nor constitute an
efficient use of court resources.
of the matters raised in the summons are ones that could be put in proper form
by some other form of pleading. It is not simply
a question that the summons
should be struck out and a proper pleading filed. Instead, the appropriate order
is for the proceedings
to be summarily dismissed with costs.
the reasons stated above, I propose to make the following orders:
(1) The proceedings are summarily dismissed pursuant to r 13.4 of the
Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs of the proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (258 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter