URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
New South Wales Resources Regulator v Whitehaven Coal Mining Ltd [2025] NSWIC 6 (31 July 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
New South Wales Resources Regulator v Whitehaven Coal Mining Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 6
Hearing Date(s):
25 July 2025
Date of Orders:
31 July 2025
Decision Date:
31 July 2025
Paingakulam J
See paragraph [60]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — case management —whether the Court should
preliminary disclosure — interests of justice — matter at more
complex end of the spectrum — orders sought
by prosecutor will avoid
disruption — no unfairness to defendant — orders made
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Amendment (Summary
Proceedings Case Management) Bill 2011
Evidence Act 1995
Relations Amendment Act 2025
Industrial Relations Amendment Bill 2025
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Cases Cited:
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
(2002) 209 CLR 478
Landsman v R
(2014) 88 NSWLR 534
[2014] NSWCCA 328
Lee v The Queen
(2014) 253 CLR 455
[2014] HCA 20
Pambula District Hospital v Herriman
14 NSWLR 387
SafeWork NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC
Secretary, Department of Planning and Environment v Harris
[2024] NSWCCA
State Pollution Control Commission v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
(1992) 29 NSWLR 487
Sutherland Shire Council v Benedict Industries Pty
[2013] NSWLEC 121
Sutherland Shire Council v Benedict Industries Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWLEC 39
The Queen v Chin
(1985) 157 CLR 671
Texts Cited:
Industrial Court Criminal Practice Note 1
Procedural rulings
New South Wales Resources Regulator (Prosecutor)
Whitehaven Coal Mining
Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
R Mathur SC / G Diggins (Prosecutor)
C Magee / E Aitken
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Holding Redlich (Prosecutor)
Seyfarth Shaw
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/416298
Publication Restriction:
Coal Mining Ltd (Whitehaven) has pleaded not guilty to an offence that, as a
person who had a work, health and safety duty
pursuant to
Health and Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with
that duty and thereby exposed workers, in particular Mr Luke Randall, to a risk
of death or serious injury
contrary to s 32 of the
. On 26 May
2025, the matter was set down before me for hearing commencing 11 May 2026, with
an estimate of four weeks.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
prosecutor seeks orders for pre-trial disclosure under
. The prosecutor accepts that, in relation to orders under
, the relevant orders are those in
defendant opposes the orders sought by the prosecutor and contends that it is
not in the interests of justice for
the Court to make those orders which
represent the highest level of case management, appropriate for complex cases.
The defendant
seeks an alternative form of case management orders.
have determined to make orders which include the disclosure orders sought by the
prosecutor, with some minor timetable adjustments.
History of the proceedings
Application to Commence Proceedings and Summons in this matter were filed by the
New South Wales Resources Regulator on 8 November
2024. The Summons was issued
by the Court later that day with a first return date of 17 February 2025. On 14
February 2025, the first
mention date was vacated and the matter was listed for
second mention on 28 April 2025. Orders were also made imposing a timetable
the defendant to seek and obtain further particulars from the prosecutor.
the second mention of the matter on 28 April 2025, the defendant entered a plea
of not guilty to the offence charged. The matter
was then adjourned for further
mention to allow the parties to negotiate appropriate case management
directions.
26 May 2025, counsel for both parties informed the Court that they were unable
to reach agreement on appropriate case management
directions for the matter.
There were a number of points of disagreement between the parties. The most
significant disagreement concerned
the prosecutor’s proposed order that
the defendant provide it with a copy of the expert evidence on which it intends
at hearing. The parties provided the Court with competing proposed case
management orders and the matter was set down for an interlocutory
resolve the issue.
that time, both parties have updated the orders that they seek. The prosecutor
now proposes that Court make the following orders:
1. Pursuant to
section 247I
Criminal Procedure Act
), the Prosecutor is to give the Defendant notice in
accordance with
section 247J
of the CPA by
22 August 2025
2. Pursuant to
section 247I
of the CPA, the Defendant is to
give to the Prosecutor notice of the defence response to the Prosecutor’s
notice in accordance
section 247K
of the CPA by
7 November 2025
3. Pursuant to
section 247I
of the CPA, the Prosecutor is to
give to the Defendant notice of the prosecution response to the defence response
in accordance with
section 247L
of the CPA by
6 February 2026
limiting the requirements in
section 247L
, such notice is to include:
a. a revised Statement of Facts in reply to any proposed
amendments indicated by the Defendant in relation to any proposed agreed
Statement of Facts; and
b. a copy of any chart or explanatory material that the
Prosecutor proposes to adduce at the defended hearing.
4. The Prosecutor is to serve on the Defendant but not file a
draft index to the Prosecutor’s tender bundle which will specify
document the Volume, Tab and page number(s) where the document is to be found in
the Brief of Evidence by
6 March 2026
5. The parties are to hold a preliminary conference on or
30 March 2026
a. to determine the scope of the matters that are in issue;
b. for the Prosecutor to confirm the witnesses it proposes to
call at hearing;
c. to determine whether any statements of witnesses that the
Prosecutor proposes to adduce at hearing can be dealt with in whole
pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
d. to settle any Agreed Facts pursuant to
e. for the Defendant to confirm which witnesses it requires for
cross-examination;
f. for the Defendant to indicate whether objection is taken to
any of the documents listed in the draft index to the Prosecutor’s
bundle and the basis for the objection(s); and
g. to determine whether ·either party disputes the
admissibility of the expert evidence, and the basis of the objection(s).
6. Prosecutor is to file and serve by
4pm, 13 April
a. an electronic copy of a paginated bundle comprising an
index, any agreed facts, and those documents and statements of witnesses
which no objection is taken, or objection is taken and has otherwise been
determined; and
b. a second electronic copy of a paginated bundle comprising an
index and those documents that the Prosecutor intends to tender
objection is taken.
7. The parties have liberty to apply.
defendant now proposes an alternative form of orders as follows:
1. Prosecutor is to file and serve a revised Statement of
Facts, if any, for the purpose of reaching agreement with the Defendant
agreed facts within the meaning of
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) by 4pm
5 September 2025
2. If any expert witness is proposed to be called by the
Prosecutor at the defended hearing, a copy of each report by the expert
must be filed and served by 4pm on
5 September 2025
3. Prosecutor is to provide to the Defendant a copy of any
chart or explanatory material to be relied upon by 4pm on
5 September
4. Defendant is to notify the Prosecutor of any facts in the
Statement of Facts or revised Statement of Facts which are agreed
10 October 2025
5. Prosecutor is to provide to the Defendant a statement or an
outline of the evidence to be relied upon for each witness the Prosecutor
intends to call (other than expert witnesses referred to in Order 3) by 4pm on
31 October 2025
6. Prosecutor is to serve on the defendant but not file a draft
index to the prosecutor’s tender bundle which will specify
document the Volume, Tab and page number(s) where the document is to be found in
the Brief of Evidence by 4pm on
7 November 2025
7. Parties are to hold a preliminary conference:
a. to determine the scope of the matters that are in issue;
b. for the prosecutor to confirm the witnesses it proposes to
call at hearing;
c. to determine whether any statements of witnesses that the
prosecutor proposes to adduce at hearing can be dealt with in whole
pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
d. to settle any Agreed Facts pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
e. for the defence to confirm which witnesses it requires for
cross-examination; and
f. for the defence to indicate whether objection is taken to
any of the documents listed in the draft index to the prosecutor’s
6 March 2026
8. At least two weeks before the preliminary conference, the
defendant is to advise the prosecutor of its position in relation
to each of the
matters to be addressed at the case conference.
9. Prosecutor is to file and serve:
a. an electronic copy of a paginated tender bundle comprising
an index, any agreed facts, and those documents and statements of
witnesses to
which no objection is taken by 4pm
20 March 2026
b. a second electronic copy of a paginated bundle comprising an
index and those documents that the prosecutor intends to tender
objection is taken by 4pm
20 March 2026
10. The matter will be listed for a readiness hearing on
orders sought by the defendant largely reflect the Usual Directions for WHS
Defended Hearings which are Annexure A to Industrial
Court Criminal Practice
Note No.1 (Usual Directions). They omit:
(1) Usual Direction 7, which requires a defendant to file and serve any expert
evidence on which it intends to rely by the nominated
(2) Usual Direction 8, which requires the prosecutor to file any expert evidence
in reply by the nominated deadline;
(3) That portion of Usual Direction 10(f) together with Usual Direction 11,
which require a defendant to notify the prosecutor of
the basis for their
objection to documents listed in the prosecution’s tender bundle two weeks
before a preliminary conference,
and to settle that issue at the preliminary
conference;
(4) Usual Direction 10(g) together with Usual Direction 11, which require the
parties to notify each other whether either party disputes
the admissibility of
the expert evidence relied upon by the other and the basis for any such
objection two weeks before a preliminary
conference, and to settle that issue at
the preliminary conference; and
(5) Usual Direction 14, which requires parties to file an outline of submissions
addressing objections to the tender of evidence
a week before the hearing.
Relevant legislation and applicable principles
case management provisions for summary offences are found in Chapter 4 Part 5
Division 2A of the
(Division 2A). The
Industrial Relations
Amendment Act 2025
(NSW), through the incorporation of ss 170(4)(c) and
247A(c) into the
, conferred power on the Industrial Court to make
orders pursuant to Division 2A from 1 May 2025. The purpose of Division 2A is
247B Purpose
(1) The purpose of this Division is to reduce delays in proceedings before the
court in its summary jurisdiction by:
(a) requiring certain preliminary disclosures to be made by the prosecution and
the defence before the proceedings are heard, and
(b) enabling the court to undertake case management where suitable in those
proceedings, whether on its own motion or on application
by a party to the
proceedings.
(2) Case management measures that are available to the court under this Division
include the ordering of preliminary hearings, preliminary
conferences and
further preliminary disclosure. The court has a discretion in determining which
(if any) of those measures are suitable
in the proceedings concerned.
2A envisions two rounds of disclosure by the parties. The “first
round” is described in ss 247E–247F and
concerns the giving of
“notice” of the prosecutor’s case and defence response.
However, it is the “second
round” of disclosure, referred to as
“preliminary disclosure”, that is in issue before me. The relevant
are found in ss 247I–247L. The “second round”
encapsulates the notice to be given under ss 247E and 247F, whilst
requiring further pre-trial disclosure by both the prosecutor and the defendant.
The relevant provisions are as follows:
247I Court may order preliminary disclosure in particular
(1) After proceedings have been commenced, the court may make any or all of the
following orders, but only if the court is of the
opinion that it would be in
the interests of justice to do so—
(a) order that the prosecutor is to give to the defendant notice in accordance
with section 247J,
(b) order that the defendant is to give to the prosecutor notice of the defence
response to the prosecution’s notice in accordance
with section 247K,
(c) order that the prosecution is to give to the defendant notice of the
prosecution response to the defence response in accordance
with section 247L.
(2) The court may order preliminary disclosure under this section on the
application of any party or on the court’s own initiative.
(3) The court may order preliminary disclosure by the defendant only if the
court is satisfied that the defendant will be represented
by an Australian legal
practitioner.
(4) The court may limit preliminary disclosure to any specified aspect of the
proceedings.
(5) Preliminary disclosure required by an order under this section is to be made
in accordance with a timetable determined by the
247J Prosecution notice—court-ordered preliminary disclosure
For the purposes of section 247I(1)(a), the prosecution’s notice is to
contain the following—
(a) the matters required to be included in the notice of the prosecution case
under section 247E,
(b) a copy of any information, document or other thing in the possession of the
prosecutor that would reasonably be regarded as adverse
to the credit or
credibility of the defendant,
(c) a list identifying the affidavits or statements of those witnesses who are
proposed to be called at the hearing of the proceedings
by the prosecutor.
247K Defence response—court-ordered preliminary
For the purposes of section 247I(1)(b), the notice of the defence response is to
contain the following—
(a) the matters required to be included in a notice under section 247F,
(b) a statement, in relation to each fact set out in the statement of facts
provided by the prosecutor, as to whether the defendant
considers the fact is an
agreed fact (within the meaning of
section 191
Evidence Act 1995
or the defendant disputes the fact,
(c) a statement, in relation to each matter and circumstance set out in the
statement of facts provided by the prosecutor, as to
whether the defendant takes
issue with the matter or circumstance as set out,
(d) notice as to whether the defendant proposes to dispute the admissibility of
any proposed evidence disclosed by the prosecutor
and the basis for the
(e) if the prosecutor disclosed an intention to adduce expert evidence at the
hearing of the proceedings, notice as to whether the
defendant disputes any of
the expert evidence and which evidence is disputed,
(f) a copy of any report, relevant to the proceedings, that has been prepared by
a person whom the defendant intends to call as an
expert witness at the hearing
of the proceedings,
(g) if the prosecutor disclosed an intention to adduce evidence at the hearing
of the proceedings that has been obtained by means
of surveillance, notice as to
whether the defendant proposes to require the prosecutor to call any witnesses
to corroborate that
evidence and, if so, which witnesses will be required,
(h) notice as to whether the defendant proposes to raise any issue with respect
to the continuity of custody of any proposed exhibit
disclosed by the
prosecutor,
(i) if the prosecutor disclosed an intention to tender at the hearing of the
proceedings any transcript, notice as to whether the
defendant accepts the
transcript as accurate and, if not, in what respect the transcript is
(j) notice as to whether the defendant proposes to dispute the authenticity or
accuracy of any proposed documentary evidence or other
exhibit disclosed by the
prosecutor,
(k) notice of any significant issue the defendant proposes to raise regarding an
application for an appearance order, severability
of the charges or separate
trials or sentencing proceedings for the charges,
(l) notice of any consent the defendant proposes to give under
section 184
Evidence Act 1995
247L Prosecution response to defence
response—court-ordered preliminary disclosure
For the purposes of section 247I(1)(c), the notice of the prosecution response
to the defence response is to contain the following—
(a) if the defendant has disclosed an intention to adduce expert evidence at the
hearing of the proceedings, notice as to whether
the prosecutor disputes any of
the expert evidence and, if so, in what respect,
(b) if the defendant has disclosed an intention to tender any exhibit at the
hearing of the proceedings, notice as to whether the
prosecutor proposes to
raise any issue with respect to the continuity of custody of the exhibit,
(c) if the defendant has disclosed an intention to tender any documentary
evidence or other exhibit at the hearing of the proceedings,
notice as to
whether the prosecutor proposes to dispute the accuracy or admissibility of the
documentary evidence or other exhibit,
(d) notice as to whether the prosecutor proposes to dispute the admissibility of
any other proposed evidence disclosed by the defendant,
and the basis for the
(e) a copy of any information, document or other thing in the possession of the
prosecutor, not already disclosed to the defendant,
that might reasonably be
expected to assist the case for the defence,
(f) a copy of any information, document or other thing that has not already been
disclosed to the defendant and that is required
to be contained in the notice of
the case for the prosecution.
outworking of those disclosure requirements in the criminal proceedings to which
they relate is then set out in ss 247M–247N,
which provide as
247M Dispensing with formal proof
(1) If a fact, matter or circumstance was alleged in a notice required to be
given to the defendant by the prosecutor in accordance
with this Division and
the defendant was required to give a defence response under section 247K but did
not disclose in the response
an intention to dispute or require proof of the
fact, matter or circumstance, the court may order that—
(a) a document asserting the alleged fact, matter or circumstance may be
admitted at the hearing of the proceedings as evidence of
the fact, matter or
circumstance, and
(b) evidence may not, without the leave of the court, be adduced to contradict
or qualify the alleged fact, matter or circumstance.
(2) If evidence was disclosed by the prosecution to the defendant in accordance
with this Division and the defendant was required
to give a defence response
under section 247K but did not disclose in the response an intention to dispute
the admissibility of the
evidence and the basis for the objection, the court
may, by order, dispense with the application of any one or more of the following
provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
in relation to the adducing of the
evidence at the hearing of the proceedings—
(a) Division 3, 4 or 5 of
(3) The court may, on the application of a party, direct that the party may
adduce evidence of 2 or more witnesses in the form of
a summary if the court is
satisfied that—
(a) the summary is not misleading or confusing, and
(b) admission of the summary instead of evidence from the witnesses will not
result in unfair prejudice to any party to the proceedings.
(4) The court may, in a direction under subsection (3), require that one or more
of the witnesses whose evidence is to be adduced
in the form of a summary are to
be available for cross-examination.
(5) The opinion rule (within the meaning of the
Evidence Act 1995
not apply to evidence adduced in accordance with a direction under subsection
(6) The provisions of this section are in addition to the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
, in particular,
section 190.
(7) This section does not affect
Evidence Act
247N Sanctions for non-compliance with preliminary
disclosure requirements
Exclusion of evidence not disclosed
The court may refuse to admit
evidence in proceedings that is sought to be adduced by a party who failed to
disclose the evidence
to the other party in accordance with requirements for
preliminary disclosure imposed by or under this Division.
Exclusion of expert evidence where report not provided
The court may
refuse to admit evidence from an expert witness in proceedings that is sought to
be adduced by a party if the party
failed to give the other party a copy of a
report by the expert witness in accordance with requirements for preliminary
imposed by or under this Division.
Adjournment
The court may grant an adjournment to a party if the
other party seeks to adduce evidence in the proceedings that the other party
failed to disclose in accordance with requirements for preliminary disclosure
imposed by or under this Division and that would prejudice
the case of the party
seeking the adjournment.
Application of sanctions
Without limiting the regulations that may be
made under subsection (5), the powers of the court may not be exercised under
this section
to prevent a defendant adducing evidence unless the prosecutor has
complied with the requirements for preliminary disclosure imposed
prosecution by or under this Division.
Regulations
The regulations may make provision for or with respect to
the exercise of the powers of a court under this section (including the
circumstances in which the powers may not be exercised).
247I(1) provides that the Court is empowered to make such orders “only if
the Court is of the opinion that it would
be in the interests of justice to do
SafeWork NSW v JBS Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 116
), Russell DCJ ruled at [51] that in determining whether it is in the
interests of justice to make orders for preliminary disclosure,
be an error to take into account matters of general application rather than
matters specific to a particular case”.
the parties have provided alternative proposed case management orders to the
Court, the scope of the dispute between them is
quite narrow. Prior to the
hearing, there were three aspects of the prosecutor’s proposed orders to
which the defendant objected:
(1) An order pursuant to s 247K(d) for the defendant to provide notification of
objections to the prosecutor’s evidence and
the basis for the
(2) An order pursuant to s 247K(e) for the defendant to provide notification of
objections to the prosecutor’s expert evidence
and the basis for the
objection; and
(3) An order pursuant to s 247K(f) for disclosure by the defence of expert
material on which it intends to rely.
the hearing, it became apparent that the defendant was willing to provide to the
prosecutor information in short form concerning
its objections to the
prosecutor’s evidence. The prosecutor had no objection to receiving that
information in short form, provided
that they were afforded liberty to apply in
the event that they required a more fulsome explanation for the basis of any of
the defendant’s
objections in order to deal with them. The defendant
accepted that the provision of objections in short form was sufficient for s
247M of the
to operate in respect of the evidence for which there was
no objection.
Accordingly,
the dispute concerning the defendant notifying the prosecutor of its objections
to the prosecutor’s evidence was
confined to the timing for that process
to occur. Indeed, order 7 of the orders proposed by the defendant provided for
that process
to occur. The defendant agreed to provide its information to the
prosecutor no later than 20 February 2026, being two weeks before
preliminary conference date. The prosecutor sought that information by 7
November 2025, to enable it to serve any evidence
in response with sufficient
time to afford the defendant procedural fairness at trial.
defendant objected to providing its expert evidence to the prosecutor at any
point prior to the close of the prosecution
Prosecutor’s submissions
support of its position, the prosecutor relied on the evidence of Jessica Clare
Alamyar, Senior Associate in the employ of Holding
Redlich, acting for the
prosecutor in these proceedings. Briefly, Ms Alamyar’s evidence outlined
the history of the proceedings,
including service of the brief on the defendant
on 29 January 2025, the provision of access to that brief to the
defendant’s
solicitors on 3 March 2025 and the entry of the plea of not
guilty by the defendant on 28 April 2025. Ms Alamyar set out the nature
content of the more than 12,000 page prosecution brief, alongside a description
of the approximately 31 witnesses whom the
prosecutor intends to call. Ms
Alamyar stated that as at the date of affirming her affidavit, she had not
received any communications
from the defendant’s solicitors attempting to
narrow the issues for trial. Moreover, it was her belief that “all facts
in the matter are to be taken as contested by the defendant” and
“all witnesses may be required by the defendant for
examination”.
Court also has before it the Statement of Facts proposed by the prosecutor,
which extends to 14 pages.
arguing that their proposed case management orders should be made, the
prosecutor submitted that
was incorrectly decided and should not be
followed. Central to this argument was Russell DCJ’s reliance on
Pambula District Hospital v Herriman
(1988) 14 NSWLR 387
as authority for the proposition that only matters specific to a case should be
considered in exercising the discretion under s
prosecutor submitted that a proper reading of
does not support
Russell DCJ’s construction of Division 2A. The prosecutor contrasted the
statutory context of
with that of Division 2A, noting in relation
to the latter that the enactment of case management provisions for summary
offences partially
abrogated the longstanding common law rule against
self-incrimination for defendants. In that regard, the prosecutor relied on the
decision of Biscoe J in
Sutherland Shire Council v Benedict Industries Pty
[2013] NSWLEC 121
Benedict No. 1
prosecutor argued that the approach of Russell DCJ in
“insufficient regard to the statutory purpose of the case management
provisions in the
”, which provides the context for the
discretion in s 247I and to which the Court of Criminal Appeal referred in
Secretary, Department of Planning and Environment v Harris
[2024] NSWCCA
prosecutor submitted that the discretion given to the Court by the term
“in the interests of justice” is a “particularly
albeit its exercise plainly must be governed by the statutory objects of the
legislation by which it was granted”.
In that context, matters of general
application were said to be an essential consideration. In support of that
submission, the prosecutor
pointed to the ability of the court to make an order
of its own motion under ss 247B(1)(b) and 247I(2).
prosecutor also relied on the observation in
Gerlach v Clifton Bricks Pty Ltd
(2002) 209 CLR 478
[2002] HCA 22
that considerations of universal
character and singular circumstances may sometimes merge. Such considerations
were submitted to
include matters such as trial length, subject matter and the
reliance of one or both parties on expert evidence, all of which properly
attracted judicial interest in case management.
the alternative and if the Court applied
, the prosecutor submitted
that a number of specific considerations in the present case dictate a finding
that the disclosure orders
sought by the prosecution are in the interests of
justice. First, the defendant is charged with an offence under the
, with such prosecutions being well regarded as being of greater
complexity than many indictable offences. In this matter, the prosecution
is over 12,000 pages long. Relevantly, the Second Reading Speech to the
Procedure Amendment (Summary Proceedings Case Management) Bill 2011
(NSW) (2011
Bill) which introduced Division 2A
identified “complex”
matters as an example of where orders pursuant to s 247I may be
appropriate.
the defendant is a corporation and has no right against self-incrimination.
Third, the defendant is legally represented. Fourth,
the prosecutor intends to
call approximately 31 witnesses, resulting in an estimated four weeks of hearing
time. That a hearing would
be lengthy was also explicitly identified in the
Second Reading Speech of the 2011 Bill as an example of when disclosure orders
be appropriate.
the prosecutor pointed to its reliance upon expert evidence in this matter. The
prosecutor submitted that if the defendant
were to lead expert evidence without
notifying the prosecutor in advance as to its contents, the prosecutor may need
to seek leave
to lead a case in reply, causing an adjournment and thereby
extending the length of proceedings.
prosecutor further noted that, with the exception of expert evidence, the
defendant was not being asked to disclose its defence
or the evidence upon which
it intends to rely. It noted the special situation of expert evidence as
identified by Craig J in in
Sutherland Shire Council v Benedict Industries
[2015] NSWLEC 39
Benedict No. 2
prosecutor pointed out that it is commonplace in criminal matters for case
management orders to require a defendant to “disclose”
evidence due to the difficulties in otherwise dealing with such evidence in an
efficient manner.
oral submissions, the prosecutor pointed to order 7 of the defendant’s
proposed orders as demonstrating its willingness to
work with the prosecutor to
determine the scope of the matters in issue. The prosecutor submitted that the
only way to do that sensibly
was to go through the steps as outlined in s 247K
. It submitted that, in the context of a matter with a 40
volume brief, determining the scope of the matters in issue could not sensibly
be achieved by way of a preliminary conference, even with the notification by
the defendant of its position two weeks
beforehand.
Defendant’s submissions
defendant noted the discretionary nature of the preliminary disclosure regime
set out in Division 2A of the
. It submitted that the orders sought by
the prosecutor create a real risk of unfair prejudice to the defendant and are
not in the interests of justice in this matter. The alternative orders
that the defendant proposed were said to be sufficient to
facilitate the
preparation of the matter for hearing.
defendant contended that “the principle of the common law is that the
prosecution is to prove the guilt of an accused person”,
(2014) 253 CLR 455
[2014] HCA 20
requirement for the defendant to disclose evidence that it proposes to rely on
prior to the closing of the prosecution case
was said to be inconsistent with
both this fundamental principle and the companion rule. Further, the defendant
submitted that, consistent
with the Second Reading Speech, pre-trial disclosure
requirements imposed on a defendant aimed at improving efficiency should not
come at the expense of fairness to defendants.
defendant submitted that the prosecutor’s argument that
incorrectly decided and should not be followed failed to engage with the clear
legislative position, reinforced in the Agreement
in Principal Speech to the
2011 Bill, that “the pre-hearing disclosure provisions are not designed to
be applied in every case”.
The defendant submitted that the prosecutor
must satisfy the Court that the interests of justice are served by making an
order against
the defendant under ss 247I and 247K of the
particular, that the imposition of such orders would reduce the length of
proceedings.
defendant submitted that the prosecutor has “started at the finish by
seeking to have the highest level of case management
applied” to the
conduct of the hearing without reference to any factors in the interests of
justice that are specific to these
proceedings and warrant its application. The
factors that were said to determine whether the prosecutor’s proposed
in the interests of justice include the competing interests of the
parties, the application of common law principles regarding the
burden of proof
and the companion principle, and public interest and policy considerations
regarding the efficient management of
prosecutions and defendant’s’
defendant took issue with the basis upon which the prosecutor asserted that the
matter was sufficiently complex to warrant the
preliminary disclosure orders:
the use of expert evidence, the length of the brief and the number of witnesses
to be called. The
defendant noted that the prosecutor had not referred to any
aspect of its case that involves complex expert evidence and contended
factual matrix of the matter was not complicated.
defendant also reiterated its willingness to engage in narrowing the issues
through the settlement of agreed facts and the minimisation
of witnesses
required to give evidence at trial, with the potential to shorten the hearing
time. It contended that experience shows
that the prosecutor will not seek to
adduce the entirety of the prosecution brief at trial and that even with a large
volume of documents,
there are usually only a small number that are central to
the determination of the matter. Moreover, the frequency with which orders
requiring disclosure by a defendant are made in criminal matters does not assist
the Court in applying Division 2A.
to the specific orders sought by the prosecutor, as noted above, given the short
form of objections which the defendant was prepared
to offer and the prosecutor
was prepared to accept, any dispute concerning an order under s 247K(d) was
reduced to one of timing.
The same applied in relation to any order made under s
defendant contended that the order sought by the prosecutor pursuant to s
247K(f) would require the disclosure of any expert report
upon which the
defendant sought to rely six months prior to the commencement of the hearing.
Such disclosure was said to be unlikely
to improve the efficiency of the hearing
but would effectively require the defendant to assist the prosecutor to
discharge its onus
and may result in disclosure of the defendant’s case
strategy more generally. It was also said to place the defendant at a
disadvantage by requiring it to decide whether to lead evidence well in advance
of the close of the prosecutor’s case.
oral submissions, the defendant contended that the orders sought by the
prosecutor which required the defendant to telegraph issues
prosecutor’s expert evidence months ahead of the trial deprived the
defendant of the opportunity to convince the Court
to exclude any supplementary
evidence on which the prosecutor might seek to rely, on the basis of fairness to
the defendant.
defendant submitted that the alternative form of orders that it proposes, and
which largely mirror the Usual Directions, will
facilitate the narrowing of the
issues between the parties and should be
Prosecutor’s submissions in reply
response, the prosecutor submitted that the decision in
is of little
assistance to the Court in determining the present application. Further, the
High Court recognised in
that even fundamental tenets of the common
law yield to statutory provisions expressed clearly. Further, the prosecutor
stated that
the defendant has failed to engage with the fact that, pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
), the defendant
as a corporation has no right against self-incrimination. In addition, the
submission that the prosecution bears
an onus “to satisfy the Court how
the interests of justice are served by making an order against the defendant
under ss 247I
and 247K of the
” ignores that the Court can make
such orders of its own motion.
prosecutor refuted the defendant’s contention that it must demonstrate a
unique feature which distinguishes the present
case from other
prosecutions to justify the case management orders that it seeks. The prosecutor
submitted that such an argument disregards the application
of Division 2A to
prosecutions for summary offences in the Supreme Court of NSW and the Land and
Environment Court of NSW. Further,
it pointed to the 41 summary offences under
outside of the general duty offences, which are often more
limited in scope. The prosecutor accepted that it would not be in the interests
of justice for the Court to make preliminary disclosure orders pursuant to
Division 2A in many of these matters.
prosecutor rejected the assertion that the defendant would suffer forensic
disadvantage if the orders sought were made, noting
that, subject to leave, the
prosecution would be entitled to lead a case in reply to address matters in the
defence case that took
it by surprise:
The Queen v Chin
[1985] HCA 35
(1985) 157 CLR
[1985] HCA 35
per Gibbs CJ and Wilson J. It reiterated that, with
the exception of expert evidence, the orders impose no requirement for the
to disclose any evidence.
prosector reiterated that order 7 of the defendant’s proposed orders
largely reflects the terms of s 247K of the
, save for the disclosure
of the defendant’s expert evidence. In that regard, the only real issue
between the parties was the
question of timing. The prosecutor said that the 7
November 2025 timetable was not unreasonable in circumstances where the
had had the prosecution brief since January 2025. The prosecutor
submitted that the defendant was aware of the prosecution case,
both because it
had the benefit of a 14 page Statement of Facts and because it had not sought
any particulars of the prosecution
case when afforded the opportunity to do so
in February 2025.
the prosecutor submitted that a practice which permits the defendant to serve
its expert report at the close of the prosecution
case is not a practice which
is supported by any line of authority. The prosecutor reiterated that the early
service of the expert
report permits the prosecutor to respond with any
supplementary evidence with sufficient notice to afford procedural fairness to
the defendant.
Consideration
have set out the purpose of Division 2A, as set out in s 247B, at [
]. As noted by Biscoe J
Benedict No. 1
“The purpose and aims of Division 2A inform understanding of how its
provisions should be interpreted and applied. An aim of
Division 2A, in my view,
is to narrow the issues to those that are genuinely in dispute. I think that is
clear but, if it is not,
then reference may be made to the Attorney
General’s Agreement in Principle speech when introducing the
Procedure Amendment (Summary Proceedings Case Management) Bill 2011
incorporating Division 2A, which confirms that that is so (emphasis added):
‘Used properly, the provisions of this Bill provide an opportunity to
reduce hardship to parties and to witnesses, to prevent
unnecessary costs and to
allow parties and the court to spend their time and money on what really matters
- that is, on those
issues that are genuinely in dispute
represents the Government’s commitment to a form of justice in which the
real issues in dispute
are determined without undue delay or
decision of Biscoe J in
Benedict No. 1
provides a comprehensive overview
of Division 2A. In relation to the second round of the disclosure regime, his
Honour stated at
“The second round of disclosure orders under s 247I is for the prosecutor
to give the defendant a ‘prosecution’s
notice’ in accordance
with s 247J, the defendant to give the prosecutor a ‘notice of the defence
response’ to the
prosecution’s notice in accordance with s 247K - a
substantial abridgment of the defendant’s right to silence - and the
prosecutor to give a ‘notice of the prosecution response to the defence
response’ in accordance with s 247L.”
Honour expanded on the operation of second round disclosure on defendants at
“The second round s 247K notice of the defence response constitutes a
substantial abridgement of a defendant’s right
to silence ...
One of the aims and consequences of requiring a defendant to disclose under s
247K(d) its objections to the admissibility of prosecution
evidence disclosed in
the prosecution notice, is to empower the court to dispense with requirements
for formal proof of prosecution
evidence to which no objection is taken: s
The s 247L notice of the prosecutor’s response to the defence response is
to contain (inter alia) notice as to whether the
prosecutor disputes any
proposed defence expert evidence and whether the prosecutor proposes to dispute
the admissibility of disclosed
defence evidence.”
the case management provisions for summary proceedings found in Division 2A
empower the Court to make orders which significantly
defendant’s right to silence. When the case management provisions were
first introduced into the
in 2011 by the 2011 Bill, the Second
Reading Speech addressed the rights of a defendant in the following
“ ... The improvements in the efficiency of the court system should not
come at the expense of unfairness to defendants. The
extent to which this bill
impacts on defendants is limited in several ways. First, the pre-hearing
disclosure provisions are not
designed to be applied in every case. They are
designed so that the courts can employ them where appropriate. A court may
these provisions appropriate, for example, in the more complex cases,
or cases that could lead to a lengthy hearing.
Secondly, even if prehearing disclosure is ordered, the defendant retains
control of whether to agree with the prosecutor on any
aspect of its case. The
defendant may still choose to object to all matters in the prosecution’s
notice and retains the right
to require the prosecutor to prove all aspects of
the case. Finally, the consequences that flow from a failure by the defence to
identify an issue at prehearing disclosure will only apply where the court
decides in its discretion that this should be the case.
The court would be
unlikely to confine the defence to its position as at preliminary disclosure if
it considered this to be unjust
to a defendant.
In conclusion, this bill aims to reduce unnecessary delay and costs in the
preparation for, and conduct of, hearing and sentencing
proceedings in summary
matters in the higher courts. I know that members opposite are interested to
ensure that unnecessary delays
and costs are not incurred, because this State
does not have a lot of money to spend on lengthy cases. I’m advised that
than 6,000 criminal cases are on the books at the moment. This is a
separate section; it deals with summary matters. The bill will
reduce delay and
costs by introducing a number of mechanisms that will give those involved the
means to identify and resolve issues
at the beginning of a matter rather than
during the trial or sentencing proceedings. This will also assist judges to
manage the proceedings
by increasing their capacity to be informed of the
relevant issues at an early stage.”
issue is whether it is in the interests of justice in this matter for case
management orders to be made which require the defendant
to disclose, well in
advance of the hearing, both the basis for its objections to the
prosecutor’s evidence and its own expert
evidence. A related issue is
whether, in the exercise of its discretion, the Court is permitted to consider
matters universal to
summary proceedings before it, or whether the relevant
considerations are issues confined to the case in which the orders are
resolution of this matter does not require me to address the correctness of
Russell DCJ’s reliance on
. Assuming that the
interests of justice consideration is confined to factors particular to this
matter, the evidence before the Court
(1) The offence charged is a general duty offence. Such an offence is more
complex than many of the offences in the
and indeed summary
matters generally.
(2) The prosecution brief extends to more than 12,000 pages which is an
indicator of complexity, even if significant portions of
it are not tendered at
(3) The current hearing estimate of four weeks is lengthy in the context of
summary prosecutions generally.
(4) The number of witnesses to be called by the prosecution also demonstrates a
level of complexity to the issues. To adopt the submission
of the defendant,
even if many of those witnesses represent only “the number of pieces of
the jigsaw puzzle that need to be
presented to the Court to give the Court the
whole picture”, the picture is one that has a large number of essential
(5) The recourse to expert evidence in this matter places it at the more complex
end of the spectrum as expert evidence is not a
feature of all
prosecutions or Division 2A summary prosecutions more generally.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the case management orders to be made in this case ought to
reflect that it is a matter of some complexity.
essence of the defendant’s objection is that the making of the orders
sought by the prosecutor will allow the prosecutor
to bolster its case by
dealing with the defence objections to its evidence well in advance of the
hearing. In addition, it will
provide the prosecutor with an understanding of
the defence case with ample opportunity to obtain evidence in rebuttal. A
objection is the loss of the ability for the defendant to seek to have
prosecution supplementary evidence excluded on the basis of
fairness to the
defendant. Justice Biscoe dealt squarely with those issues in
Benedict No.
in two ways. Firstly, and relying on the decision of Gleeson CJ (Sheller
JA and Badgery-Parker J agreeing)
in State Pollution Control Commission v
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd (No 2)
(1992) 29 NSWLR 487
Honour observed at [27] that there was no automatic right for the prosecutor to
file supplementary evidence:
“In my opinion, leave of the Court is required to file the
prosecutor’s supplementary evidence. The Court has power to
control and
supervise the conduct of criminal proceedings, including so as to prevent
unfairness. In an appropriate case, this extends
to refusing to permit a
prosecutor to lead evidence that is otherwise relevant and admissible, for
example if the evidence would
cause the defendant to suffer irremediable
prejudice, or prejudice which could only be cured by an order that the Court is
not willing
to make, such as for an adjournment of the hearing...”
his Honour observed at [30] that any unfair prejudice flows from the plain
effect of the legislation, which I have addressed
at [48]. At [34], his Honour
further noted that the provision of supplementary evidence to the defendant well
in advance of the hearing
afforded the defendant fair opportunity to deal with
it. His Honour’s judgment to this effect was cited with approval by
J (N Adams J and RA Hulme AJ agreeing) in
to the disclosure by the defendant of its expert report, it is plainly in the
interests of justice for that to occur in advance
of the hearing. As noted by
the prosecutor, in the event that this were not to occur the prosecution would,
subject to leave, be
granted time to address matters in the defendant’s
expert report that take it by surprise. This is precisely the sort of delay
the case management provisions were designed to address. As held by Craig J in
Benedict No. 2
“It seems to me that the provisions of Div 2A, properly construed, are
intended to address the situation described in the preceding
paragraphs by
ensuring that both prosecution and defence know the expert evidence that is
likely to be led in each of their respective
cases. Relevantly, the requirement
that the defence disclose, in advance of trial, the report of an expert intended
to be called,
is the only evidence of any kind that the defendant can be
required to disclose by way of preliminary disclosure (see “Note”
s 247N(1)). The manner in which expert evidence is to be addressed procedurally
under Div 2A may therefore be seen to fall into
a special or distinct category.
It is reasonable to infer that the requirement for disclosure of such evidence
by both sides was
seen by the legislature as having the potential to reduce the
time of trial, thereby fulfilling the purpose expressed in s 247B.”
defendant points to the considerable time that will elapse between the provision
of the information that it is required to provide
and the trial date. As noted
Benedict No. 1
at [33]–[34], the legislative scheme by which
each party gives early notice of objections to the admissibility of evidence
gives the other party the opportunity to meet the objections. Filing timely
supplementary evidence-in-chief prevents disruption of
the trial by the need for
an adjournment to enable one party to deal with objections only taken at that
point. This applies equally
to the defence expert evidence as it does to the
evidence on which the prosecutor relies.
as submitted by both parties, the consideration of the interests of justice in a
particular matter involve balancing the
various interests that are in play in
the relevant context and may extend to a consideration of larger questions of
legal principle,
the public interest and policy considerations:
Landsman v R
(2014) 88 NSWLR 534
[2014] NSWCCA 328
The need to maximise
the efficient use of time in this Court is acute. The delay in obtaining a
listing for a defended hearing upon
entry of a not guilty plea in a
prosecution is presently at least 10 months. It is likely to increase
significantly by the end of this year given the number of proceedings
already commenced and for which a plea is yet to be entered. That context weighs
heavily on the management of individual
recognised that this matter is one of some complexity, I also accept that the
orders proposed by the defendant largely reflect
the Usual Directions, save for
those directions concerned with the expert evidence of both parties. I therefore
gave consideration
to making the Usual Directions, other than Usual Direction
14, with some extension of the timetable and with liberty to the parties
apply. In that regard, I note that the Usual Directions essentially include the
orders set out at s 247K(a)–(f) of the CPA.
I note the prosecutor’s concern that the volume of material in this matter
is such that it is impractical to deal with
the matters which are the subject of
Usual Direction 10 by way of a discussion, even with advance notice of the
defendant’s
position as required by Usual Direction 11 and that what is
instead required are orders pursuant to s 247K of the
Notwithstanding that submission, and consistent with the orders proposed by both
parties, I consider that there is benefit in retaining
the order requiring the
parties to participate in a preliminary conference to encourage discussion as to
any issues that remain unresolved.
Finally, given the overlap between the Usual
Directions and s 247K of the
, it is the defendant who stands to
benefit from the additional disclosure orders sought by the prosecutor.
am therefore satisfied that it is in the interests of justice in this matter to
make orders largely consistent with those sought
prosecutor.
make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to s 247I of the
, the prosecutor is to give the
defendant notice in accordance with s 247J of the
(2) Pursuant to s 247I of the
, the defendant is to give to the
prosecutor notice of the defence response to the prosecutor’s notice in
accordance with s
247K of the
14 November 2025
(3) Pursuant to s 247I of the
, the prosecutor is to give to the
defendant notice of the prosecution response to the defence response in
accordance with s 247L
13 February 2026
limiting the requirements in s 247L, such notice is to include:
(a) a revised Statement of Facts in reply to any proposed amendments indicated
by the defendant in relation to any proposed agreed
Statement of Facts;
(b) a copy of any chart or explanatory material that the prosecutor proposes to
adduce at the defended hearing.
(4) The prosecutor is to serve on the defendant but not file a draft index to
the prosecutor’s tender bundle which will specify
for each document the
volume, tab and page number(s) where the document is to be found in the brief of
evidence by
6 March 2026
(5) The parties are to hold a preliminary conference on or before
(a) to determine the scope of the matters that are in issue;
(b) for the prosecutor to confirm the witnesses it proposes to call at
(c) to determine whether any statements of witnesses that the prosecutor
proposes to adduce at hearing can be dealt with in whole
or in part pursuant to
Evidence Act
(d) to settle any agreed facts pursuant to
Evidence Act
(e) for the defendant to confirm which witnesses it requires for
cross-examination;
(f) for the defendant to indicate whether objection is taken to any of the
documents listed in the draft index to the prosecutor’s
tender bundle and
the basis for the objection(s); and
(g) to determine whether either party disputes the admissibility of the expert
evidence, and the basis of the objection(s).
(6) The prosecutor is to file and serve by
4pm on 13 April 2026
(a) an electronic copy of a paginated bundle comprising an index, any agreed
facts, and those documents and statements of witnesses
to which no objection is
taken, or objection is taken and has otherwise been determined; and
(b) a second electronic copy of a paginated bundle comprising an index and those
documents that the prosecutor intends to tender
to which objection is taken.
(7) The matter is listed for a readiness hearing at
2pm on 14 April
(8) The parties have liberty to apply.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (338 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter