URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1096.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of Corrective Services NSW v Public Service Association and Professional Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales (POVB State-wide Strike) [2025] NSWIRComm 1096 (31 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of Corrective Services NSW v
Public Service Association and Professional Officers' Association
Amalgamated
Union of New South Wales (POVB State-wide Strike)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1096
Hearing Date(s):
30 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
31 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner McDonald
1. The Public Service and Professional Officers Association Amalgamated
Union of New South Wales (PSA), its officers and employees,
and its members
employed in Corrective Services NSW, must immediately take steps to cease
organising and refrain from taking any
industrial action related to the decision
of Magistrate Richardson delivered on 29 October 2025, on and from 6.00am on 31
2. The PSA, its officers and employees, must by no later than
6.00pm on 30 October 2025 publish these orders and directions in a prominent
position on its website and social media accounts.
3. The PSA must
communicate to its members that the strike action will no longer take place in
compliance with the above orders.
4. The PSA, its officers, employees, agents
and members must not influence, advise, authorise, support, encourage, direct,
abet members of the PSA, including the Prison Officers Vocational Branch,
to organise or take industrial action contrary to order
5. The parties
have liberty to apply on 3 days’ notice if information emerges justifying
the variation of these orders.
6. The PSA is directed to advise the
Notifier, and its legal representatives, in writing by 6.00pm on 30 October
2025, of the steps
taken to comply with the orders and directions, including
providing a copy of such compliance.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Industrial disputes — Dispute
orders — Strike for 48 hours by correctional officers
arising from
decision of Magistrate not to give an inmate a custodial sentence for violently
assaulting four correctional officers
— No notice given to employer of
proposed strike action — Non-compliance with procedures for settlement of
and disputes provided for in Award — Efforts of employer to
obtain redress on behalf of employees not exhausted — Significant
concerns for remaining staff, inmates and the public — Significant
disruption to criminal courts — Public interest
in favour of dispute
orders being made
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
Relations Act 1996
Oaths Act 1900
, Schedule 4
Cases Cited:
Bluescope Steel Limited (formerly BHP Steel Limited) v The Australian
Workers' Union, New South Wales (No 2)
(2005) 141 IR 329
[2005] NSWIRComm
Fire & Rescue New South Wales on behalf of the Department of Premier
and Cabinet v Fire Brigade Employees’ Union of New
South Wales
[2013] NSWIRComm 63
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of the
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development v Public Service
Association
and Professional Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of New
South Wales
[2024] NSWIRComm 1065
Industrial Relations Secretary v Public
Service Association and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated
Union of New
South Wales
[2022] NSWIRComm 1042
Maxwell v The Queen (1996) 184
[1996] HCA 46
Secretary of the Ministry of Health v New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives' Association
[2022] NSWSC 1178
; 320 IR 249
[2024] NSWIRComm 1075
; 337 IR 202
Texts Cited:
Crown Employees (Correctional Officers, Department of Communities and
Justice - Corrective Services NSW) Award
Principal judgment
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of Corrective Services NSW
Public Service Association and Professional Officers' Association
Amalgamated Union of New South Wales (Respondent)
Representation:
T Pacey and C Carvolth (Notifier)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00418273
Publication Restriction:
around 10.30am on 30 October 2025, the Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf
of Corrective Services NSW (CS NSW) lodged a notification
of an industrial
dispute with the Public Service Association and Professional Officers
Association Amalgamated Union of New South
Wales (PSA) pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
8.00am on 30 October 2025 the Cessnock Correctional Centre sub-branch of the
Prison Officers Vocational Branch of the PSA (POVB)
went on strike. The
previous evening the Cessnock Correctional Centre sub-branch had passed the
following motion:
“We the members of Cessnock Correctional Centre strongly express our
disgrace and frustration regarding the decision by Magistrate
R Richardson in
Cessnock Local Court on 29 October 2025. The decision to allow the inmate who
assaulted 4 correctional officers in
February this year, the possibility of
parole next month, due to the punishment handed down at court of a community
corrections order
is grossly inadequate due to the violent unprovoked attack
with all 4 officers hospitalised where 2 officers will never work again.
Cessnock POVB members feel increasingly vulnerable and believe that current
judicial responses fail to adequately deter inmate violence,
leaving officers
exposed to unacceptable risks including in this case a career ending incident
for 2 officers with insufficient consequences
for offenders.
Cessnock POVB will withdraw labour for 48 hours commencing at 0800 on 30
October 2025 to reconvene at 0800 on 1 November 2025.
Cessnock POVB request the PSA advocate for mandatory custodial sentencing for
the assault of law enforcement officer (not police).
Cessnock POVB request endorsement of this motion by the State Executive, the PSA
and request for state wide support.
Motion carried unanimously.
Cessnock POVB Subbranch”
NSW had no notice of the strike and only became aware of it when staff walked
out early on 30 October 2025, causing an immediate
lock down of inmates at
Cessnock Correctional Centre and executive staff having to step in to fill the
dispute was listed for an urgent compulsory conference at 1.00pm on 30 October
2025. At that time the Commission was informed
by the representative for the
PSA, Mr Pearce, that the motion of the Cessnock Correctional Centre sub-branch
had been endorsed by
the POVB State Executive and the PSA and that as at 1.00pm
all correctional officers across the state and some administrative officers
CS NSW, had gone out on strike and would remain on strike until 8.00am on
Saturday, 1 November 2025. Mr Pearce advised the Commission
that the members
considered that the strike was necessary “to convey to the judiciary and
the government how serious this issue
was for the members”.
relief sought by CS NSW in the notification of dispute was for “the POVB
at Cessnock, and other locations if they also withdraw
their labour, to return
to work” and for the POVB at Cessnock Correctional Centre to adhere to the
“Agreed Procedures
for Settlement of Grievances and Disputes”
contained in the Crown Employees (Correctional Officers, Department of
Communities
and Justice - Corrective Services NSW) Award (Award).
the course of conciliation, as I will explain in more detail later, CS NSW
indicated that each of three specific requests made
by the PSA, would be met. In
those circumstances, and having been made aware of the safety risks the strike
action posed to staff,
inmates and the citizens of NSW, and the lack of notice
given to, and engagement with, CS NSW by POVB prior to the commencement of
strike, I recommended to the PSA, pursuant to s 134(1) of the
the industrial action cease by 6.00am on 31 October 2025. In giving the
recommendation I stressed to the parties I was not foreclosing
the possibility
of a different outcome at arbitration, however I noted that it appeared to me
that the PSA faced significant hurdles
in resisting disputed orders being
Unfortunately,
the dispute was unable to be resolved through conciliation, and a Certificate of
Attempted Conciliation was issued
and provided to the President. Mr Pearce
informed me that the POVB did not “accept the recommendation”. In
the circumstances,
pursuant to s 134(2C), I directed the PSA to provide to me,
at a convenient time during the course of the arbitration, written reasons
the PSA did not propose to comply with the recommendation. I informed the
parties that I intended to refer to those reasons in
my decision in respect of
the application for dispute orders.
Arbitration
of the matter commenced at 4.00pm, with CS NSW seeking the following dispute
orders, a copy of which it had provided to
the Commission and to the PSA during
the course of the conciliation, as I had directed:
“1. Pursuant to s137(a) of the Act that the employees of
CSNSW who have withdrawn their labour effective from or thereafter
the morning
of 30 October 2025, are ordered to cease industrial action and return to work as
per their normal shift roster without
2. That the PSA be ordered to issue the return to work order to
members without delay through all reasonable means, and to do so
3. That the PSA be ordered to cease all forms of industrial
action related to the decision of Magistrate Richardson on 29 October
all associated motions related to that industrial action.”
PSA did not object to the matter proceeding immediately into arbitration.
the hearing of the matter I advised the parties that I intended to make dispute
orders, but not in the form sought by CS
NSW. I considered that there were a
number of issues with the form of the orders sought by CS NSW, for reasons that
are presently
unnecessary to articulate. I provided the parties with alternative
draft dispute orders and adjourned briefly to allow the parties
to consider and
if need be, suggest amendments to the proposed orders, which they did. I also
inquired of the parties whether they
wished to receive my reasons for making the
dispute orders that evening, which would mean the matter would not be concluded
least a further hour or more, which would hold up the execution of the
orders, or whether they would prefer to receive my reasons
at 9.30am the
following day. Both parties indicated that they preferred to have the orders
made immediately, with reasons delivered
the following day. These are my reasons
for making dispute orders on 30 October 2025, which have been prepared without
the benefit
of transcript. The orders I made were:
(1) The Public Service and Professional Officers Association Amalgamated Union
of New South Wales (PSA), its officers and employees,
and its members employed
in Corrective Services NSW, must immediately take steps to cease organising and
refrain from taking any
industrial action related to the decision of Magistrate
Richardson delivered on 29 October 2025, on and from 6.00am on 31 October
(2) The PSA, its officers and employees, must by no later than 6.00pm on 30
October 2025 publish these orders and directions in a
prominent position on its
website and social media accounts.
(3) The PSA must communicate to its members that the strike action will no
longer take place in compliance with the above orders.
(4) The PSA, its officers, employees, agents and members must not influence,
advise, authorise, support, encourage, direct, aid or
abet members of the PSA,
including the Prison Officers Vocational Branch, to organise or take industrial
action contrary to order
(5) The parties have liberty to apply on 3 days’ notice if information
emerges justifying the variation of these orders.
(6) The PSA is directed to advise the Notifier, and its legal representatives,
in writing by 6.00pm on 30 October 2025, of the steps
taken to comply with the
orders and directions, including providing a copy of such compliance.
note that CS NSW stipulated the time and date in order 1 and the time in orders
2 and 6, and the PSA voiced no opposition to the
form or content of the
The Evidence and Submissions
copy of the POVB’s motion and a copy of the “Agreed Procedures for
Settlement of Grievances and Disputes” contained
in the Award were
tendered in evidence by CS NSW.
NSW called Craig Smith, Assistant Commissioner of Corrective Services, Regional
NSW, to give oral evidence. Mr Smith has worked
for CS NSW for 26 years,
including as governor of various corrective facilities.
Smith evidence was essentially as follows:
(1) CS NSW had no prior notice of the strike;
(2) staff at Cessnock had walked out early that morning with other facilities
thereafter following suit and executive staff members
were now managing all
correctional facilities with skeleton staff – in a facility where there
would normally be 50 –
60 correctional officers, six executive staff were
running the facility;
(3) the executive staff running the facilities would not be able to go home
until the end of the strike, that is, for 48 hours;
(4) inmates were immediately locked in and would not be allowed out of their
cells until the end of the strike, which would likely
cause inmates to become
distressed and to cause disruption, including by unreasonable use of the
‘knock up system’ whereby
officers may be called to an
inmate’s cell;
(5) administrative officers at Cessnock Correctional Centre and elsewhere had
also gone out on strike;
(6) the facilities were “running unsafe” due to minimal staffing to
attend to inmates, putting the staff at the facilities
harm” and with staff potentially making unsafe decisions due to working
without relief for 48 hours;
(7) hospital escort staff stationed at hospitals would have to remain at the
hospitals with their charges until the end of the strike
as there would be no
one available to relieve them;
(8) inmates on self-harm watch would not get the attention required to keep them
(9) inmates would not be able to have visits or talk to their families by
telephone, causing distress to the inmates and their families
and children;
(10) criminal courts would not be able to operate properly on Friday, 31 October
2025 as no inmates would be able to attend court
due to the lack of escorts to
facilitate their attendance;
(11) with executive staff working potentially up to 48 hours to fill the
vacancies caused by the strike, when the strike concluded
there would be no
executive staff available for work as they would need to rest;
(12) Justice Health would not be able to attend to inmates needing medical
(13) having staff work for 24 hours or more was “unsafe all round”
and the effect of the strike would be “catastrophic”;
(14) CS NSW had made real efforts to resolve the POVB’s concerns about the
sentence imposed on the inmate who assaulted the
four correctional officers, and
he had personally had a number of phone calls with delegates of the PSA to try
to resolve the matter.
Smith’s evidence was uncontradicted. In cross examination he agreed it was
unacceptable for violence against correctional
staff to occur, and that he
believed the sentence was “manifestly inadequate”, although he also
agreed that he was not
legally qualified to make such a call. The only relevance
of this evidence is that it indicates that he, as a senior employee of
agrees with the sentiments, if not the actions, of the PSA. The submissions
made on behalf of CS NSW suggests that this
is the view of CS NSW more
not formally tendered in evidence, Ms Carvolth for CS NSW informed me from the
bar table that CS NSW has made a number of
“offers” to the PSA in an
effort to resolve the dispute – offers of which I was aware due to having
presided over
the conciliation. No objection was taken by the PSA to me
receiving this evidence in this way, which I am permitted to do pursuant
s 163(1) of the
reported by Ms Carvolth, in an effort to allay the POVB’s concerns and
have members of the PSA return to work before 8.00am
on 1 November
(1) CS NSW has offered to set up a meeting with the Minister for Corrections as
early as next week to discuss the POVB’s concerns
and possible legislative
(2) the Commissioner of Corrective Services will write to the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP) to ask that consideration be
given to appealing the sentence
given to the inmate who assaulted the correctional officers; and
(3) the Commissioner of Corrective Services will make submissions to the parole
board, which is to meet on Monday to consider the
inmate’s parole,
opposing the granting of parole, (which I understand may be imminent due to the
lack of a further custodial
Carvolth submitted that CS NSW had no disagreement with the PSA in respect of
the “principle” underlying their action,
a submission supported by
Mr Smith’s evidence, but that resolution of the issue was largely outside
of its control. She submitted
that it was doing all it could
“appropriately and within its statutory authority.”
submitted that the evidence was that the strike posed significant safety
concerns for inmates, staff and for the citizens of NSW
and it was therefore in
the public interest for dispute orders to be made.
also submitted that the PSA had failed to comply with the “Agreed
Procedures for Settlement of Grievances and Disputes”
contained in the
Award and in so doing had taken away the ability of CS NSW to engage in a
meaningful way with the POVB about the
issues arising from the
Magistrate’s decision. Those procedures relevantly include the following
(with emphasis added):
“1. Objectives
1.1 The object of these procedures is
the improvement of industrial relations and the development of a spirit of
co-operation
within CSNSW.
1.2 The parties acknowledge the
desirability, in the interests of all concerned of industrial claims being dealt
with expeditiously
without resort to industrial action
1.3 It is the intention that as CSNSW is an
essential service industry,
problems and disputes should be resolved by
discussion and the adoption of common-sense solutions rather than by the resort
to industrial
3. Procedure in Local Issues
The sub-branch Executive will
immediately notify the General Manager of the existence of any industrial
dispute or of any resolution
passed at a meeting of members of a sub-branch and
which may give rise to an industrial dispute.
3.2 The General Manager, as the person
responsible for the day-to-day running of the workplace, will endeavour to
resolve the
matter in discussion with the sub-branch Executive or in the case of
the Long Bay Correctional Complex with an official of the sub-branch
and a local
workplace delegate.
3.3 If any industrial dispute cannot be
resolved at this level, the matter will be referred to the next appropriate
higher level
of management who will attempt to resolve the matter.
3.4 That manager will advise the appropriate
higher level of management immediately of any matter which is likely to lead to
an industrial dispute or which affects the conditions of employment of
Correctional Officers and which has not been resolved in the
procedures in subclause 3.2 and 3.3, who will immediately seek to resolve the
3.5 Where the procedures of sub clauses 3.2,
3.3 and 3.4 do not lead to resolution of the industrial dispute, the State
will be advised accordingly by the sub-branch
Executive. The State Executive will consider the matter promptly and,
after discussion
if necessary, with the sub-branch Executive, will
refer the same to the Association.
The Association and CSNSW must each
immediately notify the other of any industrial dispute which is referred to
either of them and
the other party will take prompt steps seeking to
resolve the dispute through consultation
3.7 If the Association and CSNSW are unable
to resolve the dispute it must be immediately notified by one of the parties,
Industrial Relations Act
, to be dealt with
in accordance with the
Industrial Relations Act
4. Procedure in State-Wide Issues
Any resolution of a sub-branch which
is endorsed by the State Executive or any resolution of the management committee
which may lead
to an industrial dispute, is to be referred by the officials
concerned to the Association which must notify it to CSNSW. The
Association
and CSNSW will take prompt steps seeking to settle the matter by
consultation
5. General Procedures
5.1 The agreed procedures are not
be taken as an acknowledgement that industrial action by Correctional
Officers will be necessary
If a resolution be carried at any
sub-branch meeting calling for or suggesting industrial action, the sub-branch
Executive must immediately
notify the State Executive and the Association of the
terms of the resolution and it will not be implemented until all the
procedures have been completed.
At least three clear working
days’ notice must be given by the State Executive to the Association and
CSNSW of any intention
or proposal for all or any members of the POVB to take
industrial action.
No industrial action will be taken
until the agreed procedures have been completed
or until a dispute notified
pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Act
has been heard
and determined.
6. Safety and Security
6.1 The policy of the Association is that no
officer will be required to work in a role which is unsafe but, it does not
any reliance upon a pretext of safety to justify a refusal of duty where
no real personal risk is involved. Accordingly, notwithstanding
agreed procedures,
the Association upholds the right of Correctional Officers
to vary the procedures where the safety of officers genuinely arises.
to the direction I had made, the PSA provided the following written reasons for
not complying with the recommendation I had
made in conciliation:
“1. The workers hold a genuine concern about the safety
of staff working in our prison system.
2. The safety concerns that gave rise to the decision to take
action are urgent and legitimate.
3. The concerns have not been adequately addressed and remain
just as relevant now as when they were when our members took the
decision to withdraw their labour.
4. Nothing has been resolved beyond a good faith commitment to
further talk.
5. Our members continue to work in an environment that
doesn’t adequately protect their safety or provide sufficient penalty
perpetrators of violence.
6. For these reasons, and respectfully, we will not be
complying with the Commission’s recommendations.”
PSA otherwise led no evidence.
Pearce submitted that dispute orders should not be made for essentially the same
reasons as the reasons why the PSA decided not
to comply with my recommendation.
He submitted that the “system” had let correctional officers down.
However, he acknowledged
the efforts made by CS NSW, which I took to refer to
the three actions outlined at [
inquired of Mr Pearce what more could be done, given the independence of the
judiciary, other than what CS NSW has indicated would
be done, (being the only
actions requested by the PSA with any specificity), to “adequately
address” the members’
concerns. His response was that essentially
the PSA was urging the “cogs of bureaucracy to move more quickly.”
Consideration
Sub-sections
136(1) and 137(1) of the
provide that the Commission
may, in dealing with an industrial dispute in arbitration proceedings, make a
‘dispute order’,
which includes an order that a person (as specified
in sub-s 138(1)) cease or refrain from taking industrial action.
is for the notifier to persuade the Commission that the relief sought should be
granted. The Commission’s power to grant
relief, including the making of
dispute orders, is discretionary. There is no presumption that in the face
of industrial action an
order under s 137(1)(a) of the Act will
Industrial Relations Secretary v Public Service Association and
Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New
[2022] NSWIRComm 1042
Secretary of
the Ministry of Health v New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’
Association
(2022) 320 IR 249
[2022] NSWSC 1178
however there is no presumption against the making of dispute orders. The
exercise of that discretion will be informed
whole, noting in particular ss 3 and 146, and the
circumstances of the case.
Section 146 of
the Act requires the Commission to take into account the public interest in the
exercise of its functions. The Commission
might intervene to protect the public
interest from the damaging effects of industrial action:
Rescue New South Wales on behalf of the Department of Premier and Cabinet v Fire
Brigade Employees’ Union of New
South Wales
(2013) 235 IR 261
[2013] NSWIRComm 63
industrial action in this case was precipitated by understandable anger on the
part of correctional officers to the apparently
lenient sentence given by a
Magistrate of the Local Court to an inmate who severely assaulted four of their
number. In saying that
their anger is understandable I do not intend to suggest
that the sentence was inadequate – I am in no position whatsoever
comment on the adequacy of the sentence one way or the other – only that
it is understandable why corrective officers may
feel that it was inadequate and
that they would consider, as submitted by Mr Pearce, that it sets an
“unhelpful precedent”
that prison officers’ safety is not
as the PSA accepted, the judiciary is an independent arm of government. Neither
CS NSW, the Minister, the Attorney General
or any other member of the executive
government has the power to influence, let alone alter, the sentencing decision
of a judicial
officer. This is a fundamental tenet of our system of government.
No amount of strike action can change that reality and it may be
doubted that it would have any effect on future sentencing given that judicial
officers are independent and take an oath
to act “without fear or favour,
affection or ill-will.”
best, it may assist in persuading legislators to implement legislative
I understand the Attorney General retains the power to commence an appeal
against sentence, that power primarily resides in
, who is also
independent
, (or the prosecutor if
that was not the DPP at first instance, but only on a ground that involves a
question of law alone
usual course for any citizen aggrieved by a sentence is to make a request to the
DPP (and/or the prosecutor if the offence
had not been prosecuted by the DPP),
to consider whether an appeal ought to be lodged against the sentence. The
Commissioner of Corrective
Services has already taken this step or will shortly
do so. He also proposes to make submissions to the parole board opposing the
offending inmate’s imminent release.
representative for CS NSW advised the Commission that the Minister for
Corrections will make himself available as early as next
week to discuss the
POVB’s concerns and possible legislative reform. The PSA lead no evidence
as to the nature of the legislative
reform it seeks or what efforts it had made
since the assault of the correctional officers to seek such reform. All I know
the reform sought by the PSA is from the PVOB’s motion calling for
“mandatory custodial sentencing for the assault of
law enforcement
Industrial Relations Secretary on behalf of the Department of Primary
Industries and Regional Development v Public Service Association
Professional Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales
[2024] NSWIRComm 1065
Fisheries Case”
) I declined to make
dispute orders to stop fisheries officers engaging in work bans which were
designed to draw public attention
to safety issues confronting fisheries
officers and in so doing, to prompt legislative reform which was necessary
before the safety
measures sought by the union could be implemented. Ultimately,
I declined to make dispute orders in the
Fisheries Case
, the employer was unable to establish there was a risk to the public
interest and the evidence showed that the union members had
agitated for actions
to be taken to improve employees’ safety, including by legislative reform,
through consultative committees
and the like, for over two and half years, to no
is some similarity between that case and this, in that the implementation of
some of the safety measures sought by the union
Fisheries Case
were outside of the control of the employer, prompting the union to take
industrial action to gain the attention of legislators,
and similarly in this
case, the sentence to be served by the offending inmate; whether he is to be
granted parole; and legislative
reform to ensure similar sentences are not meted
out in the future, are outside of the control of CS NSW. However, that is the
of the similarity.
in this matter, there is uncontroverted evidence of a real and present risk
to the safety of the remaining staff of CS NSW, inmates
and the broader
community, including staff, patients and visitors at hospitals. It is
unnecessary for me to rehearse these risks
further – they are evident and
described as being “catastrophic”. While the PSA pointed to the
safety risks the
(inadequate) sentence posed to its members, which I accept are
also real as inmates may be emboldened to assault correctional officers
think they will not receive a further custodial sentence, there is not an
identifiable imminent risk to safety in the sense
there is from the strike
will also be real disruption to the criminal justice system and while only for
two days, such is the complexity of the justice
system, an inability to have a
court appearance proceed on a given day may result in many days, weeks or even
months of additional
delay for an accused. As the adage goes, justice delayed is
justice denied.
the POVB have acted pre-emptively and in disregard for the Award procedure
for settling grievances and disputes. The sentence was
handed down only
yesterday. The appropriate course would have been for the POVB to immediately
notify CS NSW of its concerns with
the sentence and to request that action to be
taken along the lines outlined at [
]. If that request fell on deaf ears (which was
unlikely given the attitude of CS NSW) consideration could then have been given
notifying the dispute to the Commission, as stipulated in the Award
procedures. As noted above, in the
Fisheries Case
the unions had raised
their legislative reform agenda and safety requests more generally for two and
half years in appropriate fora
before resorting to industrial action, (although
regrettably in that case the union had also not first sought the assistance of
Commission).
ink is barely dry on the Magistrate’s decision. The processes available to
address the POVB’s concerns have only just
commenced. Those processes may
well result in a positive outcome for the POVB and certainly should have been
exhausted before industrial
action was contemplated, particularly of the kind
engaged in here.
Walton J confirmed
in Secretary of the Ministry of Health v New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives' Association
[2022] NSWSC 1178
; 320 IR 249 at
reference to
Bluescope Steel Limited (formerly BHP Steel Limited) v The
Australian Workers' Union, New South Wales (No 2)
(2005) 141 IR 329
NSWIRComm 36
(Wright J, President, Walton J, Vice-President, and
Marks J) and other decisions of the Commission, that the Commission may take
into account provisions in awards about dispute resolution processes when
determining whether to make a dispute order (and by extension,
any relief in
respect of a dispute), "because it would be inconsistent with the objects of the
Act to "turn a blind eye" or disregard
terms or obligations under an industrial
instrument made under the Act." I do not consider that the generalised potential
in risk to correctional officers’ safety that may flow from the
Magistrate’s decision, real as it may be, provides sufficient
justification for the POVB to vary the procedures set out in the Agreed
Procedures for Settlement of Grievances and Disputes provided
for the Award, as
envisaged by cl 6.1 of those procedures.
the POVB have taken no steps to mitigate the risks arising from their
industrial action. In the
Fisheries Case
the fisheries officers carefully
calibrated their industrial action to ensure there was little risk to fisheries
and had no impact
noted above, there is no presumption that in the face of industrial action an
order under s 137 of the Act will be made. However,
circumstances of this case, the public interest dictated that dispute orders
should be made.
Janet McDonald
Commissioner
Oaths Act 1900
Schedule 4.
Crimes (Appeal and
Review) Act 2001
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501;
[1996] HCA 46
and see discussion in Visscher v Fripp
[2024] NSWIRComm 1075
; 337 IR 202 at
– [61] as to the nature and
source of the DPP’s
independence.
Crimes (Appeal
and Review) Act 2001
s 56(1)(a).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter