URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chomyn v Owners Corporation SP 14801 [2001] NSWSSB 6 (10 August 2001)
Chomyn v Owners Corporation SP 14801
[2001] NSWSSB 6
August 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES MANAGEMENT ACT 1996
APPLICATION NO : SB00/00835
STRATA SCHEME : SP 14801
ADDRESS OF : "...",
SCHEME FORSTER NSW 2428
APPLICANT : J
RESPONDENT : Owners Corporation SP 14801
Pursuant to
Section 181(3)
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
the order of the Adjudicator made
in proceedings is SA00/00680 on 5 December 2000 is revoked and the following
orders substituted
in place thereof.
It is the opinion of the
Board that the consent of the owners corporation for permission to keep a dog,
namely a border collie know
as "Jake" has been sought by the applicant Ms J
Chomyn pursuant to by-law 16(1) and that in breach of by-law 16(2) the owners
corporation
has unreasonably withheld its approval of keeping the said dog on
lot "..." being the lot owned by Ms Chomyn.
The applicant, Ms J Chomyn,
may keep her male Border Collie "Jake" in Lot "..." of the strata scheme,
subject to the following conditions:
Except when entering or
leaving the strata scheme, the dog is to be kept within the confines of lot
When entering or leaving the
strata scheme the dog is to be taken by the most direct route. The dog is never
to be taken above the
floor of the scheme upon which lot "..." is
When on the strata scheme,
the dogs are at all times to be clean of worms, fleas and other
When on common property of
the strata scheme the dogs are to be leashed and in control of a responsible
adult at all times.
The dog is not to create any
noise or nuisance so as to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of another
owner or occupier of another
lot or of any person lawfully using the common
The applicant is to ensure
that any soiling or damage to the common property caused by the dog is properly
The applicant is to ensure
that all waste matter generated by the dog is disposed of promptly and
hygienically so as to ensure that
no unpleasant odour or other nuisance is
caused thereby .
Permission to keep the dog on
the strata scheme relates only to the Border Collie presently owned by the
applicant known as
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE APPLICATION
This is an application to keep a dog, namely "Jake" a Border Collie in lot "..."
of the strata scheme. The strata scheme comprises
15 lots plus common property
on the New South Wales mid-north coast. The scheme is predominantly used for
holiday letting; only
one owner lives there permanently.
The applicant originally applied to a Strata Schemes Adjudicator in proceedings
SA00/00688 for permission to keep her dog "Jake"
on the strata scheme. That
application was dismissed by the Adjudicator pursuant to
section 163
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
") on 5 December 2000 for
reasons set out in that decision.
The applicant has appealed to the Board pursuant to
section 177
The appeal is a hearing
. The respondent argued that the appeal
had to be based on whether decision of the Adjudicator was unreasonable. This
is a misunderstanding
of the legislation as that consideration only applies to
an appeal from an interim order of an Adjudicator
(section 178(2)
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
THE APPLICANT’S EVIDENCE
Mr J C Hall presented an authority to represent the applicant as she was unable
to appear at the hearing.
Mr Hall gave evidence on oath.
Mr Hall gave evidence that the dog is a 2 year old Border Collie named "Jake".
A photograph of Jake was tendered in evidence.
Mr Hall gave evidence that Ms Chomyn had owned Jake since he was eight weeks
old. Chomyn had apparently owned the present unit for
a period of two years and
resides there from time to time in holiday periods. When previously staying in
her unit, Ms Chomyn had
apparently left Jake with friends in Forster so as not
to breach the present by-law.
Mr Hall gave evidence that Jake was part of Ms Chomyn’s family and that
she most attached to Jake. Ms Chomyn apparently also
had a considerable
problems with her weight and Doctors have advised her that she needed to
exercise and this would also assist hypertension
from which she suffered.
Apparently Ms Chomyn walks Jake daily to assist with this problem and that her
inability to have the dog
living with her in the unit hampers this routine. Mr
Hall tendered a medical certificate from Merewether Family Practice under the
hand of Doctor C Marley dated 15 February 2001. This medical certificate
confirmed that Ms Chomyn suffers from hypertension and
is overweight and that
this is being treated by a "strict exercise and dieting program". Further the
certificate states that "walking
the dog is an integral part of this program
please allow Ms Chomyn to have the dog in her unit". Further the certificate
to say that "since the program Ms Chomyn’s blood pressure and
weight has significantly improved."
Mr Hall gave evidence that when Ms Chomyn purchased the unit, she was aware that
she needed the approval of the owners corporation
under the by-laws to keep a
dog. Ms Chomyn was apparently prepared to abide by any restrictions placed upon
her by the owners corporation
and apparently also made this clear to them when
she sought their approval.
Mr Hall advised that due to where the unit is, the dog may be taken directly to
and from the unit without any need to use the stairs
on the strata scheme. A
photograph of this access was tendered in evidence together with photographs of
nearby parklands
Jake is apparently an "inside dog" and has a friendly nature. Jake has been
desexed and is regularly washed and treated with "Frontline"
flea prevention
treatment. Further, the dog has been fully vaccinated and is regularly wormed.
Jake does not bark excessively and
would not be left on his own.
Mr Hall stated that Ms Chomyn had been told that there was a "no dogs" policy in
the strata scheme and primarily it was on this basis
that her application to
keep the dog had been refused.
Ms Chomyn was aware of the objections from other owners in the strata scheme
which had been submitted to the Adjudicator; Mr Hall
advised that she rejected
these as groundless.
Further Mr Hall, gave evidence that he had personally searched the books of the
strata scheme and was unable to locate any resolution
either of the executive
committee of the owners corporation or the owners corporation in general meeting
whereby any quote "no dogs"
policy had been approved. Mr Hall stated that a
sign had been placed on the strata scheme sometime before stating that "no dogs
were permitted on the premises" but this would appear to have been done without
any approval of the executive committee of the owners
corporation or the owners
corporation in general meeting. Accordingly, the assertion that there was a "no
dogs" policy was, in fact,
fallacious.
In the circumstances, Mr Hall contended that the reasons that had been presented
by the owners corporation to deny Ms Chomyn keeping
the dog were
unreasonable.
Further, Mr Hall stated that he and his partner had been granted permission in
proceedings SA00/00131 by a Strata Schemes Adjudicator
on 5 April 2000 to keep
two dogs in their lots in the same strata scheme and that since that time they
had received no complaints
from any other owner in the strata scheme concerning
their dogs. Accordingly, the presence of dogs per se had not caused any
to other lot owners in the strata scheme at least in so far as he had
been made aware.
Mr Hall referred to and tendered in evidence letters and documents that had been
previously tendered to the Adjudicator which are
set out as follows:
1. Plan of the Strata Scheme
2. Letter detailing the result of the mediation;
3. Letter dated 17 November 1999 from the strata managing agent about the by-law
concerning animals.
4. Letter dated 12 May 2000 from the strata managing agent seeking permission to
keep the dog.
5. Letter dated 16 May 2000 from the strata managing agent confirming the matter
is being referred to an Extraordinary General Meeting.
6. Letter from the applicant dated 22 May 2000 seeking permission to keep the
7. Response from the chairperson of the owners corporation dated 22 May 2000
confirming that the matter must go to an Extraordinary
General Meeting.
8. Letter from the strata managing agent dated 16 June 2000 requesting
information for the Notice of Motion to be put to the Extraordinary
9. Letter dated 27 June 2000 from the applicant setting out information for the
Extraordinary General Meeting that Is her reasons
for wanting to have the dog
with her on the lot.
10. Letter dated 30 June 2000 from the strata managing agent to owners enclosing
the Agenda for the Extraordinary General Meeting
to be held on 28 July 2000.
11. Minutes of the Extraordinary General Meeting.
12. Letter dated 25 August 2000 objecting to the minutes to the Extraordinary
General Meeting regarding the quote "no pets policy".
13. Immediate article "why pets make you healthy" from the Sunday Telegraph
dated 25 June 2000.
14. Letter from CJ Hall and VE Hall of Lot 7 dated 15 November 2000 agreeing to
the owners of unit "..." keeping their dog on the
strata scheme to letter of 15
February 2001 of V Hall in further support of Ms Chomyn's application to keep
the dog on her lot.
THE RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
Mr C Stevens represented the owners corporation.
Firstly, Mr Stevens advised that there was a no dogs policy and tendered copies
of photographs of the signs clearly that displayed
"no pets allowed" in the
carpark of the premises and on the noticeboard. Further, Mr Stevens tendered
the "house rules" which stated,
amongst other things, "pets (including dogs and
cats) are not allowed on the premises (either in the units or on the common
Mr Stevens stated that the units in their strata scheme were in a holiday area
and were primarily let, he being the main permanent
resident in the strata
scheme. He said that the owners were concerned that if holiday tenants saw pets
on the lots that they would
all bring their animals and that there would be
Mr Stevens stated that he was sure that there had been a meeting at some stage
approving both the house rules and the "no pets" policy
although was unable to
produce any minutes of any executive committee meeting of the owners corporation
or of the owners corporation
in general meeting to support this contention.
Mr Stevens stated that as there was a "no pets" policy which was quite clear
that the executive committee’s refusal was not
unreasonable.
Further, Mr Stevens tendered the following documents in support of the refusal
by the owners corporation:-
1. Letter of C Stevens dated 15 November 2000.
2. Letter from S McPherson Lot "..." dated 10 November 2000.
3. Letter of J Cowling and J Cowling dated 10 November 2000 (Lot "...").
4. Letter of L Dalligan (Lot "...") dated 14 November 2000.
5. Letter of J Joyce and D Bennett (Lot "...") 15 November 2000.
6. D Kay (Lot "...") dated 17 November 2000.
To paraphrase the objections set out in these letters they are as follows:-
1. The majority of unit owners do not want the dogs.
2. The owner of Lot "..." suffers from allergies and may find himself
encountering health problems when visiting the Strata Scheme
on holiday (no
medical evidence provided to support this).
3. Other visiting tenants may suffer allergies which may affect prospective
lettings and therefore other owners’ financial
situations.
4. Children may be attacked by the dog.
5. Inappropriate to keep a large dog on a lot of a strata scheme. As the owners
of the Lot "..." and "..." (Mr and Mrs Hall) have
already been allowed to keep
the dogs, additional dogs will create chaos.
6. Tenants will think they are also allowed to bring pets which could lead to a
floodgate and "unpleasantness and possible police
intervention."
7. Lists of self imposed conditions are a waste of time as there is no-one to
enforce the conditions.
8. There are no facilities in the strata scheme to accommodate any dogs.
9. The owner of lot "..." contends that she has a mortgage on her premises and
that allowing the dog is a variation or abolition
of by-law 16 and that this in
turn will affect her mortgage.
10. The proximity of the strata scheme to parkland is irrelevant.
11. There is a "no dogs" policy in the strata scheme it was there when the
applicant purchased the premises.
12. The medical reasons to support the application were only introduced at
13. The owner of lot "..." states that Ms Chomyn should board her dog elsewhere
like he does.
14. The presence of dogs will create odours and there will be noise with
Mr Stevens stated that he was concerned that if Ms Chomyn was allowed to keep
her dog with the conditions imposed, that it would
be his job as a full time
resident to police and enforce those conditions.
Mr Stevens conceded that since Mr and Mrs Hall had been allowed to keep their
dogs that he had not received any complaints from other
lot owners nor had he
himself been disturbed.
Mr Stevens in relation to the no dog policy sought to rely on an earlier Board
decision of
Arthur Paris
the Owners Strata Plan 16973
February 1998).
In support of his argument Mr Stevens conceded that no
special by-law had been passed to amend or repeal by-law 16 to deny owners
keeping their dogs on the Strata Scheme.
By-law 16 found in schedule 1 of the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
states as follows:-
The Keeping of
1. Subject to 49(4), an owner or occupier of a lot must not, without the
approval in writing of the owners corporation, keep any
animal on the lot or the
common property.
2. the owners corporation must not unreasonably withhold its approval of the
keeping of an animal on a lot or the common property.
The appropriate time of
considering whether the consent has been unreasonably withheld is at the time
the decision was made by the
owners corporation.
It is inappropriate for the Board to consider information (such as the medical
benefits) that was not available to the owners corporation
at that time the
refusal was made (
The Owners Strata Plan 16973
February 1998 SB 98/18).
The Board is required to determine the reasonableness of the decision on the
information that was before the owners corporation,
at the time the refusal was
Section 150
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
provides as
150 Order Relating To Keeping Of
(1) an adjudicator may order a person who the adjudicator considers is keeping
an animal on a lot or common property in contravention
of the by-laws to cause
the animal to be removed from the parcel within a specified time, and to be kept
away from the parcel.
(2) an order under subsection (1) ceases to have effect if the keeping of the
animal on the lot or common property is subsequently
authorised in accordance
with the by-laws.
(3) an application for an order under subsection (1) may be made only by an
owners corporation, a strata managing agent, the lessor
of a leasehold strata
scheme, an owner, any person having an estate or interest in a lot or an
occupier of a lot.
(4) an adjudicator may, by order, declare that the applicant for the order may
keep an animal on a lot or common property in such
manner as is specified in the
order if the adjudicator is satisfied
(a) subclause (2) of by-law 16 in schedule 1 (or a provision to the like effect
in any by-laws) is in force in relation to the strata
scheme, and
(b) the application is made with the consent of the owner of the applicant's lot
(if the applicant is not the owner), and
(c) the owners corporation has unreasonably withheld its consent to the keeping
by the applicant of the animal on the lot or the
(4a) an application for an order under subsection (4) may be made only
(a) an owner of a lot in the strata scheme, or
(b) an occupant of a lot in the strata scheme, with the consent of the owner of
(5) whether or not an order under this section is consistent with any by-law,
the order binds:
(a) in the case of a freehold strata scheme, each owner and occupier of a lot in
and the owners corporation for the strata scheme,
(b) in the case of a leasehold strata scheme, the lessor of the scheme and each
owner, sublessee and occupier of a lot in and the
owners corporation for the
strata scheme, or
(c) if the strata scheme concerned is for a stratum parcel, each person who is
bound by the strata management statement for the building
and its site.
Did the owners corporation unreasonably withhold its consent to the keeping by
the applicant in the lot or strata common property
(section 150(4)(c)
Strata Schemes Management Act
The word "unreasonably" is to be given its meaning in the ordinary parlance; the
authority for this is Davies J in
Curragh Coal Co Pty Lt
[1984] FCR46. In order to have regard to the ordinary
parlance one has regard to the dictionary. The Macquarie Dictionary provides
the following definitions:-
"Reason" Sound judgement or good
"Reasonable" Agreeable to reason or sound judgement, endowed with reasons.
"Unreasonable" Not reasonable, not endowed with reason, not guided by reason
or good sense, not based or in accordance with reason
The reasons for objection I propose to deal with in order as
1. The majority of unit owners do not want the dog. The test is not whether the
bulk of the majority of the unit owners want the
dogs; it is whether the request
has been unreasonably refused. It would seem that the decision in relation to
objecting to the dogs
arose out of a common belief that there was a valid "no
dogs" policy that had been accepted by the owners corporation sometime before.
There is clearly no evidence that there was ever a "no dogs" policy passed by
the owners corporation either by the executive committee
thereof or by the
owners corporation in general meeting. It is noted however there are other
issues for the other owners and these
will be dealt with below. It is noted
that the bulk of the units are only occupied by the owners in holiday season and
2. Allergies. There is no medical evidence provided by the owner of Lot "..."
that he suffers allergies in relation to dog. Further
it is noted that the
complainant does not appear to have been affected by the presence of dogs
already on the strata scheme. Further
in any event there is no reason as to why
the dog in lot "..." should be anywhere near the lot which the complainant owns.
As to any possible allergies of prospective tenants this is highly speculative
3. Children may be attacked by dogs. There is no evidence that the dog in
question was of a vicious breed or nature. This concern
is speculative at
4. Inappropriate to keep a large dog on the lot of a strata scheme. There was
evidence provided by the applicant of her intention
to regularly exercise the
dog. A view expressed that it is inappropriate to keep a dog on a lot is a
subjective rather than an objective
view and clearly the validity of this
argument will vary from case to case. There is no evidence to support the view
presented by
the complainant in the present
5. Opening the Floodgate. There was no evidence produced to support this.
Further the allegation that this would lead to unpleasantness
and possible
police intervention appears to be somewhat
sensational.
6. Inability to ensure compliance with conditions. It would be quite clear if
the conditions adhered to by the Board are not being
met. That is if the dog is
found frolicking over the common properties or is otherwise leaving its
It is noted that a similar list of conditions were placed upon Mr and Mrs Hall
in the keeping of the dog on their lots and that no
problems have arisen from
this, or at least none have been complained
Mr Stevens also expressed a concern that it would fall upon him to "police" the
conditions. There is simply no requirement that
this be the case and this
appears to be a self assumed role that Mr Stevens wishes to
7. There are no facilities in the strata scheme to accommodate any dogs.
The Board is not quite sure what the relevant complainant means by this; there
is no suggestion by the applicant that the strata
schemes supplies any such
facilities to accommodate the dog in
8. Jeopardy to mortgage. The concern expressed that the consent of keeping of
dogs is somehow a variation or abolition of by-law
16 is nonsense. By-law 16
clearly contemplates the possibility of applications to the owners corporation
for permission to keep
a dog on a lot within a strata scheme. No actual
evidence is presented that the keeping of a lot on the strata scheme would
the relevant complainant’s
9. The proximity to parklands. I would have thought this is highly relevant
given that it will enable Jake to be exercised nearby
without jeopardising the
comfort of others using the strata scheme.
10. The "no dogs" policy. There is no evidence able to be produced that the
owners corporation in general meeting or the executive
of the owners corporation
ever approved the establishment of the house rules which amongst other things
set out a "no pets" policy.
The "no dogs" allowed sign was apparently put up pursuant to the "no pets"
policy. Again there is no evidence that there was ever
approval of the owners
corporation in general meeting or by the executive committee of the owners
corporation to erect the sign let
alone the policy.
11. Possible detriment on proposed lettings. There was no evidence produced to
support his. This is speculative highly speculative
12. Late advice regarding medical reasons. The owners state that the medical
reasons for Ms Chomyn requiring the dog were only advanced
at mediation and not
at the time the consideration of Ms Chomyn’s request was made by the
owners corporation in general meeting.
None of the persons objecting however
advise whether this information would have made any difference to their
decision: the range
of other objections including particularly the so-called "no
dogs policy" would appear to override any of the medical advice.
However, as aforementioned the appropriate time to consider their reasonableness
is at the time of when the original request was
put and considered by the owners
corporation. As the only information that is claimed to have been wanting at
that time was the
medical information it is difficult to accept that the owners
corporation was not armed with all the other information which Ms Chomyn
provide about her personal desire to have the dog and her willingness to comply
with any conditions imposed.
13. The owner of Lot "..." Ms Chomyn should board her dog elsewhere. This is a
subjective view. A decision by one owner to deal
with their personal matters
should not necessarily be a standard arbitrarily imposed upon others.
14. Odours and barking. There are by-laws in place to protect the rights and
comforts of owners and other occupants alike. Should
the presence of Jake on
Lot "..." cause problems such as barking, clearly the others in the strata
scheme will be able to avail themselves
of by-law 1 in relation to noise.
Accordingly, they are not without remedy.
As the bases for objection appear to be either without foundation, speculative
or fallaciously based upon a supposed "no dogs" policy
(that has never at any
stage been approved by the owners corporation) it is difficult to accept that
the refusal to keep Jake on
Lot 1 is not unreasonable.
It is important however, that the parties note that the orders that are made
above apply to Jake only and do not apply to any other
dog that Ms Chomyn may
acquire or have visit. Further, the permission does not run with the title of
the unit and does not apply
to any other occupant (eg tenant) or visitor to the
The conditions that are placed are stringent but are not unworkable and are
required by the Board to be adhered to as an intrinsic
part of the permission
Accordingly the orders were made as set out above.
The delay in delivery of this decision is regretted.
Strata Schemes
Residential Tribunal
10 August 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (73.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter