URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Nair [2013] NSWMT 19 (2 December 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Nair
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 19
Hearing Date(s):
Decision Date:
02 December 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr J Wright
Ms D Robinson
See paragraph 31
Catchwords:
Serious criminal conduct, breach of conditions, deregistration
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (No 86a)
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act 1985
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
General Medical Council v
[1943] AC 627
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Suresh Surendranath
Nair (Respondent)
Representation
Mr P Strickland SC (Applicant)
Mr M Lynch (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Suppression order in relation to the identity of Persons A and F
REASONS FOR
proceedings before the Tribunal are brought by the Health Care Complaints
Commission ("the HCCC"). The HCCC seeks resolution of
four complaints. They are
contained in an Amended Notice of Complaint dated 2 December 2013.
respondent has consented to the Tribunal dealing with both the establishment of
the complaints and the imposition of protective
orders at the same time.
Tribunal is acutely aware of the seriousness of the allegations put by the HCCC
and the long-reaching effect of the orders open
to it. Accordingly it has
approached the evidence on the basis of the standard of proof in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Some background
respondent was born in 1968 in Malaysia. He came to Australia with his family
when aged 11. He remains a Malaysian citizen. He
attended secondary school in
Sydney and graduated from Sydney University with the degree of MBBS in 1991. He
began his medical career
as an intern at St Vincent's Hospital and then worked
at various hospitals as a Registrar, usually in the area of neurosurgery. In
2001 he became a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of Surgeons in
Neurosurgery.
the present time the respondent is not a registered medical practitioner. His
registration was suspended on 26 November 2009.
4 February 2010 the respondent was charged with murder. He later pleaded guilty
to three charges: the manslaughter of Person A
on 19 November 2009, the supply
of a prohibited drug (cocaine) on 15 February 2009 and the supply of a
prohibited drug (again cocaine)
on 9 January 2010. The respondent was sentenced
in the District Court on 26 August 2011. He was sentenced to imprisonment for a
of a little less than eight years with a non-parole period of just over
five years. The reasons for sentence of Toner SC DCJ, together
Statement of Agreed Facts, appear behind Tab 5 in Exhibit A.
sentence imposed on the respondent was the subject of an appeal, which resulted
in some minor changes to the term of imprisonment
imposed in respect of the
first count of supplying a prohibited drug. The result of the decision of the
Court of Criminal Appeal
(Exhibit A, Tab 7) is that the respondent will become
eligible for release on parole on 31 July 2014.
The complaints
One is an allegation that the respondent was convicted of the three offences
outlined above. In specific terms the drug
offences were contrary to
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
The offence of
manslaughter is defined in
Section 18(1)(b)
Crimes Act 1900
Two alleges that the respondent has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of Section 139B
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) (No 86a)
National Law)
contravened conditions that had been imposed upon his registration. The
conditions had been imposed on 2 September 2005
and included a health condition
"Dr Nair is not to self-administer any substance detailed in Schedule 4
or Schedule 8 of the NSW Poisons List or Schedule 1 of the
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act
particulars of the complaint allege that the condition was breached in February,
June and November 2009.
Three was deleted in the Amended Notice of Complaint.
Four alleges that the respondent is guilty of professional misconduct under
Section 139E of the
National Law
. The particulars of the complaint are
the matters relied on in respect of Complaint Two.
Five alleges that the respondent "
is not a suitable person to hold
registration in the practitioner's profession
." The complaint relates to the
supply of a prohibited drug on 19 November 2009 in breach of bail conditions to
which the respondent
was then subject. In addition it is alleged that the
respondent made false and misleading statements to the Medical Board in relation
to his compliance with his conditions of practice.
respondent admitted all of the complaints. The evidence against the respondent
was overwhelming. The Tribunal formally finds the
complaints have been
established. This relates to both the alleged facts and the respective findings
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct. In addition,
again admitted by the respondent, the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent
is not a suitable person to hold registration in the practitioner's
profession.
respondent elected not to attend the hearing. He is currently in custody. He has
been represented by experienced solicitors and
counsel and has provided a
detailed statement. The Tribunal is satisfied that his case has been
comprehensively presented and that
the respondent has not been prejudiced by his
absence. In addition the Tribunal has not regarded the respondent's decision not
attend as indicative of any lack of respect for the
Protective orders
addition to the admission of the complaints the respondent added, in his
statement dated 19 November 2013 (Exhibit 1, Tab 1), these
"17. I do not contest the cancellation of my registration as a medical
practitioner and I have no intention of reapplying for registration
release from custody or in the foreseeable future.
18. I have discussed this with my advisers and I am aware that I would not
be able to meet the requirements for registration as a
medical practitioner. I
understand I have brought the profession into disrepute, and I have breached my
professional obligations
to my colleagues, and in some circumstances my
patients. Apart from the unlikelihood of ever retraining to re-establish myself
a neurosurgeon, I accept that there is a significant breach of trust with the
profession that is probably irreparable."
letter to the Tribunal dated 22 November 2013 the HCCC outlined the remaining
issues in the hearing as follows:
"The matters which remain at issue between the parties are: whether the
Tribunal should make an order under section 149C(7) of the
National Law that an
application for review of an order under
may not be made until after a
specified time, and, if so, the period of time; and costs."
the commencement of the hearing the parties indicated an agreed position in
respect of the orders to be made by the Tribunal. The
only matter not agreed
concerned costs; however an agreed position was ultimately reached.
respect of the period for which the respondent would not be able to apply to
renew his registration the parties had agreed that
this would be until 31
December 2019, effectively some ten years since the commission of the offences.
was submitted that this preclusion period fell within the general range of
similar periods applied in other cases, remembering
that other periods could be
of guidance only (
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA
Tribunal accepts that its role is not to punish. This was the task of Judge
Toner in the District Court and of the Court of Criminal
Appeal. The Tribunal's
task is to make protective orders, protective of both the public and the medical
profession. The following
statement of Viscount Simon LC in
General Medical
Council v Spackman
[1943] AC 627
is an appropriate starting point:
"The high reputation of the medical profession as a whole depends in no
small measure on excluding from it those whose professional
misconduct makes
them unworthy to belong to it, and the confidence which the public are
accustomed to put in the family doctor is
intimately connected with the
assurance that those who practise the art of medicine are, in all relations with
their patients, individuals
of the highest honour".
relation to the medical profession the respondent says in paragraph 16 of his
"16. I accept the findings of the sentencing judge and the Court of
Appeal. I accept that the Medical profession will view my conduct
observation is correct.
conduct was over a prolonged period during which the respondent must have known
that his actions were both medically and ethically
wrong as well unlawful. His
history of cocaine use is set out in the report of Dr Wilcox dated 27 June 2011
(Exhibit 1, Tab 4).
addition the conduct involved a complete abandonment by the respondent of his
fundamental role as a protector of human health.
events of 19 November 2009 are graphically described in the statement of one of
the escorts involved (Exhibit A, Tab 43). They
formed the background to the
manslaughter charge. They display a complete disregard for the welfare of the
two escorts the respondent
had engaged. He plied them with cocaine and alcohol
until one of them reached a state in which she (Person A) desperately required
medical attention. This attention, which could have been administered, or at
least arranged, by the respondent was not available
because he had, by his own
actions, again through alcohol and cocaine, rendered himself ineffectual. This
passage is included in
the Agreed Facts before Judge Toner:
"The offender ingested a large quantity of cocaine allowing himself to
become very intoxicated and consequently diminishing his capacity
to appreciate
the condition of the invitees and act responsibly. When she became unwell the
offender failed to provide adequate medical
assistance, particularly by failing
to call an ambulance."
(Exhibit A, Tab 5).
respondent acknowledges his failings in paragraph 20 of his
"20. I acknowledge that I allowed myself to become so intoxicated that I
failed to fulfil my responsibility as a medical practitioner
towards these
women, and in particular, to Person A."
addition these events occurred only about seven months after another escort
(Person F) had passed away after taking cocaine during
an engagement with the
respondent. He was aware of her death.
breach of health conditions already imposed on the respondent must also be
viewed very seriously. The conditions were imposed
both for the benefit of the
respondent and his patients. His disregard for the conditions, including the
inherent dishonesty displayed,
would of itself justify a cancellation of the
respondent's registration. The same can be said for the false and misleading
listed in Complaint Five.
considering the preclusion for review period the Tribunal's first impression was
that the agreed length of time was not sufficient.
However, on further
consideration, and bearing in mind that the HCCC advocated the suggested period,
the Tribunal came to the decision
that the length of time was sufficient and
appropriate. The Tribunal is also mindful of the very high bar the respondent
to surmount in order to be permitted to re-register.
Final orders
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(a) A direction that the respondent's registration be
(b) Alternatively, if appropriate, a direction that subject to Order (c) below
the respondent be disqualified from applying for
re-registration;
(c) The respondent may not make an application for review of his registration
prior to 31 December 2019;
(d) Each party is to pay its own costs of the proceedings up to and including 12
September 2013. Thereafter the respondent is to
pay the HCCC's
(e) The appropriate review body is the Medical Tribunal of New South
(f) The exhibits may be returned.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (141 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter