URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/262.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
E-Synergies.com Pty Ltd Pty Ltd ATF the Num-Num Trust v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue [2025] NSWCATAD 262; (24 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
E-Synergies.com Pty Ltd Pty Ltd ATF the Num-Num Trust v Chief Commissioner
of State Revenue
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 262
Hearing Date(s):
29 September 2025
Date of Orders:
24 October 2025
Decision Date:
24 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
EA MacIntyre, Senior Member
The assessment of the Respondent is confirmed.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - reviewable decision - correct and preferable decision
- Civil and Administrative Tribunal - objection - appeal
– administrative
STATE REVENUE - land tax - exemption - land used for
primary production - rural land - dominant use - cultivation - maintenance of
animals - production of bottled water
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Biodiversity Conservation
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Land Tax Management Act 1956
Native Vegetation Act
Taxation Administration Act 1997 (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Chandrala v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2021] NSWCATAD 50
Commissioner of State Revenue v Metricon Qld Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 11
Taylor FT Pty Limited as trustee for Dwayne Taylor Family Trust and DA and P
Taylor v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWCATAD 8
Australia Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] HCA 20
Manorstead v Chief Commissioner
[2010] NSWSC 867
Leda Manorstead Pty Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] NSWCA
Longford Investments Pty. Limited v. Commissioner of Land Tax
(N.S.W.) 78 ATC 4264
Loomes v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
NSWCATAD 133
Pointsyde Investments Pty. Ltd. v. Clyne. 86 ATC
Sonter v Commissioner of Land Tax (NSW)
(1976) 7 ATR 30
Estates Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2017] NSWCATAD 117
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
E-Synergies.com Pty Ltd Pty Ltd ATF the Num-Num Trust (Applicant)
Commissioner of State Revenue (Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Self represented (Applicant)
Crown Solicitor
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00169283
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant, E-Synergies.com Pty Ltd ATF the Num-Num Trust
(“Applicant”), challenges a number of assessments of land
by the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue, the respondent in this matter
(“Respondent”).
Applicant considers that exemption from land tax should apply because the land
the subject of the assessments is, in the Applicant’s
submission, land
used for primary production. The Respondent disagrees.
applies if the dominant use of the land is for;
(1) cultivation, for the purpose of selling the produce of the cultivation;
(2) the maintenance of animals for the purpose of selling them or their natural
increase or bodily produce.
question for determination is whether or not such an exemption applies.
Applicant owned certain land in NSW during the land tax years in issue. The land
was located in the Northern Rivers area of NSW.
It was zoned rural.
Steve Toneguzzo was a director of the Applicant.
Applicant leased part of the land to a different entity, Exotic Organics Pty
Ltd. That entity was a trustee of a trust. That trustee
had a right to graze
cattle on the leased land. The land, however, had multiple uses.
first use was the grazing of cattle. The cattle were both beef and dairy
land also contained two residential dwellings. They are described respectively
as the villa and the cottage. The second use was
the rental of both properties.
The cottage was leased under residential tenancy agreements for certain periods
during the relevant
land tax years. The villa was also leased under residential
tenancy agreements for periods during the relevant land tax years.
third use was growing bamboo and trees upon the land. There was evidence of
sales of bamboo and timber products grown on the land.
7 August 2022, the Applicant entered into a Property Vegetation Plan
(“PVP”) with the Northern Rivers Catchment Management
pursuant to the
Native Vegetation Act 2003
(NSW). That agreement remained
in force until November 2023. Under the PVP, the Applicant undertook certain
obligations for revegetation
and restoration and weed control, maintenance,
regrowth and riparian monitoring.
2019 and 2021, a café/restaurant operated on the land. The operator was
the lessee. This was the fourth use.
2022, the lessee started a business of bottling and selling mineral water taken
from the land. This was the fifth use.
sixth use included the growing of fruit, vegetables, herbs and roots on the
land. The Applicant also claimed that chickens were
kept on the land for the
production of eggs.
an investigation, the Respondent issued assessments for land tax on 18 October
2024 for the 2020 to 2024 land tax years. On
23 October 2024, the Applicant
lodged an objection to the assessments. On 13 February 2025, the Respondent
disallowed the Applicant’s
14 January 2025, the Respondent issued a land tax notice of assessment to the
Applicant for the 2025 land tax year. On 29 May 2025,
the Applicant lodged an
objection to that assessment. On 23 June 2025, the Respondent disallowed the
Applicant commenced proceedings on 2 May 2025 seeking administrative review of
the assessments of land tax for the 2020-2024 land
tax years. As a result of an
amended application, all of the assessments for 2020-2025 are the subject of
these proceedings.
Applicant’s right of review
land tax has been assessed,
Taxation Administration Act 1996
(NSW) (“Administration Act”), allows rights of objection to a
taxpayer dissatisfied with an assessment. This is an internal
review process
under which the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue, the Respondent in these
proceedings, must consider and determine
the objection (s 91 of the
Administration Act).
taxpayer who is dissatisfied with the decision made upon the Respondent’s
determination of an objection, may apply to the
Tribunal for an
administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions
Review Act 1997
(“NSW”) (“ADR Act”)
the decision of the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue.
circumstances have arisen in the present matter as set out in the background
above, so bringing the matter within the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal.
onus of proving their case lies with the Applicant (s 100(3) of the
Administration Act).
Tribunal, dealing with the taxpayer’s application, may do one or more of
the following under s 101 of the Administration
“(a) confirm or revoke the assessment or other decision to which
the application relates,
(b) make an assessment or other decision in place of
the assessment or other decision to which the application relates,
(c) make an order for payment to the Chief Commissioner of any amount
of tax that is assessed as being payable but has not been paid,
(d) remit the matter to the Chief Commissioner for determination in
accordance with its finding or decision,
(e) make any further order as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.”
Consideration
tax is to be levied and paid on the taxable value of all land situated in New
South Wales which is owned by taxpayers, other
than land which is exempt from
taxation under the
Land Tax Management Act 1956
The rates of land tax payable are set out in the
Land Tax Act 1956
for certain land used for primary production is allowed under s 10AA of the
LTMA. That section provides as follows:
10AA Exemption for land used for primary
(1) Land that is rural land is exempt from taxation if it is land used for
primary production.
(2) Land that is not rural land is exempt from taxation if it is land used
for primary production and that use of the land—
(a) has a significant and substantial commercial purpose or
character, and
(b) is engaged in for the purpose of profit on a continuous or
repetitive basis (whether or not a profit is actually made).
(3) For the purposes of this section, land used for primary
production means land the dominant use of which is for—
(a) cultivation, for the purpose of selling the produce of the
cultivation, or
(b) the maintenance of animals (including birds), whether wild or
domesticated, for the purpose of selling them or their natural
increase or
bodily produce, or
(c) commercial fishing (including preparation for that fishing and
the storage or preparation of fish or fishing gear) or the commercial
fish, molluscs, crustaceans or other aquatic animals, or
(d) the keeping of bees, for the purpose of selling their honey,
(e) a commercial plant nursery, but not a nursery at which the
principal cultivation is the maintenance of plants pending their
sale to the
general public, or
(f) the propagation for sale of mushrooms, orchids or flowers.
(4) For the purposes of this section, land is rural
(a) the land is zoned rural, rural residential, non-urban or large
lot residential under a planning instrument, or
(b) the land has another zoning under a planning instrument, and the
zone is a type of rural zone under the standard instrument
prescribed under
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
section 3.20
(c) the land is not within a zone under a planning instrument
but the Chief Commissioner is satisfied the land is rural land”.
the exemption claimed by the Applicant to apply, the land in question must,
first of all, be “rural land” within the
meaning of the LTMA. There
was no dispute that the land was rural land as a consequence of its zoning.
land is rural land, the availability of exemption depends on whether the land is
“land used for primary production”.
Land will fall within this
description if the “dominant use” of the land is a use that falls
within one of the subparagraphs
of s10AA(3).
question for determination in this matter is whether the land in question had a
dominant use for “cultivation, for the purpose
of selling the produce of
the cultivation” within the meaning of s 10AA(3)(a). Alternatively, the
question was whether the
dominant use was the maintenance of “animals
(including birds), whether wild or domesticated, for the purpose of selling them
or their natural increase or bodily produce” within the meaning of s
10AA(3)(b). The Applicant claimed that both were uses
of the land.
Applicant also said that;
(1) there was no power to assess land tax retrospectively for the 2020 to 2024
land tax years;
(2) that part of the land covered by the PVP and zoned for environmental
conservation should be exempt under s 10(1)(p) of the LTMA;
(3) the land should be exempt from land tax for the 2021 to 2022 years as it was
impacted by flooding;
(4) the revenue and income received should not be the dominant or sole
determinant of whether the land was exempt as primary production
(5) The land should be apportioned relative to the percentage of land use for
primary production and non primary production activities;
(6) land tax should be refunded and payment deferred until the sale of the land
for hardship reasons;
(7) the residential tenancy agreements will need to be terminated early to
facilitate sale of the land.
Respondent’s submission, on the other hand, was that the Applicant had not
discharged the onus of proof to show that the
dominant use was what the
Applicant claimed. The Respondent said that the evidence did not show that the
dominant use of the land
was for primary production within the meaning of s
10AA(3) but was something else, namely use as a cafe/restaurant or earning rent
from the cottage and villa.
What does “dominant use”
question for determination is what was the “dominant use” of the
land. If it was a “use” that fell within
ss 10AA(3)(a) or (b), the
Applicant’s will succeed in its claim for exemption from land tax.
matter in issue, first of all, requires consideration of what “use”
means within s 10AA(3). The Courts have said that
what is a “use” of
land within the meaning of s 10AA(3) is determined having regard to the
use of the land. In
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v
Metricon Qld Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA 11
, the Court of Appeal said, at
“I am of the opinion that the concept of “use” relevant to s
10AA as a whole (and s 10AA(3) in particular) –
a concept in which the
preposition “for” plays a central role – is one of physical
deployment of Isaacs J’s
“concrete physical mass” in pursuance
of a particular purpose of obtaining present benefit or advantage from it, with
deployment understood as including not only activity but also inactivity
deliberately adopted as a means of obtaining such actual
and present advantage
from the land; and with purpose understood as objectively ascertained purpose.
There is no requirement that
immediate productive return be achieved, as long as
some benefit or advantage accrues. In a s 10AA(3) case, each “use”
considered in the search for “dominant use” must be of the character
I have described. Otherwise, the necessary process
of comparison cannot sensibly
be undertaken”.
Applicant’s claim for exemption under s 10AA(3)(a) relevantly requires
that they show that cultivation was “for the
purpose of selling the
produce of the cultivation”. It is well accepted that establishing what is
a purpose of cultivation
within the meaning of s 10AA(3)(a) depends not on the
subjective intention of the user of the land but on what is objectively shown
the evidence as a purpose of commercial gain. The Court of Appeal in
said at [59] and [60]:
“Purpose is a concept necessarily at work in s 10AA(3). Each of the six
activities in paras (a) to (f) has a purpose or objective
of commercial gain.
There is a distinction, however, between the purpose for which land is acquired,
on the one hand, and the purpose
for which it is currently being devoted to use,
on the other. This point is particularly important when considering any
use under s 10AA(3). The purpose of acquisition may or may not
correspond with the purpose of current use. Land acquired specifically
sowing of crops may be put to either that use or some other use, such as cattle
grazing or residential subdivision development.
The inquiry directed by s
10AA(3) is as to current tangible and physical deployment and its purpose, not
the purpose of acquisition.
Little is likely to turn on subjective purpose or intention. The question is not
what an owner, lessee or other person able to do
so decides is to happen in
relation to the land. The task is, rather, to determine whether, as an objective
matter, the things that
that person causes to happen – no doubt in
pursuance of the person’s purpose or intention – constitute
and, if so, whether (and to what extent) that
“use” is a use described in paras (a) to (f) of s 10AA(3). Relevant
and intentions are principally those already executed, although the
complexion of things already done may be coloured by whatever
the relevant
purpose or intention envisages for the future”.
Courts have said that the word “dominant” qualifies both the word
“use” as well as the “purpose”
of the use. In other
words, the Applicant must show that both the dominant use and the dominant
purpose of that use come within s
10AA. The High Court in
Godolphin Australia
Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] HCA 20
, at [28] –
“The appellant's case turned upon what work should be given to the word
"dominant" in s 10AA(3)(b). For the reasons which follow,
it should not be
accepted that this word
qualifies the phrase "use of which
is for ... the maintenance of animals" and no more. Instead, when the text of s
10AA(3) is read
in its immediate statutory context and in light of broader
statutory and extrinsic context, the word qualifies one composite phrase,
(and relevantly) "use of which is for ... the maintenance of animals ... for the
purpose of selling them ...". The "use-for-a-purpose"
construction is thus
The "use-for-a-purpose" construction is supported by the presence of the word
"for", which is the last word in the chapeau. As Kirk
JA correctly observed, the
provision requires that the dominant use be for
something is, relevantly here, all of para (b) of s 10AA(3). That paragraph uses
a composite phrase that combines an identified
use of the land as well as a
specified purpose for that use”.
is the dominant use requires assessment of all uses and determination of which
use is the dominant use. In
Leda Manorstead v Chief Commissioner of State
[2010] NSWSC 867
, Gzell J described how this was to be done. It
required objective determination of the main, chief or paramount use. He said at
“Dominant in its ordinary meaning connotes ruling, prevailing, or most
influential. The statute’s reference to a dominant
use presupposes that
land may be used for more than one purpose and requires a determination of which
use of the land is the main,
chief or paramount use.
That is a question of fact and degree that may, in the end, be determined as an
objective matter of impression having regard to the
Saville v Commissioner of Land Tax
(1980) 12 ATR 7
was concerned with whether land was used primarily for the maintenance of
animals thereon under a former provision in the
Land Tax Management
. The primary use test was not unlike the dominant use test in the
present legislation. His Honour said at 10:
“I am of the view that, for any use of the land to justify the statement
that the land is used primarily for that purpose,
it is necessary not only that
that use prevail over any competing use but also that it be sufficiently
substantial to prevail over
the proposition that the land is primarily to be
regarded as unused land.”
Hope v Bathurst City Council (No 2)
(1983) 52 LGRA 79
Perrignon J was concerned with the definition of “rural land” as
land that is wholly or mainly used for carrying on
the businesses or industries
of grazing amongst other uses in the
Local Government Act
s 118. At 84 his Honour said that what was called for where land was put to a
number of uses, was the weighing of the evidence relating
to various uses to
which land was put, including, but not limited to, the nature and intensity of
such uses, the physical areas over
which they extended, and the time and labour
spent in conducting them.
His Honour’s decision was upheld on appeal (
Hope v Bathurst Cit
(1986) 7 NSWLR 669).
A majority of the Court of Appeal held
that the characterisation of rural land as land that is wholly or mainly used
for carrying
on the businesses or industries of grazing, amongst other uses, did
not relate solely to the quantum of area of land used for relevant
purposes but
related to the end to be achieved by the use and included other criteria such as
the nature and intensity of the use.
Thomason v Chief Executive, Department of Lands
[1995] QLAC 4
(1994-1995)
15 QLCR 286
the Land Appeal Court of Queensland, presided over by Ambrose J, had
to consider whether, at the relevant date of valuation, the
subject land was
“exclusively used ... for purposes of farming”.
In terms similar to the
Land Tax Management Act
“farming” was defined for this purpose in the
Valuation of
(Qld), s 17(2) to mean the business or industry of
grazing, and other specified pursuits, or any other business or industry
in the cultivation of soils, the gathering in of crops, or the rearing
of livestock, if the business or industry represented the
dominant use of the
land and had a significant and substantial commercial purpose or character and
was engaged in for the purpose
of profit on a continuous or repetitive
The Court, helpfully, gave its approach to the determination of dominant use of
land at 303:
“In our view, the proper approach to be taken when ascertaining the
dominant use of land is to consider such matters as the
amount of land actually
used for any purpose, the nature and extent and intensity of the various uses of
the land, the extent to
which land is used for activities which are incidental
to a common business or industry of a type specified in section 17(2), the
extent to which land is used for purposes which are unrelated to each other, and
the time and labour and resources spent in using
the land for each purpose. When
undertaking this exercise, one cannot ignore the conclusion that an objective
observer would reach
from viewing the land as a whole.”
Court of Appeal upheld the decision of Gzell J ([2011] NSWCA 366).
summary, the matters that Gzell J took into consideration in determination of
dominant use included;
(1) the amount of land actually used for the relevant purpose
(2) the nature, extent and intensity of the use
(3) the extent to which land is used for activities which are incidental to a
common business or industry type
(4) the extent to which land is used for purposes which are unrelated to each
(5) the time and labour and resources spent in using the land for each purpose.
High Court in
considered the relevance of financial gain as an
additional matter in determining what the dominant use and purpose was. The High
Court said that: “In some cases, the financial gain from a given activity
may be an indicator of predominance” (at [34]).
relevance of financial gain in determining what is the dominant use, having
regard to the intensity of various uses, had been
previously affirmed in
Sonter v Commissioner of Land Tax
(1976) 7 ATR 30.
Rath J said
at 34, “the financial gain from the various activities is some indication
of the comparative intensity of the activities”.
financial gain is not determinative of what is the dominant use. The Tribunal in
Dwayne Taylor FT Pty Limited as trustee for Dwayne Taylor Family Trust and DA
and P Taylor v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2024] NSWCATAD 8
that the dominant use was not the use that produced substantial revenue. In this
case, the vast majority of the land was used
to maintain horses
for the purpose of sale. There was no evidence of effort or time that was
similar to what was spent on horse maintenance
being spent on any other use. On
the evidence, horse maintenance also attracted significant development
investment. There is no evidence
that any other use attracted such investment.
The Tribunal said that in these circumstances, even where a horse sale operation
conducted at a loss, and a competing rental use attracted greater revenue,
the Tribunal was satisfied that the maintenance of horses
constituted the
dominant use of the land in question, when compared with any other known
time at which the assessment of what is the dominant use must be made requires
consideration. The taxing date is midnight on 31
December in the year preceding
the land tax year. However, uses of land for a period before the taxing date are
relevant in making
that determination. In
Longford Investments Pty.
Limited v. Commissioner of Land Tax (N.S.W.)
78 ATC 4264, the Supreme Court
of NSW said, at p 4,268:
“However, I should emphasise it ought not to be thought that the enquiry
here to be made is one which involves no more than
asking the question, to what
use was the land put at midnight on 31st December, 1974. That would be far too
narrow an approach. One
must take into account the provisions of sec. 8 to which
I have earlier referred and which provides that land tax is to be charged
land as owned on the relevant date immediately preceding the year for which the
land tax is levied. Moreover, one would need to
look at the use of land, not
only after what I may call the relevant date, but prior thereto as well. In
broad terms one must ask
oneself, what may it fairly be said was the primary use
of the property during a period not overlong and not overshort within which
December, 1974, falls. I do not find it useful to endeavour to specify the
period but I think, in having regard to it, one must
bear in mind that it is the
defendant's task to make an assessment and in normal circumstances he will do
that during the year following
the arbitrary date selected by the legislature
for the ownership of lands. He will not usually be looking at the position, as I
with the aid of what has happened in a period of more than three years after
the date in question”.
considered that a period of 6 months before and after the
relevant date was a reasonable period for inquiry in that case (at [4]).
Uses of land
the land tax years in issue, the Applicant said that the following activities
occurred on the land;
(1) growing of bamboo and native forest trees for timber
(2) growing fruit, vegetables, herbs and roots
(3) grazing cattle for breeding or sale
(4) keeping chickens for sale of their eggs
(5) extracting and bottling mineral water for sale
(6) operating a café/restaurant
(7) residential leasing of the cottage and villa.
is clear that neither operating a café/restaurant nor residential use
fall within s 10AA(3). This was not contested.
bottling of mineral water for sale is also an activity that falls outside s
10AA(3). While the mineral water may have been extracted
from the land, that
extraction was not the result of “cultivation” of the land (or any
other activity described in s
10AA(3)). There was no contestation of the
proposition that taking something from the land without cultivation of the land,
outside s 10AA(3)(a).
set out below my consideration of whether each of the other activities set out
at [42] above falls within s 10AA(3).
Use for growing bamboo and
Applicant submitted that the land was cultivated to grow bamboo and other native
trees for timber, to be sold for flooring.
Respondent, on the other hand, submitted that merely allowing trees to grow on
land did not constitute “cultivation”.
This was because cultivation
required management of the land and produce grown on the land during the
relevant land tax year, in
order to achieve production, including the
application of labour. The Respondent said that there was no evidence of this
having occurred.
Tribunal in Chandrala v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2021] NSWCATAD 50
described what evidence may show the cultivation of land to produce timber. The
Tribunal said, at [15]:
“Long lead time activities such as the planting of orchards or timber can
qualify. Preparatory works can amount to cultivation
if it involves labour and
appropriate business diligence in relation to the land to produce a crop for
sale. The land should be tended
according to usual practices of land management
in relation to crops. This could include ploughing, sowing, pruning,
mowing, fertilising,
spraying and improving the watering system”.
Respondent said that the Applicant had not provided evidence of any works or
activities undertaken on the land in the nature of
cultivation of the land to
produce bamboo or trees. Accordingly, there was, in the Respondent’s
submission, insufficient evidence
to show cultivation of the land within the
meaning of s 10AA(3)(a).
of production of timber during the land tax years in question is not necessary
to show cultivation of the land for the purposes
of selling timber, given the
long lead times for trees to grow and produce timber products. The Applicant,
however, produced no evidence
of what it had done on the land to produce timber,
whether by way of land management or incurring expenses for production. In the
absence of evidence to show what had been done upon the land to cultivate the
land to produce bamboo and other timber, the Applicant
has not shown that the
land had been “cultivated” in the sense required by s 10AA(3)(a).
allowing trees to grow upon land with no management of the land or other
activities to achieve production, does not, in my
opinion, answer the
description of “cultivation”.
if it can be shown that the land had been cultivated to produce bamboo and other
timber, this of itself is not enough. Section
10AA(3)(a) requires that the
cultivation be for the purpose of selling the produce of the cultivation.
of a purpose of sale, however, was limited. The Applicant said that some slabs
of timber had been sold. The only evidence
of such sales is found in 2025
showing sales for a value of $2,405.45. There is no evidence of any sales of
bamboo or other timber
prior to that date. There was, also no evidence of any
business plan for the proposed cultivation, harvesting and sale of bamboo
other timber.
terms of the PVP, additionally, prevented the felling of timber or removal of
fallen timber from particular parts of the land.
While weeding and other repair
and management activities were required under the PVP, these were activities for
the purpose of complying
with the PVP and were not, on the evidence, for
cultivation for sale of bamboo or other timber.
Growing fruit
Applicant’s evidence was that the land was used to grow fruits and
vegetables mainly Kiwi fruit, avocados, finger limes
and various greens. They
say that they cleared weeds from the land, put in irrigation, planted fruiting
trees and vines and put in
a greenhouse over the years. However, there was no
specific details as to the time these activities occurred, in particular whether
they occurred before or after 2019.
the absence of evidence of what activities in the nature of cultivation occurred
during 2019 and after 2019, I am prepared
to infer that activities involving
cultivation of relevant fruits and greens did occur during the period in
question, on the basis
of evidence of the production of these items having
occurred between 2020 to 2025 and sale of produce.
total value of sales for these years was as follows.
(1) 2020 - $1,367
(2) 2021 - $251
(3) 2022 - $835
(4) 2023 - Nil
(5) 2024 - $222
(6) 2025 - $1,770
sales represent a small proportion of the total revenue gained from use of the
land during the years in question (see [97] below)
and the land area used for
production of fruit and greens was not significant (see [76] below).
evidence was that some of the fruits and greens grown on the land was sold at
the café/restaurant or used in the preparation
of meals served at the
café/restaurant. To the extent that produce grown on the land was used as
ingredients in meals made
and served at the cafe, I do not think that such a use
answers the description of “selling the produce of the cultivation”
within the meaning of s 10AA(1)(c)(a). It is a use for secondary production.
the extent that the Applicant submits that there was an “internal
sale” of such produce for use in the preparation
of meals, that submission
must be rejected. In Spedding Estates Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
[2017] NSWCATAD 117
, the Tribunal said, at [65] – [69]:
“I find that the Applicant’s analysis of an “internal
sale” is flawed in that it disregards the fact (conceded
by the Applicant)
that the primary purpose of the cultivation is to create produce for the
restaurant on Lot 3, rather than for the
direct sale of that produce to third
There is no doubt from a legal perspective that management accounts by which the
use for restaurant purposes of produce cultivated
on the Property may be
described as “sale of produce”, do not mean that a legal sale of the
produce has taken place.
I also find that the Applicant is confusing the ordinary meaning of
‘primary production’ which involves the act “of
bringing into
existence” live plants or products, as referred to
at [39] with the statutory definition in s 10AA(3)
which in my opinion, and having regard to
purpose of sale of the plants or products without the occurrence of further
production processes. Those further processes
are described in [39] as
converting “(an agricultural commodity) into marketable form by some
special process”.
Delli-Carpini v Chief Commissioner of State
[2015] NSWCATAD 12
, a dispute as to whether certain land was
entitled to a primary production land tax exemption, I referred to excerpts
including [44] and [45] extracted at [63] above
39 Section 10AA requires that the relevant dominant use of land
is the maintenance of animals for the sale of their bodily produce,
the use of land for the subsequent conversion of that produce for the purpose of
.(emphasis added)
I am not satisfied that the analogous conversion of primary produce into meals
(consumed by third parties), some of the constituents
of which have been
cultivated on the Property, is a sale of primary produce for the purpose of s
am in agreement with the observation of the Tribunal in
Spedding Estates
that conversion of primary produce into meals is not a sale of primary produce
for the reasons it gives. However, I accept that there
is evidence of
cultivation of the land for the purpose of selling fruit and greens not used to
prepare meals for the café/restaurant.
Maintenance of
Applicant says that the land was used to produce cattle for sale. The evidence
of the number of cattle on the land and sales values
for the relevant years is
Number of Cattle
10 beef cattle
11 beef cattle
14 beef cattle
12 beef cattle
11 beef cattle
17 dairy cattle
Respondent says that even if the cattle had been maintained on the land, there
was no evidence of a present purpose of sale as
required by s 10AA(3)(b). The
Applicant, however, says that building up a herd of cattle takes time and that
the absence of sales
during a particular year does not prevent a finding that
the purpose of sale exists.
agree with the Applicant’s submission. Proof of the purpose of sale does
not require that sales have to occur during the period
when a herd is being
bred. Interruptions to breeding may also occur because of external
circumstances. The Applicant’s evidence
was that the activity was
interrupted by flooding in 2022.
accept the Applicant’s evidence that it maintained cattle for the purpose
of sale, actual sales having occurred in 2020. I
am also able to infer a present
purpose of maintaining the animals for the purpose of selling at some point in
time the cattle, their
natural increase, parts of the animals or their produce.
This is because the cattle were beef or dairy cattle and as such, they could
serve no other use. There was no evidence of some other intended or actual use,
such as a use for scientific research or a zoological
Limited evidence for purpose of sale
the extent that the land was used for cultivation or the maintenance of cattle,
the purpose of doing so must have been sale. I
have found that there was
evidence of use of the land for cultivation to grow produce and use of the land
for maintaining cattle.
I have also found that there is evidence supporting the
purpose of sale required under s 10AA(3)(a) and (b) as set out above. However,
that evidence was limited.
was no business plan evidencing a business of producing fruit and greens or
maintaining cattle for sale or both. Sales values
were also not high.
expenses incurred in maintaining animals and producing fruit and greens was also
limited (at [86] below). The Applicant questioned
whether certain expenses shown
in the lessees’ tax return for 2023 as being attributable to things other
than primary production
actually related to primary production. However, there
was insufficient evidence to determine what if any of that expenditure was
primary production.
are matters that raise questions as to whether the evidence is sufficient to
establish that, on the balance of probabilities,
the land had been used for the
purposes of cultivation or the maintenance of animals within paragraphs
10AA(3)(a) and (b). Nevertheless,
I will proceed on the basis that the uses of
the land included cultivation within the meaning of s 10AA(3)(a) and maintenance
animals within the meaning of s 10AA(3)(b) for the reasons set out at [56]
and [65] above.
Applicant said that the land had been used for the maintenance of chickens for
the purpose of selling their eggs. However, there
are no records of chickens
having been kept on the land during the relevant period, nor of sales of eggs.
The Applicant says that
wild animals “decimated” the chickens. In
these circumstances, I am unable to find that the maintenance of chickens was
relevant use upon the land within the meaning of s 10AA(3)(b).
Summary of uses
uses of the land I have found are several. Three of the uses do not fall within
s 10AA(3). They were the uses of the land to operate
a café/restaurant,
to produce bottled water and residential occupancy. None of these uses, on the
evidence, related to the
primary production activities carried out on the land,
subject to the matters set out at [79] – [80] below.
remaining uses included the growing of fruit and greens. I have found that this
was a use that falls within s 10AA(3)(a).
have also found that the maintenance of cattle was a use that fell within s
10AA(3)(b). I am unable, however, to find on the evidence
that there was a use
of the land to maintain chickens falling within s 10AA(3)(b).
is insufficient evidence to show that the land was cultivated for the purpose of
selling timber and bamboo, even if there is
some evidence of the sale of bamboo
and timber products.
remaining question for determination was what the dominant use of the land was
for the purposes of s 10AA(3) as between the uses
shown in the
Dominant use – land area
first matter of relevance in determining the dominant use of the land is
consideration of the respective areas within the land
deployed for each use.
They were as follows:
(1) growth of bamboo and trees – 11%
(2) growing of fruit – 2%
(3) growing of greens – 18%
(4) breeding of cattle – 60%
(5) sheds (industrial and commercial) – 2%
(6) environmental protection – 12%
(7) residential – 4%
was no evidence as to the area of land used to produce bottled mineral
largest proportion of the land was deployed for maintaining cattle (60%)
followed by the proportion used to grow fruit and greens
(20%). 11% of the land
was occupied by bamboo and trees.
café/restaurant sat on a small area within the land. However, whether the
land area “used” by the café/restaurant
was limited to the
area the facility physically occupied also requires consideration. The Applicant
accepted that the main attraction
of the café was that it was on a farm.
The café offered consumers a “paddock to plate” product,
using things
grown on the land to make meals at the cafe.
Respondent said that these matters allowed for the conclusion that the farm was
“ancillary” to the café. I
understood the Respondent’s
submission to be that the connection between the café/restaurant and farm
meant that the
part of the land “used” for the café and
restaurant was more than just the surface area occupied by the facility.
accept this submission, noting that there was a specific physical use of parts
of the land not occupied by the café/restaurant
to grow produce used in
the preparation of meals at the café/restaurant. I do not, however, think
that use of the farm for
the purposes of the café/restaurant went beyond
that physical use to grow the relevant produce.
parts of the land deployed for other uses represented smaller proportionate
areas of the land.
Dominant use - Nature, extent and intensity of
villa and the cottage were used in each relevant year as residences. This use
produced rent during each of the land tax years
in issue. That continuity of use
shows that the extent and intensity of residential use was high, if not maximal.
café/ restaurant operated on Friday and some Saturday and Sunday nights.
There were “pop-up” dinner events
on some weekends and live music
supply of the café/restaurant with produce from the land also adds to the
extent and intensity of the use of the land for
the café/restaurant.
purposes for which expenses were incurred is also relevant to determining
intensity of each use. The expenses recorded in each
relevant year and their
recorded purpose were as
Fruit and Greens
Café/Restaurant
(including $36,750 rent paid to the Applicant)
(including $24,600 rent paid to the Applicant)
Bottled Water
(Residential)
Not produced
Not produced
was no expenditure shown in the records before the Tribunal for primary
production activities in the 2020-2023 period and small
amounts shown for 2024
($704.87) and 2025 ($227.28). All of this expenditure was for cattle.
2020 and 2021, the largest proportion of the expenditure was attributed to the
café/restaurant (even if the rent paid by
the lessee were excluded).
During those years, the amount expended for the residential use made up the
second highest proportion
of the expenditure.
2022, the highest expenditure was for residential occupancy ($72,967) followed
by $65,484 spent on the bottled water business.
In 2023, the expenses for the
bottled water business made up the largest proportion of expenditure ($79,179)
followed by expenditure
on the residential occupancy ($66,152). Expenditure for
the residential occupancy was not produced for 2024 and 2025.
no relevant year for which full records were produced, did expenditure for
primary production make up any more than a small
part of total expenditure. The
Applicant says that 60% of a flood recovery grant of $25,000 received in 2022
was spent on repairing
farm infrastructure. However, the records produced by the
Applicant show that grant as being for the water bottling business and
expenditure is recorded for 2022 for primary production activities. The
Applicant, in these circumstances, has not shown on the
balance of probabilities
that 60% of the grant in 2022 was spent on primary production. Even if 60% of
the grant had been spent on
primary production, that amount is less than what
was spent in 2022 for each of the bottled water business and the residential
the extent that expenditure is one indicator of the intensity of use, the small
amounts of expenditure for cattle and growing produce
shows less intensive use
of the land for these purposes than for other purposes.
Applicant says no wages were paid for labour used in primary production because
Mr Toneguzzo’s own labour was deployed for
primary production activities
and that he was unpaid. The Applicant also says that it carried out organic
farming and that farming
of this kind required few inputs. It says that fuel,
maintenance and repairs were the main expenses for primary production.
circumstances described at [92] above may explain to some extent the low
expenditure on primary production. Even so, no expenses
were recorded at all for
primary production other than modest amounts for cattle in 2024 and 2025. There
was no expenditure shown
in the records for fuel, maintenance and repairs used
for primary production. Even if the Applicant received the benefit of unpaid
labour in carrying out primary production and inputs required were limited, the
absence of evidence of relevant expenditure in the
record sits uneasily with the
proposition that primary production activities required most time and effort as
between the competing
uses of the land.
Respondent in his submission relied upon the tax returns of the lessee. They
described its main business activity as the operation
café/restaurant in the 2020 and 2021 financial years and non-alcoholic
beverage manufacturing in the 2022 and 2023 financial
years. While descriptions
of this kind are not determinative, they do not assist the Applicant’s
Dominant use - Time and labour
evidence included information about the wages paid for each year in issue. That
evidence was the following:
(1) 2020 - $9,550
(2) 2021 - $3,253
(3) 2022 - $0
(4) 2023 - $0
(5) 2024 - $0
(6) 2025 - $0
wages paid in 2020 and 2021 related to the café/restaurant business. The
Applicant has not otherwise provided evidence
of the labour hours and time
devoted to each other use of the land. It has however said that Mr Toneguzzo
provided unpaid labour
for primary production activities. His wife also provided
unpaid labour for the café/restaurant business.
Financial return
income recorded during each year for each relevant use was as
Source of Income
Fruit and Greens
Café/Restaurant
Bottled Water
(flood recovery grant)
(Residential)
$113,140.30
(from lessee)
$840 (water)
income from primary production activities for all of the years in issue was a
small proportion of the total income for each relevant
year and for the entire
period taken as a whole. There was no income at all in 2023 from primary
production activities.
Evaluation of dominant use
proportion of the land area used for maintaining cattle made up most of the area
of the land (60%). The areas used for the production
of fruit and greens made up
20% of the total land area. In other words, at least 80% of the land area was
used for activities that
went to primary production within the meaning of s
I do not think that the land area used for each type of activity is itself
determinative of the question of what was the
dominant use in the present case.
Other factors also need to be brought to bear in making a determination of what
was the dominant
of all, evaluating the nature, extent and intensity of the relevant uses is one
of the necessary tasks for determination of
the dominant use. Having regard to
these factors, the highest level of use, in my opinion, attached to the
residential occupancy
during the years 2022 -2025, given the continuity of that
use during these years and the level of expenditure for that use (see [86]
above) that exceeded expenditure for other uses (other than expenditure for
bottled water in 2023 which was slightly more).
use of the land as a café/restaurant occurred during the weekends in 2020
and 2021. This use also required the highest
levels of expenditure compared with
expenditure for other uses during these two years. Recorded wage costs were
attributed to the
use of the land as a café/restaurant and to no other
use. Produce grown on the land was used to make meals at the
café/restaurant.
The labour of Mr Toneguzzo’s wife also served the
use of the land as a café/restaurant.
measured in terms of the relative expenditure for each use, the intensity of
each use on a temporal measure or the deployment
of paid labour, the nature,
extent and intensity of use of the land for the production of crops and for the
maintenance of cattle
(whether taken together or individually), did not surpass
the level of use of the land for either the café/restaurant in 2020
2021 or residential occupancy in the years following. I do not think that the
unpaid labour provided by Mr Toneguzzo is sufficient
to displace my assessment
of the relative nature, extent and intensity of the competing uses, noting also
that his wife provided
unpaid labour for the café/restaurant.
relative income from each of the competing uses carries relevance in making a
determination of what was the dominant use. The
comparatively meagre returns
from the sale of forest products, fruit, greens and cattle, in my opinion, go
towards showing that the
relevant primary production activities were less
influential uses of the land during all of the years in issue.
fact of the overwhelming share of the income having been derived from other
activities, in my opinion, although not determinative,
weighs in favour of a
conclusion that the dominant use of the land was not primary production.
Applicant said that the rent it received from the lessee should be treated as
being part of the financial return attributable
to primary production in
determining what was the financial return from primary production.
do not see any proper basis for treating the rent the lessee paid, in part or
whole as having to be attributed to primary production.
The income generated by
the activity of primary production is what was earned from the sales of produce
as set out at [97] above.
It does not also include any amounts paid by the
lessee as rent.
the extent that the rent has been sourced from receipts from the sale of primary
produce, those amounts have been already counted
as part of the financial return
from primary production and should not be counted again as part of the rent.
Where the rent has been
sourced from income derived from other activities, those
amounts, in any event, do not represent a financial return from primary
production. Where the Applicant and lessee, who are related parties, agree on
the payment of rent to the Applicant, I do not think
that the rent so agreed
between parties who are not arms-length, should be treated as income
attributable to primary production or
any other use of the land, if the income
from each competing use has already been counted.
these circumstances, I do not think that taking account of the rent the lessee
paid, as either a return from primary production
activities or as a return from
some other kind of activity, assists the Tribunal in determining the financial
return produced by
each use of the land.
the years 2020-2021, when the café-restaurant was operating, I find that
the dominant use was that use. I reach this
conclusion based on the exclusive
deployment of wage labour to the running of the that business, the largest share
of income coming
from that business and the nature, extent and intensity of that
use as described at [103] above.
the remaining years (2022-2025), I think that the dominant use was represented
by the rental activity. The largest share of the
income was earned from that
activity; it also involved the highest use in terms of the nature, extent and
intensity of use for the
reasons set out at [103] above.
are circumstances that, in my opinion, result in the conclusion that the
dominant use of the land was not the use of the land
for cultivation or the
maintenance of animals, whether each were taken as individual uses or both were
taken together as a single
use. While the land area used for each of these
activities was greater than that used for other uses, this is only one of the
factors and does not carry sufficient significance to displace the
weight carried by the relative financial returns and nature, extent
intensity of the dominant uses.
do not think that this is a case that is comparable to
no evidence of significant effort and investment into primary production
activities of the kind that occurred in
to allow for a conclusion
that the dominant use of the land was one of primary production.
will go on to deal with the remaining matters the Applicant
Retrospective assessment
Applicant says that there was no power to assess land tax retrospectively for
the 2020 to 2024 land tax years.
do not agree. There is no limitation as to when the Respondent can issue an
assessment of land tax set out in the LTMA or the Administration
Act. The power
to assess in s 8 of the Administration Act sets out no such limitation.
Applicant says that the part of the land covered by the PVP and zoned for
environmental conservation should be exempt under s
10(1)(p) of the LTMA.
10(1)(p) of the LTMA allows for exemption from land tax for certain land that is
the subject of a biodiversity stewardship
agreement under
iodiversity Conservation Act 2016
(NSW). A PVP is not such an
agreement. A PVP is an agreement under different legislation, namely the
Native Vegetation Act 2003
were no submissions made as to whether or not there was any basis in law for
reading a reference to a stewardship agreement
under the B
iodiversity
Conservation Act 2016
(NSW) as including a PVP.
10(1)(p) of the LTMA cannot as a consequence apply in the present case.
Applicant says that the land should be exempt for the 2021 to 2022 years as it
was impacted by flooding.
is well established that a hiatus in primary production activity due to weather
conditions does not necessarily prevent a claim
for exemption
Pointsyde Investments Pty. Ltd. v. Clyne
. 86 ATC 4335, p 4,338).
However, to maintain such a claim, the Applicant still has to show that there
was a previous
dominant use
for primary production that fell within s
10AA(3). There is no evidence of any previous use of this kind.
these circumstances, the Applicant has not shown that the occurrence of flooding
disrupted an existing primary production activity
that allowed it to maintain
exemption from land tax.
evidence also showed that the land remained in continuous use despite the
flooding for earning rental income. The Applicant has
not shown that any primary
production activity that would have occurred but for the flooding would have
displaced the residential
use as the dominant use.
Apportionment
Applicant says that the land should be apportioned relative to the percentage of
land use for primary production and non-primary
production activities.
Applicant’s submission cannot be accepted. The Respondent is correct in
saying that exemption applies to the whole of the
land or does not apply at all,
depending on what the dominant use is. There is no provision made in the LTMA to
allow apportionment
of the kind claimed by the Applicant.
Applicant says that land tax should be refunded and payment deferred until the
sale of the land for hardship reasons. They also
say that the residential
tenancy agreements will need to be terminated early to facilitate sale of the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine the matter on the basis of
Loomes v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
NSWCATAD 133).
Division 5 of Part 10 of the Administration Act establishes
and empowers a Hardship Review Board to deal with cases in which the
exaction of
the full amount of tax would result in serious hardship for the person or the
person's dependants. The remaining avenue
available to the Applicant would
therefore be an application to the Hardship Review
Applicant has not discharged the onus of proof to show that the dominant use of
the land during the years in issue was for a purpose
of primary production
within the meaning of s 10AA(3) for the reasons set out above.
Applicant complained that its purpose was to engage in relevant primary
production and that it should not be prevented from claiming
exemption in
circumstances where hardship had required that it also earn income from other
activities to obtain a viable return.
what the Applicant’s subjectively intended purpose was, the terms of s
10AA(3) do not allow for exemption where the
dominant use of land becomes for an
activity that does not comprise a relevant primary production activity. That is
what has happened
in the present case.
Respondent’s assessment accordingly should be confirmed.
(1) The assessment of the Respondent is confirmed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (418 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter