URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2018/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHALMERS, Rachel Mary Susannah [2018] NSWMPSC 7 (10 August 2018)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Rachel Mary Susannah Chalmers MED0001185559
Dates of Inquiry:
19 July 2018 & 20 July 2018
Committee Members:
Ms Geri Ettinger, Chairperson
Dr Colin Kingsley McClintock, Nephrologist Dr Melanie Jane Wroth,
Geriatrician
Hon A/Prof Paul Ulhas Macneill, Lay person
Health Care Complaints Commission:
Emma Bayley, Legal Officer
Dr Chalmers:
Peggy Dwyer of counsel instructed by Marianne Nicolle, Meridian
Date of decision:
10 August 2018
Certain parts of Particulars of Complaint One were proven.
Particulars of Complaint Two were proven.
The Committee made no findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct in
relation to either Complaint.
Publication of decision:
The Chairperson made a non-publication order providing for the suppression
of Patient A’s name, and any other identifying data.
he matter before the Professional Standards Committee, (the Committee),
constituted as noted above, concerned a Complaint prosecuted
by the Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC). The Complaints alleged that the conduct of Dr
Chalmers, in connection with the care
provided to Patient A on 20 June 2014,
constituted unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined in section 139B of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW), (National Law), and
section 139B(1)(b) of the National Law in relation to record keeping.
r Chalmers, MED0001185559, MPO337498 graduated MBBS in 2002. She worked in
various overseas emergency departments in 2006 to 2007.
Dr Chalmers commenced
basic physician training on returning to Australia in 2008, and became a Fellow
of the Royal Australasian College
of Physicians in April 2013. She commenced
working as a staff specialist, general physician and nephrologist with Armidale
Referral Hospital (the Hospital), in November 2013.
he conduct subject of the HCCC Complaints related to the care Dr Chalmers
provided to Patient A on 20 June 2014, and the records documenting
he Committee had documents served by both parties before it, and heard oral
evidence from Drs Michael Golding, Greg Burke, and Rachel
Chalmers, the
Respondent in these proceedings.
he Committee accepted the Complaint as amended on 17 July 2018, (as agreed by
the parties).
vidence was led, and submissions were made about both Complaints, which each
encompassed several Particulars of Complaint. The Committee
dealt with each
Particular, and has noted in these Reasons for Decision, which Particulars were
conceded by Dr Chalmers.
he Committee found Complaint One not made out. The Committee found Complaint
Two, not made out. The Committee made no findings of
unsatisfactory conduct in
relation to Dr Chalmers’ practice of medicine or record keeping.
RELEVANT LAW
he HCCC alleged that Dr Chalmers’ conduct in relation to both
Complaints, amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
n Complaint One, the HCCC alleged that Dr Chalmers was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section 139B(1)(a)
National Law.
n Complaint Two, the HCCC alleged that Dr Chalmers was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to section 139B(1)(b)
National Law in that she has contravened the
Health Practitioner Regulation
(New South Wales) Regulation 2010 (repealed),
(the 2010 regulation).
nsatisfactory professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the National
Law, as conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill
or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
r Chalmers admitted certain Particulars of Complaint One, and all of the
Particulars of Complaint Two. She did not concede that any
of the findings
should attract the finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
STANDARD OF PROOF
n matters such as the one before the Committee, the HCCC bears the onus of
establishing that the Practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct pursuant to section 139B(1)(a), and/or section 139B(1)(b)
of the National Law.
t is well established, due to the protective nature of the jurisdiction, and
the seriousness of the complaints, if established, both
for the practitioner and
the public, that the standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities, but
to the level of satisfaction
described by the High Court in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
The Court stated:
Reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or
established independently of the nature and consequence of the
fact or facts to
be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of
an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters 'reasonable satisfaction' should
not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
1) Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered health
practitioner includes:
onduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed,
or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or
experience.
ontraventions of this Law or regulations
contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law or under
regulations.
he Committee applied the standard of proof of reasonable satisfaction, and in
so doing, we were mindful of the gravity of the allegations
and the consequences
for the practitioner if we find them proven. The standard by which Dr Chalmers
is to be held, is that of a registered
medical practitioner, who has been a
Fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians since April 2013. Dr
Chalmers commenced
working as a staff specialist, general physician and
nephrologist with Armidale Rural Referral Hospital (the Hospital), in November
2013 after holding various other appointments. The incident subject of the
Complaints took place on 20 June 2014.
e have noted that in Dr Chalmers’ present position at the Hospital, she
has been engaged with the profession, and participated
in various committees in
connection with patient care and standards. Dr Chalmers was Director of
Prevocational Education and Training
between 2014 and 2016.
he issues to be determined by this Committee, taking into account Dr
Chalmers’ admissions:
hether the Committee is comfortably satisfied that any or all of the
Particulars of the two Complaints are proven;
f so, whether the Practitioner’s conduct overall amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct; and
f such finding is made, the Committee must decide whether orders or
directions made pursuant to Part 8 Division 3 Sub-division 3 of
the National Law
are appropriate.
r Chalmers had been on call, a regular and recurring duty at the Hospital, on
19 June 2014. Her duties ended at 0800 hours, and she
was at the Hospital
shortly after that time for the day shift, on the morning of 20 June 2014. There
was a question put to Dr Chalmers
regarding her fitness for duty after a night
of being on call. She told the Committee that she was confident that she had
been completely
fit for duty. There was no allegation in the Complaints
regarding Dr Chalmers’ fitness for duty on 20 June 2014. The Committee
accepted that Dr Chalmers was completely fit for duty on 20 June 2014.
n 20 June 2014, Patient A, aged 78 years, who lived alone, called an
ambulance, and presented to the Hospital ED at 0427 hours, complaining
shoulder pain, radiating to the left side of the chest. The Patient, who
suffered a number of conditions, including cardiac
problems, claimed his pain
had arisen when hanging out washing.
atient A had undergone a left extensor tendon repair five weeks prior, and on
presentation to the Hospital, was wearing a back slab
on his left hand. Patient
A had two cardiac stents placed in 2011, and had a chronic back injury for which
he had been taking large
doses of opiates for some time.
atient A was first reviewed at the Hospital ED by Dr A Tillmann, who was
familiar with him, and who had referred him to Dr R Diebold,
an orthopaedic
surgeon, for the surgery on his hand in May 2014. The surgery had been carried
out by a locum orthopaedic surgeon
r Chalmers first reviewed Patient A with a Resident Medical Officer (RMO) at
and assumed care of
Patient A. She had spoken with Dr Tillmann, the admitting doctor for Patient A
in the ED, at approximately 6:30
am, and also had access to his Clinical Access
Program (CAP) records.
r Chalmers delegated the task of communicating her management of Patient A on
20 June 2014 in the hospital progress notes, to the
RMO. That is not an unusual
practice, although Dr Chalmers acknowledged that ultimately she was responsible
for the record keeping.
r Chalmers’ last interactions with Patient A were at approximately 1510
and 1600 hours on 20 June 2014. She left the hospital
premises later that
afternoon after a face-to-face handover to Dr P Braslins at approximately 1510
hours. Dr Braslins, an infectious
diseases physician, was the consultant
rostered to cover the care of ward patients, including Patient A, after
e noted the following about the expert witnesses who each gave oral evidence
at the Inquiry. Dr M Golding was first registered as
a medical practitioner in
1985. He holds Australian specialist qualifications in Emergency Medicine,
Medical Administration and
General Practice. Dr Golding is Director of the
Emergency Department at Prince of Wales Hospital. Relevantly, Dr Golding is also
a Fellow of the Australian College of Remote and Rural Medical Practitioners. He
stated that since June 2016, he has been working
at Queen’s Hospital in
London as a Consultant Emergency Physician.
he Committee is mindful that Dr Golding wrote his first expert report dated
25 January 2017 without the benefit of having seen any
statement by Dr Chalmers,
and before the Complaints of the HCCC were formulated. It is for this reason the
Committee has not accepted
certain of his views, as stated below. Dr Golding
provided two further reports, dated 13 March 2017, and 2 July 2018. In his final
report, Dr Golding commented on the report of Dr Burke, dated 23 June 2018.
s Dwyer who appeared for Dr Chalmers, submitted that Dr Golding’s
qualifications and experience, making him differently qualified
and far more
experienced than Dr Chalmers was in 2014, caused his views as an expert, and
standards to which he has referred in this
matter, to be open to question. The
Committee noted Ms Dwyer’s submission, and has considered all the evidence
before it, including
that of Dr Golding, and Dr Burke, who also appeared before
us as an expert witness.
r G Burke, a respiratory physician of long standing, is employed at the
Shoalhaven District Hospital. His report was dated 23 June
DISCUSSION OF THE COMPLAINTS, AND FINDINGS COMPLAINT ONE
n relation to Complaint One, the HCCC alleges that Dr Chalmers is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a)
of the National Law
in that she has:
engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of medicine is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
he HCCC alleges further, that each of the Particulars 1. to 5. in themselves
justifies a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
In the alternative,
when two or more of these Particulars are taken together, a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct is
justified as set out in Particular 6.
Complaint One, Particular 1.
he practitioner failed to adequately review and assess Patient A in the
morning of 20 June 2014 at about 1030 hours and 1100 hours
in that she failed
ake a history of the number of Patient A’s past presentations for
ake a history of how frequently Patient A had attended a hospital for any
other pain related condition;
dequately assess Patient A’s baseline functional state apart from
“chronic back pain”;
ssess the significance of the time of Patient A’s presentation to
the hospital (0427 hours) concerning the cause of his severe
ssess Patient A’s pain score at the time of assessment;
ssess the possible inconsistency between the level of pain reported by
Patient A and the activity he described as prompting the pain;
xamine Patient A’s abdomen, chest, cardiovascular system, left
axilla, left wrist wound, hydration or joints other than the
shoulder and
nvestigate her finding on physical examination of tenderness over the
scapula and instead focussed on the left shoulder.
e have reproduced Particular 1. of Complaint One above, noting that the
records made in connection with Particular 1. form part of
Complaint Two,
Particular 1. We note also that Dr Chalmers did not admit any of the sub-
paragraphs of Complaint One, Particular
1, numbered (a) – (h).
articulars 1.a. & 1.b. deal with the history of Patient A’s
attendances at a hospital for back pain, and other pain related
conditions. We
are mindful that Dr Chalmers had access via the CAP to such history relating to
Patient A. We are also comfortably
satisfied that her discussions with Dr
Tillmann, the admitting practitioner from the ED at 6:30 am on 20 June 2014,
(whom Patient
A had consulted as a general practitioner), were adequate in
relation to Particulars 1.a. & 1.b. of Complaint One. Dr Chalmers
able to converse with Patient A when she first examined him on 20 June
2014.Those Particulars are accordingly, not proven.
s to Particular 1.c.; although Dr Chalmers did not document baseline
functional state data apart from chronic back pain, we are comfortably
that she had sufficient information from Dr Tillmann in that regard. She told us
that he informed her that Patient A had
suffered an injury to his finger for
which he had undergone surgery, and that this had occurred when he was
gardening. Dr Chalmers
documented that Patient A claimed the pain leading to
his admission arose when he was putting washing on the line. She was also
to converse with the Patient A, and knew that he was living independently in the
community when she first examined him at 1030
hours on 20 June 2014. We were
accordingly comfortably satisfied that Particular 1.c. is not proven.
n Particular 1.d., the HCCC alleges that Dr Chalmers failed to assess the
significance of the time of Patient A’s presentation
to the hospital (0427
hours) concerning the cause of his severe pain. We are satisfied that Dr
Chalmers discussed Patient A with
Dr Tillmann at 0630 hours. We are also
comfortably satisfied that on the basis of that conversation, the fact Patient A
treated with medication for his pain, and was stable, and other
patients for whom she had to care, she only attended at Patient A’s
bedside with the RMO at 1030 hours. Dr Chalmers told us Patient A was in pain,
but lucid and conversing with her at that time. We
are comfortably satisfied
that Particular
1.d. is not proven, and that Dr Chalmers did not fail to assess the
significance of the time of Patient A’s presentation to
the Hospital.
n Particular 1.e. we have noted the allegation that Dr Chalmers failed to
assess Patient A’s pain score at the time of assessment.
Strictly, if not
documenting Patient A’s pain on a 1 – 10 scale is intended, then we
are satisfied from the evidence
that Dr Chalmers did not do that in regard to
Patient A on 20 June 2014. We accept from the evidence that it is a useful tool
used by nursing staff, and doctors at times, and that the Hospital notes
made by nursing staff did in fact record Patient A’s
pain in those terms
at various times. We are also satisfied to the requisite standard that Dr
Chalmers was able to converse with
Patient A, to assess him for pain, and use
other diagnostic measures to then provide for pain relief. Accordingly, although
Particular 1.e. as written, proven, we make no adverse findings in that
n Particular 1.f., the HCCC alleges that Dr Chalmers failed to assess the
possible inconsistency between the level of pain reported
by Patient A, and the
activity he described as prompting the pain. Dr Chalmers’ evidence was
she was aware of Patient A’s chronic back pain, which the RMO
documented on her behalf, but that the Patient’s presentation
something new
(i.e. other than dealing with the washing, or his
chronic back pain). The Hospital record of her consultation with the Patient at
1030 hours, records relevantly at T33/13:
Presented with intrascapular back pain.
Also c/o L shoulder pain and worse +++ on movement.
? Related to putting washing on the line.
urther entries document examinations, but are not strictly relevant to
Particular 1.f. The fact
rule out septic arthritis
is documented followed
by a plan to deal with that possibility, convinces us to the requisite standard
that the allegations in Particular
1.f. are not made out.
n Particular 1.g., the HCCC alleges that Dr Chalmers failed to examine
Patient A’s abdomen, chest, cardiovascular system, left
axilla, left wrist
wound, hydration or joints other than the shoulder and scapula. We have noted Dr
Chalmers’ evidence in relation
to the examination of Patient A at 10:30 am
on 20 June 2014. She told us that she crouched in front of the seated Patient to
lthough no examination of the chest and cardiovascular system is documented,
Dr Chalmers told us that she was aware of Patient A’s
cardiac history and
the previous pneumothorax, and that it was extremely unlikely that she would not
have examined both. She has
no independent recollection of doing so, nor of
undressing Patient A. However, it is documented that she examined his scapula
shoulder, and would have been well positioned to examine the chest, which,
she told us, is her usual practice.
s to hydration; Dr Chalmers told us that as a renal physician, she
automatically questions each patient as to urine output, and assesses
We noted that Patient A was also recorded as taking fluid orally.
r Chalmers told us that she was looking for signs of infection. Patient A did
not have a fever. However, it is likely that the results
of blood tests ordered
at 0700 hours were available to her at the 1030 hours review, and that the WCC
reading of 25.3 and neutrophil
count of 11.4 alerted her to infection. The CRP
was subsequently ordered by her at 1100 hours, and became available at 1229
The written instruction regarding the CRP at Tab 33/13, was
- Do blood M/C/S/.
e are satisfied from the evidence of Dr Chalmers, notwithstanding the paucity
of records, that she did examine the left arm, and the
surgical wound on Patient
A’s left hand. She says that she did not notice any discolouration of the
skin as she would otherwise
have noted it in the record. Dr Chalmers has no
independent recall of doing the examination of the left arm, and it is likely
her evidence that she did not remove the back slab, which, we note for the
sake of completeness, was still in place at the time of
the autopsy.
e are satisfied from Dr Chalmers’ evidence that she did not examine
Patient A’s axilla or abdomen. We are also satisfied
that at 1030 hours Dr
TTCC11,,11
WDAAIFIIIAPWieaaaattTTIDMTWDDDPPODIIWTWTACC(IIDUIITTETTTDT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (667 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter