URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/273.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Griffinchuk No 1 Pty Ltd ATF Griffinchuk Family Trust v The Owners �e" Strata Plan No 92745 [2025] NSWCATAP 273;
(29 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Griffinchuk No 1 Pty Ltd ATF Griffinchuk Family Trust v The Owners –
Strata Plan No 92745
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 273
Hearing Date(s):
23 June 2025, 25 August 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Appeal Panel
R C Titterton OAM, Senior Member
D Goldstein, Senior member
(1) The appeal is
(2) The respondent is to file and serve
any submissions (and if necessary evidence) as to costs on or before 12 November
(3) The appellant may respond on or before
26 November 2025
(4) The respondent may reply on
or before 3 December 2025
Catchwords:
LAND LAW – strata title – meaning of
Schemes Management Act 2015
APPEALS - whether decision of
the Registrar of the Consumer and commercial Division of the Tribunal is an
“internally reviewable”
decision for the purposes of
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW), r 41
Strata Schemes
Management Act 2015
Cases Cited:
Attorney General for New South Wales v Gatsby
[2018] NSWCA 254
Developments Pty Ltd v The Owners – Strata Plan No 85305
[2019] NSWCATAP
Frampton v The Owners – Strata Plan No 35012; The Owners –
Strata Plan No 35012 v Frampton
[2019] NSWCATCD 15
Georgiadis v Australian
& Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
(1994) 179 CLR 297
[1994] HCA 6
Grabovsky v Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP
Mamassalski & Riley (No 3)
[2022] FedCFamC1F 562
Owners Strata
Plan No 74232 v Tezel
[2023] NSWCA 36
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
Preston v Diaspora Holdings Ltd v Owners
Corporation of Strata Plan 68608
[2019] NSWSC 651
Unique Commercial Group
Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Vickery v The Owners -
Strata Plan No 80412
[2020] NSWCA 284
Westerweller v The Owners Strata Plan
[2023] NSWCATAP 113
Principal judgment
Griffinchuk No 1 Pty Ltd ATF Griffinchuk Family Trust
(Appellant)
The Owners – Strata Plan No 92745 (Respondent)
Representation:
Adj/Prof A Anforth AM (Appellant)
Solicitors:
Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2028/00086730
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
[2025] NSWCATCD
Date of Decision:
4 February 2025
R Collins, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2024/00164282
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an appeal from the decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division of the
) of 14 February 2025 in application 2024/00164282
Primary Decision
application 2024/00164282, the appellant sought compensation for water ingress
including compensation for inconvenience and economic
losses suffered. The
economic losses included relocation of the appellant’s lessee, expenses
related to the sale of the subject
lot including commission paid and marketing,
legal fees for the sale and purchase of the lot, stamp duty on the purchase of
new premises
and compensation for liquidated damages payable to
appellant’s lessee.
matter was listed for a preliminary hearing as to the Tribunal’s
the reasons given in the Primary Decision, the Tribunal dismissed the
appellant’s application. The Tribunal found it had
no jurisdiction to hear
and determine the matter, as the appellant did not meet the relevant definition
of “interested person”
Strata Schemes Management
the following reasons, we see no error by the Tribunal, with the result that the
appeal should be dismissed.
The appellant’s
Notice of Appeal
setting out a detailed chronology of events, the appellant identifies three
grounds of appeal.
first ground of appeal is stated as follows:
The delay caused in the [appellant] undertaking the steps from 9 November 2023
to 21 December 2023 was due to the Registrar's failures
set out at paragraph 13
above. These failures involve a failure to turn her mind to her statutory duty
section 227(1)(b)
and therefore a failure to address the case put. The
considerations that the Registrar did take into account at paragraph 12
were irrelevant
consideration. This conduct on the Registrar's part constitutes very material
errors of law.
second ground of the appeal, in the alternative, is that the application lodged
by the appellant on 3 May 2024 was not a new application
but a relodging of the
application of 9 November 2024 (sic – 2023) with the evidence of mediation
requested. The appellant
submits that the Registrar’s administrative
action of prematurely closing the file on 30 November 2023 does not negate the
right in fact of the appellant’s original lodgement.
third ground of appeal is that the Tribunal erred in its construction of
of the SSMA.
addition, the appellant also submitted that the Primary Decision was not fair
and equitable because:
(1) the Tribunal misconstrued
of the SSMA;
(2) this erroneous construction of the legislation acted to deny the appellant
its rights at law to claim for the breaches that had
occurred while it was a
unit owner;
(3) any decision that is wrong at law is unfair and inequitable;
(4) the appellant had continuous dialogue with the respondent in an effort to
resolve the matter, even to the point of prior Tribunal
proceedings in which the
respondent admitted liability and thereafter;
(5) the appellant had sought mediation with the respondent prior to November
(6) it was unlawful, unfair and inequitable for the Registrar to have rejected
the application of 9 November 2023 and require that
the appellant further
attempt mediation through NSW Fair Trading;
(7) the findings of fact at [42]-[44] of the Primary Decision are unfair because
they fail to address the relevant evidence and,
on their face, are contrary to
the appellant stated in the Notice of Appeal that it is contrary to the public
interest in promoting access to justice to
adopt a construction that
“reads the Tribunal out of jurisdiction” and “forces the
parties into a cost, evidence
and rules-based jurisdiction”.
in its submissions filed 20 August 2025, after we allowed an adjournment of the
appeal hearing at the request of the appellant,
the appellant stated that its
grounds of appeal were as follows:
(1) whether the Tribunal has incorrectly interpreted and applied
SSMA in its finding that the appellant was not an 'interested person' entitled
to lodge its claim with the Tribunal after
the date of sale of the unit in
question on 21 December 2023, for compensation arising from breaches in the
period prior to the sale
(when the appellant remained the registered proprietor
and therefore an 'interested person');
(2) whether the
Registrar's
decision to reject the lodgement of the appellant’s claim on 9 November
2023 was void at law for jurisdictional error by reason
(a) the failure to correctly construe and apply
of the SSMA in
appellant’s claim and not
s 227(1)(b)
, being the provision relied upon by
the appellant, and in so doing failed to address the case as put and to exercise
the statutory
power accordingly;
(b) the inflexible application of a “mere policy “of the Tribunal to
require a report from Fair Trading before determining
that the respondent had
refused to participate in mediation under
s 227(1)(b)
(3) whether the
fell into error of law:
(a) in finding that the Registrar's decision was a lawfully valid one
(b) in coming to findings of fact and law on the evidence before the Registrar,
that the respondent had not refused to participate
in the mediation within the
s 227(1)(b)
of the SSMA;
(c) in determining whether the Registrar failed to take into account relevant
evidence in coming to its findings and arrived at an
unreasonable decision.
Other documents
note that the appeal was first listed for hearing on 23 June 2025. We gave the
appellant an adjournment of the hearing as its counsel
Adj/Prof Anforth AM
explained the appellant had not been able to obtain copies of documents it had
filed for the Tribunal hearing.
Apparently, the appellant was not legally
represented at the Tribunal hearing, had failed to retain a copy of its
materials for itself,
and we were told that the tendered material could not be
located by the Registry of the Consumer and Commercial Division of the
the adjournment was not opposed by the respondent, we allowed the adjournment so
as to enable the appellant the chance to locate
the documents and file them with
the Appeal Panel Registry.
Accordingly,
along with the 150 pages of materials filed by the appellant on 5 May
we also had before
(1) a transcript of the Tribunal proceedings, filed 20 August 2025;
(2) an affidavit of the appellant’s director, Mr Gary Woodbridge, affirmed
7 August 2025, filed 20 August 2025;
(3) a 34 page bundle of documents titled “Tender Book”, also filed
20 August 2025;
(4) a 124 page bundle of material tilted “Appendices to
Submissions”, filed 25 August 2025.
Submissions
also had the benefit of submissions of the appellant:
(1) in reply to the respondent’s submissions of 28 May 2025, dated 29
April 2025 in the name of but not signed by Adj/Prof
Anforth AM;
(2) in reply to the respondent’s submissions of 28 May 2025, dated 18 June
2025, filed 23 June 2025, signed by Mr Woodbridge;
(3) filed 20 August 2025.
The respondent’s materials
Reply to Appeal
respondent filed its Reply to Appeal on 31 March 2025.
summary, the respondent submitted that none of the grounds of appeal disclosed a
discernible ground of appeal in respect of a question
of law, and were variously
argumentative, misconceived or an attempt by the appellant to reargue the issues
before the Tribunal.
relation to the appellant’s “not fair and equitable
submissions”, the respondent submitted that:
(1) to the extent that an error of construction in
of the SSMA is made,
the respondent accepts that this is capable of being an error on a question of
(2) the stated basis of the challenge does not disclose an error on a question
of law and is argumentative;
(3) the Tribunal’s finding in relation to
is based on the appellant
not being "an interested person, original owner or building manager" (Primary
Decision at [23]), and that
there is no error of construction by the Tribunal.
Other documents
also had the benefit of a number of
aides memoire
prepared by the
respondent’s solicitor, Mr Ton, which included:
(1) a schedule of use of “owner” in respect of applications under
(2) a chronology of “mediation communications”.
Submissions
also had the benefit of submissions of the respondent filed 28 May
Nature of an appeal
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
sets out the basis upon which appeals from decisions of
the Tribunal may be brought. That section states that an appeal may be made
of right on any question of law or with leave of the Appeal Panel on any other
(s 80(2)(b)).
A question of law
Prendergast
v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
, the Appeal
Panel set out a non-exhaustive list of possible questions of law giving
rise to an appeal as of right:
(1) whether there has been a failure to provide proper reasons;
(2) whether the Tribunal identified the wrong issue or asked the
wrong question;
(3) whether a wrong principle of law had been applied;
(4) whether there was a failure to afford procedural fairness;
(5) whether the Tribunal failed to take into account relevant (that
is, mandatory) considerations;
(6) whether the Tribunal took into account an
irrelevant consideration;
(7) whether there was no evidence to support a finding of fact;
(8) whether the decision was so unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker
would make it.
matters were clarified and expanded by the Appeal Panel in
Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Appeal Panel stated (references omitted):
32 To the above list [referring to the list
Prendergast
extracted above] might be added the
following (some of which are nuanced aspects of the
categories in
Prendergast
(1) Whether the Tribunal drew inferences that were not
available from the facts as found (an extension of item
7 [of Prendergast])
(2) Whether the construction of a statute or
contract arrived at by the Tribunal at first instance was wrong in
some identified
(3) Whether the Tribunal’s decision was vitiated by bias,
or a reasonable apprehension of bias, relates to and intersects
the fair hearing rule, and may encompass or be related to
the procedural fairness question: ...
(4) Whether the Tribunal failed to respond to
substantial, clearly articulated arguments based on established
facts which may constitute
a failure to accord natural justice,
that is, procedural unfairness. Alternatively, it may also
constitute a constructive failure
to exercise jurisdiction:
(5) Whether the facts as found necessarily satisfied the
statute or necessarily did not:
Appeal Panel concluded at [33] that, “plainly”, the categories (of
questions of law) are not closed.
The Primary Decision
considering the grounds of appeal, it is appropriate to briefly summarise the
structure and content of the Primary Decision.
[1]-[5], the Tribunal briefly sets out an introduction to the application. This
is followed, at [6]-[14], with the background to
the application.
[15]-[20], the Tribunal then set out an overview of the appellant’s
application. In summary, this was:
, 106 and 232 of the SSMA do not exclude jurisdiction;
(2) sections 106(1) and 106(5) of the SSMA create a species of statutory right
that resides
in an owner for the
time being when the breaches occur at the point they first become aware of
the losses:
Vickery v The Owners - Strata Plan No 80412
[2020] NSWCA 284
Owners Strata Plan No 74232 v Tezel
[2023] NSWCA 36
(3) principles of statutory interpretation mean that Parliament is presumed not
to have "abrogated vested or accrued right[s] of
a proprietary nature without
express language to that effect":
Georgiadis v Australian & Overseas
Telecommunications Corporation
(1994) 179 CLR 297
[1994] HCA 6
(4) the use of the word “must” in s 106(1) of the SSMA imposes a
strict liability on the owners corporation to repair
common property;
(5) there is no monetary jurisdictional cap on the Tribunal’s power in
claims brought under
of the SSMA.
[21], the Tribunal briefly summarises the respondent’s submissions, noting
that the respondent submitted that the appellant
did not meet the definition of
“interested” person under the SSMA as they were no longer owners or
occupiers in the strata
Frampton v The Owners – Strata Plan No
35012; The Owners – Strata Plan No 35012 v Frampton
[2019] NSWCATCD 15
Mamassalski & Riley (No 3)
[2022] FedCFamC1F 562.
[22]-[30], the Tribunal sets out the relevant legislative provisions and
principles, concluding:
31 The Tribunal is satisfied that the rights under ss 106(1)
and 106(5) accrue with an owner when the breaches occur at the point
become aware of the losses. However the Tribunal is not satisfied that these
rights are abrogated without express language.
The lot owners retain these
rights, however the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine the claim.
The language "for the
time being" is an express term which parliament have used
to abrogate the right of parties to apply to the Tribunal to determine
32 Unlike Georgiadis v AOTC
[1994] HCA 6
, there remains a forum
for former lot owners to pursue their rights, but it is not the Tribunal under s
232 of the Act.
33 There is also no dispute as to the strict liability of
owners corporations under s106(1), however this is not determinative
intention of the section to empower the Tribunal to be able to hear applications
from former lot owners.
34 The case of Frampton v The Owners - Strata Plan No 35012
involved a lot owner who sold her lot after the proceedings commenced
they were completed. Accordingly it is not analogous to this situation, and
supports the contention that an lot owner
must be a lot owner at the time they
commence proceedings.
35 The case of Massalski & Riley (No 3) was a family court
matter, which incidentally referenced other Tribunal proceedings
relevant to the issue in dispute here.
36 For these reasons, the Tribunal is satisfied that under the
Act, there is a requirement for the lot owner to be the owner at
the time they
lodge their application with the Tribunal.
[37]-[47], the Tribunal sets out its analysis of whether the appellant had
standing to bring the application. The Tribunal concluded
at [48] that since the
appellant was not a lot owner, but rather a former lot owner at the time the
application was filed, the appellant
did not meet the definition of an
“interested person” for the purposes of s 232 of the SSMA, and
dismissed the application.
Relevant law
set out the relevant provisions of the SSMA.
interested person
—see section 226.
106 Duty of owners corporation to maintain and repair
(1) An owners corporation for a strata scheme must properly maintain and
keep in a state of good and serviceable repair the common
property and any
personal property vested in the owners corporation.
(2) An owners corporation must renew or replace any fixtures or fittings
comprised in the common property and any personal property
vested in the owners
corporation.
(3) This section does not apply to a particular item of property if the
owners corporation determines by special resolution that—
(a) it is inappropriate to maintain, renew, replace or repair the
property, and
(b) its decision will not affect the safety of any building,
structure or common property in the strata scheme or detract from the
of any property in the strata scheme.
(4) An owners corporation may defer compliance with subsection (1) or (2)
in relation to damage to common property until after the
taking of action
(a) the action is taken by the owners corporation against an owner or
another person in relation to the damage, and
(b) the deferment will not affect—
(i) the safety of buildings, structures or common property in the
strata scheme, or
(ii) a person’s access to or use of the common property or a
lot in the strata scheme.
(5) An owner of a lot in a strata scheme may recover from the owners
corporation, as damages for breach of statutory duty, any reasonably
foreseeable
loss suffered by the owner as a result of a contravention of this section by the
owners corporation.
(6) An owner may not bring an action under this section for breach of a
statutory duty more than 6 years after the owner first becomes
aware of the
(7) This section is subject to the provisions of any common property
memorandum adopted by the by-laws for the strata scheme under
this Division, any
common property rights by-law or any by-law made under section 108.
(8) This section does not affect any duty or right of the owners
corporation under any other law.
226 Interested persons
(1) The following persons are
for the purpose of making an application to the Tribunal
under this Act—
(a) the owners corporation,
(b) an officer of the owners corporation,
(c) a strata managing agent for the scheme,
(d) an owner of a lot in the scheme, a person having an estate or
interest in a lot or an occupier of a lot,
(e) if the strata scheme is a leasehold strata scheme, the lessor of
the scheme.
interested persons
for the purpose of
making an application to the Tribunal under this Act relating to a strata scheme
for a part strata parcel also
include the following—
(a) the owners corporation or a strata managing agent for, an owner
of a lot in, a person having any other estate or interest in
a lot in, or an
occupier of a lot in, any other scheme affecting the building,
(b) any other person for the time being bound by any strata
management statement for the building.
227 Certain applications cannot be accepted without prior
(1) A registrar must not accept an application made to the Tribunal under
this Act unless—
(a) mediation by the Secretary under Division 2 or otherwise has been
attempted but was not successful, or
(b) a party refused to participate in the mediation, or
(c) the registrar considers that mediation is unnecessary or
inappropriate in the circumstances.
(2) The registrar must inform an applicant that the applicant should
arrange for mediation if the registrar rejects an application
(3) The applicant may arrange for mediation under Division 2 or otherwise.
232 Orders to settle disputes or rectify complaints
Orders relating to complaints and disputes
The Tribunal
may, on application by an interested person, original owner or building manager,
make an order to settle a complaint
or dispute about any of the
(a) the operation, administration or management of a strata scheme
under this Act,
(emphasis added)
Consideration
the outset of its submissions, the appellant submits that the principles set out
in ss 3, 36 and 38 of the NCAT Act are relevant.
to s 3 of the NCAT Act, we note that the objects of the NCAT Act
(1) ensuring that the Tribunal is accessible and responsive to the needs of all
of its users (NCAT Act, s 3(c));
(2) enabling the Tribunal to resolve the real issues in proceedings justly,
quickly, cheaply and with as little formality as possible
(NCAT Act, s 3(d));
(3) ensuring that that the decisions of the Tribunal are timely, fair,
consistent and of a high quality (NCAT Act, s 3(e));
(4) ensuring that that the Tribunal is accountable and has processes that are
open and transparent (NCAT Act, s 3(f));
(5) promoting public confidence in tribunal decision-making in the State and in
the conduct of Tribunal members (NCAT Act, s 3(g).
appellant submits that in
Preston v Diaspora Holdings Ltd v Owners
Corporation of Strata Plan 68608
[2019] NSWSC 651
, the Supreme
Court held that the real issues referred to in s 3(d) are the substantive ones
not procedural ones. The appellant submits
that the substantive issues in this
case are whether the respondent has breached its statutory and contractual duty
to repair, which
the respondent has “not even denied”.
appellant submits that the purpose or intent of s 3 was addressed by the Court
of Appeal in
Attorney General for New South Wales v Gatsby
[2018] NSWCA
where the Court of Appeal stated at [224]:
Nor is this a matter of mere semantics; the objects of the
Administrative Tribunal Act
demonstrate that, as was the case with many of the
22 tribunals and other bodies which were combined to create NCAT, a significant
purpose of the creation of NCAT was to provide an alternative mechanism for
dispute resolution, allowing persons with disputes in
particular categories to
obtain a resolution outside the formal court structure. Thus, the first object
was to establish a tribunal
to provide a single point of access "for most
tribunal services in the State"; the third object was to ensure that the
Tribunal "is
accessible and responsive to the needs of all of its users" and the
fourth was to enable the Tribunal to resolve "the real issues
in proceedings
justly, quickly, cheaply and with as little formality as possible". There are
other objects, but the intention to
provide a tribunal separate from the court
system is nevertheless manifest.
appellant submits that the Court of Appeal explicitly noted that one of the
purposes of
is to avoid forcing citizens into the court systems with its
costs in time and money, but “this is precisely the outcome that
present construction of the legislation in question will have”.
appellant then addresses s 36 of the NCAT Act, noting that s 36
36 Guiding principle to be applied to practice and
guiding principle
for this Act and the
procedural rules, in their application to proceedings in the Tribunal, is to
facilitate the just, quick and
cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings.
(2) The Tribunal must seek to give effect to the guiding principle when
(a) exercises any power given to it by this Act or the procedural
(b) interprets any provision of this Act or the procedural rules.
(4) In addition, the practice and procedure of the Tribunal should be
implemented so as to facilitate the resolution of the issues
between the parties
in such a way that the cost to the parties and the Tribunal is proportionate to
the importance and complexity
of the subject-matter of the proceedings.
appellant submits that:
9 Section 36 explicitly requires that the Tribunal interpret
its applicable legislation in a manner that facilitates the quick
disposition of cases. The idea is that where two constructions of a legislative
provision are reasonably open, that the
Tribunal take the relevant construction
which facilitates the quick and cheap disposition of cases, and does not force
citizens into
the slower and more expensive court systems.
10 This same principle forms part of the common law of
statutory interpretation which requires a beneficial construction of a remedial
11 In short, the Tribunal should approach the statutory
interpretation issue in the spirit of reading itself into jurisdiction
than a goal of reading itself out of jurisdiction.
appellant then sets out s 38 of the NCAT Act, noting that s 38
38 Procedure of Tribunal generally
(1) The Tribunal may determine its own procedure in relation to any matter
for which this Act or the procedural rules do not otherwise
make provision.
(2) The Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inquire
into and inform itself on any matter in such manner as it
thinks fit, subject to
the rules of natural justice.
(4) The Tribunal is to act with as little formality as the circumstances
of the case permit and according to equity, good conscience
and the substantial
merits of the case without regard to technicalities or legal forms.
(5) The Tribunal is to take such measures as are reasonably
practicable—
(c) to ensure that the parties have a reasonable opportunity to be
heard or otherwise have their submissions considered in the proceedings.
appellant then submits that:
(1) in terms of the substantial merits of the case, the respondent has not
denied liability for its failure to carry out repairs
and it has already
admitted liability in the Tribunal proceedings;
(2) the repairs required by a Deed of Settlement to be carried out by the
respondent were not carried out and nor where the repairs
for subsequent
leakages. This is the real issue, and the substantial merits, to be
determined;
(3) the appellant is the aggrieved party who has suffered loss from the
respondent's failure to repair. The respondent's actions
to date have been
directed to procedural obstruction and delay. Even if the Appeal Panel
determines that it has no jurisdiction,
the matter is still actionable in the
District Court at which time the respondent will be forced to either admit or
deny liability
in the face of the evidence. By then, the appellant will have
been subjected to the costs and delays in the court's process (in addition
the costs and delays incurred in the current proceedings before the
(4) the effect of denying jurisdiction within the Tribunal is to defeat the
right of the appellant to proceed in the less costly
and more expeditious
processes of the Tribunal and to be forced into a more costly jurisdiction.
our view, the relevance of those submissions to s 38 of the NCAT Act is not
readily apparent.
now turn to the appellant’s three grounds of appeal
the Tribunal has incorrectly interpreted and applied s 226 of the SSMA
appellant’s first ground of appeal was whether the Tribunal erred in its
finding that the appellant was not an “interested
person” entitled
to lodge its application with the Tribunal after the date of sale of the unit in
question on 21 December 2023,
for compensation arising from breaches in the
period prior to the sale (when the appellant remained the registered proprietor
therefore an “interested person'”.
appellant relied on its submissions made to the Tribunal on this issue. These
were sufficiently summarised in the Primary Decision
and are set out above.
submissions were amplified by the appellant’s counsel at the appeal
hearing. Counsel suggested there were two interpretations
open to the Tribunal,
the first being the one ultimately taken by the Tribunal. The second, and the
one argued for by the appellant,
was that “for the time being”,
means that at the time the cause of action arose, “you are recorded in the
Tribunal, appropriately, found that it was necessary to consider the definition
of interested person, set out in s 226 of the
SSMA. That is set out above. It
includes “an owner of a lot in the scheme, a person having an estate or
interest in a lot or
an occupier of a lot": SSMA, s 226(1)(d).
Tribunal noted (Primary Decision at [25]), that s 4(a) of the SSMA defines owner
....each person for the time being recorded in the Register as entitled to an
estate in fee simple in the lot (in the case of a freehold
strata scheme) or as
entitled to a leasehold estate in the lot (in the case of a leasehold strata
(emphasis added)
to the words, “for the time being”, the Tribunal
26 ... Giving this phrase its natural interpretation, it
requires the applicant to be a lot owner at the time it commenced the
proceedings to be considered a "owner" under the [SSMA].
27 Turning to the lot owners' specific submissions, there is no
dispute that the lot owner is only claiming compensation for losses
prior to the sale of the Lot.
28 The language "for the time being" in the definition of
"owner" suggest there is a limit to the definition- that is, that there
a nexus in time between when the applicant is an owner, and the specific section
using the defined term 'owner' within the
29 Whilst s106 is a remedial provision, it does inherently have
limitations such as the time limit for making claims as set out
in s 106(6).
Nonetheless, the reading of s 106 and the references to "owner" in ss 106 (5)
and 106 (6) of the [SSMA] is not the prohibitive
provisions in this instance. It
is the power of the Tribunal under s 232 which limits the Tribunal's ability to
make the orders sought
to lot owners "for the time being", which links to the
time the application was filed.
30 The Tribunal is not satisfied that interpreting the
statutory rights or common law rights. The right to make a claim may remain, the
difference is that the Tribunal is not the correct
forum to seek the remedy.
31 The Tribunal is satisfied that the rights under ss 106(1)
and 106(5) accrue with an owner when the breaches occur at the point
become aware of the losses. However the Tribunal is not satisfied that these
rights are abrogated without express language.
The lot owners retain these
rights, however the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine the claim.
The language "for the
time being" is an express term which parliament have used
to abrogate the right of parties to apply to the Tribunal to determine
see no error by the Tribunal on this issue, and we find the Tribunal’s
reasons for concluding that that as the appellant
was not a lot owner at the
time its application was ultimately filed, and that the Tribunal had no
the applicant, to be correct.
consider that the Tribunal’s reasons for decision to be entirely orthodox,
and see no substance in the appellant’s
submissions that:
(1) there are no words of limitation in the definition of owner or in s 106 and
the words “for the time being”, suggest
the contrary;
(2) the Tribunal’s interpretation of s 226 ignored established principles
of statutory interpretation including that legislation
is presumed not to
alienate vested proprietary rights without adequate compensation, not to
interfere with vested propriety rights,
not to interfere with vested statutory
rights and not to alter common law doctrines or invade common law rights.
we accept the appellant’s submission that the use of the word
“must” imposes a strict liability on the respondent,
the relevance
of that to the substantive jurisdictional argument is not explained by the
appellant, nor is the relevance of there
being no monetary “cap” on
the Tribunal’s power to award compensation under s 106.
first ground of appeal raises a question of law, but we see no error on this
ground of appeal.
ground of appeal is dismissed.
Whether the Registrar's decision
to reject the lodgement of the appellant’s claim on 9 November 2023 was
void at law for jurisdictional
appellant’s second ground of appeal was that the Registrar’s
decision to reject the lodgement of the appellant’s
claim on 9 November
2023 was void at law for jurisdictional error.
Appellant’s
submissions
appellant claims that the Registrar’s decision was void by reason
(1) her failure to correctly construe and apply s 227 of the SSMA in the
appellant’s claim and not s 227(1)(b), being the provision
relied upon by
the appellant, and in so doing failed to address the case as put and to exercise
the statutory power accordingly;
(2) the inflexible application of a “mere policy “of the Tribunal to
require a report from Fair Trading before determining
that the respondent had
refused to participate in mediation under s 227(1)(b).
the appeal hearing, we drew the parties’ attention to the recent decision
of the Appeal Panel in
Grabovsky v Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 192.
In that decision, the Appeal Panel (at [51]ff), considered
whether or not decisions of the Registrar were internally appealable decisions
for the purposes of internal appeals to the Appeal Panel. We pointed out that,
relevantly, it appeared only those decisions of the
Registrar set out in r 41
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
) were internally reviewable decisions for the purposes of s 32 of the
case that decision took the parties by surprise, particularly the appellant, we
offered the parties the opportunity to provide
a post-hearing note if they
wished. Mr Anforth told us that was unnecessary as he could address the point
straight away. He submitted
that there was a distinction between merits review
carried out under a statute that confers power, and judicial review which is
with the validity of an administrative decision and whether the
decision has efficacy or force at all. Mr Anforth said he had addressed
issue in his written submissions, and relied on the decision of the High Court
of Australia in
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v
[2002] HCA 11.
Anforth submitted that as the Registrar’s decision was tarred with
and was a nullity.
its written submissions, the appellant submitted that there were at least three
issues concerning the Appeal Panel’s power
to review a decision of the
first issue was:
(1) whether the Tribunal had the power to declare that the Registrar's refusal
to process the application of 9 November 2023 was
ultra vires;
(2) whether the Tribunal below had the power to declare that the claim of 9
November 2023 had been validly lodged and had effect
(3) if no, then what is the “operational status” of an unlawful
refusal by the Registrar?;
(4) whether the Appeal Panel can review this aspect of the Tribunal below and
what remedy the Appeal Panel can provide.
second issue was whether the Appeal Panel could directly review the decision of
the Registrar for its lawfulness under s 80 of
the NCAT Act as:
(1) an error of law that has occurred within the making of the decision; and
(2) an error of law as part of an “ancillary decision”.
third issue was whether the principle in
applies to empower the
Tribunal, whether through a direction to the Registrar by the President of the
Tribunal or by order of the
Appeal Panel, to withdraw the decision (of the
Registrar) refusing to accept the appellant’s application of 9 November
by reason of jurisdictional error of law, and to replace it with an
acceptance of the claim for lodgement of the appellant’s
application on
its submissions to the Tribunal, repeated on appeal, the appellant submitted
that ss 227(1)(b) and (c) applied at the time of the
lodgement of its
application, but were not considered by the Registrar. The appellant submitted
that the Registrar was aware that
the respondent had denied the
appellant’s request for mediation. The appellant further submitted that,
in any event, whether
its application was effectively lodged on or after the
sale of its property, that did not operate to abrogate its accrued existing
appellant submitted that at [22] of the Primary Decision the Tribunal took the
view that it did have jurisdiction to review an
ancillary matter and did in fact
review the Registrar’s decision(s). The appellant further submits that the
Appeal Panel also
has power to determine any collateral matters, being matters
of fact or law necessary to determine the dispute (
Dyldam Developments Pty
Ltd v The Owners – Strata Plan No 85305
[2019] NSWCATAP 229)
this includes the validity of an application lodged with the Registrar.
the appellant submitted that the contrary proposition is that a decision of the
Registrar to reject an applicant is final
except for judicial review by the
Supreme Court is a construction that would lead “many mischiefs” in
the administration
of the Tribunal generally.
Respondent’s
submissions
is not necessary to repeat the respondent’s submissions. That is because,
for the following reasons, the appellant’s
submissions are
misconceived.
Consideration
relevant factual background is as follows.
or about October 2020, the appellant suffered water ingress from common
June 2021, the appellant commenced proceedings against the respondent. Those
proceedings were resolved by consent orders in October
or about 9 November 2023, the appellant attempted to lodge another application
seeking rectification of leaks and compensation
under s 106 of the SSMA.
10 November 2023, the Registrar wrote to the appellant, relevantly
On 09/11/2023 the Registrar received your Application for an Order (substantive
application).
Pursuant to
Section 227
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
Community Land Management Act 2021
, the Registrar must not accept an
application for an order unless satisfied that mediation has either been
attempted or mediation
is not necessary or appropriate.
Proof of attempted mediation must be provided on or before 16/11/2023. Note, if
you do not provide the information within this time
the application will not be
accepted by the Registrar and the file will be closed.
appellant responded that day, stating that it had attempted to engage with the
respondent “prior to issuing the claim, but
with no success”. The
respondent attached an email exchange between it and the respondent’s
solicitor, enquiring whether
that correspondence was evidence of attempted
13 November 2023, the Registrar responded, indicating that proof of attempted
mediation needed to come from either a Fair Trading
or Community Justice
29 November 2023, the appellant applied to the Tribunal to dispense with
30 November 2023, the Registrar issued the following order:
The Registrar must not accept an Application for an Order unless satisfied that
mediation has either been attempted or that mediation
is unnecessary or
inappropriate. No such information has been received. Therefore, your
application has not been accepted and the
file has been closed.
21 December 2023, the appellant sold the subject lot.
28 February 2024, NSW Fair Trading wrote to the appellant confirming that the
application for mediation was closed as the appellant
was no longer an owner in
the strata scheme.
3 May 2024, the appellant filed the application that was subject of the
proceedings below.
appellant submitted that the issue was whether the Appeal Panel could directly
review the decisions of the Registrar for its lawfulness
as part of the Appeal
Panel’s power under s 80 of the NCAT Act because the Registrar’s
decision contained:
(1) an error of law that has occurred within the making of the decision; and
(2) an error of law as part of an “ancillary decision”.
agree that the issue is whether we can review the Registrar’s decision.
our view, we have no power to do so. Our power in this internal appeal is
limited to hearing internally appealable decisions.
80 of the NCAT Act relevantly provides:
80 Making of internal appeals
(1) An appeal against an internally appealable decision may be made to an
Appeal Panel by a party to the proceedings in which the
decision is made.
Internal appeals are required to be heard by the Tribunal constituted as an
Appeal Panel. See section 27(1).
(2) Any internal appeal may be made—
(a) in the case of an interlocutory decision of the Tribunal at first
instance—with the leave of the Appeal Panel, and
(b) in the case of any other kind of decision (including an ancillary
decision) of the Tribunal at first instance—as of right
on any question of
law, or with the leave of the Appeal Panel, on any other grounds.
32 of the NCAT Act in turn relevantly provides:
32 Internal appeal jurisdiction of Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal has
internal appeal
(b) any decision made by a registrar of a kind that is declared by
this Act or the procedural rules to be internally appealable
for the purposes of
this section.
(4) An internally appealable decision is a decision of the
Tribunal or a registrar over which the Tribunal has internal appeal
(5) An internal appeal is an appeal to the Tribunal against an
internally appealable decision.
(6) Subject to the procedural rules, if a decision of a registrar is an
internally appealable decision, the provisions of this Act
relating to the
making and determination of an internal appeal are taken to apply as
(a) any reference to the Tribunal at first instance (however
expressed) included a reference to a registrar, and
(b) any requirement concerning the granting of leave to appeal
against particular kinds of decisions of the Tribunal or on particular
extended to decisions of the same kind made by a registrar or grounds of the
(emphasis added)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) provides:
41 Registrars may make certain interlocutory decisions of
(1) A registrar may, at the direction of the President or a Division Head,
make any of the following interlocutory decisions of
the Tribunal on behalf of
the Tribunal—
(a) a decision under
of the Act concerning the extension
of the period of time for the doing of a thing under legislation in connection
with proceedings,
(b) a decision under section 45 of the Act concerning the granting or
revocation of leave for a person to represent a party to proceedings,
(c) a decision under section 45(4)(a) or (b) of the Act concerning
the appointment of a person to act as guardian ad litem for a
represent a party, in proceedings,
(d) a decision under section 45(4)(c) of the Act concerning the
making of an order for a party to be separately represented in proceedings,
(e) a decision under section 55(1)(a) or (d) of the Act concerning
the dismissal of proceedings,
(f) a decision under section 64(1)(d) of the Act concerning the
making of an order prohibiting or restricting the disclosure of
evidence or
documents in proceedings,
(g) a decision under clause 10 of Schedule 6 (Guardianship Division)
to the Act concerning the granting of consent for the withdrawal
application in proceedings,
(h) a decision concerning the setting aside of a summons or excusing
compliance with a summons in connection with proceedings,
(i) a decision concerning the granting of access to documents or
things produced in compliance with a summons in proceedings.
(4) A decision of the Tribunal made by a registrar under this rule is
declared to be internally appellable for the purposes of section
32 of the Act
if the decision would have been an internally appellable decision for the
purposes of the Act had it been made by the
Tribunal rather than the
(emphasis added)
other words, because the decision of the Registrar made on 30 November 2023
(Primary Decision, at [37]) was not referred to in
r 41 of the NCAT rules, it is
not an internally appealable decision as defined by s 32 of the NCAT Act. It
follows therefore, that
no internal appeal is available to the appellant on this
ground of appeal.
this ground of appeal is misconceived and is accordingly
Whether the Tribunal otherwise fell into error of
appellant’s third ground of appeal was whether the Tribunal below fell
into error of law:
(1) in finding that the Registrar's decision was a lawfully valid one;
(2) in finding that in coming to her findings of fact and law on the evidence
before her, that the respondent had not refused to
participate in the mediation
within the meaning of s 227(1)(b) of the SSMA; and
(3) whether the Tribunal failed to take into account relevant evidence in coming
to its findings and arrived at an unreasonable decision.
ground of appeal simply reagitates the matters set out in the second ground of
submissions are misconceived as the Registrar’s decision is not reviewable
by the Appeal Panel.
ground of appeal is also dismissed.
appellant has been unsuccessful.
respondent has already indicated that it seeks its costs.
have included in our orders a timetable for the filing of submissions on
propose to deal with costs on the papers and without a
Westerweller v The Owners Strata Plan No 18482
NSWCATAP 113
. Any party opposing that approach must address
that issue in their submissions.
Submissions
are to be limited to five pages.
Appeal Panel orders:
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
(2) The respondent is to file and serve any submissions (and if necessary
evidence) as to costs on or before 12 November 2025.
(3) The appellant may respond on or before 26 November 2025.
(4) The respondent may reply on or before 3 December 2025.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Namely that the Registrar was
not satisfied that mediation had been attempted or \that it was unnecessary of
inappropriate, and because
the mediation “was not a structured process
facilitate by an independent
Emphasis of
the appellant.
Appellant’s emphasis.
These documents included but were not limited to a document titled
“Chairman’s report SP 92745 admitting liability to
leaks”; mediation invitation from NSW Fair Trading; Rejection of mediation
by NBSW Fair Trading; Applicant’s particular
of claim case; Application to
dismiss case 2024/.001164282 by Respondent; Applicant’s submissions in
reply; a chronology and
a statement of Mr Gary Woodbridge dated 28 April
In the Primary Decision
this word is recorded as “accused”, clearly a typographical
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (369 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter