URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWLEC/2025/128.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:00:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Van Beek v Lou (No 2) [2025] NSWLEC 128 (5 November 2025)
Land and Environment Court
New South Wales
Van Beek v Lou (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWLEC 128
Hearing Date(s):
04 November 2025
Date of Orders:
04 November 2025
Decision Date:
5 November 2025
See orders at [45].
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: application to vacate hearing date –
applicable legal principles – application upheld.
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Encroachment of
Buildings Act 1922
Land and Environment Court Rules 2007
3.7(2) and 7.7
Real Property Act 1900
Cases Cited:
Atanaskovic v Birketu Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 11
Jiang v Sydney Metro
[2023] NSWLEC 126
Kenoss Pty Ltd v Palerang Council
[2013] NSWCA 174
Procedural rulings
Nicholas Van Beek and Diana Van Beek (Applicants)
Yi Kun Lou and Olivia
Lou (Respondents)
Representation:
C Koikas (Applicants)
Y Lou (LIP) (First Respondent)
Yuan (Agent) (Second Respondent)
Solicitors:
Finns Roache Lawyers
(Applicants)
N/A (Respondents)
File Number(s):
2024/283555
Publication Restriction:
The Parties Seek a Vacation of the Hearing Date
parties appeared before the Court at a mention late in the afternoon of 4
November 2025, prior the final hearing of the proceedings
listed on 6 November
explained below, the Court listed the matter for mention of its own volition due
to non-compliance with the timetable for the preparation
of the matter for
hearing. At the mention an application was made to vacate the hearing to allow
the parties further time to prepare.
The Court acceded to the application but
due to the late hour (the application concluded at around 6:00 pm) indicated
that it would
publish written reasons later, which it now does.
The Van Beeks Allege an Encroachment onto Their Land
Class 3 proceedings concern an encroachment dispute between the applicants,
Nicholas Van Beek and Diana Van Beek (“the Van
Beeks”), and the
respondents, Yi Kun Lou and Olivia Lou (“the Lous”).
Van Beeks’ land is adjacent to the Lous’ land. The western boundary
of the Lous’ land is contiguous with the
eastern boundary of the Van
Beeks’ land.
short, the Van Beeks allege that a 1.699 m2 portion of the Lous’ dwelling
and shed encroaches onto their land at the rear
of their property. They rely
upon two surveys prepared by a now retired surveyor, Stephen Carr, on 16 March
2021 and 9 February 2022,
respectively.
encroachment is said to arise as a result of alteration works undertaken in 2003
and 2004 pursuant to a development consent granted
by Leichhardt Municipal
Council on 27 November 2002.
construction certificate issued in relation to the consent on 18 March 2003
records the owner-builder’s name as Feng Yeng,
who is Mr Lou’s late
wife and the then joint registered proprietor (along with Mr Lou) of the
Lous’ land.
Van Beeks became the registered proprietors of their land in July 2013.
Van Beeks seek compensation for the asserted encroachment.
Relevant Legislation
proceedings are brought under the
Encroachment of Buildings Act 1992
(“Encroachment Act”). If it is demonstrated that the Van Beeks are
“adjacent owners”, the Lous are the “encroaching
owners”, and that the Lous’ buildings are “buildings”
for the purpose of s 2 of the Encroachment Act, then
s 3 of that Act governs
applications for relief in respect of encroachments. It relevantly provides
3 Encroachments
(1) Either an adjacent owner or an encroaching owner may apply to the
Court for relief under this Act in respect of any encroachment.
(2) On the application the Court may make such orders as it may deem just
with respect to:
(a) the payment of compensation to the adjacent owner,
(b) the conveyance transfer or lease of the subject land to the
encroaching owner, or the grant to the encroaching owner of any
interest therein or any easement right or privilege in relation thereto,
(c) the removal of the encroachment.
(3) The Court may grant or refuse the relief or any part thereof as it
deems proper in the circumstances of the case, and in the
exercise of this
discretion may consider amongst other matters:
(a) the fact that the application is made by the adjacent owner or by
the encroaching owner, as the case may be,
(b) the situation and value of the subject land, and the nature and
extent of the encroachment,
(c) the character of the encroaching building, and the purposes for
which it may be used,
(d) the loss and damage which has been or will be incurred by the
adjacent owner,
(e) the loss and damage which would be incurred by the encroaching
owner if the encroaching owner were required to remove the encroachment,
(f) the circumstances in which the encroachment was made.
terms of compensation, the Act prescribes the following in s 4:
4 Compensation
(1) The minimum compensation to be paid to the adjacent owner in respect
of any conveyance, transfer, lease, or grant to the encroaching
owner shall, if
the encroaching owner satisfies the Court that the encroachment was not
intentional and did not arise from negligence,
be the land value of the subject
land, and in any other case three times such land value.
(2) In determining whether the compensation shall exceed the minimum, and
if so by what amount, the Court shall have regard to:
(a) the value, whether improved or unimproved, of the subject land to
the adjacent owner,
(b) the loss and damage which has been or will be incurred by the
adjacent owner through the encroachment and through the orders
proposed to be
made in favour of the encroaching owner,
(c) the circumstances in which the encroachment was made.
Van Beeks submit that the encroachment arose as a result of negligence, namely,
that of the owner-builder overseeing the Lous’
2003/2004 alternation
works. It is alleged that the owner-builder owed a duty of care to the then
proprietor of the Van Beeks’
land not to erect any buildings upon their
breach is alleged to have occurred because cl 24 of the development consent
requiring a survey report to be submitted to the principal
certifying authority
during construction was never finalised.
is necessary to set out some of the procedural history of the matter because it
is relevant to the exercise of the Court’s
discretion to grant the
doubt in an effort to minimise costs, the Lous filed a notice of motion on 24
July 2025, seeking that pursuant to s 9(2) of the
Encroachment Act the Court
“determine the true boundary” between the two properties.
9(1) and (2) of the Encroachment Act states:
9 Boundaries
(1) If any question arises as to whether an existing
building encroaches or a proposed building will encroach beyond the boundary,
either of the owners of the contiguous parcels of land may apply for a
determination of the position of the boundary:
(a) to the Registrar-General under Part 14A (Boundary
determinations) of the
Real Property Act 1900
(but only if the
application could be made under that Part apart from this section), or
(b) if the application cannot be made under that Part or the
Registrar-General refuses to make that determination—to the
(2) On an application to the Court the Court may make such
orders as it may deem proper for determining, marking, and recording
matter came before me in my capacity as List Judge on 15 August 2025, for the
purpose of setting the motion down for hearing and
to make consequential
timetabling orders, including the filing and serving of evidence and written
submissions. The Lous are not
legally represented and English is their second
discussion between the parties and the Court, it was agreed that given that the
substantive proceedings were reasonably advanced
in terms of their preparation,
and in light of the fact that the Court would have to determine the location of
the boundary at the
final hearing in any event, it would be preferable to hear
the notice of motion at the same time as the substantive hearing because
issue of the location of the boundary, and whether there was an encroachment,
was likely to occupy the majority of time at the
final hearing.
was also an issue as to whether or not the Court had the power to make the
boundary determination sought in the motion pursuant
to s 9(2) of the
Encroachment Act because it was not clear whether an application for a boundary
determination could not be made
by the Lous themselves under
Real Property Act 1900
, or in the alternative, if the Lous had made such
an application, whether the Registrar-General had refused to make the
determination
(see s 9(1)(b) of the Encroachment Act).
were made reflecting the exchange and the matter was set down for final hearing
on 6 November 2025:
1. Notice of Motion filed by the Respondents to be heard the
same date as the final hearing;
2. The Respondents to file and serve any further evidence by 29
August 2025;
3. The Applicants are to file and serve any evidence in reply
by 12 September 2025;
4. The Applicants to file and serve written submissions by 19
September 2025;
5. The Respondents to file and serve written submissions by 26
September 2025;
6. The Applicants to file and serve written submissions in
reply by 3 October 2025;
7. The proceedings are set down for 1 day hearing on 6 November
2025 (1 day); and
8. Liberty to restore on 2 days’ notice.
matter came before the Registrar on 19 September 2025, whereupon the Registrar
made the following orders:
1. The parties may file brief written submissions (no more than
5 pp) by Friday 26.9.25.
2. Vacate orders 4, 5+6 made 15.8.25.
3. [Liberty to restore on] 2 days’ notice for the parties
to seek orders regarding written submissions in the substantive
proceedings once
the [Notice of Motion] filed on 24.7.25 is determined.
orders vacated the earlier orders made by consent, including the order that the
notice of motion be heard and determined at
the final hearing.
Beasley was allocated to hear the notice of motion and when the application came
before him on 29 September 2025, his Honour
essentially remade the orders made
by the Court on 15 August 2025 (albeit with some timetabling adjustments),
including that the
notice of motion seeking a boundary determination be heard at
the final hearing on 6 November 2025.
have not had the benefit of a copy of the transcript of the directions hearings
conducted before myself or Beasley J.
The Directions Hearing on
4 November 2025
Court listed the matter for mention on 4 November 2025 because when it reviewed
the file in preparation for the hearing, it was
concerned that:
(a) (a) there was no valuation evidence from the Lous;
(b) (b) the written submission filed by the Van Beeks were late
and were filed after the Lous had filed their submissions;
(c) (c) there were competing Court Books; and
(d) (d) there were no objections to evidence as ordered.
Lous appeared in person, with Olivia Lou represented (with leave granted
pursuant to r 7.7 of the
Land and Environment Court Rules 2007
(“LEC Rules”)) by Haiyang Yuan, a family friend with no legal
qualifications and for whom English is a second language.
quickly became apparent that the Lous were confused as to what was to occur at
the hearing on 6 November 2025. Whether this was
due to the series of
contradictory orders made by the Court on 15 August and 19 and 29 September
2025, their unrepresented status
or their English comprehension, is not clear.
They repeatedly stated that they believed that only the boundary determination
is, the issue of whether there was in fact an encroachment) would be dealt
with by the Court on 6 November 2025. It is for this reason
that no valuation
evidence had been filed and served by them.
was, however, the Van Beeks who made the application to vacate the hearing date.
This was, they submitted, in order to:
(a) (a) enable joint reporting of the surveyors to take
(b) (b) to permit the Lous to file and serve their valuation
(c) (c) to cure the accepted prejudice to the Lous occasioned
by the late service of their submissions;
(d) (d) to file further surveying evidence because their
surveyor was no longer registered and there was an issue with his professional
liability insurance; and
(e) (e) to permit a delimitation plan to be registered that
would, they claimed, have the effect of determining the boundary and
with a potential adverse possession claim being made by the Lous.
the Lous resisted the vacation application. However, their position changed when
it was explained to them that if the hearing
went ahead, and an encroachment was
found, they had no valuation evidence in response to that served by the Van
Beeks. The Lous stated
that they wanted the opportunity to file and serve
valuation evidence in reply and to respond in writing to the Van Beeks’
submissions.
Legal Principles Applicable to the Vacation of
Hearing Dates
66(1) of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(“the CPA”) provides
66 Adjournment of proceedings
(1) Subject to rules of court, the court may at any time and from time to
time, by order, adjourn to a specified day any proceedings
before it or any
aspect of any such proceedings.
power to adjourn must be exercised having regard to the overriding purpose of
the CPA articulated in s 56(1) and (2) of the CPA:
56 Overriding purpose
(1) The overriding purpose of this Act and of rules of court, in their
application to civil proceedings, is to facilitate the just,
quick and cheap
resolution of the real issues in the proceedings.
(2) The court must seek to give effect to the overriding purpose when it
exercises any power given to it by this Act or by rules
of court and when it
interprets any provision of this Act or of any such rule.
relation to the objects of case management which the Court must consider, s 57
of the CPA states:
57 Objects of case management
(1) For the purpose of furthering the overriding purpose referred to in
section 56 (1), proceedings in any court are to be managed
having regard to the
following objects—
(a) the just determination of the proceedings,
(b) the efficient disposal of the business of the court,
(c) the efficient use of available judicial and administrative
(d) the timely disposal of the proceedings, and all other proceedings
in the court, at a cost affordable by the respective parties.
(2) This Act and any rules of court are to be so construed and applied,
and the practice and procedure of the courts are to be so
regulated, as best to
ensure the attainment of the objects referred to in subsection (1).
Court must act in accordance with the dictates of justice in deciding whether to
grant an adjournment (s 58(1) of the CPA). Section
58(2) identifies some of the
factors that the Court may have regard to in determining where the dictates of
justice lie:
58 Court to follow dictates of justice
(2) For the purpose of determining what are the dictates of justice in a
particular case, the court—
(a) must have regard to the provisions of sections 56 and 57, and
(b) may have regard to the following matters to the extent to which
it considers them relevant—
(i) the degree of difficulty or complexity to which the
issues in the proceedings give rise,
(ii) the degree of expedition with which the respective parties
have approached the proceedings, including the degree to which
they have been
timely in their interlocutory activities,
(iii) the degree to which any lack of expedition in approaching
the proceedings has arisen from circumstances beyond the control
respective parties,
(iv) the degree to which the respective parties have fulfilled
their duties under section 56 (3),
(v) the use that any party has made, or could have made, of any
opportunity that has been available to the party in the course
proceedings, whether under rules of court, the practice of the court or any
direction of a procedural nature given in the
proceedings,
(vi) the degree of injustice that would be suffered by the
respective parties as a consequence of any order or direction,
(vii) such other matters as the court considers relevant in the
circumstances of the case.
the practice and procedure of the Court should be implemented with the object of
eliminating delay (s 59 of the CPA) and
in such a way “that the cost to
the parties is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the
subject-matter in dispute”.
Kenoss Pty Ltd v Palerang Council
[2013] NSWCA 174
Ward JA stated (at
13 The power to adjourn proceedings or vacate hearings
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) confers a
discretion that must be exercised in accordance with the overriding purpose
described in
Civil Procedure Act
accordance with the dictates of justice as described in
of that Act. The
considerations that must be taken into account include: the prejudice to the
respondent by such an adjournment;
the prejudice to the applicant if such an
adjournment is refused; the circumstances in which the application is brought;
and considerations
relating to the administration and management of matters in
this Court.
Honour’s reasoning has been subsequently endorsed and applied by the Court
of Appeal in
Atanaskovic v Birketu Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 11
(at [12] per
Gleeson JA) and by this Court in
Jiang v Sydney Metro
[2023] NSWLEC 126
(at [47] per Pritchard J).
The Hearing is Vacated
for what I accept to be genuine confusion on the part of the Lous which has
resulted in the erroneous belief that the hearing
would be bifurcated, I would
not, having regard to the principles articulated above, have adjourned the
hearing. The reasons proffered
by the Van Beeks were not in and of themselves
sufficiently compelling to warrant an adjournment. No explanation was provided
them for their slippage in complying with the orders made by Beasley J.
Furthermore,
the Court is increasingly concerned about the inevitable increase in costs
consequent upon any delay in the finalisation
of the proceedings. Costs that,
even at this juncture, are disproportionate to the relief claimed by the Van
Beeks. At its highest,
the compensation sought by the Van Beeks is approximately
$57,600, assuming that they can prove that the encroachment occurred
negligently.
If no negligence is demonstrated, then in the absence of any
valuation evidence filed by the Lous, the compensation will be approximately
should be recalled in this context that r 3.7(2) of the LEC Rules (wherein each
party pays their own costs unless it is fair and
reasonable to order otherwise)
does not apply to proceedings under the Encroachment Act and that, therefore,
the ordinary rule that
costs generally follow the event applies.
said this, there is real prejudice to the Lous if the hearing is not vacated
given their absence of valuation evidence. Unless
the valuation evidence of the
Van Beeks is not admitted (the Lous foreshadowed an objection to the evidence on
the grounds of partiality
by reason of a prior professional relationship between
Mr Van Beek and the valuer), it is likely to be accepted by the Court.
vacation of the hearing will enable the Lous to file and serve their valuation
evidence and to properly digest and respond to
the written submissions of the
Van Beeks. As a matter of fairness, this ought to be permitted. I note that to
date the Lous have
largely complied with the orders of the Court and have not
engaged in delay.
vacation will have the further benefit of enabling the joint reporting by the
surveyors and, if such expert evidence is relied
upon by the Lous, the valuers,
thereby refining the issues for determination by the Court.
vacating the hearing, I have considered the issue of delay in the finalisation
of the proceedings. For this reason, I have relisted
the matter for final
hearing before me prior to the end of the year and I have made consequential
timetabling orders. The matter
has been listed for two days as a matter of
prudence given the length of time that the mention before me took to conclude
accommodate any language or other comprehension difficulties, but it is
the expectation of the Court that the proceedings ought to
conclude in one day.
have also ordered additional mediation in the matter having regard to the
disproportionate nature of the quantum of the relief sought
and the amount of
legal costs already incurred and likely to be incurred into the future.
orders of the Court are as follows:
(1) the hearing
on 6 November 2025 is vacated;
(2) all matters are listed for final hearing before Pepper J
at 10am on 17 and 18 December 2025;
(3) the applicants are to file and serve any additional
survey evidence by 14 November 2025;
(4) the respondents are to file and serve any additional
survey evidence in reply by 28 November 2025;
(5) the surveyors are to file and serve a joint surveying
report by 10 December 2025;
(6) the respondents are to file and serve any valuation
evidence in reply by 21 November 2025;
(7) the valuers are to file and serve a joint valuation
report by 5 December 2025;
(8) the parties are to file a single Court Book, including
any objections to evidence, by 12 December 2025;
(9) the parties are to file a joint Tender Bundle by 12
December 2025;
(10) the respondents are to file and serve any submissions
in reply by 8 December 2025;
(11) the applicants are to file and serve any submissions in
reply by 12 December 2025;
(12) pursuant to
Civil Procedure Act 2005
the matter is referred to mediation before a Commissioner of the Court. Such
mediation is to take place on or before 10 December
2025. The parties are to
confer and approach the Registrar by eCourt for a date for the mediation;
(13) liberty to restore on two days’ notice
(preferably before Pepper J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (274 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter