URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/84.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Australian Salaried Medical Officers federation (NSW) v Greater Western Area Health Service [2006] NSWCIMC 84 (23 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Applicant: The Australian
Salaried Medical Officers federation (NSW)
Defendant: Greater Western
Area Health Service
Case Number: 124567/05
20 June 2006
Date of Decision: 23
Magistrate:
Legislation:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Representation:
Counsel for
Applicant: Mr A Britt
Counsel for Respondent: Mr P Newall
Judgement On Notice of Motion
The Applicant commenced
proceedings under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
on 23 December
The Applicant claims is that:
i. The applicant seeks and order pursuant to
Annual Holidays Act
directing the respondent to pay its member, Dr Barbara Allan, the amount of
$52,800 in respect of payments that have become due to
Dr Allan under that Act
and or the Staff Specialists (State) Award (NSW) under
Relations Act 1996
ii. Pursuant to clause 11 of the Staff Specialists
(State) Award (NSW) Dr Allan is entitled to five weeks annual leave (25 days) on
full pay in respect of each 12 months service with the
respondent.
iii. Dr Allan was employed by the respondent as a staff
specialist from 19 December 2001 – 29 August 2004 (2 years, 8 months
iv. Dr Allan was not provided with or paid any annual leave
whilst employed by the respondent, during or on the termination of her
employment.
The Respondent filed a Notice of Motion on 20 February 2006 seeking
that the Applicant’s claim be struck out for lack of jurisdiction
order that the Applicant had no standing to prosecute its claim.
basis for the Respondent’s claim is set out in paragraph B of its’
Notice of Motion as follows:
i. The applicant’s member was not
employed by the Award as alleged in the Applicant’s claim.
the applicant’s member was not employed under the Award, there is no
behalf of its member pursuant
of the industrial Relations act 1996.
iii. If the
Applicant’s member was not employed under the Award, the applicant has no
standing to claim annual leave pursuant
Annual Holidays Act
behalf of its member.
The principles
The principles
governing such strike out motions are well known and are as set out in the
former Industrial Court in
Nagle (t/as W. D. and J. L. Nagle & Sons) v
[1993] 51 IR 8
at (p10-12). The approach so stated in
, although adopted in relation to proceedings under the since
Industrial Relations Act
1991, has been consistently followed
and applied in proceedings under the present 1996 Act (see
Amalgamated Television Services Pty Limited
(1998) 81 IR 364
at 396-397;
Clarkson v Dent
(1998) 84 IR 250
at 251-252;
Bell v Macquarie Bank
Limited (No. 2)
(1999) 87 IR 126
Newton v New South Wales Police
(1999) 87 IR 66
Federated Municipal and Shire Council
Employees' Union of Australia, New South Wales Division v Energy Australia
(1999) 90 IR 311
at 317-319;
Beahan v Bush Boake Allen Australia Ltd
(1999) 93 IR 1
Virtue v New South Wales Department of Education and
(1999) 92 IR 428
at p447-448;
Hogan v Employment
National(Administration) Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 47
at para 10-11; and
Euphoric Pty Ltd v Ryleader Pty Ltd & Anor
[2002] NSWIRComm 136
[2002] 117 IR 1
In order to succeed the Respondent "must demonstrate that no order
could be made which would be within jurisdiction" (see
Beahan v Bush Boake
Allen Australia Ltd
(1999) 93 IR 1
at 2) or for the Respondents to succeed
it must be “demonstrated that there is no power for the Court to grant
the applicant” (see
Virtue v New South Wales Department of
Education and Training
(1999) 92 IR 428
at p448 and
Euphoric Pty Ltd v
Ryleader Pty Ltd & Anor
[2002] NSWIRComm 136
[2002] 117 IR 1
Further, the
authorities make clear that the striking out of pleadings in a statement of
claim allegedly containing no reasonable
cause of action should only occur in
circumstances where the claim is “manifestly groundless”; “so
obviously untenable”
that it cannot possibly succeed; so “manifestly
faulty that it does not admit of argument” (see
General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
(1964) 112 CLR at 125. In
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
, (a summary judgment case) Mason CJ,
Deane and Dawson JJ said in their joint judgment at 602 that “the issue
before the learned
Master on the application for summary judgment”, in
that case, “was not whether the plaintiffs would probably succeed
action against the defendant. It was whether the material before the Master
demonstrated that the action should not be permitted
to go to trial in the
ordinary way because it was apparent that it must fail.”
General Steel
test remains the appropriate criterion for a strike out
application. In that regard, more is required of the defendant, upon whom
onus lies, than demonstrating that a plaintiff’s chances of success are
slim:(per McHugh J in
Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd v Peat Marwick
Hungerfords
[1997] HCA 8
(1997) 188 CLR 241
per McHugh J at 271 and Gummow J at
The Court is required to take the Applicants’ allegations at
its highest in determining a motion of this nature.
The Respondent
agrees with the principles as set out above.
Respondent’s
Grounds and Reasons
(a) Ground 1
The Applicant concedes
ground 1 that the Applicant was not employed under the terms of the
Specialists (State) Award (NSW).
(b) Grounds 2 and
The respondent submitted that Dr Allan appointed by the Respondent
as a Visiting Medical Officer was not an employee by operation
of her contract
with the respondent and the
Health Services Act 1997
(the HS Act). On 2 March
2001 a letter of appointment was sent by the respondent to Dr Allan appointing
her, subject to her acceptance
to the position of Locum VMO, general practice,
Collarenebri (Annexure “a”). Dr Allan accepted the position on 15
2001 (Annexure “b”). The parties signed a written contract on
27 April 2001 (Annexure “c”). Further contracts
were entered into
(Annex ures “d to f’).
In regard to the contract there is
insufficient evidence before the court at this stage to determine whether Dr
Allan is an employee
of the respondent or not. If one looks at the particular
clauses in Annexure “c ” there is nothing to suggest Dr Allan
an employee. In fact, there are many examples of direction and control in the
document that suggests an employer and employee
relationship. However, there is
a copy of an unsigned draft contract (amongst Annexure “e ”); dated
3 May 2004, that
contains clause 1.3 which specifically states that this
contract shall not establish the relationship of employer and employee but
independent contractor relationship.
The relevant sections of the HS
Act provide:
76 Who is a visiting practitioner?
(cf PH Act s 29K)
visiting practitioner
is a medical practitioner or dentist
who is appointed by a public health organisation (otherwise than as an employee)
to practise
as a medical practitioner or dentist in accordance with the
conditions of appointment at any of its public hospitals or health institutions,
or in relation to any health service it provides, specified in the
appointment.
77 What are the kinds of visiting practitioners?
(cf PH Act s 29K)
The kinds of visiting practitioners are:
visiting practitioners appointed under a service contract (whether as
visiting medical officers or honorary medical officers), and
visiting practitioners appointed otherwise than under a service contract.
Who is a visiting medical officer?
(cf PH Act s 29K)
visiting medical officer
is a medical practitioner appointed
under a service contract (whether the practitioner or his or her practice
company is a party
to the contract) to provide services as a visiting
practitioner for monetary remuneration for or on behalf of the public health
organisation
80 What is a service contract?
(cf PH Act s 29K)
service contract
is an agreement between:
a public health organisation and a medical practitioner under which the
practitioner is appointed as a visiting practitioner to provide
to or on behalf
of the public health organisation the medical services that are specified in the
agreement, or
a public health organisation and a practice company under which:
the medical practitioner who conducts his or her practice by means of the
company is appointed as a visiting practitioner, and
the company agrees to provide to or on behalf of the public health
organisation the medical services, to be performed by the medical
practitioner
(as a visiting practitioner), that are specified in the agreement.
Any contract, agreement or other arrangement for the supply of medical
services that is entered into as a result of a tendering process
service contract.
The definition in s76 only applies where one is appointed otherwise as an
employee. Section 77 contains another definition of a visiting
practitioner
depending on whether the practitioner is appointed under a service contract or
not. Section 80 defines a service contract.
It is clear from s77 that some
visiting practitioners have a service contract and others do not. Even if the
visiting practitioner
falls within the first group that is, within s 77(a) there
is nothing within s80 that states that such a person is not an employee.
effect of all the definitions in the HS Act is the Court cannot be satisfied Dr
Allan is not an employee. I do not agree with
the respondent that because Dr
Allan is titled a visiting medical practitioner; that precludes her from being
an employee of the
defendant. Experience and the Law suggest titles can be
misleading.
At this stage of the proceedings the Court is not prepared to
say Dr Allan is not an employee of the respondent. Therefore, there
to pursue at the moment the respondent’s submission that Dr Allan is
unable to be a member of the Applicant Union.
However, the respondent questions
the Applicant’s power to bring the proceedings as brought on Dr
Allan’s behalf. The
respondent’ s submissions on this point mainly
rely on Dr Allan not being a member of the Association as she is not entitled
be a member as she is not an employee for the purposes of the Union
The Applicant submits that even if their member is not covered
by the an Award, the Applicant may seek relief on behalf of its member
to s365 of the Act and in so doing may seek outstanding annual leave owing to
the Applicant’s member.
The Applicant’s Application for
Recovery of Money is brought under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Annual Holidays Act
. In particular:
The applicant seeks an order pursuant to
Annual Holidays Act
directing the respondent to pay its member, Dr Barbara Allan, the amount of
$52,800 in respect of payments that have become due to
Dr Allan under that Act
and or the Staff Specialists (State) Award (NSW) under
Relations Act 1996
Section 365 of the Act provides:
“An industrial court may, on application, order an employer to pay
any amount payable under an industrial instrument that remains
unpaid to the
person to whom it is payable.”
Section 364 of the Act provides in part:
In this Part:
"industrial court "means:
the Commission in Court Session, or
in the case of proceedings under section 380 (Small claims during other
Commission proceedings)—the Commission, whether or not
in Court Session,
a Local Court constituted specially for the purposes of this Part by an
Industrial Magistrate sitting alone.
Section 382 of the Act provides in part:
The Chief Industrial Magistrate or any other Industrial Magistrate may
exercise throughout the State the jurisdiction conferred by
the following Acts
on a Local Court constituted by a Magistrate:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Other industrial relations legislation
Section 369
provides in part:
An application for an order under this Part
[Part 2-which includes
for the payment of money may be made:
by the person to whom the money is payable, or
with the written consent and on behalf of that person by an inspector, by
an officer of a Government Department or
by an officer of an industrial
organisation concerned in the industry to which the proceedings relate
Section 364
provides in part:
In this Part
[Part 2-which includes
"amount payable" under an industrial instrument, includes:
remuneration payable to an employee for work done where the industrial
instrument fixes the rate or amount of the remuneration, or
commission or other amount payable to a person in the circumstances
specified in the industrial instrument (other than remuneration
for work done),
an amount for which an employee is required under the industrial
instrument to be re-imbursed or compensated for an expense incurred
sustained by the employee.
In this Part, a reference to an industrial instrument and to an amount
payable under the industrial instrument includes a reference
a permit under
section 125
and the amount that may be paid to the employee
in accordance with the permit, and
Holidays Act
Service Leave Act
Service Leave (Metalliferous
Industry) Act 1963
and an amount payable to the employee under any such
provision.(my emphasis)
There is no evidence before the Court that the Australian Salaried
Medical Officers Federation (NSW) is not an industrial organisation
purposes of the Act.
There is no evidence before the Court that person
who commenced the proceedings is not an officer of the Australian Salaried
Officers Federation (NSW).
The effect of the above provisions is
that the Applicant may commence proceedings under s365 on behalf of Dr Allan
if she is a worker for the purposes of the Annual Holiday Act
these proceedings were commenced by an officer of an industrial organisation
concerned in the industry to which the proceedings
relate (see s369). The Court
is an “industrial court” for the purposes of s365 (see s364 and
s382). The claim by the
Applicant under the
Annual Holidays Act
is a claim for
an “amount payable under an industrial instrument”
The Applicant has elected to proceed under the remedy provided by
Industrial Relations Act
rather than the remedies provided in
Annual Holidays Act
. Accordingly, in my opinion an inconsistency does not
arise between
Industrial Relations Act
Holidays Act
In these circumstances the Court cannot at this stage,
without a hearing determining the relationship between Dr Allan and the
respondent,
be satisfied that the claim by the Applicant is such the Respondent
has demonstrated “that no order could be made which would
grant any relief to the applicant”.
Accordingly, the Notice of
Motion is dismissed and the Respondent should pay the Applicant’s costs on
the Motion as agreed or
The matter is adjourned to Wednesday, 5
July 2006, at 2pm in Court 4.4, Downing Centre for mention.
Acting Chief Industrial Magistrate
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (102 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter