URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hitchings v Secretary, Department of Planning, Industry and Environment [2021] NSWWCCPD 12 (19 February 2021)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
v Secretary, Department of
Planning, Industry and Environment
[2021] NSWWCCPD 12
Vaughan Hitchings
RESPONDENT:
Secretary, Department of Planning, Industry and
Environment
Allianz – As Agent for the NSW Self Insurance Corporation
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Mr J Isaksen
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
25 September 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
19 February 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Workers Compensation Act 1987
– whether the
injury occurred in the course of employment –
Hatzimanolis v ANI
Corporation Ltd
[1992] HCA 21
173 CLR 473
considered and applied
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr R Harrington, counsel
Stacks Law Firm
Mr D A Baker, counsel
Rankin Ellison Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
name of the respondent, wherever it appears in these proceedings and in the
proceedings below, is amended to read “Secretary,
Department of Planning,
Industry and Environment.”
Certificate of Determination dated 25 September 2020 is
matter is remitted to a different arbitrator for determination of the remaining
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Vaughan Hitchings (the appellant) was employed by the Secretary, Department of
Planning, Industry and Environment (the respondent)
as a procurement officer. He
commenced that employment in February 2019. Initially he was required to work
from the respondent’s
Queanbeyan office. The appellant resided at Port
Macquarie. The arrangements that the appellant was required to work five days
week at the Queanbeyan office were subsequently changed, and ultimately the
arrangements were that the appellant was to attend the
Queanbeyan office on
Mondays and Tuesdays, work in the Sydney office on Wednesdays and work from home
in Port Macquarie on Thursdays
and Fridays. As part of his duties, the appellant
was also required to visit clients at various places within New South
8 October 2019, the appellant was driving from home very early in the morning in
his manual vehicle, intending to travel to the
Queanbeyan office, in accordance
with the latest arrangements in place. When the appellant reached the vicinity
of Kew, which is
not far from Port Macquarie, the appellant suffered a severe
onset of lower back pain associated with shooting left leg sciatica.
appellant was unable to continue the journey and returned to Port Macquarie,
where he sought medical treatment. He was thereafter
certified as having no
current capacity for work.
appellant made a claim for compensation. The respondent disputed the claim on
the basis that, at the time the injury occurred,
the appellant was on a journey
within the meaning of s 10 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Act) and there was not a real and substantial connection between and the
incident from which the injury arose, as required
by s 10(3A) of the 1987
Act. In the alternative, the respondent disputed the claim on the basis that the
appellant’s injury
did not arise out of or in the course of his employment
and that the employment was not a substantial contributing factor to the
in accordance with s 9A of the 1987 Act.
appellant brought proceedings in the Commission claiming weekly payments of
compensation on an ongoing basis. The appellant alleged
that he was injured in
the course of his employment, or that the injury arose out of his employment, or
alternatively that he was
on a journey in accordance with s 10 of the 1987 Act,
and there was a real and substantial connection between his employment and
occurrence of his injury (as required by s 10).
matter proceeded to arbitration. Arbitrator Isaksen delivered a Certificate of
Determination on 25 September 2020. He determined
that the appellant did not
suffer an injury in the course of his employment, the injury did not arise out
of the appellant’s
employment and there was no real or substantial
connection between the appellant’s employment and the incident out of
the injury arose, while the appellant was on a journey between his place
of abode and his place of employment.
appellant appeals that decision.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the
Commission is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in
connection with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this
Act without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content to have the matter determined on
the basis of the documents and written submissions
and that the matter does not
require an oral hearing.
have had regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties indicating
that the appeal can be
determined on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed ‘on
the papers.’
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been
A PRELIMINARY MATTER
the documents lodged with the Commission, the name of the respondent was
described as the “State of New South Wales t/as
Department of Finance,
Services and Innovation.”
Direction was issued by a delegate of the Registrar on 22 October 2020,
directing the parties to advise of the correct name of the
legal entity of the
4 November 2020, the respondent advised that it was instructed that the correct
name of the appellant was “Secretary, Department
of Planning, Industry and
Environment” and that the appellant agreed to the name of the respondent
being amended to reflect
the correct entity.
Accordingly,
the name of the respondent, wherever it appears in these proceedings and in the
proceedings below, is amended to read
“Secretary, Department of Planning,
Industry and Environment.”
THE EVIDENCE
The appellant’s statement evidence
appellant provided a statement dated 3 July
He advised that he commenced
as a procurement manager for the respondent on 4 February 2019 and his
particular role description was
that of a category manager, which required him
to meet with external businesses in order to engage indigenous companies to
to the New South Wales Government. The appellant said that he was
required to travel between Queanbeyan, Sydney, Port Macquarie and
Coffs Harbour.
He said initially he was based in Queanbeyan but in July 2019 it was agreed that
he could work full-time from the
Port Macquarie office. He said that the
arrangement was then changed, so that each week he attended the Queanbeyan
office on Monday
and Tuesday, the Sydney office on Wednesday and the Port
Macquarie office on Thursday and Friday. He said he would drive to those
appellant disclosed that he had experienced minor back symptoms about eighteen
months to two years previously, which were not
associated with any precipitating
incident. The appellant described the onset of severe lower back pain with pain
down the left leg
on 8 October 2019 when he was driving from his home to
the Queanbeyan office. He said he was unable to keep driving, so returned
Port Macquarie where he consulted Dr Paul Goodridge, general practitioner,
at the Port Macquarie Medical and Dental Centre.
appellant referred to a healthy lifestyle promotion being conducted by the
respondent (the burpee challenge) in which he had been
participating and said
that he had been able to work up to 40 sit ups, squats and push ups per day. The
appellant asserted that this
challenge was strongly encouraged by the employer.
appellant advised that he attended Dr Paul Jones, general practitioner of the
same practice as Dr Goodridge, on 10 October 2019
and on 14 October 2019, who
provided a medical certificate, prescribed medication and arranged for him to
undergo a CT scan of the
lumbosacral spine. The appellant also attended
physiotherapy, which he said was beneficial, but was not of sufficient
for him to be able to return to work. He advised that his symptoms
worsened when the physiotherapy was discontinued about two months
later. He said
that in early 2020, physiotherapy was re-introduced, which resulted in some
minor improvement of his symptoms.
appellant stated that he also consulted Dr Simon Spedding and Dr Fiona McDonald,
general practitioners at the Flynns Beach Medical
Centre, who provided him with
medication and certificates of capacity. He underwent an MRI scan of his back on
9 June 2020 and was
referred to Dr Michael Edgar, neurosurgeon at
appellant complained of ongoing severe pain in his lower back, left hip, buttock
and left leg and restriction of movement. He
said he was unable to return to
work, or to his previously active lifestyle. The appellant described his ongoing
restrictions.
appellant provided a supplementary statement dated 9 September 2020 in response
to a statement made by Ms Mary
his manager. He stated that
Ms Sexton had been overseas for the majority of his employment and had not
raised any performance issues
with him. He said that, in meetings prior to his
injury, he was in fact praised for his performance and was given an exemplary
performance
review in September 2019. He said that he was unaware of any
conflict of interest he may have had in a business in which he had been
involved, did not undertake any work in that business and the business was
essentially not operating.
appellant disputed Ms Sexton’s comments about his attendance at work and
gave explanations for the inaccuracy in the records.
He confirmed that on 8
October 2019, he had an appointment with a client in Queanbeyan and this
appointment had been entered in his
Outlook calendar.
Ms Mary Sexton, Senior Manager
Sexton was employed by the respondent as a Senior Manager and was the
appellant’s substantive line manager. She provided
a statement dated 14
Ms Sexton said that she
was, however, on extended leave at the time of the appellant’s appointment
to the position and did
not return to work until 29 July 2019.
Sexton confirmed that the position was based in Queanbeyan, where the appellant
was expected to work on a full-time basis but shortly
before she returned from
leave, the appellant was given permission to work from the Port Macquarie
office. Ms Sexton said there were
still occasions when the appellant was
required to attend meetings in Queanbeyan and Sydney. Ms Sexton advised that
there was no
provision for travel expenses, except for attendances in Sydney and
any travel to and from Port Macquarie was required to be taken
appellant’s own time.
Sexton spoke of concerns she had with the appellant’s working arrangements
and in August 2019, she said she negotiated with
the appellant to return to work
in the Queanbeyan office on Mondays and Tuesdays, work in Sydney on Wednesdays
and Port Macquarie
on Thursdays and Fridays. Ms Sexton described some
dissatisfaction with the appellant’s performance. She advised that she
a Skype meeting with him for 4 October 2019 in which she intended to
raise those performance concerns, but the internet connection
failed, and the
meeting was cut short. She said that because the appellant went off work on
8 October 2019, there had been no discussion
with the appellant about his
performance.
The clinical records
The clinical notes of the Port Macquarie Medical and Dental
Port Macquarie Medical and Dental Centre notes from 8 October 2019 to 11
December 2019 were in evidence.
Relevantly, on 8 October 2019, the appellant consulted Dr Goodridge, who
“Non traumatic radiculopathic back pain
- while driving - pushed pedals -> acute LBP
- radiating to L hamstring/calf/sole of foot
- nil previous back injuries
Goodridge prescribed medication and back exercises and provided a medical
certificate. The appellant then attended Dr Jones on
10 October 2019,
complaining of persisting lower back pain with sciatic radiation. The appellant
attended Dr Jones again on 14 October
2019. Dr Jones arranged for the appellant
to undergo a CT scan of his lower back and provided a further medical
certificate.
21 October 2019, the appellant consulted Dr Spedding. Dr Spedding took a
detailed past history, which included a complaint of previous
back pain two
years prior to the consultation. Dr Spedding noted that the appellant was
working in procurement and that he had been
servicing a bigger area over
Canberra, Sydney and Port Macquarie in the past three months. Dr Spedding
further noted that the appellant
required physiotherapy and was to have a CT
scan that morning. Dr Spedding prescribed medication and provided a certificate
of capacity.
appellant sought physiotherapy treatment from Mr Shane Murray, who was also from
the Port Macquarie Medical and Dental Centre,
on 22 October 2019. Mr Murray
recorded the history of a sudden onset of low back pain while driving on 8
October 2019, following
which the appellant was unable to weight bear on the
left leg. Mr Murray noted that the appellant was “In car all day some
appellant returned to see Dr Spedding on 28 October 2019. At that consultation,
Dr Spedding recorded that the CT Scan of the lumbar
spine disclosed an old
injury at the L1 and 2 levels, no other injuries, and the presence of arthritis
and disc problems. Subsequent
consultations with Mr Murray and Dr Spedding
indicate that there had been limited improvement in the appellant’s
The Flynns Beach and Lachlan Medical Centre clinical
Flynns Beach and Lachlan Medical Centre notes were also in
The appellant attended Dr
McDonald on 19 December 2019. Dr McDonald noted that the
(a) was suffering from chronic lower back pain;
(b) was unable to drive due to the pain;
(c) suffered a workplace injury in October 2019, and
(d) complained of previous sciatica, which had resolved.
McDonald further noted that a CT scan of the lumbar spine showed mild
degenerative changes at the L1-2 level. The appellant continued
to consult Dr
McDonald, who recorded on 30 January 2020 that the appellant had attempted to
his back had locked up. Dr McDonald
referred to the appellant’s employment as a procurement officer which
involved a bit of
driving to Sydney and Queanbeyan. Dr McDonald noted the
appellant got as far as Sydney.
The Hastings Sports Injury and Physiotherapy
McDonald referred the appellant to Hastings Physiotherapy on 19 December 2019.
She referred to the left lower back injury in October
2019 and advised that the
appellant was “still suffering from a [l]ot [sic] of pain, and unable to
His occupation involves drives for long periods of
Paul Seward, physiotherapist, reported back to Dr McDonald on 29 January
Mr Seward provided the
history of the appellant having participated in the respondent’s physical
fitness challenge and advised
that that exercise was likely to have irritated
the appellant’s left lumbar spine. He said that the left side of the back
be irritated by any physical activity or sitting in a car for more than an
hour. Mr Seward reiterated that there was a bit of wear
and tear in the
appellant’s back which was most likely aggravated by the physical fitness
The certificates of capacity
number of certificates of capacity were issued by the appellant’s treating
general practitioners. Relevantly, in certificates
dated 21 October 2019 and 11
November 2019, Dr Spedding indicated that the injury was related to work
because of “excessive
sitting driving and work
were also certificates from Dr McDonald. Dr McDonald issued an undated
certificate which appears to have been completed on 9
and a further certificate
dated 30 January 2010.
McDonald indicated that the injury was related to the appellant’s
employment because of long periods of driving from Port
Macquarie to Queanbeyan,
with the appellant suffering pain “en route” on 8 October
Dr Murray Hyde-Page, orthopaedic surgeon
Murray Hyde-Page was requested to conduct a video link conference with the
appellant and provide a medico-legal opinion for the
purposes of the
appellant’s case. He provided a report a report dated 1 April
Hyde-Page took a history of the journey taken by the appellant from his home on
8 October 2019. He noted that the appellant was
intending to travel to
Queanbeyan and left home at 2 am in his small SUV, but only managed to drive for
he suddenly developed severe low back pain and
shooting pain down his left leg.
Hyde-Page said that he had read the notes of the general practitioners and he
recorded a history of the treatment provided to the
appellant after the onset of
symptoms, as well as the symptoms the appellant reported to him in the
interview. Dr Hyde-Page referred
to the fitness challenge in which the appellant
participated. He took the history that the appellant was performing those
before the injury satisfactorily and that it did not cause him any
back problems. Dr Hyde-Page recorded the past history of some
low back pain two
years previously, which settled quickly without treatment. He reviewed the
radiological evidence.
Hyde-Page reiterated that the appellant had suffered an acute onset of lower
back pain with left sided sciatica in the early hours
of 8 October 2019, noting
that the appellant drove a manual car. He felt that the CT scan did not show any
significant underlying
cause for the appellant’s symptoms. He opined
“Overall, I have concluded that the acute onset of his
low back pain and left sided sciatica is a consequence of his early morning
driving on 8 October 2019, when in the course of his work he had left Port
Macquarie to drive to Canberra. His acute low back pain
and sciatica is
therefore directly related to his
employment.”
Hyde-Page considered that the appellant’s employment as a procurement
officer was a substantial contributing factor to the
The letter of offer of employment
respondent’s letter to the appellant offering him employment with the
respondent as an Aboriginal Procurement Manager was
The document confirmed
that the appellant would start his employment on 4 February 2019 and that his
commencement location would
be Queanbeyan.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator noted that, at the commencement of the appellant’s employment
with the respondent, his “commencing location”
was Queanbeyan, and
that the appellant resided in Port Macquarie. The Arbitrator also noted that on
8 October 2019, the appellant
commenced driving from his home in Port Macquarie
to Queanbeyan for work purposes and, when in the vicinity of Kew, suffered the
onset of severe lower back pain with pain down his left leg. He recorded that
the pain caused the appellant to stop his journey and
for medical treatment, following which the appellant did not return to work.
Arbitrator identified the issues for determination as:
(a) whether
the appellant suffered a “personal injury” within the meaning of s 4
of the 1987 Act;
(b) whether the personal injury to the appellant’s lower back on 8
October 2019 arose out of or in the course of his employment
with the respondent
in accordance with ss 4 and 9A of the 1987 Act, and
(c) if the journey from the appellant’s place of abode to his place of
employment was a journey within the meaning of s 10 of
the 1987 Act, whether
there was a real and substantial connection between the appellant’s
employment and the accident or incident
out of which the personal injury arose,
as required by s 10(3A) of the 1987 Act.
Arbitrator noted that the respondent did not dispute that the appellant was on a
journey to his place of work. He referred to
the documents that were adduced
into evidence and said that he had taken that evidence into account in making
his determination.
He summarised the evidence provided by the appellant in his
statements dated 9 September 2020. He also summarised:
evidence given by Ms Sexton;
(b) the evidence recorded in the clinical notes of Port Macquarie Medical and
Dental Centre between 8 October 2019 and 21 October
(c) the contents of the certificate of capacity issued by Dr Spedding on 21
October 2019, together with the report of the CT scan
undertaken on that
(d) the evidence provided by Dr McDonald, and
(e) the evidence from Dr Hyde-Page.
Arbitrator referred to the authority of
Trustees of the Society of
St Vincent de Paul (NSW) v Maxwell James Kear as administrator of the
estate of Anthony John
in which Roche
DP quoted from
Kennedy Cleaning Services Pty Ltd v
where Gleeson CJ
and Kirby J observed that a personal injury is a “sudden and ascertainable
or dramatic physiological change
or disturbance of the normal physiological
state.” The Arbitrator noted that the appellant attended Dr Goodridge on
of the injury complaining of tenderness and was prescribed medication,
and two weeks later was referred for a CT scan and again prescribed
medication.
Arbitrator said that, on the basis of the appellant’s evidence that he
suffered a sudden onset of pain and on the basis
of the records of the Port
Macquarie Medical and Dental Centre commencing from 8 October 2019, he accepted
that there was a sudden
pathological change, even though it was not identified
in the radiology. Consequently, he was satisfied that the appellant did suffer
personal injury to his lower back on 8 October 2019.
Arbitrator turned to the issue of whether the injury was sustained in the course
of the appellant’s employment. He noted
the appellant’s submissions
that all of the journeys undertaken by the appellant were in the course of his
employment, because
the appellant, unlike other workers, was required to travel
a considerable distance each week from his home to his place of employment,
which creates a significant risk of injury.
Arbitrator quoted from the High Court decision in
Hatzimanolis v ANI
Corporation Ltd
Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and McHugh JJ observed that:
course of employment is ordinarily perceived as commencing when the employee
starts work in accordance with his or
her ordinary or overtime hours of work and
as ending when the employee completes his or her ordinary or overtime hours of
“... there are cases where an employee is required to embark upon some
undertaking for the purpose of his or her work in circumstances
notwithstanding that it extends over a number of daily periods of actual work,
the whole period of the undertaking constitutes
an overall period or episode of
“... In determining whether the injury occurred in the course of
employment, regard must always be had to the general nature,
circumstances of the employment ‘and not merely to the circumstances of
the particular occasion out of which the
injury to the employee has
Arbitrator further referred to
French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ said:
important to identify how
Hatzimanolis
sought to define the
circumstances for, and the extent of, an employer’s liability for
compensation.
Hatzimanolis
sought to provide a legal
justification for an injury, which occurred between periods of actual work,
being regarded as occurring
in the course of the employee’s employment. It
did so by characterising the interval by reference to the employer’s
or encouragement. The employer’s liability in such
circumstances depends upon what the employer induced or encouraged the employee
Hatzimanolis
did not seek to extend the employer's
liability beyond
“The starting point in applying what was said
Hatzimanolis
, in order to determine whether an injury was
suffered in the course of employment, is the factual finding that an employee
injury, but not whilst engaged in actual work. The next enquiry is what
the employee was doing when injured. For the principle
Hatzimanolis
to apply, the employee must have been either
engaged in an activity or present at a place when the injury occurred. The
enquiry is then: how was the injury brought about? In some cases, the
injury will have occurred at and by reference to the place.
More commonly, it
will have occurred while the employee was engaged in an activity. It is only if
and when one of those circumstances
is present that the question arising from
Hatzimanolis
principle becomes relevant. When an activity
was engaged in at the time of injury, the question is: did the employer induce
or encourage
the employee to engage in that activity? When injury occurs at and
by reference to a place, the question is: did the employer induce
or encourage
the employee to be there? If the answer to the relevant question is affirmative,
then the injury will have occurred
in the course of
employment.”
Arbitrator observed that, in accordance with
Hatzimanolis
appellant’s course of employment would ordinarily be perceived as when he
commenced work in Queanbeyan and ending when
he completed his work that day in
Queanbeyan. The Arbitrator noted that Dr Hyde-Page opined that the
appellant’s injury was
caused by driving to work, which activity the
Arbitrator considered was no different from the activity of thousands of workers
day. The Arbitrator said that the appellant was not in the course of his
employment until he arrived at his workplace. The Arbitrator
Hatzimanolis
acknowledged that the:
“whole period of an
undertaking for the purposes of work can constitute an overall period or episode
of work, and that the general
nature, terms and circumstances of employment must
be considered in determining whether injury has occurred in the course of
employment.”
Arbitrator considered that this gave some support to the appellant’s
submissions that the requirement for the appellant
to travel significant
distances between three locations meant that, during the entire period from when
he left his home until he
returned, the appellant was in the course of his
employment. The Arbitrator noted that the appellant met clients in Queanbeyan
out of the office, travelling over a large area of NSW, but said that when
the appellant experienced lower back pain, he was on a
journey to commence his
work for the week. The Arbitrator observed that the injury which occurred while
driving from Port Macquarie
to Queanbeyan was not part of an overall period or
episode of work but occurred on a journey before the appellant commenced his
activities. The Arbitrator added that he did not consider that the
respondent encouraged or induced the appellant to undertake that
activity, which
would have brought the appellant’s injury within the course of his
employment.
Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s contract of employment, which
initially required the appellant to work full time
from the Queanbeyan office,
but that arrangement was subsequently altered, ultimately requiring him to work
at the three locations
each week. The Arbitrator noted that the appellant was
amenable to those arrangements and did not assert that he was persuaded or
motivated by the respondent to undertake those arrangements. The Arbitrator said
that there was no evidence to say that the respondent
persuaded or motivated the
appellant to do so. The Arbitrator observed that:
simply a necessary requirement of his employment that the applicant work each
Monday and Tuesday in Queanbeyan. So long
as the applicant lived in Port
Macquarie, he needed to undertake a journey each week to Queanbeyan, so that he
could undertake his
employment duties in accordance with the terms of his
contract of employment with the
respondent.”
Arbitrator concluded that he was not satisfied that the injury was sustained in
the course of the appellant’s employment,
and that the injury sustained by
the appellant occurred while he was on a journey from his place of abode.
Arbitrator turned to the question of whether the appellant’s injury arose
out of his employment with the respondent. He
referred to the Presidential
decision of
Bina v ISS Property Services Pty
He said that matter
involved proceedings in which the worker alleged that the injury either arose
out of her employment or occurred
while the worker was on a journey within the
meaning of s 10 of the 1987 Act in circumstances where she was travelling home
the first of two shifts. The Arbitrator quoted the following passage from
the reasons of Arbitrator Sweeney, who was the Arbitrator
“I do not believe that it is open to an arbitrator
to hold that an injury on a journey, between a worker’s place of abode
place of employment, arises out of the employment unless there is some greater
connection with the employment than having to
get to and from the place of
employment.
... If a journey arose out of the employment why was it necessary for the
legislature to enact a provision whereby such an injury
was to be treated or
deemed an injury arising out of the
employment?”
Arbitrator also quoted from the observations of Keating P in the appeal
determination, in which Keating P said:
Arbitrator’s Reasons establish that he identified and applied the correct
causal connection test to his consideration
of whether the injuries sustained by
Ms Bina during the journey between her place of work and her home arose out of
her employment.
He concluded (at [44]) that the mere fact that a worker must
travel to or from work, of itself, does not establish a causal connection
between her injury and the activities of, or incidental to, her employment. In
the present case, there is no causal relationship
between Ms Bina’s
employment and her injury. For the reasons given, I am satisfied that the
Arbitrator identified and applied
the correct
Arbitrator considered that, in his view, the mere fact that the appellant had to
drive from his home to Queanbeyan to commence
work was not sufficient to
establish a causal connection between his lower back injury and his employment.
The Arbitrator said that
the fact that the appellant was required to travel long
distances in his work did not create a greater connection with his employment
the journey he undertook on 8 October 2019. The Arbitrator said that that
journey was merely a journey between the appellant’s
place of abode and
his place of work. The Arbitrator added that there was little medical evidence
that supported a claim that the
injury to the appellant’s back was caused
by prolonged driving.
Arbitrator referred to the certificate of capacity issued by Dr Spedding on 21
October 2019, who opined that the injury was caused
by excessive sitting,
driving and the pressure of work and also noted that the appellant was servicing
a larger area. The Arbitrator
noted that Dr McDonald said on 19 December 2019
that the injury was related to work because of the long periods of driving the
was required to do between his home and the Queanbeyan office. The
Arbitrator observed, however, that there were no reports from
those doctors to
explain their conclusions as to the cause of injury. The Arbitrator considered
that the reference to long periods
of driving by Dr McDonald in the referral to
the physiotherapist was simply an observation, providing some background about
the appellant.
Arbitrator said that Dr Hyde-Page was the only medical expert to provide a
detailed opinion on causation, which was that the onset
of lower back pain with
left leg sciatica was a consequence of the early morning drive that day. The
Arbitrator did not accept that
Dr Hyde-Page’s opinion went further than to
say that the cause of the injury was the driving the appellant was doing that
He added that Dr Hyde-Page did not record details of the extensive
driving the appellant undertook in his employment. The Arbitrator
concluded that
he did not accept that the injury sustained by the appellant arose out of the
appellant’s employment.
Arbitrator proceeded to consider the issue of whether there was a real and
substantial connection between the appellant’s
employment and the injury,
in accordance with s 10(3A) of the 1987 Act. He referred to Keating P’s
observations in
, in which his Honour observed (citations
“(a) that a substantial connection is one ‘of
substance’;
(b) that ‘employment’ in s 10(3A) is the same as in s 9A, that
is, it is the activities of, or incidental to the employment,
as opposed to the
(mere) fact of being employed;
(c) the mere fact that a worker must travel to and from work is insufficient
to establish a real and substantial connection between
the employment and the
accident - there must be some real relationship (connection) between the
activities of the employment and
the accident out of which the personal injury
(d) if merely travelling to and from work was sufficient to establish the
relevant connection, s 10(3A) would be
Arbitrator also quoted the following observations made by Keating P in
“It is therefore clear that s 10(3A) has work to
do. Its purpose is found in the words used in the subsection, read in the
of the 1987 Act as a whole. In my view, the purpose of the provision is
to ensure that injuries received in the circumstances provided
for are injuries
that are deemed to arise out of or in the course of employment and compensation
is payable accordingly. The subsection
will usually be satisfied, depending on
the facts, when there is a real and substantial connection between some feature
of what the
worker is reasonably required, expected or authorised to do, by
reason of his or her employment, and the accident or incident out
of which the
personal injury
“Whether, and in what circumstances, s 10(3A) will be satisfied will be
a question of fact, applying the words of the provision,
in a commonsense and
practical manner in each
Arbitrator observed that Ms Bina was unsuccessful in establishing that there was
a real and substantial connection between her
employment and the motor vehicle
accident that occurred in her journey between two shifts.
Arbitrator also considered the decisions of Roche DP in
Dewan Singh and Kim
Singh t/as Krambach Service Station v
Department of Education and
Communities
and Keating P
State Super Financial Services Australia Limited
circumstances of injury in each case and noting that each of the workers were
successful in establishing a real and substantial
connection between the
employment and the incident in which the injury occurred. The Arbitrator
referred to the appellant’s
submission that the long periods of driving
undertaken by the appellant caused the appellant’s injury, which
established a
real and substantial connection between the employment and the
injury. He did not accept that submission because Dr Hyde-Page’s
was limited to the cause of the injury being the driving the appellant did that
morning. The Arbitrator reiterated that Dr
Hyde-Page did not record details
of the extensive driving the appellant undertook each week in his employment, so
that there was
no support for the appellant’s assertion that it could be
inferred that Dr Hyde-Page’s opinion was that the extensive
driving caused
the injury.
Arbitrator concluded that he could not identify any real and substantial
connection between the appellant’s activities of
employment and the onset
of the lower back pain during the journey the appellant undertook on 8 October
2019. He reasoned that:
“The journey which the applicant
undertook was not reasonably required, expected or authorised by reason of his
employment,
other than what would ordinarily be expected of an employee to
travel from his place of abode to attend his place of employment.
applicant’s driving on that morning was simply a journey to his place of
work which was required as part of his contract
employment.”
Arbitrator said that the circumstances of the journey undertaken by the
appellant on 8 October 2019 were consistent with Keating
observations in
, that is, that the mere fact that a worker is
required to travel to and from work is not sufficient to show a real and
substantial
connection between the appellant’s employment and the
incident. As Keating P observed, if it were, then s 10(3A) of the 1987
Arbitrator distinguished the facts in
, because those cases involved events that could be related to an
employment activity or a requirement of that employment. He observed
onset of lower back pain did not result from the appellant’s employment
activity, or something which was incidental
to that employment.
Arbitrator concluded that the appellant was on a journey from his abode to his
place of work and the provisions of s 10(3A) of
the 1987 Act were not satisfied.
Certificate of Determination issued on 25 September 2020
“The Commission determines:
applicant did not sustain an injury in the course of his employment with the
respondent on 8 October 2019.
applicant did not sustain an injury arising out of his employment with the
respondent on 8 October 2019.
was no real and substantial connection between the applicant’s employment
and the incident out of which the applicant’s
injury arose in the journey
undertaken by the applicant from his place of abode to his place of employment
on 8 October 2019.
The Commission orders:
award for the respondent.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant brings three grounds of appeal, alleging the Arbitrator erred as
(a) Ground One: error of fact,
law or discretion in finding that the medical evidence did not support the
assertion that there was
a connection between the back injury and the need to
drive long distances as part of the appellant’s work duties;
(b) Ground Two: error of fact and law in finding that there was not a real
and substantial connection between the appellant’s
back injury and the
need for the appellant to drive long distances in order to carry out his duties,
(c) Ground Three: error of fact and law in finding that the appellant’s
back injury did not arise out of or in the course of
his employment when the
Arbitrator had found that the appellant had injured his lower back as a result
of driving to work.
LEGISLATION
4 of the 1987 Act provides:
Definition of
(cf former s 6 (1))
In this Act:
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of employment,
(b) includes a
disease injury
which means:
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing factor
to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in the
course of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease, and
(c) does not include (except in the case of a worker employed in or about a
mine) a dust disease, as defined by the
Workers’ Compensation (Dust
Diseases) Act 1942
, or the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of a dust disease, as so defined.”
10 of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
Journey claims
(cf former s 7 (1) (b)-(d), (f), (g))
(1) A personal injury received by a worker on any journey to which this
section applies is, for the purposes of this Act, an injury
arising out of or in
the course of employment, and compensation is payable accordingly.
(1A) Subsection (1) does not apply if the personal injury is attributable to
the serious and wilful misconduct of the worker.
(1B) A personal injury received by a worker is to be taken to be
attributable to the serious and wilful misconduct of the worker
if the worker
was at the time under the influence of alcohol or other drug (within the meaning
Road Transport Act 2013
), unless the alcohol or other drug did not
contribute in any way to the injury or was not consumed or taken voluntarily.
(1D) Subsection (1) does not apply if the personal injury resulted from the
medical or other condition of the worker and the journey
did not cause or
contribute to the injury.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a) the injury was received during or after any interruption of, or
deviation from, any such journey, and
(b) the interruption or deviation was made for a reason unconnected with the
worker’s employment or the purpose of the journey,
unless, in the circumstances of the case, the risk of injury was not
materially increased because of the interruption or deviation.
(3) The journeys to which this section applies are as follows:
(a) the daily or other periodic journeys between the worker’s place of
abode and place of employment,
(3A) A journey referred to in subsection (3) to or from the worker’s
place of abode is a journey to which this section applies
only if there is a
real and substantial connection between the employment and the accident or
incident out of which the personal
injury arose.
SUBMISSIONS
One and Two of the appeal pertain to the question of whether there was a
connection between the appellant’s employment
and his injury. For the
reasons set out below, I have determined that the third ground of appeal
succeeds, and the Certificate of
Determination is to be revoked. It is not
necessary therefore to reproduce the parties’ submissions in respect of
Grounds One
and Two or to discuss those grounds.
Ground Three
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that it was irrelevant to the question of whether the
respondent authorised or encouraged the appellant to work
in the manner he did,
or that the contract of employment initially required him to work in Queanbeyan
and changes to that contract
were made which were of benefit to the appellant.
The appellant submits that whether the respondent encouraged or authorised him
to perform the activity is only relevant to the circumstance that a worker was
doing something outside of his contract of employment,
such as going on a
sightseeing trip. The appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s finding that
the journey was not one which was
reasonably required, expected or authorised,
other than what would ordinarily be expected of an employee to travel from home
workplace. The appellant submits that this characterisation is untenable.
The appellant points out that:
(a) the journey was approximately 663
kilometres;
(b) the journey commenced at 2 am and would take about eight hours;
(c) the journey was undertaken pursuant to a contract of employment to work
in different towns in New South Wales and serviced an
area from Queanbeyan to
Coffs Harbour;
(d) the journey was inherently dangerous and could not have been undertaken
on public transport;
(e) the appellant could not participate in shared rides to work or fly to
these places because of incompatible flight schedules;
(f) he was required to take clothing and personal items that he would require
over the following three to four days in various towns,
together with his
(g) he did not return home after each day’s work;
(h) the means of travelling to work were not requisites of an ordinary
journey, and
(i) the journey would be tax deductable, unlike an ordinary journey to
appellant submits that, in a number of cases, it has been accepted that a
journey from a place of abode to work can also be a
journey arising out of or in
the course of employment, citing the cases of
Scharrer v The Red
Rock Co Pty Ltd
appellant refers to the Arbitrator making reference to
that their Honours also said that:
“When injury occurs at and
by reference to a place, the question is: did the employer induce or encourage
the employee to be
there? If the answer to the relevant question is affirmative,
then the injury will have occurred in the course of
employment.”
appellant submits that the Arbitrator focussed on the event which led to the
injury, rather than the circumstances which brought
the appellant to the place
where the injury occurred. The appellant says that in
Hatzimanolis
worker would have been unsuccessful if the connection to employment was
determined by the injury because the worker was on a
sightseeing tour, unrelated
to his employment. The appellant submits that in this case, not only did the
respondent induce and encourage
him, it was part of his contract to service the
extensive area.
appellant asserts that the journey on the day of the accident should not be
looked at as a single journey, but as part of the
overall journey required to
carry out his duties. In conclusion, the appellant submits that there is no
reason to distinguish the
journey he was undertaking from the various other
journeys he was required to take.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the appellant assumes that because the Arbitrator found
that the appellant was injured on a journey, it
should result in a finding that
the injury arose out of or in the course of the appellant’s employment.
The respondent reiterates
that the appellant’s contract did not require
him to travel by car, the decision to do so was his own, and the appellant was
not reimbursed for the travel from his abode to Queanbeyan and return.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the finding that the
appellant was on a journey from his place of abode
was untenable. The respondent
submits that the fact that the journey was lengthy, inherently dangerous,
commenced early in the morning,
and the other matters referred to in the
appellant’s submission, is irrelevant to this journey and completely
contrary to the
evidence of Ms Sexton.
respondent says that the appellant relied upon three decisions where the worker
was on a journey, but it was found that the injury
arose out of or in the course
of employment. The respondent recites the facts of
and submits that each of those matters were determined on their
specific facts, which had no correlation with the facts in this case
no assistance to the appellant.
respondent submits that both
Hatzimanolis
dealt with the
period of time between periods of employment where the employer encouraged or
induced the worker to be in the place
that the injury occurred. The respondent
describes the facts of each case and asserts that in the present case, the
Arbitrator found
that the appellant was on a journey to which s 10 of the 1987
Act applies and the respondent did not encourage or induce the appellant
undertake that journey. The journey was a requisite part of the job which was
based in Queanbeyan.
respondent contends that the Arbitrator’s conclusion was readily available
to him and the facts as determined by the Arbitrator
have not been shown to be
wrong, as required in order to displace the decision. The respondent asserts
that the Arbitrator was entitled
to make the findings that he
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant does not identify the relief he is seeking in this appeal.
respondent submits that the Certificate of Determination should be
CONSIDERATION
Arbitrator was required to determine whether the appellant was in the course of
his employment when he suffered the injury or
whether the injury arose out of
the appellant’s employment. The issue in the alternative was that he was
on a journey within
the meaning of s 10 of the 1987 Act, and there was a real
and substantial connection between the appellant’s employment and
incident out of which the injury arose.
challenge to the Arbitrator’s finding that the appellant was not in the
course of his employment when the injury occurred
is found in Ground Three of
the appeal. If Ground Three succeeds, there is no need, and nor in the
circumstances is it appropriate,
to address the submissions as to whether there
was a sufficient connection between the appellant’s employment and the
resulting in the injury (Grounds One and Two of the appeal). It is
therefore convenient to consider Ground Three of the appeal before
the remaining two grounds.
challenge is in part premised on the assertion that the Arbitrator made a
finding that the appellant had injured his lower back
as a result of driving to
work. In the process of determining whether the appellant suffered a personal
injury on 8 October 2019,
the Arbitrator reviewed the medical evidence and the
relevant authorities as to what constitutes a “personal Injury”
the purpose of s 4 of the 1987 Act. The Arbitrator concluded as
“I accept from the applicant’s evidence of a
sudden onset of lower back pain, and the records made by the doctors at Port
Macquarie Medical and Dental Centre on and from 8 October 2019, that there was a
sudden pathological change in the applicant’s
lower back, even though it
might not have been positively identified in any subsequent radiology. I accept
from this evidence that
the applicant did sustain a personal injury to his lower
back on the morning of 8 October
Arbitrator did not make a finding that the personal injury was caused by the
appellant driving to work. The Arbitrator simply
accepted, on the basis of the
evidence before him, that the onset of symptoms was sufficient to identify a
sudden pathological change,
which satisfied the requirements of s 4 of the 1987
the injury occurred in the course of the appellant’s employment involves a
temporal element. Of course, if the appellant
had been successful in
establishing the temporal element, he would have then had to satisfy the
Arbitrator that his employment was
a substantial contributing factor to the
injury in accordance with s 9A of the 1987 Act. However, having found against
the appellant,
the Arbitrator did not proceed to determine the issue in relation
appellant contends that it is not relevant whether the respondent required,
encouraged or authorised the appellant to drive to
Queanbeyan. The appellant
describes the Arbitrator’s conclusion that the journey was one which would
ordinarily be expected
of an employee as “untenable.” This was said
to be so because the journey was lengthy, had commenced at 2 am, and was
journey which could not have been taken by other means of transport. It also
required the appellant to take with him his electronic
devices and other items
he would need over the working week.
appellant refers to
Hatzimanolis
. Those cases each
involved an injury sustained between two intervals of employment where the
worker was at a particular place where
he or she was required to be for the
purpose of undertaking his or her employment duties. It is important that this
case does not
involve an injury occurring during an interval in, or interruption
to, the appellant’s employment duties. That is not to say
observations of the High Court in
Hatzimanoli
s provide no assistance in
the determination of whether the injury in this case occurred in the course of
the appellant’s employment.
While the Court in
Hatzimanolis
considering factual circumstances which can be distinguished from the present
case, the Court expressly considered the phrase
“in the course of
employment.” The reasons expressed in that decision provide useful
guidance in a consideration of the
proper application of s 4. In a joint
judgment delivered by Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and McHugh JJ, the Court made
the following useful
observations (citations omitted):
the purposes of section 4, the course of employment is not identical with the
period of employment of a worker or with
the work which that person performs.
From a very early stage in the history of the law of workers’
compensation, it was recognised
that the course of employment covered not only
the actual work which a person was employed to do but also ‘the natural
connected with the class of work’. In 1931 in
Whittingham v.
Commissioner of Railways (WA)
Dixon J said that there can ‘no longer
be any doubt that the accident must happen while the employee is doing something
is part of or is incidental to his service’. But his Honour went on
to say that it was ‘another matter to be sure what
is included within this
conception’. He thought that, in considering what was incidental to
service, the sufficiency of the
connection between the worker’s employment
and what he was doing at the time that he was injured could only be a matter of
degree in which time, place, practice and circumstances as well as the
conditions of employment had to be
considered.”
“... In determining whether the injury occurred in the course of
employment, regard must always be had to the general nature,
circumstances of the employment ‘and not merely to the circumstances of
the particular occasion out of which the
injury to the employee has
Arbitrator acknowledged that the passages above lent support to the
appellant’s argument that he was in a unique role that
significant travelling, and that during the entire period from when the
appellant left home until he returned, the appellant
was in the course of his
employment. The Arbitrator concluded that the journey undertaken on
8 October 2019 could not be found to
be part of the appellant’s whole
course of employment and that at the time of the injury, the appellant was on a
journey from
his home to his place of employment.
respondent argues that the appellant’s contract did not require him to
travel by car, the decision was that of the appellant
and the appellant was not
reimbursed for the travel from his abode to Queanbeyan and return. Further, the
journey was a requisite
part of the job which was based in Queanbeyan.
do not regard that the fact that the appellant travelled by car, which was not
at the direction of the respondent, is determinative
of whether the appellant
was or was not in the course of his employment. The contractual arrangement
between the appellant and the
respondent that the respondent would not pay an
allowance for the trip between the appellant’s abode and the
respondent’s
Queanbeyan office is also not determinative. The fact that
the appellant travelled by car was clearly a practicality and the
appellant’s
acceptance that he was not to be reimbursed for that expense
does not of itself indicate that the journey undertaken was a journey
meaning of s 10 of the 1987 Act.
determinative question is whether the journey undertaken by the appellant was a
journey between the appellant’s place of
abode and his place of
employment, or whether the appellant was in the course of his employment once he
left his abode on the morning
of 8 October 2019. This requires a
consideration of what was the appellant’s “place of
employment.”
is clear that the Arbitrator’s observation that the appellant’s
course of employment would ordinarily be perceived
as when he commenced work in
Queanbeyan and ending when he completed his work that day in Queanbeyan
indicates that the Arbitrator
did not give proper consideration to the special
circumstances in which the appellant worked. The nature of his duties were such
that he would not have ceased to be in the course of his employment when he
finished work in Queanbeyan on that day. He was then
required to continue on to
Sydney. In addition, the Arbitrator considered that the activity of driving to
work on 8 October 2019
was no different from the activity of thousands of
workers each day. That observation also indicates that the Arbitrator did not
fully appreciate the circumstances in which the appellant attended to his weekly
appellant’s contract of employment stipulated that his commencing location
was Queanbeyan. It is apparent from the evidence
of both the appellant and Ms
Sexton that the arrangements as to where the appellant worked changed over the
course of time. In July
2019, he was based in Port Macquarie on a full-time
basis. Then, in August 2019, the working arrangements were again changed,
the appellant to work in the Queanbeyan office for the first two days
of the week, the Sydney office on Wednesdays, and the remaining
working week in
Port Macquarie. The appellant was also required to service clients outside of
those areas, including the Coffs Harbour
area. Thus, the appellant’s
working week did not begin and end at the Queanbeyan office.
the principles enunciated in
Hatzimanolis
, a consideration of the general
nature, terms and circumstances of the appellant’s employment shows that
the appellant was
not simply embarking upon a journey from his place of abode to
his place of employment. The Queanbeyan destination was just one destination
the overall route upon which the appellant embarked, having taken with him all
of the things, both business and personal, which
he would require at each
destination throughout the working week. The character of the journey on 8
October 2019 was therefore not
a journey within the meaning of s 10 of the 1987
Act. The circumstances were that once the appellant embarked upon that journey,
he was in the course of his employment.
follows that the Arbitrator’s determination that the appellant was not in
the course of his employment when the injury occurred
was wrong. Ground Three of
this appeal succeeds and the Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination
must be revoked. It is therefore
not necessary to consider the two remaining
grounds of appeal.
Arbitrator did not determine the cause of the appellant’s injury. As a
result of his findings he also did not give consideration
to whether the
appellant’s employment was a substantial contributing factor to the injury
in accordance with s 9A of the 1987
appeal from a decision of an Arbitrator is limited to a determination of whether
the decision appealed against was or was not affected
by any error of fact, law
or discretion, and to the correction of any such
As a determination of the
matter involves a consideration of matters not determined by the Arbitrator,
those issues cannot be determined
on appeal. It is appropriate therefore to
remit the matter to a different arbitrator for determination of the cause of the
and whether the appellant’s employment was a substantial
contributing factor to the injury.
Certificate of Determination is revoked, and the matter is to be remitted to
another arbitrator for determination of the outstanding
Certificate of Determination dated 25 September 2020 is revoked.
matter is remitted to a different arbitrator for determination of the remaining
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
19 February 2021
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp 1–3.
Appellant’s Application to Admit Late Documents (AALD) dated 9 September
Respondent’s
AALD dated 14 September 2020, pp 1–8.
Hyde-Page’s report, ARD, p 19.
[2014] NSWWCCPD
[2000] HCA 45
[1992] HCA 21
173 CLR 473
Hatzimanolis
Hatzimanolis
Hatzimanolis
Hatzimanolis
[2013] HCA 41
Hitchings v
Secretary, Department of Finance, Services and Innovation
[2020] NSWWCC 339
(reasons), [71].
[2013] NSWWCCPD 72
Property Services Pty Limited
NSWWCC 328, [38]–[39].
[2014] NSWWCCPD 13
NSWWCCPD 16
[2018] NSWWCCPD 26
[1998] NSWCC 24
[2010] NSWCA 365
Hatzimanolis
Hatzimanolis
Section 352(5) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.82 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter