URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2021/464.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Britt v Parcell [2021] NSWDC 464 (14 May 2021)
District Court
New South Wales
Britt v Parcell
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2021] NSWDC 464
Hearing Date(s):
13-14 May 2021
Date of Orders:
14 May 2021
Decision Date:
14 May 2021
Neilson DCJ
Appeal dismissed. Order applicant pay respondent’s costs on an
indemnity basis.
Catchwords:
Appeal – From Small Claims Division of Local Court – Limited
right of appeal: only if Local Court acted without jurisdiction
procedural fairness – Consideration of statutory scheme – Claim
commenced by respondent to appeal, plaintiff
in Local Court – Claims for
moneys had and received by the defendant to the use of the plaintiff ($9,497)
and for the return
“Harold” – Plaintiff/respondent wholly successful in
Local Court.
(1) Animals – a dog is a chattel personal and
Local Court had power to order the return of the dog.
(2) Torts –
Detinue – elements of demand for return of goods and refusal to comply.
Admitted on pleadings. Not argued
in Local Court. Could not be an appeal.
Appeal – arguments not raised in Court below. Should not be raised on
appeal. Neither errors of law or errors of fact raised
an argument about
Domestic Relationships – as domestic relationship between parties had not
persisted for 2 years, no Federal jurisdiction
available, and property rights
could not be adjusted between parties by any court. Jurisdiction of ordinary
courts not affected.
(5) Costs – when appeal should not have been
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Companion Animals Act 1988
Dog and Goat Act 1898
Family Law Act 1975
Goods Act 1958
Local Court Act 2007
Sale of Goods Act 1893 (UK)
Sale of Goods
Sale of Goods Act 1895
Sale of Goods Act 1896
Sale of Goods Act 1896
Sale of Goods Act 1908 (NZ)
Goods Act 1923
Sale of Goods Ordinance 1954 (ACT)
Cases Cited:
Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd v Gordian Runoff Limited (No 2)
[2009] NSWCA 12
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
; (2001) 117 FCR 424
Davenport v Davenport (No 2)
[2020] FCCA 2766
Gergorio v Ohanessian
[2021] NSWDC 100
Downey v Beale
[2017] FCCA
Edwards v Gilliespie
[2020] NSWDC 475
Hatch v Wood-Davies
[2006] NSWDC
Kojima v Australian Chinese Newspapers
[2000] NSWSC 1153
Engineering Pty Ltd v Federal Airports Corporation
(1997) 47 NSWLR 631
Investments Pty Ltd v Optima Developments Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 287
Texts Cited:
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings (Sweet and
Maxwell, 13th ed, 1990)
Megarry and Wade, The Law of Real Property (Stevens,
3rd ed, 1966)
Proverbs 26:11
Sutton, the Law of Sale of Goods in Australia
and New Zealand (The Law Book Co., 1st ed, 1971)
Principal judgment
Applicant – Nathan Britt
Respondent – Blaine Parcell
Representation:
Applicant – M. Fantin
Respondent – P. Boncardo
instructed by M. Nott (Goldman Lawyers)
File Number(s):
2020/003262232
Publication Restriction:
1 HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal pursuant to
Local Court Act
. The plaintiff before me, Mr Nathan Britt, was the defendant in the
Local Court. The defendant before me, Mr Blaine Parcell, was
the plaintiff in
the Local Court. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the moving party in these
proceedings as the applicant and
the responding party as the respondent. It
ought be clear from the legislative provision invoked by the applicant that the
proceedings
in the Local Court were in the Small Claims Division.
Legislative scheme
2 The appeals procedure for judgments in the civil jurisdiction of the Local
Court needs to be considered. The
Local Court Act 2007
"Subject to this Division, all judgments and orders of the Court exercising
The following section deals with appeals as of right. It is this:
"39(1) A party to proceedings before the Court sitting in its General
Division who is dissatisfied with the judgment or order of the
Court may appeal
to the Supreme Court, but only on a question of law.
(2) A party to proceedings before the Court sitting in its Small Claims
Division who is dissatisfied with a judgment or order of the
Court may appeal to
the District Court, but only on a ground of lack of jurisdiction or denial of
procedural fairness".
The next section of the
Local Court Act 2007
deals with appeals
requiring leave. It is in these terms:
“40(1) A party to proceedings before the Court sitting in its General
Division who is dissatisfied with a judgment or order
of the Court on a ground
that involves a question of mixed law and fact may appeal to the Supreme Court
but only by leave of the
Supreme Court.
(2) A party to proceedings before the Court sitting in its General Division
who is dissatisfied with any of the following judgments
or orders of the Court
may appeal to the Supreme Court, but only by leave of the Supreme Court:
(a) an interlocutory judgment or order,
(b) a judgment or order made with the consent of the parties.
(c) an order as to costs".
Section 41 of the Act bears a heading "Determination of appeals" and in (1)
provides what orders may be made by the Supreme Court
and in (2) provides what
orders may be made by this Court.
3 Accordingly, it must be seen that the
Local Court Act
itself distinguishes
between errors of law, errors that involve questions of mixed law and fact, and
appeals which require the leave
of the Supreme Court but such leave only arises
in cases heard in the General Division. One must therefore distinguish errors of
law, errors of fact, and errors of mixed fact and law. However, the right of
appeal from the Small Claims Division to this Court
does not involve errors of
law or errors of fact or errors of mixed fact and law but only orders made with
a "lack of jurisdiction"
or a "denial of procedural fairness".
4 The pleadings in the Local Court were not made by lawyers but by the
parties. The pleading made by the plaintiff/respondent was
1. On 23 March 2020...the plaintiff left the defendant...property [at Mascot]
leaving behind...dog Harold. We also had a cruise planned
for May 2020 which
cost...the plaintiff...$1,200 in which the defendant...has taken as the cruise
was reimbursed due to COVID-19.
...the plaintiff...has made numerous deposits
into the defendant's...NAB high interest bank account totalling $8,100
which...the
plaintiff...is also wanting back.
2. The Police have contacted the defendant...on numerous occasions to return
Harold to...plaintiff..., the defendant...is yet to return...dog
3. The amount of monies I am wanting to claim is the amount $9,300 as well as
the safe return of the...dog Harold".
On any view of it, the plaintiff's claim was for the return of the dog to
him, a dog which by inference is a dog detained by the defendant
and for the
return of moneys which the defendant/applicant had to the use of the
plaintiff/respondent.
5 The defence to the statement of claim is much lengthier but I shall
endeavour to shorten it, to cut to the chase. That defence is
"2. The defendant denies the statement in para 1 of [leaving with] the
plaintiff's dog, Harold. The NSW Companion Animals Register
lists both the
defendant and the plaintiff as the owners of Harold. The plaintiff was removed
by NSW Police on March 23 from the
defendant's apartment [at Mascot] after
becoming violent.
3. The defendant admits the allegation of receiving the amount of $1,200 to
be paid to a travel agent as part payment for a planned
cruise. The defendant
has not returned this money to the plaintiff as this was used to pay for
replacement [of] of items the plaintiff
refused to return after a request made
by NSW Police.
4. The defendant admits the allegation in para 1 of receiving bank deposits
from the plaintiff as specified to an account for payment
of bills as specified
in the evidence provided in the plaintiff's claim. The defendant also made
payments on a regular basis to the
plaintiff to the value of $18,053 between
March 2019 and 23 March 2020. In addition [to] these payments, on March 24 the
provided in addition $500 through a third party at the request of the
plaintiff...
6. The defendant admits the allegation in para 2 to receiving calls from NSW
and Victoria Police before and after 20 July 2020, with
regards to an allegation
of the plaintiff's stolen dog. During these calls by NSW Police, specifically,
the defendant requested the
retrieval of a building security swipe and key to
the defendant's leased apartment [at Mascot] and a key to a BMW motor vehicle to
which the plaintiff repeatedly refused. [the paragraph then states that the cost
of replacing those items was $1,250]. The defendant
has retained the money
refunded from the cruise to cover these costs.
7. The defendant denies the allegation that the plaintiff solely owns Harold,
8. The defendant denies the allegation in para 3 of the ownership by the
plaintiff alone of the dog, Harold.
9. The plaintiff has provided evidence on p 19 [of the defendant's tender
bundle] that the defendant was with him at the shelter on
17 January [2019] and
Harold was adopted later that afternoon..."
There are three further paragraphs of the defence but they carry the defence
case nowhere.
Local Court proceedings
6 The matter was heard by Assessor Keir sitting in the Downing Centre Local
Court on 22 October 2020. Less any confusion arise, the
transcript says, "In the
Local Court, John Maddison Tower" but the formal address of the Local Court is
the Downing Centre Local
Court, but Local Court proceedings are often heard in
the John Maddison Tower just as many District Court hearings are held in the
Downing Centre. At the hearing before the Assessor, the parties were represented
by solicitors. There is a transcript of the proceedings
in the Local Court, and
that can be found on pp 96 to 119 of exhibit A before me. The Assessor's reasons
commence at the foot of
p 20 of that transcript, or p 115 of exhibit A before
me. In essence, the Assessor found for the the respondent both on his claim
the restitution of the dog, Harold, to him and for the refund to him of $9,300
being moneys had and received by the applicant
to the use of the respondent.
Exhibit A contains at p 123 a formal judgment made on 26 October 2020 ordering
the plaintiff to pay
$9,447 being the damages awarded on the monetary claim
together with a filing fee of $103 and a service fee of $44. I am unaware
whether any formal order was made for the return of the dog. I am told from the
Bar table that no part of the judgment formally
entered or no part of the order
for the return of the dog has been implemented and that there is an application
for a stay of proceedings
that has not yet been heard in the Local Court.
Grounds of appeal
7 The grounds of appeal are these:
"6. That the learned Assessor made an error of law by finding that the Court
had jurisdiction to order that Harold be returned to
NSW when Harold was not
"detained goods" within that meaning in
Local Court Act 2007
Harold was then a companion animal within the meaning in
Animals Act 1998
and was at all material times under the effective and
responsible care of an owner within the meaning in that Act.
7. That the Assessor erred by acting on the error in ground 1 and by not
dismissing the claim with respect to the return of Harold
8. That the Assessor erred by acting on the errors in ground 1 and 2 above
and by not permitting Harold to continue to live with the
plaintiff who does and
can provide for the effective and responsible care and management of Harold.
9. The Assessor erred by finding, contrary to the evidence, that there was a
contract between the parties despite no evidence of consideration
or intention
to be legally bound.
10. The Assessor erred by finding that a contract existed between the parties
despite the existence of a domestic relationship".
8 I have quoted the grounds with the numbering provided in the amended
summons but the numbering refers not to the number of the grounds
of appeal but
to the paragraphs of summons. The grounds numbered 9 and 10 are grounds added to
an amended summons which has typed
upon it the date 10 May 2021 but was only
filed in Court on 13 May 2021, that is, yesterday. The respondent formally
objects to grounds
9 and 10 but he told me that, nevertheless, he could meet
such grounds.
A dog is a chattel personal
9 Harold is a desexed male dog that was purchased from the Sydney Dog and Cat
the dog was $350.50. That
was paid for by the credit card owned by the respondent. The dog is a boxer dog.
I shall refer to the dog
as Harold. The first argument advanced by the plaintiff
was that the dog did not fall within the meaning of "detained goods" in
Local Court Act 2007
. The same provision can be found in
s 30(1)(b) of the Act which confers jurisdiction on the General Division of the
Local Court.
The conferral of jurisdiction on the Small Claims Division is
contained in s 30(2). The argument advanced was that Harold was not
10 This involves a reconsideration of basic principles. I often have recourse
to books that I use when I was a law student. In the
third edition of Megarry
The Law of Real Property
, (1966) there is a discussion of the
meaning of the term "real property" commencing at p 10. It highlights the
difference between
real property and personal property:
"As is the case with so many expressions in English law, the explanation of
the term 'real property' is historical.
In early law, property was deemed 'real' if the Courts would restore to a
dispossessed owner the thing itself, the 'res', and not
mere give compensation
for the loss. Thus, if X forcibly evicted Y from his freehold land, Y could
bring a 'real' action whereby
he could obtain an order from the Court that X
should return the land to him. But if X took Y's sword or glove from him, he
bring only a personal action which gave X the choice of either returning
the article or paying the value thereof. Consequently, a
distinction was made
between real property (or 'realty'), which could be specifically recovered and
personal property (or 'personalty'),
which was not thus recoverable. Nature has
provided one division of property, namely into immovables (i.e. land) and
movables: the
English division into real and personal property is similar, with
one important exception. In general, all interests in land are
real property
with the exception of leaseholds (or 'terms of years'), which are classified as
personalty.
This peculiar exception was first of all due to the fact that leases were
foreign to the feudal system of land holding by tenure,
under which, in its
earliest form, the social and economic status of every member of society was
fixed. Originally, leases were rather
regarded as personal business arrangements
under which one party allowed the other the use of his land in return for a
were in other words personal contracts, operating
in personam
between the parties and not creating or transferring any rights in rem, i.e.
rights in the land itself which could affect feudal
status. Leases helped to
supply a useful form of investment for a society which knew nothing of stocks
and shares. Money might be
employed in buying land and letting it out on lease
in order to obtain an income from the capital, or in buying a lease for a lump
sum which would be recovered with interest out of the produce of the land. These
were commercial transactions, more in the sphere
of money than of land, as
land-owing was then understood. Once leaseholds were classified with personal
property, it was discovered
that the position was not without its advantages.
Not only were leases then immune from feudal burdens and the intricate legal
required for freeholds: they could be bequeathed by will in times when
wills of other land were still not allowed. Thus the illogical
continued until it became too well settled to alter.
Leaseholds are still, therefore, personalty in law. But having now for so
long been recognised as interest in land and not merely
contractual rights, they
have been classified under the paradoxical heading of 'chattels real'. The first
word indicates their personal
nature (cattle were the most important chattels in early days, hence the
name), the second shows their connection with land. The three
may therefore be classified thus:
(i) Realty.
(ii) Chattels real.
(iii) Pure personalty."
11 Another term for pure personalty is chattels personal. In our law, any
form of property must either be realty, a chattel real,
or a chattel personal.
If one goes to a standard law dictionary such as Osborn's Concise Law
Dictionary, one will find this type
of definition of the word "goods":
"All chattels personal other than things in action and money, emblements and
things attached to or forming part of the land which
are agreed to be severed
before sale or under the contract of sale".
That definition is taken from the
Sale of Goods Act 1893
statute was one of a number of statutes passed in the late 19th century or the
early 20th century which were designed
to bring together various common law
principles and to codify and rationalise the common law. Another example of such
a statute is
the Partnership Act, both in the UK and in various jurisdictions in
Australia. The first edition of Sutton,
the Law of Sale of Goods in Australia
and New Zealand
(1971) commences the introduction with this:
"The law governing the sale of goods in Australia and New Zealand is based on
the English Sale of Goods Act 1893, the various States
having enacted
legislation substantially identical with the parent Act".
A footnote refers one to the
Sale of Goods Act
of Goods Act 1896
(Tasmania), the
Sale of Goods Act 1895
Sale of Goods Act 1895
Goods Act 1923
Goods Act 1958
Sale of Goods Ordinance 1954
Sale of Goods Act 1908
Sale of Goods Act 1923
provides a number of definitions in
The definition of goods is this:
include all chattels personal other than things in action and
money. The term includes emblements and things attached to or forming
the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of
“Goods” is a word apt to describe all personal chattels that are
corporeal. A chose in action is not corporeal and emblements
are in fact pieces
of land that are agreed to be severed or taken from the land. I do not need to
decide whether emblements such
as a crop of wheat growing on land or a crop of
potatoes growing in the land is a good for the purposes of
Court Act 2007
. However, I would point out that, for example, a distinction
must be made when considering "money". One may have a valuable coin
which, for example, has solid silver or gold coins with a face value much lower
than their actual value and one may be
able to recover in detinue a valuable
coin collection even though it might otherwise be described as "money". That
question does
not arise for discussion here, but I would think that the word
"money" in the definition of goods in the
Sale of Goods Act
means only a claim
in debt rather than a claim made in detinue for a specific object such as a
specific gold coin with a nominal
face value but worth much more in monetary
terms. There can be no doubt that an animal is a chattel. As what I have quoted
from Megarry
and Wade makes clear, the word chattel is derived from the same
etymon as the word cattle. A cow or an ox is a chattel. Any animal
13 If one needs any further statement of that principle, one can have regard
to cases such as
Edwards v Gilliespie
[2020] NSWDC 475
proceedings which
concerned "Oscar the Cavoodle". At [11] it was accepted by Gibson DCJ that Oscar
was a chattel. The problem in
that that case was that it was not a claim in
detinue but a claim for equitable relief which was beyond this Court's
Another case is
Di Gergorio v Ohanessian
[2021] NSWDC 100
in which the Local Court assessor ordered a party to deliver a dog, Xena, a
female American Staffordshire Terrier to another party.
The appeal to this Court
from that decision was dismissed by Scotting DCJ. There is no argument that the
dog was not a "good" capable
of being the subject of an order for the return of
Downey v Beale
[2017] FCCA 316
, Harman FCCJ said at [14],
"The law describes the manner in which this case is to be determined. [name of
dog omitted] is a chattel
and his ownership is to be determined by the Court as
an issue of the ownership of property". The matter of a dog being an item of
personal property was also considered by the Federal Circuit Court in
Davenport v Davenport (No 2)
[2020] FCCA 2766
by Tonkin FCCJ. At [34] his
Honour said this
To date Courts have dealt with pets and other animals as personal property.
The term “personal property” is defined in
Butterworth’s Legal
Dictionary as “all forms of property other than real property; that is all
forms of property other
than land and interests in land (excluding
leaseholds).” Personal property is traditionally divided into two classes:
real (which includes interests in land for a fixed term of years and
annuities issuing out of such interests) and chattels personal
(which includes
all other forms of personal property both tangible and intangible). The term
“chattel” is defined in
the Legal Dictionary as a moveable
possession; any property that is not freehold land. There is no precise
definition of a chattel
at common law it can be a real or personal chattel. A
chattel personal can be classified as either a chose in possession (items
of being the subject of actual possession) or a chose in action (items
that cannot be physically possessed but are recoverable by
action). A chose in
possession is an item of tangible personal property that is capable of physical
possession by the owner and transfer
by delivery such as a book or a chair in
other words a moveable possession. The authorities establish that a dog is
regarded as property
being a chattel or personal property. I am satisfied that
the Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine the wife’s application
for final orders that she retain the dog as part of the property dispute. That
matter has not been listed for trial.
14 If one needs any further elucidation of the matter, one can go to the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
relates to judgments for the
detention of goods. It is in these terms:
93 Judgments for detention of goods
(1) In proceedings for the detention of goods, the court may (whether or not
their value has yet been assessed) give judgment—
(a) for their delivery to the plaintiff, or
(b) for payment to the plaintiff of an amount equivalent to their assessed
(c) for their delivery to the plaintiff or for payment to the plaintiff of
their assessed value, at the defendant’s option,
and, in addition to any judgment referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c),
may also give judgment for payment to the plaintiff of
damages for their
(2) The court may, in an order for delivery of goods or in a subsequent
order, specify the date by which delivery of the goods must
be effected.
(3) If judgment has been given as referred to in subsection (1) (a), but the
goods are subsequently damaged, destroyed or otherwise
rendered unavailable for
delivery, the court may, on application by the plaintiff, make an order for the
payment to the plaintiff
of an amount equivalent to their assessed value, as
referred to in subsection (1) (b).
(4) If judgment has been given as referred to in subsection (1) (c) and the
plaintiff subsequently applies for an order under this
subsection, the court may
make an order for the delivery of the goods to the plaintiff without the option
for any payment of the
kind referred to in subsection (1) (b).
(5) In this section, the assessed value of goods is their value as assessed
by, or in accordance with the directions of, the court.
There is no definition of "goods" in
of that Act. There is such a
definition in s 102 of the Act but that is only for the purposes of Pt 8 which
relates to enforcement
of judgments and orders. The definition in s 102 is
means chattels, other than chattels real".
The purpose of that, though, is that it gives meaning to s 105 which is
headed "Judgments for delivery of goods" and is in these terms:
"A judgment or order for the delivery of goods may be enforced by a writ of
It appears that the remedy for a judgment for the delivery of goods is
enforced by the issuing of a writ of delivery and such a writ
can be granted in
respect of any chattel personal.
15 The argument that Harold could not be the subject of any jurisdiction of
the Local Court to order the return of detained goods
is without any basis.
Companion Animals Act 1988
16 The next argument advanced by the plaintiff is an argument based on
Companion Animals Act 1988
. The general definitions for the purposes
of that Act are provided in s 5. The definition of "owner" refers one to s 7.
is in these terms:
7 Meaning of “owner”
(1) Each of the following persons is the owner of a companion animal for the
purposes of this Act—
(a) the owner of the animal (in the sense of being the owner of the animal as
personal property),
(b) the person by whom the animal is ordinarily kept,
(c) the registered owner of the animal.
(2) A reference in this Act to the owner of a companion animal is a reference
to each and all owners of the animal.
Note— A provision of this Act that makes the owner of a companion
animal guilty of an offence makes each owner guilty of the
(3), (4) (Repealed)
(5) When a companion animal is ordinarily kept by an employee on behalf of
his or her employer, the animal is for the purposes of
this Act taken to be
ordinarily kept by the employer and not the employee. This subsection does not
prevent an employee being the
registered owner of an animal and does not prevent
the employee being an owner if the employee is the registered owner.
(6) In any prosecution of the owner of a companion animal for an offence
against this Act it is a defence if the defendant establishes
(a) another owner of the animal has been convicted of an offence arising out
of the same circumstances, or the commission by another
owner of the animal of
an offence arising out of the same circumstances has been proved but a court has
made an order under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
in respect of the offence, or
(b) another owner of the animal has paid the amount of the penalty prescribed
under section 92 (Penalty notices) for an alleged offence
arising out of the
same circumstances.
The first thing to note is that in the chapeau to (1) the definition provided
is "for the purposes of this Act". It is not for the
purposes of the law
generally. It is only for the purposes of the
Companion Animals Act 1998
argument advanced by the applicant is based upon the three limbs in (1), each
limb created by a paragraph and the use of the
word "persons", a plural word in
the chapeau. Paragraph (a) refers to the "owner of the animal (in the sense of
being the owner of
the animal as personal property)". That person was held by
the Assessor to be the respondent. There was evidence to support that
Although it ought not be necessary to do so, I shall for the benefit of those
involved in this litigation refer to it.
17 The parties met in or around April 2018 and formed an intimate, romantic
relationship. In or around September 2018, the respondent
accommodation rented by the applicant in Mascot. They then lived together as
domestic partners. The relationship came
to an end on 23 March 2020 when the
applicant called police to the apartment after there was an incident between the
two men. When
the police arrived they asked the respondent to leave, which he
did, and an ADVO was made for the protection of the applicant from
respondent. The applicant's job required him to be away from the shared
accommodation for a week or a fortnight at a time on
a fairly regular basis. The
affidavit of the respondent contained this matter:
"11. Prior to Christmas 2018, I said to Nathan words to the effect: 'What
12. Nathan responded with words to the effect of: 'What do we need a dog
for?' and 'Who is going to look after it'.
13. I regularly browse pet rescue and pet adoption sites in our lounge room
but Nathan never engaged in this search.
14. Nathan regularly travelled out of Sydney for work and I often felt
isolated and believed a pet would be great company.
15. On 17 January 2019, I visited Sydney Dogs and Cats Home [in Carlton] and
found a dog called Harold that I had an instant connection
16. Without consulting Nathan, I pre-filled all the paperwork
required for purchase and adoption of Harold.
17. While going back to my apartment at about 12.30pm, I texted Nathan
pictures of Harold and said: 'I love him'....
18. Nathan texted, 'I'm a yes', which I understood to mean that he was
supportive of my buying a pet....
19. I then visited the offices of the building manager in our apartment
complex [at Mascot] to see if it was possible to have a pet
in the apartment.
20. On 17 January 2019, I received an email from...the building
manager...confirming that my intent to have a pet on the premises
conveyed to the owner...
21. Nathan returned to our apartment and we both went to the Sydney Dogs and
Cats Home in his car so I could finalise the purchase
of the dog.
22. At 1628 on 17 January 2019, I paid the Sydney Dogs and Cats Home $350.50
for Harold's adoption charge, council registration, food
and collar and
18 There is no dispute that that payment was made by the respondent from his
own funds. The idea to purchase a dog was the respondent's.
The respondent
purchased the dog to be a companion for him with his own money. That in law
makes him the owner of the dog.
19 The applicant's argument is not based on the first paragraph of the
definition of "owner" in the
Companion Animals Act
but, rather, on the second
paragraph: namely, that the applicant was a "person by whom the animal is
ordinarily kept". I thought
there was some learning on the meaning of the
question "ordinarily kept". My associate's search ascertained that the only
on the subject was one of my own. It is
Hatch v Wood-Davies
[2006] NSWDC 96
a judgment given at Wagga Wagga. To determine the meaning of
those words, I had recourse to legislative history starting with the
Goat Act 1898
Dog Act 1966
. That Act replaced the
Goat Act 1898
Dog Act 1966
, of course, was replaced by the
Companion Animals Act 1998
. I commenced the discussion on this issue at
[103] to [126]. In essence, the term used describes a person who physically has
of the dog, not the person who cares or nurtures the dog, the person
who provides its food and water and perhaps exercise. Insofar
as the applicant
was the lessor of the premises which he was sharing with the respondent at
Mascot and that is where the dog was
kept, then the applicant could be seen to
be a keeper of the dog whenever both he and the dog were in the same place.
20 The third limb of the definition of owner is
Animals Act
is "the registered owner of the animal". Despite brave submissions
made on behalf of the applicant, this can only refer to the respondent.
certificate of registration was reprinted on 12 April 2019. It shows the owner
as being the respondent at the address in Mascot
where up until 23 March 2020
the respondent resided with the applicant. It gives a "secondary contact person"
as being the applicant
but it does not state that the secondary contact person
is the owner.
21 However, again, it is necessary to consider the structure of the
Companion Animals Act 1998
. For example,
requires a companion animal
to be identified from the age of 12 weeks. Under
the owner of the animal
is guilty of an offence if it is not identified in accordance with (1). Under
the owner of a companion animal must comply with a notice requiring a
companion animal to be registered. Failure to do so is a criminal
places requirements on the owner to notify of certain changes and
events. Again, a failure to notify is a criminal offence.
Section 11C
an annual permit for a dangerous dog. The owner of a dangerous dog who does not
comply with that provision is guilty of
a criminal offence. Furthermore, an
annual permit is required for "restricted dogs" and the owner of a restricted
dog who fails to
comply with that provision is guilty of a criminal offence. The
Act allows for a notice to be given requiring a permit to be obtained
companion animal. The owner of a companion animal who fails to comply with such
a notice is guilty of a criminal offence. Section
12 requires a dog to wear a
collar and tag. The owner of a dog is guilty of an offence if he or she does not
comply with that provision.
22 Section 12A places an obligation under criminal sanction for the owner of
a dog to take all reasonable precautions to prevent the
dog from escaping from
the property on which it is being kept. Section 13 places responsibilities on a
person with a dog in a public
place. If the section is contravened, either the
owner of the dog or, if the owner is not present at the time of the offence,
other person who is over the age of 16 years in charge of the dog commits a
criminal offence. Of course, if the dog has escaped,
that is an offence under s
12A, an offence committed by the owner. Section 14 prohibits dogs to be in a
number of specified public
places. If a dog is found in such a place, either the
owner of the dog or, if the owner is not present at the time of the offence,
person of or above the age of 16 years is in charge of the dog at the time is
guilty of a criminal offence. Section 15 provides
that certain breeds of dogs
are to be muzzled. If the section is contravened, either the owner of the dog or
a person of or above
the age of 16 years who is in charge of the dog is guilty
of an offence at the time. Therefore, the scheme of the Act is that should,
example, a dog which is required to be muzzled escapes and runs into a public
place without the muzzle, the owner of the dog
is liable for both the escape of
the dog and the dog’s not being muzzled.
23 Section 16 refers to offences where a dog attacks a person or animal.
Again, the owner of the dog or, if the owner is not present,
any person of or
above the age of 16 years who is in charge of the dog at the time is guilty of a
criminal offence. If a dog defecates
in a public place, the owner of the dog or,
if the owner is not present, but the dog is under the control of a person of or
the age of 16 years, that person is guilty of a criminal offence. So if a
dog escapes from its owner and defecates whilst not under
the control of any
person, the owner of the dog is still liable for the dog's defecating in a
public place. Section 25 provides for
liability for injury to a person or damage
to a person's property. That liability is placed on the owner of the dog. That
found in ss 25, 26 and 27. Section 26 extends the liability for injury to
a person to death caused by the dog injuring a person.
24 I need not continue any further except to refer to s 72. Section 72 is
headed "certificate of registration". It is in these terms:
72 Certificate of registration
(1) The Departmental Chief Executive is to provide the registered owner of a
companion animal with a certificate of registration for
the animal, showing the
registration information for the animal.
(2) The certificate of registration is to be provided at the time of
registration and is to be provided free of charge.
(3) The certificate of registration is evidence that the animal is registered
and that the registration information shown on the certificate
is that entered
on the Register. Information entered on the Register is presumed (in the absence
of evidence to the contrary) to
be correct.
In this way, the certificate of registration can be used as evidence of (for
example) the name of the registered owner of an animal
and the address at which
it is ordinarily kept.
(4) The Departmental Chief Executive can issue a replacement certificate of
registration when a certificate of registration is lost,
stolen, damaged or
destroyed, and can charge a fee for the issue of the replacement
certificate.
I highlight that s 72(3) provides that the certificate of registration is
evidence that the animal is registered and that the registration
information
shown on the certificate that is entered into the register is presumed, in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, to
be correct. In the current matter, that
presumption was in favour of the respondent.
Co-ownership?
25 The argument advanced is that because of the nature of the relationship
between the plaintiff and the defendant, the dog was in
fact joint or common
property and, therefore, as the applicant had some form of joint or common
tenancy in the dog, an order in the
nature of detinue, an order for the delivery
of the dog from the applicant to the respondent could not be made. The
Companion Animals Act 1998
does not otherwise amend the law relating to
the ownership of chattels. The dog belonged to the respondent. He paid for it.
his property just as much as if he went out and bought a cup of coffee or
a book. Even if he took them back to the premises in which
both the respondent
and the applicant were living, such cup of coffee or book would remain the
respondent's property.
26 It is very much because of such considerations that when there is a
breakdown of de facto or domestic relationships, which have
lasted for more than
two years, or when there is the breakdown of a marriage that Courts exercising
Family Law Act 1975
can make property adjustment
orders. The
Companion Animals Act
does not create in the respondent a
form of tenancy in the dog. Nor does the evidence disclose that there was any
declaration by
the respondent that the property was enjoyed by both the
respondent and the applicant. True it is, he sought the applicant's consent
purchasing the dog, but that was explicable purely by the fact that the
respondent would have had to have lived with the dog since
the dog was to live
with the applicant in the premises the applicant was sharing with the
respondent. Furthermore, that is merely
a question of fact. The argument does
not raise any issue of jurisdiction. The dog was a chattel. The dog could be
described as "goods".
There is no doubt that the Local Court in its Small Claims
Division had power to order the delivery of the dog by the applicant to
respondent. Not only did the right arise under the common law in the action of
detinue but it also arose under
Civil Procedure Act 2005
27 The next argument advanced by the applicant was that the action in detinue
had not been made out in the Local Court because of
a lack of a formal demand by
the plaintiff upon the defendant and a clear refusal by the defendant of the
plaintiff's demand. In
the 13th edition of Bullen & Leake & Jacob's
Precedents of Pleadings
(1990) the following may be found on p 953:
"The distinction between detinue and conversion used to be that with the
former mere possession adverse to the rights of the person
entitled to
possession was sufficient and it was unnecessary to show any intention to deal
with the goods in a way inconsistent with
those rights. In practice, however,
demand by the person with possessory title followed by an unjustified refusal to
deliver up was
treated as a conversion, thus rendering detinue largely otiose
even before its abolition in 1977.
A demand is necessary before the detention will be actionable (
[1911] UKLawRpKQB 114
[1911] 2 KB 1031)
and the defendant must be in possession at the time
of the demand. If he is not, then there is no conversion by detention (although
there may have been an earlier conversion by transfer -
Featherstonehaugh v
[1818] EngR 335
(1818) 8 Taunt 237).
The demand must be unconditional (
Rushworth v Taylor
(1841) 3 QB 699)
and the refusal must also be unconditional. A detainer may be entitled to a
reasonable time in which to make inquiries but, once
that has elapsed, whether
or not the detainer is satisfied as to the claimant's rights, must hand over the
Alexander v Southey
(1821) 5 B. & Al 247)."
28 Of course, the action in detinue has not been abolished in this State. The
problem here is that that issue was never raised in
the Local Court. In fact,
the respondent argues that the demand was admitted by the pleading. The
respondent points to the fact that
the plaintiff's pleading was relying upon
requests made by him through the police for the return of the dog and the
failure of the
defendant to reply. In par 6 of the defence, the defendant
admitted the allegation in par 2 of receiving calls from both the New
Wales and Victoria Police before and after 20 July 2020 with regards to an
allegation made by the plaintiff that his dog had
been "stolen" by the
defendant. Even in the pleading, the defendant maintained that he was entitled
to refuse the demand made by
the plaintiff to the police for the return of the
LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
29 Before turning to the issue of the matter not having been raised in the
Local Court, it is important to bear in mind that these
proceedings were in the
Small Claims Division of the Local Court. It is important to bear in mind the
procedure and other considerations
arising when matters are in the Small Claims
Division of the Local Court. The following provisions of the
Local Court Act
ought be noted:
35 Procedure generally in Small Claims Division
(1) The jurisdiction of the Court sitting in its Small Claims Division may be
exercised by a Magistrate or an Assessor.
(1A) However, the jurisdiction of the Court in proceedings involving company
title home unit disputes under
section 34A
may only be exercised by a
Magistrate.
(2) Proceedings in the Small Claims Division are to be conducted with as
little formality and technicality as the proper consideration
of the matter
(3) The rules of evidence do not apply to proceedings being heard or other
proceedings in the Small Claims Division.
(4) Witnesses may not be cross-examined except in circumstances in which, and
to the extent to which, the cross-examination of witnesses
is authorised by the
rules or a practice note.
(5) A Magistrate or an Assessor exercising the jurisdiction of the Court
sitting in its Small Claims Division may inform himself or
herself on any matter
relating to proceedings being heard or other proceedings in the Small Claims
Division in such manner as he
or she thinks fit.
(6) Proceedings in the Small Claims Division (other than any judgment given
or order made in respect of the proceedings) are not required
36 Conciliation of parties
(1) A Magistrate or an Assessor is not to give judgment or make a final order
in respect of proceedings being heard in the Court’s
Small Claims Division
unless the Magistrate or an Assessor has brought, or has used his or her best
endeavours to bring, the parties
to the proceedings to a settlement acceptable
to the parties.
(2) If such a settlement is reached, the Magistrate or an Assessor is to give
judgment or make a final order that gives effect to
the terms of the
settlement.
37 Costs in Small Claims Division
Except as provided by the rules, the Court sitting in its Small Claims
Division has no power to award costs.
30 It is important to bear in mind that the sittings in the Small Claims
Division are to be conducted without undue formality and
undue technicality. The
rules of evidence do not apply and the assessor, if the Assessor is sitting as
the Local Court, or a magistrate
sitting in the Small Claims Division, is
permitted to act in an inquisitorial fashion by informing him or herself on any
matter relating
to proceedings before the assessor or magistrate. In
Investments Pty Ltd v Optima Developments Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 287
JA said at [101]:
"The legislative policy is clear: relatively small claims brought in the
Small Claims Division should be resolved efficiently, cheaply,
informally, and finally in that division. Otherwise, the legal costs will swamp
the original claim..."
In regard to a predecessor
of the current Act, O'Keefe J said in
Kojima v Australian Chinese Newspapers
[2000] NSWSC 1153
"...the legislation has been so framed so as to ensure to the greatest extent
possible that claims before the Small Claims Division
of the Local Court should
begin and end in that Court. The limitation on the right of appeal permitted by
the statute betokens this.
Such a policy is readily understandable in light of
the fact that the ceiling for claims in the Small Claims Division is so low,
$3,000 at the material time. Taking up the time of superior Courts with such
small matters is thus avoided in the vast majority of
Although the jurisdictional limit of the Small Claims Division is currently
$20,000, it has to be borne in mind that what was in issue
was $9,300 and a dog
which was purchased for the princely sum of $350.50. Of course, a dog would have
much greater value to its owner.
Companion animals are beloved pets and much
money is often laid out to feed them, house them and provide for their needs.
Nevertheless,
the matter was clearly within the Small Claims Division of the
Local Court and the matters that I have just mentioned had to be and
taken into account.
31 I return to the issue that the question of the making of a formal demand
for the return of Harold and a formal refusal to do so
by the applicant were not
canvassed at the hearing in the Local Court. Indeed, according to learned
counsel for the respondent, none
of the points now sought to be agitated were
raised in the Local Court. Jurisdictional issues were raised in the Local Court.
first jurisdictional issue raised there was that the dog was located at that
time and still is in Victoria and the Local Court of
New South Wales had no
power to make an order in respect of a piece of personal property that was
located out of New South Wales.
That of course is completely irrelevant when the
cause of action arose within New South Wales.
32 The other submission as to jurisdiction was said by the solicitor
appearing for the current applicant in the Local Court in this
"The second submission...goes a bit further...It really goes to the nature of
the action and it's arising out of a de facto relationship
and what the
defendant submits is this is really probably a federal matter. The parties were
involved in a de facto relationship.
They were involved in, and it's commonly
accepted, I think it's generally accepted between the parties, excuse me if I'm
wrong, there
was an intermingling of funds. They were living together for 18
months. It was a domestic relationship. It falls within the boundaries
facto relationship pursuant to the
Family Law Act
and...the Court is not able to
hear it because it's not invested with powers under the Family [Law] Act of the
Commonwealth provisions
in respect of de facto relationships".
Of course, this de facto relationship had not persisted for two years. That
led to the Assessor applying a reductio ad absurdum which
had Counsel for the
current applicant agree that as the Family Court or the Federal Circuit Court
could not make a property adjustment
order as the relationship had not persisted
for two years, that, nevertheless, the matter was a "federal matter" and the
Local Court
had no jurisdiction and, therefore, no Court had jurisdiction in
respect of returning the dog to the plaintiff/respondent. Those
issues have not
been agitated before me, and very properly so, but the issue about the Court
having no power to make an order for
the return of the dog was not agitated at
33 In Multicon Engineering Pty Ltd v Federal Airports Corporation
, Mason P said commencing at 644:
"In an endeavour to escape the consequences of the stance adopted below,
senior counsel for Multicon Engineering sought to characterise
constitutional argument as a jurisdictional point, citing a number of cases in
support of the principle that parties cannot by
consent confer power upon a
Court to make orders outside its jurisdiction:
Cockle v Isaksen
[1957] HCA 85
Thomson Australian Holdings Pty Ltd v Trade Practices
(1981) 148 CLR 150
at 163-165;
National Parks and Wildlife
Service v Stables Perisher Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 573
Finance Services Ltd v Commercial Tribunal
(NSW) (1995) 36 NSWLR 220 at 222.
In my view, this principle has no application to the case as presented by
Multicon Engineering
which, it will be remembered, accepts the validity of Giles
J's order referring the whole proceedings to the referee pursuant to
accepts the validity of r 13 (so long as it is construed in accordance with the
constitutional principle advanced by Multicon
Engineering in this appeal). In
other words, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of New South Wales to
entertain and dispose of
the proceedings is not in issue, nor its power to use
the assistance of the referee and his report. By this means Rolfe J ascertained
'existing rights by judicial determination of issues of fact and law' (
v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
R v Davison
[1954] HCA 46
(1954) 90 CLR 353
at 369 in a matter within the
Federal jurisdiction confirmed by
Trade Practices Act 1974
Indeed the fragility of Multicon Engineering's contention that a
'jurisdictional' error occurred (assuming the correctness of the
constitutional
point) is exposed by the very fact that Multicon Engineering argues that r 13 as
expounded in Super precluded the
adoption of the referee's findings, except with
the consent of the parties at the time. The qualification entailed in the
words was added in order to accommodate Multicon Engineering's
submission to Rolfe J (repeated in the Court of Appeal) that he could,
Multicon Engineering's consent, adopt significant parts of the evidence before
the referee and those parts of the report to
which no objection was taken. This
concession lies ill with Multicon Engineering's argument that its stance before
Giles J did not
have some preclusive effect. But of present relevance is the
difficulty of fitting such a qualification with the argument that an
impermissible assumption of jurisdiction or even power was involved. From start
to finish the issue in the appeal involved the manner
in which the power
conferred by r 13 was exercised. That manner was (for present purposes) exactly
as proposed by Multicon Engineering,
in the cases cited about a Court declining
to make an order by consent that is outside jurisdiction have no application.
In support of the procedural objection the Federal Airports Corporation and
the Attorney-General relied principally upon
University of Wollongong v
(1985) 58 ALJR 481.
That was a case in which a party to
completed proceedings by way of case stated in the High Court sought to vacate a
declaratory
order which had been made by the Full Court of the High Court after
it had been perfected by being taken out. The applicant desired
to raise a point
which had not been raised on the hearing in the High Court and which was in
direct conflict with the basis of the
case presented on his behalf in the
completed proceedings in the High Court. (He wished to assert the constitutional
invalidity of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) after having lost
an earlier argument which assumed the validity of that Act, contending that it
was inconsistent with a State
University of Wollongong v
[1984] HCA 74
(1984) 158 CLR 447.)
In that context, the High Court stated (at
'It is elementary that a party is bound by the conduct of his case. Except in
the most exceptional circumstances, it would be contrary
to all principle to
allow a party, after a case had been decided against him to raise a new argument
which, whether deliberately
or by inadvertence, he failed to put during the
hearing when he had an opportunity to do so.'
While the principle is a compelling one, it needs recognition that University
of Wollongong did not involve an appeal by way of re-hearing.
Indeed it did not
involve an appeal at all: see
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
(1986) 162 CLR 1
Since this is an appeal by way of a re-hearing, the matter should be
approached in accordance with the principle stated in cases such
Gundowda Pty Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR 418
Coulton v Holcombe
7-9). A party seeking to advance for the first time on appeal a new ground not
taken at trial will be precluded from doing so
if the new ground could possibly
have been met by calling evidence at the hearing or if, had the ground been
raised below, the respondent
might have conducted the case differently at trial.
Multicon Engineering argues that these principles do not preclude it from
the constitutional point on appeal, because all that is in issue is the
proper approach to be followed in considering whether to
adopt a report in a
matter in the Federal jurisdiction. The evidence which each party wished to rely
upon was before the judge.
However, there is another principle of more direct relevance. A party does
not have a right to insist that a new point be decided
on appeal simply because
all of the facts have been established beyond controversy or the point is one of
construction or of law,
even constitutional law. This is because it remains a
question of whether the appellate court 'may find it expedient and in the
of justice to entertain the point';
Water Board v Moustakas
(1988) 180 CLR 491
at 497; see also
Jones v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
(1995) 63 FCR 32
at 47. The rule is not an absolute one, as
evidenced by the Court's decision in
Della Patrona v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
[No 1] (Court of Appeal, 1 September 1995, unreported).
Unlike the present case, the respondent in
Della Patrona
failed to raise
the 'procedural point' until long after the appellant had been given leave to
debate it. This was a very important
factor in the Court's consideration. For
later proceedings in the same case, see
Della Patrona v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
(1995) 38 NSWLR 257.
'...it is a sound general principle, leading not only to the maintenance of
fair play, but also to the repression of unnecessary litigation,
that parties
must be bound by the course they deliberately adopted at the trial':
Australia United Steam Navigation Company Ltd
[1909] HCA 25
(1909) 9 CLR 1
Isaacs J; see also
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67 at 75;
Commerciale SA (In Liq) v Akhil Holdings Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 279
In Coulton (at 7), Gibbs CJ, Wilson J, Brennan J and Dawson J said that:
'It is fundamental to the due administration of justice that the substantial
issues between the parties are ordinarily settled at
the trial. If it were not
so the main arena for settlement of disputes would move from the court of first
instance to the appellate
court, tending to reduce the proceedings in the former
court to little more than a preliminary skirmish'."
34 Those remarks are particularly significant in the present case which
concerns proceedings before the Small Claims Division of the
Local Court for
reasons stated by O'Keefe J in
Kojima v Australian Chinese Newspapers
(supra). The same principle can be found discussed by Allsop J (as he then was)
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1833
(2001) 117 FCR 424. His Honour said:-
36. The roles of the trial and the appeal need to be kept distinct. The
appeal is not a reworking of the trial taking account of such
impediments as are
thrown up by the judge’s findings which alter the landscape. As was said
Coulton v Holcombe
, supra at 7:
It is fundamental to the due administration of justice that the substantial
issues between the parties are ordinarily settled at the
trial. If it were not
so the main arena for the settlement of disputes would move from the court of
first instance to the appellate
court, tending to reduce the proceedings in the
former court to little more than a preliminary skirmish.
37. It is beyond question that if a new matter is raised and evidence could
have been given which by any possibility could have prevented
the point from
succeeding, the point cannot be taken:
Coulton v Holcombe
supra at 7-8.
38. However, to say as much does not exhaust the description of the
considerations for an appellate court when faced with a party
raising a fresh
point. First, the finality of litigation and the importance of parties being
bound to the cases they make at trial
should never be overlooked: Gleeson CJ and
Hayne J in Crampton, supra at [15] and [157], respectively and
University of
Wollongong v Metwally
, supra; see too
JB Chandler Investment Company
Limited (in voluntary liquidation) v Commissioner of Taxation
[1993] FCA 641
(1993) 47 FCR
per Gummow J at 593G. Secondly, the difficulty of the party against whom the
new point is raised reaching back in time to assess,
necessarily hypothetically,
how the conduct of the trial would, or may, have been different should not be
underestimated. Such judgments
or assessments can require re-agitation or
reconsideration of decisions taken before and at trial (which may be privileged)
can be very difficult to assess and articulate after the event. The
entitlement of a party to the benefit of the opportunity of informed
reasonably contemporaneous assessment of relevant evidence, or inquiry, should
be respected. Thirdly, the potential unfairness
on counsel conducting an appeal
who will be expected to assist the court in respect of the prejudice, or lack of
it, to his or her
client in the face of such matters being raised should not
lightly be brushed aside. Even when counsel cannot positively say that
in particular would have been done differently, that does not mean that the
court will be satisfied of a lack of prejudice.
The possibility of evidence or
the possibility that the hearing would have taken a different course, if not
fanciful, may well suffice
to deny raising of the new point. These
considerations should not be seen as not requiring counsel frankly and candidly
to say that
the trial would not have been conducted differently if he or she is
of that view. Fourthly, and in conclusion, before any new point
be allowed, the
court should be able to be satisfied that the raising of it could work no
injustice on the other party and is otherwise
in the interests of justice. The
extent of the consideration of “the interests of justice” was
discussed by Branson J
and Katz J in
H v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
, supra, at [8]. For my part, I would reserve comment
upon the matters there discussed in this context concerning the relevance of
growing pressure on the time of courts. Considerations of the kind there
discussed by their Honours have not formed part of my
reasons, expressed later,
for refusing to entertain certain issues on appeal. Nothing I have said is
intended to be in any way contrary
to, or inconsistent with, what was said by R
D Nicholson J in
Jones v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1995) 63 FCR 32
at 47 or with the cases there discussed, that being an
authority specifically relied on by the appellants in argument.
39. Whether or not a point was raised at the hearing should not be decided
narrowly or technically. The pleadings and the particulars
will ordinarily mark
the boundaries of the dispute. Due regard also should be had to the direction of
the conduct of the hearing
within or outside these marked boundaries:
Board v Moustakas
, supra at 497-98.
35 As I said before the luncheon adjournment, the issue about the giving of
formal notice and a formal denial of the request may be
seen in the pleadings
but was certainly not the subject of any argument at all in the Small Claims
Division before the Assessor.
In the circumstances, it is not a matter that can
be agitated on this appeal which is limited to two very narrow issues: a
of jurisdiction; and a question as to the denial of procedural
Appeal grounds numbered 6, 7 and 8
36 There is no substance in appeal grounds that bear the numbers 6, 7 and 8.
If there were a jurisdictional argument, it is raised
in appeal ground 6. Appeal
grounds 7 and 8 are really pleading errors of fact based on an earlier error of
law and I am not persuaded
that there was an earlier error of law going to the
question of jurisdiction.
Grounds 9 and 10
37 I then turn to the final two grounds of the appeal. There is no dispute
that the applicant and the respondent wished to take a
cruise in 2020. For that
reason, the respondent transferred $1,200 to the applicant's bank account on 25
February 2020. The cruise
was cancelled because of the COVID-19 pestilence. The
evidence contains an email sent by Alexander Jeon, the travel agent, to the
respondent advising him that the deposit for the cruise - namely, $2,524 - was
returned to the applicant's bank account on 3 August
2020. The email says
"As discussed, as he had paid for the cruise from his own account and under
his name, we are legally only allowed to refund back to
the person who has
This was $1,200 given by the respondent to the applicant to pay for the
cruise or its deposit. That was refunded to the applicant
on 3 August 2020 but
the applicant did not account to the plaintiff for his money.
38 It is also common ground that the respondent paid four separate amounts
totalling $8,100 to the applicant. Paragraphs 59 and 60
of the respondent's
affidavit are these:
"59. I trusted Nathan and began to transfer my funds from the joint account
to Nathan's personal account from March 2019 for the purposes
of him [sic]
investing the money.
60. On 27 March 2019 and 12 July 2019 I made four separate
payments totalling $8,100. Annexed and marked 01-04 is a photocopy of the
four confirmations of monthly transactions sent".
In his statement, the applicant said this:
"10. On 12 July 2019, he paid me the sum of $4,700 which sum was received by
him by way of a tax refund. He asked me to invest those
funds in a managed
account which I did on his behalf. The funds were invested in an IOOF managed
fund's account known as a Pursuit
Select Account. The account was closed in
April 2020. Subsequent to the investment of the firm [sic], I was informed by
verily believe that the amount on the investment has diminished due to
the impact of the COVID-19 upon the investment portfolio.
I believe the current
balance of the investment is $3,200...
11. In addition to the sum of $4,700 referred to in par 10 above, the
plaintiff also made the following payments to me which I held
in escrow to be
paid back from [sic, scil. to] him from the bills account:
(a) 27 March 2019: $1,000.
(b) 10 April 2019: $1,500.
(c) 8 May 2019: $900.
Annexed hereto and marked with the letter D, a true copy of the transaction
reports to [sic] the above payments".
The $4,700 was the respondent's income tax refund. The other amounts were
ones which the defendant admitted he was holding on behalf
of the plaintiff. No
clearer case could be made out for moneys had and received by the applicant for
the use of the respondent.
39 Nevertheless, the applicant seeks to raise two new grounds of there being
"no contract" or there being no contract because there
is existed between the
respondent and the applicant a "domestic relationship" and therefore there was
no intention of creating legal
relationships in accordance with the well-known
Balfour v Balfour
[1919] 2 KB 571.
There was raised in the
discussion about the jurisdictional issue the fact that this was a domestic
relationship but otherwise it
was never asserted in the Local Court that the
moneys were not recoverable because of Balfour v Balfour and nor was it alleged
some contract had been entered into, but the matter proceeded on the basis
of quasi-contract, as we used to call it, or now the principles
enrichment.
40 The only real defence raised in the Local Court was one of set-off which
the Assessor rejected because it was not adequately particularised.
the transcript of proceedings in the Court below, or p 119 of exhibit A, the
Assessor is recorded as saying this:
"In terms of this set-off, Mr Britt in his statement is essentially claiming
a number of payments, I think, that were due to him and
never paid by
Mr...Parcell. And that is at annexure J to his statement. Now the difficulty
that that Court has with that schedule
is that it lacks detail. All it is, is a
list of dates from March 2019 and I think the evidence is, the couple lived
together from
September 2018 through to 23 March 2020 which is probably
consistent with the separation date which I believe is March 2020 and the
itemisations on that are two items that say 'Harold's food'.
So I cannot be satisfied on this evidence, Mr Kassim, that your client has
made out a claim for moneys owed which could be set-off
against the debt that I
have determined is owed by your client to Mr Parcell. There is just simply no
evidence of it. If there were
utilities, bills or other bills that Mr Parcell
should have contributed to then I would expect those bills to be attached so I
see what they were actually for and then we could be satisfied the
particular portion of that can be attributed to Mr Parcell.
Similarly, there is a conflict in the evidence in terms of the rent
arrangement. Mr Parcell says the arrangement was a rent-free and
he was going to
be attending to the domestic duties and I think pay for petrol, contribute to
groceries and day to day living expenses,
and that Mr Britt would pay rent,
utilities, car registration and insurance.
On the other hand, Mr Britt says that the rent was $740 a week and he was
agreed that Mr Parcell would contribute one-third of that.
But there is no
evidence of what the rent was. It would not be too difficult to attach a lease
or a rental statement substantiating
that claim. So, what I consider to be Mr
Britt's evidence of mere bare assertions unsupported by any evidence that could
have easily
been obtained to support his claim".
We know exactly why the set-off failed. It failed for lack of adequate proof.
I think it is highly ironical that the moneys that the
applicant sought to
offset included moneys paid by the applicant for the payment of food for the dog
the applicant has failed to
deliver up to the respondent. There is no substance,
in my view, in paras 9 and 10. There is no issue about jurisdiction. Insofar
it might be thought to be inadequate dealing with an issue, it is patently clear
that the Assessor dealt with the issues that
were raised.
Procedural fairness
41 If I understand the applicant's argument correctly, the essence of the
argument about procedural fairness can be seen in a number
of paragraphs of the
appellant's written submissions which are in MFI1. They are these:
"70. The Assessor was under a duty to afford procedural fairness.
71. The content of that procedural fairness included looking at the whole of
the evidence, availing...herself [of] the law and applying
the facts to the
72. The Assessor failed to draw the proper inference of fact, drew the wrong
inference of fact, misconstrued the statute/legislation,
and failed to give
proper weight to the evidence."
The relevant principle of natural justice is the audi alteram partem rule.
When one reads the transcript, it is patently clear that
the Assessor listened
to each of the submissions put on behalf of the applicant and read the evidence
that was placed before her
by the applicant and weighed that evidence. All that
is being alleged is either a factual error or an error of law. That is not a
failure to give an impartial assessment of the evidence. The Assessor, the
applicant might think was not impartial, but objectively
she was. I can find no
substance in these two grounds. Because of the fact that it was only raised on
10 May 2021 in proceedings
commenced in the Local Court on 23 June 2020 and
heard in the Local Court on 22 October 2020 and not raised in the Court below,
application to rely upon those two grounds should not be permitted and, even
if I were to permit them, they must be dismissed.
42 For those reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
[Submissions about costs]
43 This is an application for indemnity costs. The relevant principles can be
found stated in
Baulderstone Hornibrook Engineering Pty Ltd v Gordian Runoff
Limited (No 2)
[2009] NSWCA 12
by Allsop P (as he then was) with whom
Beazley JA (as her Excellency then was) and Campbell JA agreed. At [4] his
Honour said this:
The first basis ([3 (a)] above) was supported by reference, in part, to the
well-known line of cases to the effect that a party should
pay costs on an
indemnity or a solicitor and client basis when it appears that an action (here
an appeal) has been commenced or continued
in circumstances where the moving
party, properly advised, should have known that it had no chance of success:
Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty Limited v International Produce Merchants
Pty Limited
(1988) 81 ALR 397 at 401, applied in
Rosniak v Government
Insurance Office
(1997) 41 NSWLR 608
at 615-616 (Mason P, with whom Clarke
JA agreed, and with which statement of principle Meagher JA did not disagree,
though he dissented
on the order for indemnity costs);
Harrison v Schipp
[2001] NSWCA 13
(Giles JA, with whom Handley JA agreed and Fitzgerald
JA relevantly agreed);
Commonwealth of Australia v Ryan (No 2)
(Beazley, Giles and Hodgson JJA);
Chen v Karandonis
[2002] NSWCA 412
(Beazley JA, with whom Heydon and Hodgson JJA agreed);
Colgate-Palmolive v Cussons Pty Limited
[1993] FCA 536
(1993) 46 FCR 225
(Sheppard J in his helpful summary of the structure of the principles); and
Re Wilcox; Ex parte Venture Industries Pty Limited (No 2)
(1996) 72 FCR
151 at 156-157.
It is also important to bear in mind what his Honour said at [10]:
I should say that the basis for awarding costs on an indemnity basis in
DSE (Holdings) Pty Limited v Intertan Inc
[2004] FCA 1251
51 ACSR 555
(upheld on appeal:
Intertan Inc v DSE (Holdings) Pty Limited
[2005] FCAFC 54)
was particular to that case. In that case, I took the view that
although the points run by the appellant at the trial had not been
imprudently
or unreasonably taken, nevertheless the appellant had engaged in litigious
“trench warfare” taking every
point in the teeth of honest
commercial commonsense. I said the following at [36] in the context of a 12 day
case that could have
been a three day case with certain reasonable concessions
and a degree of openness about the evidence:
“... if people want to fight trench warfare in commercial litigation
and if people want to fight a case about rectification
and common understanding
and construction of contracts and not lay out reasonably frankly the evidence
that is central to that then
they should pay the full costs of a 12-day
44 In the current case, there was a hearing in the Small Claims Division of
the Local Court. The matter came before me yesterday with
an estimate of "half a
day" but it took me half a day to read the documentation that had been relied
upon in the Local Court. I suspect
that the real dispute was not about the
monetary judgment but about the order for the return of the dog, Harold. Whilst
not be called "trench warfare in commercial litigation", it had the
flavour of "trench warfare in Family Court litigation". At [11]
the President
pointed out that in that case the appellant had "trimmed its arguments
responsibly". In the current case, the applicant
had not trimmed his arguments
responsibly but expanded them and kept returning to the issues which had earlier
been argued making
the hearing a painful exercise. Perhaps counsel for the
appellant ought to have considered Proverbs 26:11:
"Sicut canis, qui revertitur ad vomitum suum, sic stultus, qui iterat
stultitiam suam".
45 The respondent has submitted that this was an appeal that lacked any
merit. I agree. There were repeated attempts by the applicant
to turn alleged
errors of law and/or alleged errors of fact into arguments about jurisdiction or
the denial of natural justice. The
attempt was palpable and ought not to have
been made. The respondent has been wholly successful. The initial estimate of
was half a day. It took two whole days. That was because of the way
the appellant mounted his case and argued it and reargued it
and revisited the
argument yet again and again.
46 I order the applicant to pay the respondent's costs on an indemnity basis.
That order is made pursuant to
Civil Procedure Act
02 May 2022 - 1. Paragraph 3: "must" removed; quotation marks inserted around
"denial of procedural fairness".
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (361 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter