URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Evelyn (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 6; (5 May 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Evelyn (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 6
Hearing Date(s):
Date of Orders:
Decision Date:
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
Dr C M West, Senior Member
(Professional)
E A Pickering, General Member (Community)
In relation to the enduring guardian appointment made by Evelyn on 5
November 2015 appointing Chris the Tribunal orders, directs or
The resignation of Chris as an enduring guardian is
The application for review is treated as if it were an
application under the
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) for a guardianship order for
1. A guardianship order is made for Evelyn.
The Public Guardian is appointed as the guardian.
3. This is a
temporary guardianship order for a period of 30 days from 5 May
4. This is a limited guardianship order giving the
guardian(s) custody of Evelyn to the extent necessary to carry out the functions
5. The guardian has the following
a) Accommodation
To decide where Evelyn may
b) The guardian may authorise others including members of
NSW Police and the Ambulance Service of NSW to:
i) take Evelyn to a
place approved by the guardian.
ii) keep them at that
iii) return them to that place should they leave
c) Health care
To decide what health care Evelyn
may receive.
d) Medical/Dental consent
substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental treatment,
where Evelyn is not capable of giving a valid
To make decisions about services to be provided to
CONDITIONS:
6. The condition of this order
a) Standard Condition
In exercising this role, the
guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Evelyn to an understanding of
the issues and to obtain
and consider their views before making significant
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – review of an enduring guardianship appointment –
enduring guardian seeking resignation as guardian –
whether the subject
person continues to be in need of a guardian – conflicting views as to the
subject person’s capacity
– lack of functional capacity –
ultimately considered to be in need of a guardian – resignation approved
application treated as an application for a guardianship order –
temporary guardianship order only – need to make urgent
decisions about
health – Public Guardian appointed.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
(1)(a)-(b),
Cases Cited:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Review of an Enduring Guardianship Appointment
Evelyn (the
St Vincents Hospital Sydney Ltd (applicant)
Chris (enduring
Elmer (joined party)
Public Guardian
NSW Trustee and
Tom (spouse)
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2025/00068791
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a 76-year-old woman who lives in her own home in Inner West Sydney with her
husband, Tom.
has three sons, namely Chris, Mark and Elmer. Chris and Mark live with Evelyn
and Tom in their home in Inner West Sydney.
5 November 2015, Evelyn appointed Chris as her guardian pursuant to an Enduring
Guardianship instrument. A copy of this instrument
has been provided to the
20 February 2025, the Tribunal received a request from St Vincents Hospital
Sydney Ltd (“St Vincents”) to review the
Enduring Guardianship.
Tribunal conducted Directions Hearings on 11 March 2025 and again on 22 April
2025. At these Directions Hearings the Tribunal
made various procedural orders
regarding the submission of evidence, as well as joining Elmer as a party to the
proceedings.
28 April 2025, the Tribunal received a “Notice of Resignation of
Appointment as Enduring Guardian”, executed by Chris
on 27 April
Reasons for Decision relate to the application submitted by St Vincents on
20 February 2025.
THE HEARING
Hearing was listed on 5 May 2025 and was conducted from the Tribunal’s
Sydney Registry.
Hearing was attended in person by Tom, Elmer and Mark.
Hearing was attended by video link by Chris and a social worker on behalf of St
Vincents and a Cardiology Registrar at St Vincents.
did not participate in the Hearing. On the morning of the Hearing, the Tribunal
received correspondence indicating that Evelyn
was too unwell to participate in
the Hearing. The Tribunal decided that the Hearing should proceed
notwithstanding Evelyn’s
absence, and that it would be in her best
interests to do so.
the morning of the Hearing, the Tribunal received a number of late papers. These
included an eight-page statement by Chris, which
Chris reports was emailed to
each of the other parties, and a number of medical records, which were not
provided to other parties
and which were reported to be made available for
consideration by the Tribunal only.
that the late material was provided to the Tribunal otherwise than in accordance
with the directions made on 11 March 2025,
as amended by the directions made on
22 April 2025, and having regard to the notations made on the face of the 22
April 2025 orders
(which were included due to concerns raised by Chris about
potential procedural unfairness in the event of non-compliance with the
filing directions), the Tribunal determined that the material submitted to the
Tribunal on 5 May 2025 should be excluded from
evidence. Accordingly, the
Tribunal has not considered such material in determining the current application
(save for the notification
that Evelyn would be too unwell to participate in the
the conclusion of the Hearing, the Tribunal decided to reserve its decision as
there was insufficient time available for the Tribunal
to deliberate at the
conclusion of the Hearing. Later the same day the Tribunal decided:
(1) To approve Chris’ resignation as Enduring Guardian; and,
(2) To treat the application as if it were an application for a guardianship
order; and,
(3) To appoint the Public Guardian as Evelyn’s guardian under a temporary
guardianship order for a period of up to thirty days
with the functions of
accommodation (including authorise others), services, health care and
medical/dental consent.
WHAT DID THE TRIBUNAL NEED TO CONSIDER?
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) provides for the resignation of an
appointed enduring guardian. If the appointor is not in need of a guardian, then
the appointee
may resign from the appointment by providing written notice to the
Guardianship Act
s 6HB(1)(a).
If, however, the appointor is a person in need of a guardian, such
resignation may only be made with the approval of the Tribunal:
Guardianship
s 6HB(1)(b).
light of Chris’ purported resignation on 27 April 2025, it is necessary
for the Tribunal to consider whether Evelyn is a
person in need of a
person in need of a guardian is “a person who because of a disability
is totally or partially incapable of managing his or
her person”:
Guardianship Act
person with a disability is a person who is:
(a) intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced age;
(c) a mentally ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise disabled;
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one or more major life activities
to such an extent that he or she requires supervision
or social habilitation:
Guardianship Act
the event that the Tribunal finds that Evelyn is not a person in need of a
guardian, Chris’ resignation from his appointment
appears on the face of
it to be valid, and there would be no practical utility in the Tribunal
considering any further action on
the event that the Tribunal finds that Evelyn is a person in need of a guardian,
the Tribunal needs to consider
(1) To approve Chris’ purported resignation from his appointment as
Enduring Guardian;
(2) To substitute another person as Evelyn’s enduring guardian consequent
to Chris’ resignation (in accordance with
Guardianship
(3) To treat the application as if it were an application for a guardianship
order (in accordance with
Guardianship Act
CONSIDERATION
Is Evelyn a person in need of a guardian?
application made by St Vincents was premised on an assertion that Evelyn, as at
February 2025, had the requisite capacity to provide
her own informed consent to
medical treatment and declined treatment on account of influence from her
enduring guardian and/or Evelyn’s
enduring guardian was proposing to make
decisions regarding Evelyn’s access to medical treatment notwithstanding
the assessment
by her treating medical practitioner that she retained the
requisite capacity to provide her own consent.
light of Chris’ resignation, it is ultimately unnecessary for the Tribunal
to make findings of fact with respect to these
allegations.
assessing whether a person is a person in need of a guardian, the Tribunal
commonly considers the person's ability to make important
personal, health and
lifestyle decisions – the ability to make such decisions being a major
life activity that impacts on the
person's ability to function normally in the
community with others. It is important, however, not to conflate the issue of
decision-making
ability with the issue of whether a person who, because of a
disability, is totally or partially incapable of managing his or her
Vincents provided the Tribunal with a number of reports in support of their
application, including:
(1) Letter from a resident medical officer (RMO), dated 19 February 2025;
(2) Letter on behalf of Dr Z
cardiologist, dated 20 February 2025;
(3) Letter from the RMO, dated 19 February 2025 (referred to as
“Assessment of Mental Capacity”).
evidence provided by St Vincents, on its face, appears to relate to
Evelyn’s capacity to provide her own informed consent
treatment. An understanding of the circumstances under which such
assessments were conducted is relevant for current purposes.
following is reported by St
“[Evelyn] ... presented [to hospital] with decompensated heart failure in
the context of medical non-compliance. She was admitted
to St Vincent’s
Hospital on 14/02 with symptoms of heart failure, including fluid overload and
During her admission, her son [Chris] disclosed that he had been altering her
medications based on side effects he read about, independently
adjusting dosages
without medical oversight. On examination, [Evelyn] appeared fluid overloaded,
with signs consistent with heart
failure, including elevated JVP, peripheral
edema, and distended neck veins. Her echocardiogram showed a significantly
reduced ejection
fraction of 20-25%, representing a sudden deterioration from a
previous echocardiogram result. Given her condition an angiogram was
recommended
to exclude reversible ischemic causes; however, [Chris] strongly opposed this
intervention despite being informed of
the serious health consequences if left
[Evelyn] was assessed and determined to have full decision-making capacity. She
expressed her willingness to proceed with the angiogram;
however, she
subsequently discharged herself against medical advice on Tuesday night
(18/02/2025). Prior to this, [Evelyn] reported
to the medical team that [Chris]
had been depriving her of food, disregarding her treatment preferences, altering
and withholding
her medications, and being verbally abusive.
Given these circumstances, we have serious concerns that [Evelyn] is under
coercion by her son, with elements of elder abuse contributing
to her reluctance
to proceed with medically necessary treatment. We firmly believe her autonomy is
being compromised, and urgent
intervention is required to safeguard her
wellbeing.”
the “Assessment of Mental Capacity”, the RMO records the
“The assessment revealed that [Evelyn] is fully competent to make
decisions regarding her ongoing medical treatments. She demonstrated
understanding of her health situation, treatment options, and the potential
consequences of not undergoing the proposed procedure.
During the assessment,
[Evelyn] provided coherent and responsive answers to questions about her
opinions, and she showed a sound
grasp of the risks and benefits associated with
the angiogram procedure.”
report dated 20 February 2025 outlines that a Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(MOCA) was undertaken on 17 February 2025 in which
Evelyn returned a score of
Hearing, the cardiology registrar outlined that during Evelyn’s admission
he had formed the view that Evelyn retained the
requisite capacity to provide
informed consent to the proposed treatment based on her MOCA score and the
assessments made by himself
and other treating medical practitioners involved in
her care. The cardiology registrar noted that on account of her non-English
speaking background a RUDAS may have been preferable to a MOCA. He noted that it
is possible that Evelyn’s capacity has deteriorated
since her discharge
(particularly noting her “significantly advanced heart failure”),
and he declined to comment on more
functional aspects of Evelyn’s capacity
in circumstances where this falls more into the domain of allied health
professionals.
identified by Evelyn’s treating team include:
(1) Reports by Evelyn that she is not allowed to consume a sufficient amount of
food (including documented weight loss of 10kg between
her prior admission in
August 2024 to her admission in February 2025 – a drop from 60kg to
(2) Concerns that Evelyn is being improperly coerced into refusing medical
interventions notwithstanding a clearly expressed desire
to receive such
(3) Concerns that Evelyn’s medications are improperly being altered
without necessary and appropriate medical oversight.
denied that Evelyn is a person in need of a guardian. Notwithstanding the
reports presented by St Vincents and email correspondence
between Chris and the
social worker to the contrary, Chris told the Tribunal that “[Evelyn]
knows what she wants, what she
is doing” and denied that his appointment
as enduring guardian had been activated.
Notwithstanding
Chris’ assertions at Hearing, his email to the social worker dated 18
February 2025 includes the following comments:
“ENDURING GUARDIAN’S POSITION
The patient’s capacity is diminished and most especially diminished to
make risk-weighted decisions in respect of her treatments,
including procedures
and medications.
For the record, if SVHS wish to attain consent directly from the Patient to the
exclusion of myself, then I must be informed of this
position and have the
opportunity to attain independent medical advice (from experts not associated
with St Vincent’s) and
have an opportunity to object through legal
RESERVATION OF RIGHTS
I sincerely hope my position is clear, that it is not permissible for a group of
medical practitioners to unilaterally assess capacity,
and then proceed to
attain consent, in the face of strong objections from family, Enduring Guardian,
and Officer of the Court. The
situation must be resolved through an adjudicative
I have reasonable grounds to assert that the patient has insufficient capacity
to undertake risk-weighted decision making of medical
treatment. I make this
assertion as an Officer of the Court of NSW and Justice of the Peace of NSW.
was provided the opportunity to address these earlier statements at Hearing, and
maintained his position that Evelyn is not
a person in need of a guardian and
that his appointment as Evelyn’s enduring guardian had not been
told the Tribunal that he had recently visited Evelyn and “
shadow of her former self
”. Elmer told the Tribunal that although he
is unsure about Evelyn’s capacity (and supports the need for a proper
of same), she now provides only very short answers to questions, and
requires considerable personal care, including help moving from
her bed to her
chair and for toileting. This is in contrast to her presentation mid-2024 when
Evelyn asked Elmer for input around
medical treatment, when she freely engaged
in discussion about the proposed treatment, and where she was capable of
engaging in lengthy
conversations. Elmer expressed a view that Evelyn requires
more support than she is currently receiving, but was unsure of what supports
may be required.
Tribunal attempted to seek Tom’s views as to whether Evelyn may be a
person in need of a guardian, however the Tribunal
was unsure to what extent Tom
understood the concepts being discussed as his answers to questions were not
always responsive to the
question that was posed. This could, in part, be
attributable to possible hearing loss (where the Tribunal observed at one point
that Tom appeared unable to hear Mark despite him speaking quite loudly), though
Tom denied any hearing impairment and rejected the
offer for him to use a
hearing loop.
response to questions asked regarding Evelyn’s need for any support
services and her ability to organise such services herself,
Tom told the
Tribunal that Evelyn doesn’t want any services. When asked his
thoughts on the proposed treatment Tom told the
Tribunal “I quite agree
with her [Evelyn] ... I think it was the right decision”. Tom proceeded to
explain to the Tribunal
his own experiences with cardiology treatment in the
past, and relied on his negative experiences as a basis for why Evelyn should
not receive treatment. Tom told the Tribunal that Evelyn didn’t want the
treatment and that she was “put under pressure
by the doctors”
though conceded that he was not present during these discussions. When asked
Evelyn’s discharge from hospital contrary
to medical advice, Tom confirmed that he did not take any steps to speak to
doctors to help satisfy himself that discharge was the
appropriate decision to make.
was able to provide evidence about his own observations and interactions with
Evelyn, which occurred as recent as the morning
of the Hearing. Mark told the
Tribunal that he “
strongly believes
” that Evelyn is in need
of a guardian and that there is a need for an independent person to be
appointed to the role. Mark
described considerable decline in Evelyn’s
presentation, particularly over the last month. Mark told the Tribunal that he
believe that Evelyn would be able to implement her own decisions
and that in his interactions with her she appears “
”. Mark told the Tribunal that he believes Evelyn needs to be in
hospital and that she is “
declining day by day
reported that when discussing the possibility of getting medical attention for
Evelyn she expressed her support for
this, telling him “
”. Mark told the Tribunal that Evelyn requires
substantial daily care
” including being unable to cook and
requiring considerable assistance with activities of daily living including
bathing and
social worker, after hearing the reports from Evelyn’s family, opined that
is someone who requires substantial support
the evidence “
seems to support that she is a person in need of a
Irrespective
of whether or not Evelyn is able to provide her own informed consent to medical
treatment, there is evidence of cognitive
decline (based on her score on the
MOCA and the reported decline in her ability to engage in meaningful
conversation) which may impact
upon her ability to make important lifestyle
decisions for herself.
there is no medical evidence regarding Evelyn’s functional capacity, the
evidence before the Tribunal supports that
there has been a significant decline
in Evelyn’s functional capacity to the extent that she requires support in
a number of
activities of daily living.
the absence of any formal diagnosis other than symptoms of heart failure, the
Tribunal is satisfied based on the lay evidence regarding
reported cognitive and functional decline that she is “otherwise
disabled” to the extent that she is at
least partially restricted in her
ability to manage her person. Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that Evelyn
is a person in
need of a guardian.
Should the Tribunal approve
Chris’ resignation as enduring guardian?
regard to Chris’ desire to resign from his appointment as enduring
guardian and the nature of the allegations made against
Chris (without the need
to make any findings in relation to same), the Tribunal is satisfied that
Chris’ resignation should
be approved by the
Should the Tribunal substitute another person as
Evelyn’s enduring guardian?
it is open to the Tribunal to substitute another person to fill the vacancy
arising from Chris’ resignation, the Tribunal
did not consider that it
would be appropriate to do so. In reaching this decision the Tribunal notes that
there were no proposals
before the Tribunal for a suitable private person to be
appointed as Evelyn’s guardian and that in any event there was limited
evidence before the Tribunal to allow the Tribunal to appropriately assess the
suitability, or otherwise, of any proposed appointment.
Compounding these
concerns is that the Hearing was conducted in Evelyn’s absence, and
accordingly there was no ability for
the Tribunal to consider Evelyn’s
views, and the weight to be attributed to same, with respect to any such
appointment.
Is it in Evelyn’s best interests to deal with
the review as if an application had been made for a guardianship order?
the reasons outlined above, the Tribunal is satisfied that Evelyn is a person in
need of a guardian.
Chris’ resignation as enduring guardian, Evelyn is left without a
substitute decision maker. There are clearly identifiable
decisions to be made
on Evelyn’s behalf, particularly with respect to her access to health care
and medical treatment. There
are concerns about Evelyn’s functional
capacity to make and implement such decisions, particularly in circumstances
decisions appear not to be supported by her spouse (Tom) and carer
(Chris), and where there are identified concerns that, even if
Evelyn retains
the cognitive capacity to make her own informed decisions regarding her medical
treatment, her will may be overborne
all of the circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that it is in Evelyn’s
best interests for the Tribunal to proceed as if
the application were an
application for a guardianship order.
Should the Tribunal make a
guardianship order, and if so, what order should be made?
determined that Evelyn is a person in need of a guardian, and therefore a person
for whom the Tribunal could make a guardianship
order, the Tribunal is required
to consider whether or not to exercise its discretion to make such an
Guardianship Act
outlines a number of equally
important factors for us to consider and balance in the exercise of our
discretion. These matters have
no hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory
consideration. However, the Tribunal must undertake a balancing exercise for its
consideration of the matters in
Guardianship Act
When undertaking this task the Tribunal may be guided by the principles
that are set out in
Guardianship Act
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
The Tribunal has had regard to each of the
factors of the
Guardianship Act
, which are only
referred to herein to the extent that they are of particular relevance to the
decision made by the Tribunal.
the Hearing the Tribunal informed the participants that, in the event the
Tribunal decided to proceed as if the application
were an application for a
guardianship order and thereafter make a guardianship order, it was the
intention of the Tribunal to proceed
on the basis that a temporary guardianship
order would be made.
is in circumstances where the Hearing proceeded in Evelyn’s absence, where
her views are not before the Tribunal (in any
reliable way), where there was
limited evidence available to assess the suitability (or otherwise) of any
proposed private guardian,
and where there was insufficient time available to
the Tribunal to properly consider issues of suitability for the purpose of a
proceeding on the basis that the Tribunal was only considering a temporary
guardianship order, the Tribunal notes that the Tribunal
is only permitted to
appoint the Public Guardian and may do so for a period not exceeding thirty
Guardianship Act
critical factor weighing in favour of the making of a temporary guardianship
order (as opposed to adjourning the Hearing on a part-heard
basis) was the
identified need for urgent assessment, and if necessary treatment, of
Evelyn’s potentially life-limiting health
condition. In his submissions
Mark expressed significant concern that without hospitalisation and appropriate
treatment Evelyn may
die prior to the Tribunal’s next Hearing.
accordance with
Guardianship Act
, in the absence of the
appointment of a guardian with a medical/dental consent function, Tom would
appropriately be considered as
Evelyn’s “person responsible”
for the purpose of providing substitute consent to medical treatment. The
was sufficiently concerned about the suitability or otherwise of this
arrangement prevailing in the immediate short term in circumstances
supported Evelyn’s discharge from hospital contrary to medical advice,
where he relies on his own negative experiences,
rather than suitable medical
advice, to inform Evelyn’s treatment options, and where there is no
evidence of Tom having actively
assisted Evelyn to obtain any follow up
cardiology treatment upon her discharge from St Vincents.
outlined above Evelyn did not participate in the Hearing and accordingly the
Tribunal was unable to ascertain her views with respect
to the making of a
guardianship order.
as Evelyn’s former enduring guardian and her current carer, opposes the
making of a guardianship order. He informed the
Tribunal that the making of a
guardianship order presents a “
great risk of violating [Evelyn’s]
Elmer and the social worker each supported the making of a temporary
guardianship order.
was afforded the opportunity to share his views about the proposal to make a
temporary guardianship order, however his response
to the Tribunal was not
directly relevant to this issue.
Tribunal is conscious that the making of a guardianship order (and the
appointment of the Public Guardian) may have an impact
on Evelyn’s
existing family relationships and may also be inconsistent with Evelyn’s
cultural background. Although no
evidence was presented to the Tribunal specific
to the issue of culture, it was apparent to the Tribunal, based on the
interactions
between the parties, that there may be cultural sensitivities that
weigh against such appointment. Notwithstanding this, the Tribunal
is satisfied
that it is manifestly in Evelyn’s best interests for a guardianship order
to be made even if doing so may have
an impact on her family relationships and
cultural background.
Tribunal is satisfied that absent the appointment of a guardian it is unlikely
that services, allied health supports and/or appropriate
medical care will be
provided to Evelyn.
immediately pressing issue is the need for Evelyn to receive
appropriate medical assessment, and if necessary, interventions.
requires the appointment of a guardian with a medical/dental consent function,
as well as a health care function to enable access
to necessary health
information to inform any decisions that may need to be made.
the context of Evelyn discharging from hospital contrary to medical advice, and
thereafter declining assistance to be transported
the Tribunal is satisfied that for a guardian to make appropriate and necessary
decisions regarding
Evelyn’s access to medical services it will be
necessary for a guardian to be appointed with accommodation and authorise others
functions. This will enable the guardian to have Evelyn transported to hospital
and prevent her unauthorised discharge from hospital.
receipt of any necessary medical interventions, it is anticipated that a
guardian will need to make a decision with respect to
whether or not it is safe
for Evelyn to be discharged home. The inclusion of a services function will
enable the guardian to commence
an ACAT assessment and consider whether Evelyn
may benefit from any supports to remain living safely at home, or otherwise (in
with the accommodation function) whether Evelyn requires
accommodation instead in a residential aged care facility.
all of the circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the Public Guardian
ought to be appointed as Evelyn’s guardian pursuant
to a temporary
guardianship order for a period of up to thirty days with the functions of
accommodation, authorise others, services,
health care and medical/dental
Tribunal notes that the Public Guardian is not authorised to override
Evelyn’s objections to medical treatment, and in the
event that such need
arises it is possible for an urgent application to be made to the Tribunal to
consider whether such authority
may be required.
is hoped that Evelyn will be able to participate in the next Hearing, though it
is the intention of the Tribunal to appoint a separate
representative for Evelyn
for the purpose of the Hearing for the review of guardianship order to ensure
that, to the extent possible,
Evelyn’s views may be available to the
Tribunal for the next Hearing.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Noting that such written notice
must be in accordance with
Guardianship
Noting that this is not a
comprehensive list of powers available to the Tribunal on review, but rather a
list of options that may
reasonably be considered by the Tribunal in the
particular circumstances of the current
Jointly prepared by a
Cardiology Advanced Trainee, a Cardiology Registrar, and a Cardiology Social
See letter prepared by
the RMO dated 19 February 2025.
The Tribunal notes that scores below 26/30 may be suggestive of a degree of
cognitive impairment.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter