URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2007/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sedrak [2007] NSWPB 4 (10 October 2007)
[2007] NSWPB 4
10 October 2007
Kym Ayscough v
Maged Sedrak
The complaint of professional misconduct encompassed events arising from
the dispensing of paediatric prescriptions by the pharmacist,
proprietor and pharmacist in charge of the pharmacy. In the first incident the
medication for a 20 months old infant was
placed in a box containing a
directions label for another adult patient. The child had an adverse reaction to
the medication. The
complaint alleged certain failures n the pharmacist’s
dispensing process, including a failure to counsel. In the second incident
pharmacist dispensed a medication for a 10 year old girl, which had an approved
indication for the treatment of a prostatic condition,
without verifying with
the prescriber the intended use of the medication in a female child or
satisfying himself as to the therapeutic
purpose of such supply contrary to
clause 53 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
. The pharmacist
had also failed to counsel the mother of the patient as to the dosage and
administration of the medication. In the
third incident the pharmacist had
supplied antibiotic eye drops and eye ointment for a 20 months old child,
without a prescription
from a medical practitioner, contrary to
Section 10(3)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
. The pharmacist admitted some of the
particulars of the complaint. No witnesses were called for cross examination by
the Respondent.
pharmacist’s procedure for counselling referred to certain criteria for
the pharmacist to be involved in counselling, yet
on three occasions when it was
so indicated, adequate counselling did not occur.
pharmacist at the time of dispensing did not have a full understanding of the
uses and applications of Flomax.
volume of prescriptions and level of staffing, as disclosed in the Pharmacy
Board’s Dispensary and Dispensing Procedures
Review of the pharmacy, would
have made it very difficult to discharge all dispensing and counselling
requirements in a timely manner.
A disputes resolution procedure such as that suggested in the QCPP standards,
(which was absent from the pharmacy), would have assisted
the pharmacist in
dealing with these complaints.
the conduct the subject of the complaint occurred the pharmacist has taken
certain rehabilitative steps including upgrading
his operating systems and
attending continuing professional education.
particulars of the complaint have been proven including those not admitted by
the pharmacist and the Board finds that the pharmacist
engaged in conduct which
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment or care in the
practice of pharmacy.
pharmacist was reprimanded and educative orders were imposed including the
submission of written dispensing process, a related
tutorial presentation and
inspection/audit of such procedures. The pharmacist was required to obtain and
maintain Quality Care pharmacy
Program Accreditation for any pharmacy in which
he has a pecuniary interest with annual assessments for 3 years following
accreditation
and assessment results being provided to the Board. The costs of
complying with these orders are to be borne by the pharmacist.
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee (the "Committee")
held on the 15th of June 2007 into a Complaint of professional misconduct
the provisions of the Pharmacy Act (the "Act") by Kym Ayscough (the
"Complainant") against Maged Sedrak (the "Respondent").
THE COMPLAINT
That Maged Sedrak has been guilty of professional
misconduct within the meaning of section 19A of the Act in that the Respondent
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment or care in the
practice of pharmacy pursuant to Section 19A(a) of the
Particulars of Complaint
Respondent was at all relevant times the sole proprietor of the Pharmacy and the
pharmacist in charge.
25th February 2004, the Respondent in the course of dispensing a paediatric
prescription written for Claudia Querin, a 20 months
old child, for a restricted
substance, namely, Prednisolone as Redipred sol 30ml 5mg/ml:
to ascertain the child's age or date of birth and body weight in that no
relevant inquiry was made of her parent/carer by or
on behalf of the
Respondent;
to ensure that the medication as dispensed, was given to the infant patient's
parent/carer in that an assistant place the dispensed
bottle of medication into
a box to which a directions label for another (adult) patient, dated 23 December
2003, was affixed and
handed both to the patient's
parent/carer;
to ensure the application of a proper dispensing procedure in that without any
or any adequate supervision by the Respondent,
dispensed medication was placed
by an assistant, into the box to which as described above, a label for another
(adult) patient was
already affixed and handed to the
parent/carer;
reason of the patient's parent/carer receiving the dispensed bottle in the box
to which an inappropriate label was affixed as described
above, the Respondent
facilitated an excessive dose of the medication to be administered to the infant
patient contrary to the dose
prescribed;
to counsel the patient's parent/carer as to the dosage and administration of the
medication including its proper administration
with or after food;
to apply to the dispensed medication an appropriate ancillary label "take with
or after food"
17 March 2004, the Respondent in the course of dispensing a restricted
substance, namely Flomax capsules on a prescription written
by Dr R H Farnsworth
for five(5) Flomax tablets for a 10 year old patient, Olivia
to confirm by inquiring of the prescriber, the intended use of Flomax in a
female child when the Respondent knew or ought to
have known, that the approved
indication for the medication was for the treatment of a prostatic
to satisfy himself as to the therapeutic purpose of the supply of Flomax
prescribed for the particular patient contrary to
clause 53 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
in circumstances where the Respondent knew or
ought to have known of its approved indication in the treatment of a prostatic
supplying a restricted substance, namely, thirty (30) Flomax capsules the
Respondent exceeded the prescribed amount of five (5)
tablets, such supply of
twenty five (25) capsules being contrary to
Section 10(3)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
to counsel the patient's mother adequately or at all, on the administration of
the medication including the dosage instructions
and the mechanism needed to
deliver half a capsule to the patient especially when the mother was expecting
medication in a tablet
form in accordance with the prescribers advice to
on 18 March 2004, in the circumstances, to respond in a timely and professional
manner to the mothers query regarding the administration
of a half-capsule dose
to her daughter.
12 June 2005, the Respondent supplied two restricted substances, namely,
Chlorsig eye ointment and Chlorsig eye drops to Mrs Rebecca
Rowan for the
treatment of conjunctivitis in her 20 month old son, Franklin Rowan, in
circumstances where such supply occurred other
than on the order, direction or
prescription of a medical practitioner, contrary to
Section 10(3)
and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
for the Complainant tendered with the consent of the Respondent the following
material which became the exhibits:
folder of the Complainant’s documents;
labelled bottle and labelled box of Redipred related to particular
statement from the Respondent including annexures;
references in support of the Respondent;
hand-written reference from Mr Henry Best in support of the Respondent.
Initially this reference did not refer to the author being
aware of the matter
before the Committee. However, the reference was subsequently amended to reflect
the author’s knowledge
of proceedings.
The Respondent gave evidence, was cross-examined and
answered questions by the Committee members.
The Respondent, through his Counsel said that he:
Accepts globally that he is guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of the Act
However, the Respondent did not admit particulars 2(a), 2(e), 3(b), 3(d),
In respect of particular 2(a), the Respondent’s evidence was
unsatisfactory. His evidence in letters to the Board was that
assistants asked Querin:
(page one, letter from the Respondent to Pharmacy Board dated the
of May 2004) and that the medication had been
dispensed correctly except for the fact that it had been placed inside the
box. He told the Board on the 20th of October 2004 that he did not
always check the dose when dispensing medication for children
and he could not
recall whether he checked the dose when he dispensed the Redipred for Querin on
the 25th of February 2004. He agreed
that he did not counsel Mr Querin and
the medication was handed to him by one of the pharmacy assistants. He told the
Board on the
30th of April 2006 in a letter to it that all the relevant
information:
must have been collected from Mr Querin, particularly there
was no History of Medication file on the computer available for
Miss Claudia
Querin, this created a need to ask and record these
information
He sets out in that letter a procedure when dispensing medication for a
child. He points to the fact that the medication dispensed
was not for an
adult, it was for another child. In his statement dated 7th of June 2007 he
says at paragraph 32:
I accept that I should have taken more care and ensured the
assistant did not place the dispensed medication in the box for another
He refers to measures he has put in place to make sure that all unwanted or
expired medication boxes and immediate containers are
disposed of
immediately.
He does not refer to the importance of taking the proper history relevant to
this particular of the Complaint. Mr Regoli, Peer Reviewer,
in his report
of the 17th of August 2005 sets out:
Dispensing for an infant or children requires extra checks to be
performed. Some medications may be inappropriate for infants or
their dose may
change with changes in body weight
He found the Respondent’s action, or inaction, to be a departure from
the standard expected of the general body of peers of
good repute and competence
and that such a departure would expose the patient to possible danger from an
inappropriate dose. He
felt that the departure would invite moderate
disapproval. The Respondent has focused on what happened in a practical sense
the medication to be placed in the incorrect box rather than on the
importance of proper practice and procedures to be followed not
only by him but
by his staff. The Respondent said:
I felt embarrassed like no other way any time in my life. This is
a disgrace for me
In cross-examination the Respondent was asked:
Did you engage in any counselling with Mrs Querin when she
presented the prescription?
The Respondent replied:
I’m not sure, really. I’m not sure because what I
really remember is that she left the script while I was in the chemist,
collected by the girl..., and they collected the information from her father and
they left it with the other ones, you know to be
dispensed. When I looked at
it, the name, how old, how many kilos and I found it, it is within the
The Respondent said the information was gathered on his behalf by someone
else. He said that:
We don’t make a record of it. We have like a bit of a
sticker, a piece of paper. Written on it, it has how old, what is the
information
He said he does not keep the information after dispensing really. He said
that whatever is important on the piece of paper is supposed
to be in the
computer including age and weight. He then said the computer would have the
age. He was not sure about how many kilograms.
He confirmed that he did not
provide a computer profile printout in respect of the child Querin to the Board.
He agreed the Patient
Profile printout did not disclose the patient’s age
and said that he operated an AMFAC system where there was a space for the
and the address and the phone number, if there was any allergy and how old. He
said that he could not print that document out.
The Respondent’s evidence on this issue was clearly not satisfactory.
The Committee does not accept that the Respondent has
a full understanding of
the importance of taking proper particulars from a patient, recording history
and generally having in place
proper procedures and protocols. It is not
satisfactory to the Committee that the Respondent maintains relevant information
obtained from the patient carer but that he could not be sure exactly what
that was, where it was recorded and if it was recorded
correctly. Accordingly,
the Committee finds this particular proved.
In respect to particular 2(e) the Respondent’s evidence was
inconsistent and again not satisfactory. He states in a letter to
May 2004 (Page 2 paragraph 1):
when Mr Querin attended the pharmacy to collect the medication, the
shop assistant read the label for him, as it is essential part
before handling
any prescription is to make everyone collecting a script for himself [herself]
or for someone else is always fully
aware of the dose intended to be used or if
there is any medications of the counter which should not to be taken while on
the dispensed
medication..
In another letter dated 30
April 2006 (Page 2
paragraph 1):
on handing out the prescription the pharmacy assistant read the
label .......
Furthermore, under cross-examination the Respondent admits that if he had
used his own dispensing procedure, the incorrectly labelled
box would never have
been given to the patient’s carer. The Respondent was asked:
According to your own system had you counselled that parent they
would not have got the box?
In two Dispensary and Dispensing Procedure reviews conducted on the
of April 2004 and the 4
of June 2004 by Pharmacy Board inspector Allan Bear the Respondent answered
Question 3(b) Page 5:
How is the pharmacist involved in
counselling?
In the review of the 8
of April 2004, the
Respondent answered the following:
1 Patient requests
3 Special Needs e.g. After food, Take for a certain time
4. ...........
In the further review of the 4
of June, 2004, the
Respondent answered:
1 New Medications
Clearly, the dispensing of Redipred falls within the criteria set out by the
Respondent for the pharmacist to be involved in counselling.
Yet on three
occasions he has failed to satisfy the Committee that any adequate counselling
has taken place and therefore the Committee
finds this particular proved.
In respect of particular 3(b), the Respondent gave evidence that he had
acquired knowledge of the use of Tamsulosin (Flomax) in women
from conferences
he had attended in Sydney in 2003 and in Houston in 2004. In support of this the
Respondent talked about studies
that had been carried out in Europe and America.
Copies of these studies were supplied as annexure 'D' in the Respondent’s
statement. The Respondent said:
I think what they said is that there was successful trials in
Europe currently conducted regarding blah, blah, blah and results will
announced shortly, and that's what they said and PCCA in Sydney. When I went to
Houston in 2004 yeah, there was the web site
at that time that would make it
accessible information for.
The Respondent states on several occasions that multiple sites were studying
the effect of Tamsulosin on the female urethra. The Respondent
Three different groups of people are researching the same
The Respondent answered:
Correct, that's my understanding, yes.
On closer examination, it was established that multiple copies of the same
small study had been submitted by the Respondent from different
sources. The
Respondent gave evidence to the Committee that the multiple copies were separate
studies. This was clearly not the case.
Further, it was established that this
study was not accepted for publication until April 2004.
At a meeting with the Pharmacy Board on the 20
October, 2004 the Respondent informed the Board that Flomax was indicated for
treatment of urinary tract infections.
The Committee does not accept that the Respondent had a full understanding of
the uses and applications of Flomax at the time of dispensing
in March 2004,
which was prior to the publication of the article the Respondent says he relied
upon. Accordingly, the Committee
finds this particular proven.
In respect of particular 3(d), the Respondent’s evidence was sparse,
save to say the Respondent said he was not afforded the
opportunity to counsel
due to the patient’s mother’s desire to leave the pharmacy. The
Committee accepts that while
this certainly created difficulties, there were
opportunities the following day via telephone and in person to provide adequate
counselling.
In respect of particular 3(e), the Respondent gave evidence that he was not
given a chance to explain about the administration of
half capsule doses. The
Respondent was asked:
The opportunity was lost by you to convey to her what had to
The Respondent answered:
“Not by me. I went to explain and because of the situation that she
don't have any intention to wait because she was late,
she didn't give me a
Mr. Albert Regoli in his peer review report dated
August 2005 (page 8) was of the opinion that a
general body of peers of good repute and competence would treat a customer
as a priority. The Committee agrees that a disputes resolution
procedure along the lines of that suggested in the QCPP would also
have helped
resolve the situation in a timely manner. Furthermore such a procedure may well
have prevented the unprofessional situation
that occurred where the Respondent
and Mrs. Fricot traded insults regardless of how angry or impatient they
Mr. Regoli was also of the opinion:
“part of the reason for the delay may be the workload placed on the
pharmacist...”
The Committee agrees that the volume of prescriptions and the level of
staffing as outlined in the Pharmacy Board Dispensary and Dispensing
Review of the 8
of April, 2004 would have made it
very difficult to discharge all dispensing and counseling requirements in a
timely manner.
Accordingly, the Committee finds the particular proven.
Mr Sedrak through his counsel has admitted all other particulars of the
complaint. No witnesses were called for cross examination
by the Respondent in
relation to the position he adopted in regard to any of the particulars.
Submissions - Complainant
The counsel for the complainant submitted
There are some
strikingly inconsistent facts asserted by the Respondent in contest with what
family members have to say;
Some of these
inconsistencies have been explained in evidence but more importantly the
Respondent has, through his counsel, conceded
the particulars of these
Complaints;
The Respondent
has had some significant memory failures and some systematic failures;
The degree of
supervision of the Respondent could have lead to serious adverse
consequences;
There was too
great a readiness to look for reasons to go beyond the law in supply of
restricted substances;
There is a need
to be reminded of the principles that apply to good professional practice if
sorrow is going to override the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
The Pharmacy
Boards role is to protect the community and commensurate with that is the need
for the availability of careful, competent
and law observing pharmacists.
A list of suggested orders was submitted to the Committee. The
Committee accepts that:
were inconsistencies in the evidence given by the Respondent;
Respondent’s preparedness to go beyond the law in the Rowan matter is of
great concern to the Committee as is the fact he
allowed himself to be
overwhelmed by Mrs Fricot.
Respondent has had some memory failures that have also resulted in some
inconsistencies in evidence. An example of such an inconsistency
in evidence is
the Respondent’s evidence that he took a telephone call from Dr. Favalero
but that Dr. Favalero denies making.
Submissions - Respondent
Counsel for the Respondent submitted that:
The Respondent
is very passionate about pharmacy and in particular compounding;
The Respondent
has an earnest interest learning and developing new skills in compounding;
volition the Respondent has attended seminars relating to his interests;
Inadvertence in
care with a very busy pharmacy has lead to dispensing errors;
The Respondent
is a proud man who is quite emotional about the allegations.
The Respondent
accepts that no-one is above the law.
It has been a
very busy two or three years and the Respondent doesn't necessarily remember all
of the events and has misplaced some
of the events in his memory.
It was beyond
the Respondents health or ability to maintain a very busy pharmacy as it
previously was.
The Respondent
has decided to move his life into a different area of pharmacy practice.
There have been
no other Complaints brought to the Board for discipline apart from the three
being dealt with now.
The Respondent
is willing to comply with the list of suggested orders submitted by the
Complainant, save for the fact that the Respondent
requests that the suggested
degree of reprimand be reduced from “severe reprimand” to
“reprimand”.
The Committee accepts that:
Respondent is very passionate about pharmacy and the practice of compounding in
particularly. This was clear from the evidence
given and observing him in the
witness box;
Committee was shown evidence of upgrading of operating systems within the
Pharmacy an example of this being the need for a faxed
order to be provided
before a restricted substance is supplied.
Respondent has voluntarily participated in Continuing Education.
Respondent is willing to comply with whatever the Board decides is necessary to
upgrade his pharmacy practice to a level that
is commensurate with public
expectation and the protection of it.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, including
admissions of the Respondent, documents and cross-examination of the Respondent,
the Board is comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities (Bannister v
1993 30 NSW LR 699)
that all of the particulars of the complaint have
been proved including those not admitted by the Respondent, to its reasonable
satisfaction
and that the conduct constitutes Professional Misconduct, in that
the Board finds that the Respondent has engaged in conduct which
demonstrated a
lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgement or care in the practice of pharmacy
pursuant to section 19A(a) of the
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, it is a protective one. The Board is
concerned to protect the interests of the public and minimise
the risk of future
breaches. Accordingly, the Board makes the following orders:
Maged Sedrak is reprimanded for his lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgement
and care in the supply of restricted substances.
Particularly in the cases of
substances for paediatric use and the necessary counselling to parents/carers on
the proper use of such
substances.
Maged Sedrak is required to complete in each of the years 2008, 2009 and 2010 at
least 30 hours of continuing Professional Education
(CPE),approved by the Board,
of which at least 15 hours of each year is to be in a lecture, seminar, workshop
or other contact activity.
Furthermore, 10 hours of this CPE must relate to
areas of pharmacy practice other than those related to
compounding.
At the conclusion of each year, Mr Sedrak is to submit
to the Pharmacy Board documented evidence of the CPE he has completed during
Maged Sedrak is to present to the Board within three months written procedures
outlining the complete dispensing process that
will be adopted in any
pharmacy(s) he has a pecuniary interest in over the next three years. These
procedures must include but are
not limited to
of details of age and weight for children;
criteria for counselling patient/carer for the supply of restricted
substances.
A tutorial outlining the above procedures is
to be presented to the Board within 4 months of the procedures being initially
made available.
Mr Sedrak is to submit to the inspection/audit of these procedures by a Board
approved pharmacist at least six times in the three
years following these orders
becoming effective.
18 months from the effective date of these orders Mr Sedrak is to obtain and
maintain Quality Care Pharmacy Program (QCPP)
Accreditation for any pharmacy(s)
in which he has a pecuniary interest.
Following accreditation, Mr
Sedrak is to submit to an external Standards Maintenance Assessment annually for
a period of three years.
The results of such assessment are to be provided to
the Board within one month of completion.
Mr Sedrak will be responsible for all costs involved in complying with these
Orders. The effective date of these Orders will be one
month from the date on
which the Respondent is notified by Registered Post at his address as it appears
on the Register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter