URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2017/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Draper [2017] NSWMHRT 2; (31 May 2017)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO DRAPER AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
20 JULY 2017
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2017] NSWMHRT 2
s 68(2) Review of person apprehended under s 68
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dr Rob McMurdo
Psychiatrist
Ms Diana Bell
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
Hearing Room 1, MHRT
APPLICATION:
Unconditional Release
1. Having determined pursuant to
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act 1990
that neither the safety of Alistair Draper nor that of
any member of the public would be seriously endangered by his unconditional
release, that an independent forensic psychiatric report is also of that opinion
and having regard to the other matters to which
sections 43
Tribunal determines that Alistair Draper be unconditionally released.
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dated 31 May
1. This is the 36
review of Alistair Draper who is a forensic
patient. In 2017 the Tribunal issued a
Order for Apprehension for
detention in a forensic hospital. Mr Draper’s current order for detention
interim order on Adjournment signed by the Tribunal with access
to escorted day leave. Prior to the Tribunal issuing a
Apprehension Mr Draper was conditionally released by order of the Tribunal but
remained detained in a forensic hospital.
2. Mr Draper’s treating team is seeking unconditional release at this
3. Mr Draper was found not guilty by reason of mental illness and was ordered
to be detained.
TRIBUNAL REQUIREMENTS
4. This is a review pursuant to
section 46(1)
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(“the Act”). Under
Tribunal is required to review the case of each forensic patient every six
months. On such a review the Tribunal may make orders
as to the patient’s
continued detention, care or treatment or the patient’s release.
5. The Act has special evidentiary requirements in relation to leave or
release which must be satisfied before the Tribunal can grant
leave or release.
In view of this, the Tribunal requires notice of applications for leave or
release to ensure that the necessary
evidence is available. This process also
enables the Tribunal to provide notice of such applications to the Minister for
the Attorney General, and any registered victims who are entitled to
make submissions concerning any proposed leave or release. A
notice was provided
to the Tribunal prior to this review for an application for unconditional
6. The Tribunal must be satisfied pursuant to
Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(a) the safety of the patient or any member of the public will not be
seriously endangered by the patient’s release, and
(b) other care of a less restrictive kind, that is consistent with safe
and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available
to the patient or
that the patient does not require care.
7. Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must consider the principles of care and treatment under
Mental Health Act 2007
as well as the following matters under
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
when determining what
order to make:
(a) whether the person is suffering from a mental illness or other mental
(b) whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that care,
treatment or control of the person is necessary for the person’s
protection from serious harm or the protection of others from serious harm,
(c) the continuing condition of the person, including any likely
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects
such deterioration,
(d) in the case of a proposed release, a report by a forensic psychiatrist
or other person of a class prescribed by the regulations,
who is not currently
involved in treating the person, as to the condition of the person and whether
the safety of the person or any
member of the public will be seriously
endangered by the person’s release,
(e) in the case of the proposed release of a forensic patient subject to a
limiting term, whether or not the patient has spent sufficient
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
8. The Tribunal considered documentary material and reports, an exhibit list
of which is held on the Tribunal’s files
9. Mr Draper attended the hearing by videolink and was represented by his
lawyer of the Mental Health Advocacy Service. Also in attendance
Counsel for the
Attorney General;
Solicitor for
the Attorney General.
By videolink from the forensic hospital:
Psychiatrist;
Psychologist;
Nursing Unit
Manager( by telephone);
Occupational
Therapist; and,
By telephone:
Psychiatrist; and,
Forensic Psychiatrist;
By telephone from Queensland:
CIRCUMSTANCES
Notice of Intent
10. The Consultant Psychiatrist, filed a Notice of Intent. It sought
unconditional release for Alistair Draper.
11. There is a comprehensive medical report from the Consultant Psychiatrist
currently treating Mr Draper.
12. She documents Mr Draper’s forensic history which includes minor
summary offences. The only significant offence is the offence
which was the
subject of the index event when Mr Draper was charged with an armed robbery.
13. The treating psychiatrist noted that Mr Draper had been asked to develop
his own goals. He “
identified being in a warmer climate and being
closer to his family as high priorities, also identifying a desire for
employment and
intimate relationships to help provide additional stability in
his rehabilitation.”
14. Mr Draper’s treating psychiatrist documented the many years of
unsuccessful attempted conditional releases, time in the
Forensic Hospital,
residential drug treatment programs and periods at Bloomfield Hospital. He again
breached conditional release
last year. His conditional release was reinstated
early this year and he absconded two days later.
15. Since his most recent admission his mental state has remained stable
without any evidence of psychotic features. Although he denies
thoughts or plans
of self-harm or harm to others, his “
insight into his risk for violence
is poor and he minimises the impact his illness and personality has on himself
and those around
16. The diagnosis offered by his treating psychiatrist is Bipolar Affective
Disorder, Substance Abuse and Dependence as well as narcissistic
personality/Cluster B traits.
17. In dealing with the risk assessment, his treating psychiatrist refers to
Mr Draper as “
a 39 year old man who committed a single violent act
which resulted in psychological distress but no physical harm, almost 15 years
The event “
occurred in the context of illicit substance
use and homelessness
.” The major issue over his rehabilitation has
“his impulsive drug and alcohol use, which has led to sabotage of
his recovery goals on a number of occasions
.” His treating
psychiatrist added that “
good control of his mental illness has not
previously been sufficient to ensure good compliance with rules or
rehabilitation
.” Significantly, his treating psychiatrist offered the
that the probability of him committing a violent act in the
future is low and the gravity of any such act is unlikely to be severe.”
18. Furthermore, his treating psychiatrist offers this opinion:
“He has made minimal progress despite 16 years of inpatient
treatment. His risk when he became a Forensic Patient at the age
related to his personality, drug use and untreated mental illness. The
likelihood of him acting recklessly is high (using
illicit substances, gambling,
infidelity, offending family and friends) but the severity of the subsequent
violence is likely to
19. His treating psychiatrist refers to this and adds that on each occasion
except the first “
the breach was a result of his personality disorder
and not his mental illness.”
As his treating psychiatrist says, given
that Mr Draper’s life goals include the continued use of ICE and cannabis,
impossible to reconcile conditions of release around these life
” He will continue to “
fail to take responsibility for
his actions and blame others (the forensic system) for each failure.”
therefore not make any progress.”
Referring to each
episode of absconding and before the index event, his treating psychiatrist said
that Mr Draper “
has sought professional help when within the
unity.” Despite his drug use, non-compliance and alienating
himself from social supports, “
he did not commit any violent
” She said that Mr Draper
“likes to access help and
support on his own terms and he has proved that he does this successfully when
She expressed the opinion “
that if he were granted
unconditional release he would voluntarily access support around his drug and
alcohol issues and his mental
.“ This, treating psychiatrist
would reduce his risk
20. Again addressing risk, treating psychiatrist refers correctly to the
importance of distinguishing between the likelihood of violence
and the gravity
of the risk. She adds that “
the gravity of the risk is low
in Mr Draper’ case.
21. The treating psychiatrist says this:
“In Mr Draper’s case, based on the extensive evidence that we
have about his behaviour when he has absconded, we can say
with some conviction
that if he were to relapse into drug use, fail to take his medication and engage
in an itinerant lifestyle,
that he may behave recklessly (having unprotected
sex, sharing needles, driving intoxicated, alienate his friends and family) but
he is unlikely to commit a serious violent act, as he has never done this
22. Acknowledging that her position is “counter intuitive”, the
treating psychiatrist expresses the view that “
unconditional release in
this case may reduce the risk to the community as he is aware that there would
not be the safety net of the
Forensic system. If he spent all his money
irresponsibly, if he committed an offence or used drugs and became mentally
.” The treating psychiatrist concludes with her opinion
that his risks could be safely managed without the need for the
forensic order and within the civil mental health services and the
justice system
.” She proposes a management plan for unconditional
release noting a return to live with his cousin and seeking local support
form of drug and alcohol counselling and a general practitioner and community
health services and leisure.
23. There is a report from the NSW Community Forensic Mental Health Service
(CFMHS) regarding Mr Draper’ proposed unconditional
release. It was
prepared by a Forensic Psychologist, and a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist.
They too recite Mr Draper’s forensic
history. They conclude with the
opinion that Mr Draper “
has an established diagnosis of Bipolar 1
”. They add that he “
presents with problematic
and met the “
criteria for cannabis and amphetamine
.” They also note he “
presents with Cluster B
personality traits
”. They add that his “
problem behaviour is
best described as reactive aggression.”
However they add that the
“reported aggression has been limited to a time when mentally unwell
and it does not appear to be a long-standing trait.”
24. In relation to self-harm they say that Mr Draper
falls into a group of people who cause low clinical concern.
presents with a high loading of historical factors and a low
loading of dynamic factors that are associated with a potential for future
episodes of reactive aggression.
” But they add that these factors
“need to be viewed in terms of their specific relevance to Mr
Draper’ history of violent offending
.” They note the context of
the index event and his repeated lapse into substance use but add that despite
those episodes “
Mr Draper has not perpetrated any further violence and
has repeatedly self-presented to emergency services for
treatment.”
25. Significantly the authors expressed this opinion :
“As such it is our opinion based on 16 years of monitoring from
forensic mental health services, that whilst it is considered
that Mr Draper
presents with a high risk of relapse into substance use and thus mental
instability, the link between this and the
serious endangerment of himself or
others has not been demonstrated, supporting the view that his risk of violent
reoffending is
currently low while he remains engaged with
treatment.”
26. They note his mental illness and express the opinion that there are
reasonable grounds that Mr Draper requires care, treatment and control
for his own protection and the protection of others from serious
If inadequately treated, his “
condition is likely to
deteriorate and will thus pose a risk to himself and others.
Nevertheless, they express the opinion that “
on the balance of
probabilities, the safety of Mr Draper and/or the public is unlikely to be
seriously endangered were he to be Unconditionally
Released into the community
provided the management plan proposed is adhered to.”
They expressed
the opinion
“that community placement with a Community Treatment Order
is considered to offer a safe and effective level of care of the
restrictive nature and that he requires such care.”
They go on to
recommend a Community Treatment Order to ensure his ongoing compliance
with treatment as he transitions into a community placement
27. They support the application for unconditional release and
“recommend that Mr Draper complies with all aspects of a Community
Treatment Order that includes the proposed treatment recommendations.”
They consider that proposed treatment to be “
of the least restrictive
kind to ensure Mr Draper’ ongoing compliance with treatment as he
transitions into community placement.”
They recommend abstinence from
alcohol and illicit substances and make a long list of recommendations for Mr
Draper as he reintegrates
into the community.
28. There is a report from a Clinical Nurse Consultant. She notes that Mr
“rapport with staff is superficial and he denies suicidal
or homicidal thoughts or intent
.” She adds that the treating team has
seen no evidence of either. She added that the treating team “
to discuss progress and plan the complex and ongoing rehabilitation and recovery
care pathway for Mr Draper
29. There is a psychological report (annexing earlier reports) from a
Clinical Psychologist. He notes that Mr Draper’ “
responses to
rehabilitation initiatives are highly questionable”
becomes problematic when considering what the nature of his discharge
journey must be.”
His final position was to ask the MHRT “
provide guidance on what Mr Draper’s discharge journey needs to
.” In an earlier report the Clinical Psychologist thought that
an ideal solution is not regrettably available.
” He thought
the likelihood of his risk profile (regarding his index offence) being
elevated to high, is currently unlikely.
” On the other hand,
his risk profile for drug related offending and vehicle related
offences is high.”
30. A Social Worker provided a report. She supported “
team’s submission for unconditional release.
” She too thought
that Mr Draper would understand that there would be no safety net or backing by
the forensic system and that
will be good for Alistair to make some
of his own decisions and to take full responsibility for them
“shown in the past that he will access support as he needs and as per
the detailed medical report the risks associated with
behaviours can be safely managed within the civil mental health
31. There is a report from a Diversional Therapist. She too refers to his
history of absconding
” but that “
reoffended in using violence.
“thought that the
probability of him reoffending in the future would be low
pointed out that the treating team thought that the absence of a forensic backup
“may activate him to modify his risk taking behaviour, or take greater
responsibility for his actions.”
She supported the application for
unconditional release.
32. There was a report from an Occupational Therapist. She pointed out that
Mr Draper has not acted violently or aggressively as a patient on
[the] Unit, nor when he has been in the community, both when on
approved leave
and during periods of absconding.”
She added that
has not harmed himself or others directly when he has absconded or during
periods of leave.”
She thought his functional capacity and lack of
violent offending since the index event met the requirements of
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
33. There was a letter from Mr Draper’s cousin. They had a close
relationship growing up and lived together with the family
from the age of 16.
She lives with her 16 year old son, with whom Mr Draper is close. She pointed
out that she has been a support
person for him over the last 17 years and that
“has a large support system in [X] with the majority of his
family living here and through the relationships he has developed
siblings and their children
.” She said the intention was that
“[Alistair] live with me in the short term to provide him sufficient
time to find appropriate accommodation in [X].”
She has found a GP who
will bulk bill and support groups nearby. She said she was aware of her
“medical conditions and I have the ability to identify
these in their early stages.
” Being his support person over so many
I have always taken a strong stand and hard line with
” There would be “
no tolerance at all when it comes to
the use of drugs and alcohol within my home”
and Mr Draper knows that.
She pointed out that she directs a childcare centre and that both she and Mr
Draper were aware that it
“detrimental to my career and to my
son if Alistair was to participate in drugs and alcohol while living with
At the hearing
34. His treating Psychiatrist was asked whether her patient’s risk was
increasing or fixed over the last five or six years.
She said that the risk was
static and that the risk of serious harm to the public had not been elevated. It
was helped by having
the medication in depot form which provided a stable dose.
She emphasised the pattern of Mr Draper’s behaviour of seeking help
past. If he reverted to substance use then he was likely to seek help with drug
and alcohol counselling. Any unconditional
release would involve liaison with
local mental health services and a discharge summary.
35. His treating psychiatrist acknowledged the obvious risks with consumption
of illicit substances both from the harmful effects
of the substances themselves
and the impact of the environment in which they were taken. But again she
acknowledged that Mr Draper,
based on his past habits, was likely to seek help
and treatment.
36. Asked whether Mr Draper was untreatable in an inpatient setting, his
treating psychiatrist did not agree that he would be untreatable
but said that
there was no benefit in an inpatient setting without access to the community.
Treatment does not need to be provided
in an inpatient setting.
37. His treating psychiatrist was further of the opinion that Mr
Draper’s reckless behaviour was more to do with his personality
to do with failing to take responsibility. Behaviour based on personality
factors is likely to improve with age. Mr Draper
is turning 40 later this year.
She expressed it by saying that Mr Draper will pose less risk to the public aged
40 than when he was
38. She said that Mr Draper’s mental state had settled quickly after
illicit drug taking and the Paliperidone medication helped
as a protection
against relapse into mania. His mental illness was not very fragile and was well
added that if Paliperidone was stopped then
it would not lead to an increase in the risk of harm to others. She added that
endangerment to others was not present in this case. The one violent
episode was the index event which caused a psychological but
no physical harm
and there had been no other instances of violence since then. She thought that a
further violent offence was very
39. She said the continued hospital treatment was not adding any value and
would not help the risk.
40. Asked about conditional release as a preliminary step, his treating
psychiatrist expressed the opinion that Mr Draper does not
require conditions to
manage any risk to the community. She emphasised that Mr Draper has breached his
conditional release time and
again without any risk to the public. His treatment
and management can be done by community health services. She expressed the view
that on conditional release community mental health support was the most
appropriate course.
41. The Clinical Director
agreed with the treating
psychiatrist’s summation on the question of risk. He thought that the risk
to the community was less
than the risk to Mr Draper himself. But the risk to Mr
Draper himself was more along the lines of spending money and putting his
accommodation at risk. He referred to an instance of driving under the influence
but acknowledged that very many other people
posed the same risk.
42. The independent psychiatrist was asked questions about Mr Draper being
released on a Community Treatment Order. He explained that
references in his
report were not meant to be a proposal for a Community Treatment Order release.
A Community Treatment Order would
merely add an extra level of certainty.
43. On the other hand, the treating psychiatrist expressed the view that a
Community Treatment Order would still not be justified
even if he were to be
released within this State. She based this on Mr Draper’s history of
always voluntarily complying with
treatment, the severity of his illness and his
good insight.
44. The Clinical Director did not think that a Community Treatment Order
would add value. Mr Draper has not been non-compliant and
even if he was
breached for drug use he would then be released. A Community Treatment Order
would not add to the strength of his
45. The treating psychiatrist emphasised that her assessment was not made on
the basis that Mr Draper would be released on a Community
Treatment Order.
46. The independent psychiatrist agreed that there was no change in his risk
assessment of Mr Draper if there was no Community Treatment
Order. He emphasised
that the question of serious endangerment was not the main point. There was no
suicide risk and all the clinicians
agreed that there was no risk to the public.
He said what was at the heart of the unconditional release application was the
that the public was not seriously endangered. He acknowledged some risk of
self-harm by indifference or recklessness but queried
the magnitude of the
resulting harm. There are numerous episodes of illegal drug taking in his past
and although all his relapses
were assisted by drugs, there were other occasions
when the use of drugs produced no relapse. It was important to take into account
the pattern of Mr Draper’s behaviour before and after the index event. Of
all the relapses, none was associated with any violence,
reckless behaviour or
endangerment to himself or the public. Looking at the index event, it was
affected by his mental illness and
intoxication. He was impressed by Mr
Draper’s own reflections on the event and his remorse. He pointed to the
absence of criminogenic
history and behaviour and attitudes. He was of the view
that Mr Draper is not an habitual criminal. Over the last 16 years Mr Draper
had plenty of exposure and opportunity to commit acts of violence but it has not
happened. Over that time the risk of such an
event being repeated has become
reduced, perhaps to the point of absence. As he said, the risk of repetition was
very high the day
after the index event but has changed over 16 years with Mr
Draper’s behaviour and attitude. The index event could be described
bizarre and connected with delusions and driven by financial need.
47. Mr Draper’s cousin was asked how she would cope if there was a
problem. She emphasised the importance of family support
and mental health
services. She said he had lots of family support and has had contact with Mr
Draper’s mother.
48. Finally, Mr Draper himself said that the traffic incident involved him
being pulled over for a U turn and making an admission
to the police about drug
use some weeks before. The charge of driving under the influence of drugs was
later dropped through lack
of evidence. There is documentary evidence to support
Submissions
49. Counsel for the Attorney General referred to her written submissions
dated 1 May 2017. She made the additional submission that
she would take
instructions about the enforceability of a NSW Community Treatment Order
interstate. She urged the Tribunal to act
with caution pointing out that usually
patients were not unconditionally released without at least six months of
conditional release
beforehand. She said there is evidence of high risk
behaviours (drug taking) and pointed out what that can do to Mr Draper and the
community. She pointed out the number of relapses to do with drugs and alcohol
and leading to chaotic behaviour.
50. Mr Draper’s solicitor, referred the Tribunal to
section 53(3A)
Mental Health Act
and argued that a Community Treatment Order would
not be available in this case. Her client is suffering not so much from mental
as a substance abuse problem. She pointed out that her client in those
circumstances is insightful, follows directions and turns
up to hospital. Prior
history demonstrated that he survives the risks associated with substance abuse.
He has never been in an intensive
care unit or presented at hospital with broken
bones and there has never been any application for a Financial Management Order
his gambling habit. She pointed out that the only evidence of violence
was the index event itself and that the risk was reduced by
her client’s
increasing age with the risk changing for the better. How he behaved when absent
without leave was not criminally
violent in nature. She argued that pursuant to
section 43(b)
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
does not require care
.” She argued that there was no risk of
serious endangerment to her client or members of the public by his proposed
unconditional
Consideration
51. This is a case that poses an apparent conundrum. A man with a history of
regular breaches of conditional release, usually involving
drug taking, is now
asking for unconditional release. The answer to the apparent conundrum lies not
in summary dismissal of the application
as fanciful nor in granting the
application because he has exhausted his treating team’s efforts in
managing him. The answer
(to grant or to refuse the application) lies in the
careful addressing of the questions posed by the legislation relevant to such
application.
The legislative questions
52. As counsel for the Attorney General has pointed out in her written
submissions (1 May 2017), after our review under
of the Act we may
make an order as to Mr Draper’s “
continued detention, care or
treatment in a mental health facility”
(either unconditionally or subject to conditions)”
. Because the
application is for Mr Draper’ release, the “
Tribunal must not
make an order”
for his release “
unless it is satisfied, on
the evidence available to it”
of two things. The first is that
the safety of the patient or any member of the public will not be
seriously endangered “
by Mr Draper’s release. The second is
“other care of a less restrictive kind, that is consistent with
safe and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available”
Mr Draper or that the Mr Draper “
does not require care.”
Those requirements come from
of the Act.
53. If we make an order for Mr Draper’s unconditional release, he will
no longer be a forensic patient, as Counsel points out
(section 51).
ceases to be a forensic patient, Mr Draper “
must be discharged from the
mental health facility”
in which he is detained
(section 54).
54. Without limiting other matters,
of the Act provides that
the Tribunal must have regard”
, relevantly to this case, to
four matters. The first is whether Mr Draper “
is suffering from a
mental illness or other mental condition”
. The second is
whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that care,
treatment or control”
of Mr Draper “
is necessary”
own protection from serious harm or the protection of others
from serious harm”.
The third is Mr Draper’s
continuing condition ... including any likely
deterioration”
in that condition “
and the likely effects of
any such deterioration”.
The fourth is a report by a forensic
psychiatrist not involved in treating Mr Draper as to Mr Draper’s
condition and whether
his safety or the safety of any member of the public
will be seriously endangered”
by Mr Draper’s
55. Relevant to the question posed by
of the Act about whether
anyone’s safety will be “
seriously endangered”
reminds the Tribunal of the decision of the Court of Appeal in
General for the State of New South Wales v XY
[2014] NSWCA 466.
Tribunal accepts Counsel’s statement of the effect of that decision in
this case that
“the Act implicitly requires a risk assessment, and that
such risk assessment involves weighing two factors: first, the likelihood
relevant risk eventuating; and, secondly, the magnitude of harm which would
result in such a case.”
considerations
56. Almost all the evidence points away from Mr Draper’s safety or the
safety of any member of the public being “
endangered”
by Mr Draper’s release. Pointing to Mr
Draper’s behaviour in the past, the opinion of his treating psychiatrist
the probability of him committing a violent act in the future
is low and the gravity of any such act is likely to be
the likelihood of him acting recklessly is
“severity of the subsequent violence is likely to
She adds that Mr Draper “
is unlikely to commit a
serious violent act, as he has never done this before.”
57. The independent psychiatrist, says that the risk of self-harm on the part
of Mr Draper is of “
low clinical concern”.
Although referring
to reactive aggression, the independent psychiatrist places weight on Mr
Draper’s history and the context
of the original event. In a cogently
expressed opinion “
based on 16 years of monitoring from forensic mental
health services”
, he says that the link between the high risk of Mr
Draper returning to substance use “
and the serious endangerment of
himself or others has not been demonstrated.”
That supports the view
that his risk of violent reoffending is currently low while he remains
engaged with treatment.”
He concludes that “
the safety of Mr
Draper and/or the public is unlikely to be seriously endangered”
his unconditional release. It is important to note a proviso to the independent
psychiatrist’s opinion that “
the management plan proposed is
adhered to.”
58. The Clinical Psychologist expresses a qualified opinion. A high risk
offence such as the index event “
is currently unlikely”
although he is at high risk of drug-related offending. One other qualified
opinion is the social worker who thinks that Mr Draper’s
behaviours can be safely managed within the civil mental health
Other health workers point to Mr Draper’s non-violent
behaviour when he has been at large.
59. The risk seems to be, according to Mr Draper’s treating
psychiatrist, reckless behaviour rather than violence. She attributes
Draper’s personality. It seems to the Tribunal that if the risk is the
result of personality rather than mental
illness or a mental condition then the
Tribunal would not be authorised to detain Mr Draper.
60. The Clinical Director agreed with the Treating Psychiatrist.
61. The independent psychiatrist’s qualification about a treatment plan
was explained during the hearing to mean that his opinion
was not dependent on
Mr Draper being on a Community Treatment Order. That would “
an extra level of certainty.”
The treating psychiatrist made it clear
that her opinion was not based upon a Community Treatment Order. The Clinical
Director agreed.
The Independent Psychiatrist added that there was no change in
his risk assessment if there is no Community Treatment Order.
62. The Tribunal must base its decisions “
on the evidence available
The evidence referred to above, in the Tribunal’s
opinion, points overwhelmingly to the public’s or Mr Draper’s
not being seriously endangered by his release.
63. Does Mr Draper require care any longer? The nature of the care in
question, in the Tribunal’s opinion, must be related to
why he is in
detention. He is in detention because he was found not guilty by reason of
mental illness of the charge he faced. Orders
for detention (which can be made
under section 39 of the Act by the Court or under other provisions by the
Tribunal) are not made
on the basis of a criminal offence but by reference to Mr
Draper’s mental illness. The Tribunal must always have regard (section
to whether a person “
is suffering from a mental illness or other mental
condition”.
Hence the Tribunal expects that any requirement for care
provided for by section 43(b) must be related to Mr Draper’s mental
64. There is evidence that Mr Draper requires ongoing care. His treating
psychiatrist thought that the antipsychotic medication afforded
a protection
against relapse into mania. His mental health was well supported by the
Paliperidone. The independent psychiatrist was
of the view that Mr Draper still
requires care.
65. Is there then available to Mr Draper “
other care of a less
restrictive kind, that is consistent with safe and effective care”
is such care appropriate? Again the evidence here points to a pattern of
behaviour on the part of Mr Draper. As his treating
psychiatrist said, he is
familiar with the hospital and community mental health systems and readily falls
back on them. When he has
been at large and in breach of his conditions, he
turns up at such facilities in order to seek help. The services of those
have been effective in the past. They are reasonably available in
Australia. It therefore seems to the Tribunal that although Mr
Draper requires
ongoing care for his mental illness, that care is reasonably available to him
within the community or at public hospitals
and that he is likely to resort to
it. The care provided is appropriate.
Section 74 considerations
66. By reference to section 74, it is clear from the psychiatric opinions
that Mr Draper suffers from a Bipolar Disorder as his main
mental illness. He
also has a Substance Dependence and Cluster B personality traits.
67. Although Mr Draper requires care and treatment (which can be provided in
the community) control of him, based on the evidence,
own protection from serious
harm or the protection of others from serious harm’.
His risk to
others is assessed as being low. There appears to be a sound basis for that
assessment, namely his behaviour over the
last 16 years both in detention and at
large, uninfluenced and influenced by illicit drugs.
68. Mr Draper’s mental illness will continue. His illness will
deteriorate if he resorts to illicit drugs. But soundly based
performance, he is likely to seek appropriate help in that event. Indeed his
treating psychiatrist acknowledged that although
the Paliperidone helped Mr
Draper’s mental illness, if it was stopped it would not lead to an
increase in the risk of harm
69. The independent psychiatrist supports the diagnosis referred to above and
expresses the opinion that the safety of Mr Draper or
any member of the public
will not be seriously endangered by his release.
70. Although the proposed unconditional release of Mr Draper is, as his
treating psychiatrist acknowledges, counter-intuitive, it
seems to the Tribunal
that almost all of the available evidence points one way on the critical
legislative issues.
71. Despite many episodes of drug and alcohol abuse and absconding, there is
no history of other significant criminal activity or
aggressive behaviour. The
only risk of harm is resumption of illicit drug use. He has done that a lot over
the years but has not
attracted attention from law enforcement agencies except
for a drug driving charge which was dismissed without evidence.
72. The Tribunal was somewhat concerned with the circumstance that the
treating team has sought only very limited leave for Mr Draper
but has also
applied for his unconditional release. This is part of the conundrum. It is
probably a realistic acknowledgement of
the failure of a process of conditional
release but also the need to prepare Mr Draper for unconditional release. As has
been pointed
out, those failures are related to his personality rather than his
mental illness.
73. The Tribunal considered conditional release on the understanding that a
further breach would result in Mr Draper being housed
in another facility. There
are two problems with this. The first is that realistically Mr Draper is likely
to breach the conditions,
despite the consequences. The second is that the
breaches would be unrelated to his mental health condition. The choice remains
leaving Mr Draper in indefinite detention (because of the real likelihood of
any conditional release being breached) or unconditional
release into the
community. The tests provided by the legislation are all fulfilled in Mr
Draper’s case. He will be yet another
drug addict in the community, like
many others. Like many drug addicts, he will pose very limited threats to
himself or others, apart
from the impact of the drugs on himself. Mr Draper has
a track record of resorting to the public health system to deal with the impact
of these breaches will have on his mental health. That is available and an
appropriate resort.
74. The Tribunal thought that the ideal solution would be to release Mr
Draper on a Community Treatment Order. However, as Counsel
for the Attorney
General points out in her written submissions dated 12 May 2017, Mr Draper is
likely to relapse with or without
a Community Treatment Order. A Community
Treatment Order, in the Tribunal’s view, would serve little utility in Mr
case. Not only that, he proposes to move interstate and, for the
reasons Counsel points out, it does not seem that a NSW Community
Order could be enforced interstate. The more realistic course is that proposed
by his treating psychiatrist that she would
speak to the community mental health
team where Mr Draper is likely to be living and advise them of his move into
their jurisdiction.
75. The Tribunal finds that Mr Draper meets all of the legislative
requirements for the proposed unconditional release and will order
His Honour Judge Richard Cogswell
Dated 31 May 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (368 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (101 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter