URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Young [2020] NSWMHRT 3; (1 July 2020)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO YOUNG AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
21 JULY 2021
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2020] NSWMHRT 3
s 37(1)(b) Review of
Involuntary Patient
Judge Paul Lakatos SC
DATE OF HEARING:
Mental Health Review Tribunal
1. Ms Young did not attend the hearing. She was represented by her
lawyer, Mr Callum Hair of MHAS. Also in attendance were:
Ms Georgina
Wright, Barrister (representing Ms Young);
Ms Rosalind
Acland, Crown Solicitors Office;
Richards, Crown Solicitors Office;
Callan Barrister on behalf of Secretary of Health, and
2. This is an adjourned hearing of the Tribunal (from [date]) of a review of
Ms Young, pursuant to
Mental Health Act 2007
relating to a civil patient’s ongoing care, treatment and
detention. At the hearing in [date], the Tribunal foreshadowed an
Ms Young would be transferred to another metropolitan mental health
facility and that if the order was not complied with
by [date], the matter
should be relisted before the President.
3. On [date], Ms Young was sentenced to a term of imprisonment in
relation to an offence of damage property by fire or explosives.
The sentence
and the non-parole period have now expired.
4. Ms Young went into custody on [date] and two days later, she was
transferred to Facility A. On [date], Ms Young was admitted to
and has remained in that facility since then.
5. On [date], the State Parole Authority revoked her parole order because
Ms Young posed a serious and immediate risk to her own safety.
the Tribunal determined that Ms Young is a mentally ill person and should
be detained in a mental health facility. Between
[date] and [date],
Ms Young was treated with the administration of ECT (with the authorisation
of the Tribunal) and with clozapine,
which was commenced, ceased due to
side-effects and recommenced.
6. Ms Young has a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder and
polysubstance abuse, which is currently contained in a controlled
environment.
7. Between [date] and about [date], multiple enquiries were made by the
treating team at Facility B to the following eight mental
health facilities
regarding Ms Young’s placement. The position as at [date] is
summarised in the minutes from the Committee
Meeting as involving
“challenges progressing Ms Young to a less secure mental health
facility” and having exhausted a
number of possibilities, liaison was to
take place with [X] Local Health District Clinical Director and “if
unsuccessful consider
referral to the Complex Care Review and Access
Committee.”
8. I should observe that at this hearing, the Tribunal requested
Ms Callan, counsel for the Secretary, to pass on to her client the
that all endeavours to expedite Ms Young’s transition should be
undertaken. Following that request, the Registrar of
this Tribunal received a
letter dated [date] which updated the efforts being made and indicated that
there appeared to be two options
remaining: a potential suitable placement
within the [X] Local Health District and failing that, a reference to the
Complex Care
Review Committee.
9. Subsequent to the hearing on [date] (in respect of which reasons were
delivered on [date]), the panel was made aware of the official
[2020] NSWMHRT 1
and of legal issues concerning the extent of
section 38(4).
Consequently this matter was relisted before a panel
including the President.
10. To provide sufficient context, it is instructive to note that at an
earlier hearing on [date], Deputy President Johnson observed
at paragraph [9]
that “staff at the Facility B accept that Ms Young does not need to
be detained in the high secure environment
of the Facility B, but says she does
need involuntary inpatient treatment in a mental health unit”.
11. The Deputy President referred to the views of Dr [E], the Treating
Psychiatrist, that Ms Young had a long history of “revolving
door” admissions, that she does not currently have housing available if
she were to leave Facility B and finally, that her
mental state was very fragile
and she was liable to quickly decompensate if the arrangements for her discharge
were not carefully
planned and supported – paragraph [17].
12. On that basis, the Tribunal was satisfied that “if discharged from
a mental health facility without housing, appropriate
supports and assertive
mental health follow-up, Ms Young is at a high risk of a relapse and a
mental illness” – paragraph
[23] and accordingly, there was no other
safe and effective care of a less restrictive kind that is appropriate and
reasonably available
– paragraph [25].
13. As was referred to earlier, the Official Report of the Tribunal in
was published after the initial hearing of this matter. That
decision related to the second limb of
that is, whether the patient’s ongoing detention at Facility B provided
less restrictive care that was safe and effective,
and “appropriate and
reasonably available”. The issue particularly focused upon the
appropriateness and the reasonable
availability of the proposed facility,
particularly the notion of reasonableness.
14. Deputy President Bisogni concluded at paragraph [53] that the term:
... would include care that was “likely” or
“probably” available. ... a “mere possibility” of
availability will (not) suffice. In addition, ... a very significant factor in
determining “reasonably available” is
that medium secure units have
their own powers and discretions in determining the availability of placements
depending on factors
such as their assessments of the suitability and needs of
individual patients, the unit’s resources and their priority of placement.
15. I accept that the formulation in
(5) (c) is not dissimilar to
(4), but they are not identical either. More particularly,
the focus of the hearing in
was not on any power of transfer
but on the matter of reasonable availability of safe and effective care and
16. This case raised two major issues: firstly, whether the Secretary of
Health should be permitted leave to appear and make submissions
and, secondly,
(4) permitted the Tribunal to make an order of the kind
foreshadowed, i.e. an order for detention and transfer to another metropolitan
mental health facility.
LEAVE TO APPEAR
17. Ms Wright, counsel for Ms Young argued that the Secretary had
no sufficient interest warranting leave to appear and make submissions
interpretation of
(4) and any interest grounded on arguing for the
“coherency of the statutory scheme” was too general –
[4]. It was further submitted that the decision of
[2015] NSWMHRT 4
states the correct approach in cases of this
kind that is, by the appointment of counsel assisting to make such submissions.
contended that merely claiming there was a public interest alone was
insufficient – paragraphs [5] and [7].
18. It was argued that the rationale for this restrictive approach was the
risk that “the involvement of lawyers” results
in hearings of more
formal, technical and adversarial nature – paragraph [8]. However no issue
was taken with the Secretary
providing factual assistance relating to the
options for transfer of Ms Young to a less secure facility.
Secretary of Health
19. Ms Callan, counsel on behalf of the Secretary, accepted that she has
no express right to appear but the Tribunal has broad powers
in relation to the
conduct of his hearings.
20. Reference was made to
, in which Deputy President
Johnson determined that the Tribunal has power to allow a person (in the case,
the Attorney General) to
participate in a review hearing but only in
“highly unusual cases” – paragraph [5]. Ms Johnson pointed to
the intended
flexibility of the proceedings and the capacity of the Tribunal to
obtain information from whomever it considers appropriate.
21. At paragraphs [25] and [26], the Deputy President determined that given
the experience that the general involvement of lawyers
leads to a more formal
technical and adversarial proceeding, leave ought not to be granted unless it is
to enhance the Tribunal’s
“proper consideration of the matters
before it”. Where there is only a general “public interest” in
the proceedings,
rather than a personal or professional interest then “it
will be vanishingly rare” to allow a person to intervene in
proceedings.
22. The Secretary submits that she should have leave in order to give proper
consideration to the issue of whether the Tribunal has
power pursuant to
to order the transfer of Ms Young to any civil
mental health facility within the Sydney metropolitan area within six weeks of
hearing. The Secretary points to her particular interest as to the
construction of that provision, given her role in administering
system including managing capacity to accommodate patients at mental health
facilities and her power pursuant to
to order the
transfer of patients.
23. It is submitted that the Secretary’s role and responsibilities in
relation to the administration and coherency of the scheme
means she should be
heard on this legal issue. In short her interest is more than a general
“public interest” in the
proceedings.
24. In the present case, fortuitously perhaps (for this purpose),
Ms Young was not present at the hearing due to medical concerns.
argument raised on her behalf that involvement of lawyers would lead to a more
formal proceeding, therefore was not a significant
consideration in the present
25. Counsel for Ms Young supports her argument on the onus on the
treating team to adduce evidence, on the objects provisions in
. Those objects refer to the fact that mentally ill
people should receive the best possible and less restrictive effective care and
treatment (a) and that such persons should be provided with appropriate
information about treatment, alternatives and effects (e).
(The relevance of
sub-section (e) is not immediately obvious.)
sets out the intention
of Parliament that the principles should apply “as far as
practicable”.
Section 195
confirms that
, inter-alia, is
intended “to give guidance” as to the administration of
and does not “create, or confer on any person, any right or
entitlement enforceable at law”.
section 151
makes clear, the Tribunal is not
bound by the rules of evidence but may inform itself of any matter in such
manner as it thinks appropriate
and as the proper consideration of the matter
permits. The High Court in
MIMA v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507;
[2001] HCA 17
considered arguments as to actual and reasonable apprehension of
bias in relation to a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
dealing with that issue, Hayne J at paragraph [180] made the following
observations (which are pertinent to the proceedings before
this Tribunal):
... Reference need only be made to a body like the Refugee Review Tribunal
... The procedures for decision-making by that body are
much less formal than
those of a court ... There is no provision for any contradictor and the
procedures are, therefore, not adversarial.
The decision-maker, in a body like
the Refugee Review Tribunal, will bring to the task of deciding an individual's
application a
great deal of information and ideas which have been accumulated or
formed in the course of deciding other applications. A body like
the Refugee
Review Tribunal, unlike a court, is expected to build up "expertise" in matters
such as country information. Often information
of that kind is critical in
deciding the fate of an individual's application ...
27. Kirby P in
Harry v Mental Health Review
(1994) 33 NSWLR 315
at 329 echoed those of views describing
this Tribunal as “
an expert body with specialist membership and other
forensic advantages”.
28. It follows in my opinion, the objects provision read in conjunction with
section 195
, gives no support for the argument as to onus and I reject that
29. I conclude that the Secretary does have a sufficient interest to make
submissions and be heard, for essentially two reasons: firstly,
given she has a
co-extensive power to order the transfer of patients, the interaction of the
power of the Tribunal (if indeed,
(4) is so construed) and the power
of the Secretary
(section 80)
is a relevant consideration in determining the
issue of construction of the former provision; and secondly, on a more practical
level, any order of the Tribunal can only be made by consideration of
what is appropriate and reasonably available, an issue squarely
within the care
and responsibility of the Secretary.
POWER OF THE TRIBUNAL TO ORDER TRANSFER OF INVOLUNTARY PATIENT FROM
ONE MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY TO ANOTHER – SECTION 38
30. Counsel for Ms Young submits that there is a real question whether
the Tribunal can make the determination required under section
38 (4) to enable
an involuntary detention order to be made in the circumstances of this case. It
is submitted that there is “an
onus on those who care for
Ms Young” to demonstrate to the Tribunal that no less restrictive
kind of care is reasonably available
(to enable the Tribunal to make a
determination).
31. Further, counsel submits that the power of Tribunal to make a
determination is not enlivened in the circumstances of this case,
because on the
evidence available no determination about the reasonable availability of other
care has been adduced and the onus
to do so is upon “those who care for
Ms Young” – paragraphs [30] and [32]. For reasons which are
explained above,
I reject the submission that in hearings before the Tribunal,
any of the participants bears an “onus” as understood in
the context
of legal proceedings.
32. It is submitted that the Tribunal is required to compare the present
circumstances and other forms of care, which are reasonably
available –
paragraph [33]. Consequently so it is contended, where the current care is not
appropriate, there is no such obligation
on the Tribunal to make an order
– paragraph [34]. I understand this submission to be consequent upon the
earlier contention
that the onus is upon the treating team and if not
discharged, the Tribunal has no information upon which to make a determination.
33. The result of this interpretation, it appears, is that in the present
circumstances, the Tribunal would be obliged to make no
order for detention and
hence, Ms Young would be at liberty. For reasons expressed below, I
consider that such a result would abdicate
the responsibility of the Tribunal
and contravene other provisions of
, which are protective of the
safety of Ms Young and others. In these circumstances, the Tribunal would
inform itself in any manner
it thinks fit (cf section 151 (2)) and use its
expertise and experience to determine the appropriate course.
34. Counsel submits that the descriptor “restrictive” readily
applies to Facility B and involuntary detention at a civil
mental health
facility would be less restrictive – paragraph [37] and therefore the
Tribunal should consider whether other
forms of involuntary detention in
alternative facilities would be less restrictive and appropriate –
paragraph [38].
35. The Secretary argues in summary, that the Tribunal does not have the
power (either express or implied) to order the transfer of
an involuntary
patient from one mental health facility to another mental health facility. She
submits that
does not expressly provide the Tribunal with such a
power and contrasts that position with the Secretary’s power of transfer
in section 80.
36. In addition, the submissions point to section 48 of
the Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 2009
and its predecessors, which show that prior
to 2008, the Tribunal had no such express power, a matter which is remedied by
48. That there is no express power in the Tribunal to transfer a
patient, is unarguably correct.
37. The Secretary further argues that there is no implied power for such a
transfer, given her express power in section 80. Furthermore,
it is submitted
that it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to have such a power in order to
appropriately carry out its functions. It
is argued that section 38 is focused
upon whether a person ought to be detained or not, “rather than the
circumstances of detention”.
Undoubtedly, the primary focus is upon the
question of detention but for reasons expressed below, a proper implication from
the language
of that section is that the Tribunal does indeed have an obligation
and a right to examine the circumstances of the care and treatment
consequently to make an order, consistent with the result of such an
examination.
38. It is further submitted that the phrase “no other care of a less
restrictive kind” appears in the context of an assessment
as to whether a
person should be detained or not “rather than to provide a basis for
delineating the intensity or form of care
once it is determined the person
should be detained.”
39. Finally, the Secretary submits that a construction inconsistent with that
for which she argues, would be unworkable because it
would require the Tribunal
to examine features of the care and treatment being delivered, including levels
of restriction of liberty.
The Tribunal would need to descend into matters such
as the capacity and willingness of facilities to receive involuntary patients.
Accepting this to be so, it is not readily obvious why this would be unworkable.
In the normal course, the Tribunal would expect
to be informed of matters such
as this by the treating team and/or by the legal representative of the patient.
By way of example,
these matters are commonly raised without problems, when the
Tribunal makes orders pursuant to section 35 (5)
CONSIDERATION
40. Any examination of
must appropriately commence with a
consideration of the objects and principles applicable to it. Section 3 sets out
the objects as
(a) to provide for the care and treatment of, and to promote the recovery
of, persons who are mentally ill or mentally disordered,
(b) ..., and
(c) to facilitate the provision of hospital care for those persons on a
voluntary basis where appropriate and, in a limited number
of situations, on an
involuntary basis, and
(d) while protecting the civil rights of those persons, to give an
opportunity for those persons to have access to appropriate care
necessary, to provide for treatment for their own protection or the protection
of others, and
41. Section 68 sets out the principles for care and treatment:
It is the intention of Parliament that the following principles are, as
far as practicable, to be given effect to with respect to
the care and treatment
of people with a mental illness or mental disorder:
(a) people with a mental illness or mental disorder should receive the
best possible care and treatment in the least restrictive environment
the care and treatment to be effectively given,
(b) people with a mental illness or mental disorder should be provided
with appropriate information about treatment, treatment alternatives
effects of treatment and be supported to pursue their own recovery,
(c) any restriction on the liberty of patients and other people with a
mental illness or mental disorder and any interference with
their rights,
dignity and self-respect is to be kept to the minimum necessary in the
circumstances,
42. The Act
sets out the following statutory regime for the admission,
detention and treatment of involuntary patients. Chapter 3 regulates the
circumstances under which persons may be subjected to an involuntary admission
into a mental health facility and the treatment they
are to receive. Part 1
(sections 12 to 16) sets out the restrictions on and criteria for the admission
of involuntary patients. Part
2 (sections 17 to 49) deals with the involuntary
detention of persons in a mental health facility and their treatment. It is this
upon which there is particular focus in relation to the
case at hand. Chapter 4 (sections 68 to 104) deals with the care and treatment
of patients or detained persons generally. Chapter 5 focuses upon the New South
Wales public health system particularly in relation
to mental health facilities
and Chapter 6 provides for the constitution and procedures of the Tribunal. The
remaining Chapters are
not relevant for present purposes.
43. Turning to the most relevant provisions of
, section 12
sets out the necessary prerequisites before a person is involuntarily
(1) a patient or other person must not be involuntarily admitted to, or
detained in or continue to be detained in, a mental health
facility unless an
authorised medical officer is of the opinion that:
(a) the person is a mentally ill person or a mentally disordered person,
(b) no other care of a less restrictive kind, that is consistent with safe
and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available
to the person.
(2) If an authorised medical officer is not of that opinion about a
patient or other person at a mental health facility, the officer
must refuse to
detain, and must not continue to detain, the person.
44. An authorised medical officer is defined in section 4 (1) as the medical
superintendent of a mental health facility or in effect,
45. Section 13 provides that a mentally ill person is only to be admitted as
an involuntary patient or detained (or continue to be
detained) in a mental
health facility “
if, and only if
” the person satisfies the
relevant criteria set out in Part 1 of
. Those criteria are set
out in sections 14 and 15 and relevantly are: that the person is suffering from
a mental illness and owing
to that illness, there are reasonable grounds for
believing that “
care, treatment or control
” of the person is
necessary for the person’s own protection from serious harm or the
protection of others from serious
harm – section 14 (1).
46. Part 2, Division 3 sets out the prerequisites for continued detention of
involuntary patients in mental health facilities and
prescribes the nature of
the reviews to be conducted by the Tribunal.
47. Section 34 directs the Tribunal to hold an inquiry “as soon as
practicable after admission” (section 27 (1) (d)) in
relation to a person
detained in a declared mental health facility for whom an inquiry is required
(an “assessable person”).
Section 35 directs the Tribunal to
determine whether or not on the balance of probabilities that person is a
mentally ill person
and if so, to discharge to the person into the care of a
carer, make a community treatment order or:
(c) an order that the person be detained in or admitted to and detained in
a specified mental health facility for further observation
or treatment, or
both, as an involuntary patient, for a specified period of up to 3 months, if
the Tribunal is of the opinion that
no other care of a less restrictive kind,
that is consistent with safe and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably
or that for any other reason it is not appropriate to make any other
order under this subsection.
48. The language of subsection (5) (c) makes it plain that the Tribunal is
given the specific power to order the detention and admission
of the person to
“a specified mental health facility”.
49. Section 37 provides for the reviews of involuntary patients by the
Tribunal, including the regularity of such reviews and the
procedure to be
adopted in them. Section 38 sets out the matters to be considered by the
Tribunal in conducting the review, and relevantly,
the findings it may make and
the consequential orders which follow.
50. Section 38 relevantly provides are as follows:
(1) The Tribunal is, on a review of an involuntary patient, to determine
whether the patient is a mentally ill person for whom no
other care (other than
care in a mental health facility) is appropriate and reasonably available.
(3) If the Tribunal determines that the patient is not a mentally ill
person, the patient must be discharged from the mental health
facility in which
the patient is detained.
(4) If the Tribunal determines that the patient is a mentally ill person
and that no other care of a less restrictive kind, that is
consistent with safe
and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available to the patient, the
Tribunal must make an order
that the patient continue to be detained as an
involuntary patient in a mental health facility for further observation or
(5) In any other case that the Tribunal determines that a patient is a
mentally ill person, it must make an order that the patient
be discharged from
the mental health facility in which the patient is detained and may make any of
the following orders--
51. The Act
therefore deals sequentially with the usual process by
which a person may come in contact with a mental health facility: initial
presentation and admission; detention and continued detention, including the
appropriate care and treatment; review by the Tribunal
subsequent to initial
admission and thereafter regularly on a statutorily mandated timeframe.
52. It is self-evident from the structure of
responsibility for determining and administering appropriate care and treatment
lies with the treating teams at the mental
health facilities. Accordingly, those
matters are not usually within the purview of the Tribunal, the situation which
in any event
is borne out by common sense and practicalities: notwithstanding
the expertise of the psychiatrist and allied health members of the
decisions as to the appropriate treatment can only properly be made by those
fully informed of the patient’s circumstances
and with the continuous
experience of contact with the patient. Notwithstanding the expertise of members
of the Tribunal, it is neither
correct nor appropriate that a reviewing panel
without the above knowledge and experience, should dictate the precise care and
which should be administered to the patient.
53. It is clear from a review of the relevant provisions, that the tests or
criteria to be applied at each stage, are relatively standard
and the Tribunal
in exercising its functions, must examine the level of care, the degree of its
restrictive nature and whether a
better level of care is reasonably available.
The two relevant questions are whether the person is mentally ill and secondly,
alternative safe and effective care, which is less restrictive and
appropriate, is reasonably available to the person.
54. As a matter of principle and practicality, the judgments as to the
appropriate mental health facility and the availability of
places (i.e. whether
places are reasonably available) are best made by the Secretary of Health or by
her delegated authorised medical
officers. So much is confirmed by the terms of
section 84 which reposes in the authorised medical officer, the authority to
any treatment (including any medication) that the officer thinks fit to an
involuntary patient – see also MHRT Guideline: The
role of the Mental
Health Tribunal in relation to treatment. Guideline 7 reinforces the statutory
mandate of the Tribunal to ensure
a consumer receives safe and
effective treatment, given all the circumstances
” and Guideline 8
states that the Tribunal should not “
try to direct or dictate
55. However, the Tribunal in its role, is obliged to review such decisions
and if in its opinion, the decision is found wanting (on
reasonable grounds),
the Tribunal may make a different order. As Mahoney JA said in
Mental Health Review Tribunal
(1994) 33 NSWLR 315
... It is proper to refer to the procedures which safeguard the exercise
of power over mentally ill persons. This Act, as did earlier
Acts, establishes
procedures whereby the condition of those to whom the statutory powers are to be
applied can be monitored to ensure
that they are continue to be in need of the
statutory constraints. It is proper that these things be monitored and that the
and tribunals ensure that the statutory requirements are
56. There is no bright line between directing treatment and reviewing
treatment in all cases. If for example, the reasonable alternatives
for care or
treatment involve a binary question i.e. that administered by the treating team
and only one other alternative, the determination
of the Tribunal that the
current care and treatment did not meet the statutory test, would by definition
dictate that the treating
team is obliged to take the only other alternative. In
that sense, the functions of the Tribunal would have the effect of dictating
what the appropriate treatment was.
57. In many respects, that example defines the issue in the present case. The
entire and overwhelming medical opinion in relation
to the circumstances of
Ms Young is that her “detention” at Facility B is not the least
restrictive form of care and
treatment. It appears that there is no serious
contest by any of the participants in Ms Young’s review that this is
the position.
The only feasible alternative if this is the case, is that
Ms Young’s care and treatment be conducted in an appropriate facility
other than Facility B. In terms of practical alternatives, it would be an
abdication of the Tribunal’s statutory responsibilities
to the welfare of
Ms Young, to decline to make any order as to her detention (an alternative
suggested argument by her counsel),
because either her own safety or less
likely, the safety of others would be endangered by the course of action cf
section 3 (d).
58. Returning to the provisions of section 38 (4), what then are the matters
which the Tribunal must determine if a person is to be
continue to be detained?
They are as follows:
(1) is the person mentally ill?
(2) what is the nature of the care, in relation to the restrictions it
imposes, its safety, effectiveness and/or appropriateness that
the person is
currently receiving?
(3) if the nature of the current care (in the way identified above) of the
person is not appropriate, what is the nature of the care
in those respects,
that is reasonably available? and
(4) if the care under consideration meets the statutory criteria, the
Tribunal is obliged to make an order that patient “continue
to be detained
in a mental health facility”
59. Relevantly, this exercise requires a consideration of the restrictions
imposed by the person’s current placement in the
mental health facility
and whether that placement constitutes the least restrictive kind of care. If
the evidence before the Tribunal
discloses that the current placement is not the
least restrictive appropriate care, the Tribunal should receive and must
alternative placements and make an adjudication about the
appropriateness of the restrictions in the alternative placements.
60. It is fair to say that in the real world context applicable in New South
Wales, the Tribunal has an understanding by the nature
of its work, of many of
the mental health facilities and more particularly, of the categories of mental
health facilities in terms
of their being high security or medium security.
Therefore, often evidence is not essential to inform the Tribunal of these
in relation to specified health facilities cf
Undoubtedly, the Tribunal cannot without evidence know what particular
limitations any given mental health facility has, in terms
of its available
services, resources or bed availability.
61. As is obvious, these reviews take place against the uniform backdrop that
a person has been detained on the authority of the authorised
medical officer.
So much is apparent from the references in subsections (3) and (5) to
mental health facility in which the patient is
detained”. The reference to the definite article “
mental health facility” has significance in my view. By contrast, the
operative subsection, section 38 (4) makes reference
to an order for the
continued detention of the patient in “
mental health
facility for further observation or treatment, or both.” It is noteworthy
therefore that the subsection refers
to continued detention in “a”
rather than “the” mental health facility presumably where he or she
is currently
being detained. If the focus of that subsection is upon “the
critical question of liberty: whether a patient or to be detained
(paragraph [37] of the Secretary’s submissions), then that result could
have been more clearly achieved by the
use of the definite article i.e.
“the mental health facility in which the patient is detained”.
62. Furthermore, the subject matter of the order for detention is broadened
by the language “for further observation or treatment,
Those words clearly import that the Tribunal can properly have some input into
the issue of “observation or
treatment, or both” cf the submissions
of the Secretary (paragraph [37]: “Questions of care and treatment -
questions of transfer of an involuntary patient from one facility to
another are matters for the [authorised medical officer]”.)
63. In my opinion, these references recognise that the Tribunal has by
implication, the power to direct the continued detention of
a mentally ill
person at an appropriate mental health facility which conforms with the
requirement that is the least restrictive
option. That is not to say that such
an order may direct that a mentally ill person necessarily be taken to a
specific mental health
facility, but it does in my view, authorise the continued
detention but in an available facility which is least restrictive to the
64. I do not accept the argument that because the Secretary has an express
power of transfer in section 80, this militates against
any power in the
Tribunal pursuant to section 38 (4). Ultimately, it is the words of the section
which need to be construed and in
any event, I am unable to see why the system
constructed by
cannot work coherently with a power that can be
exercised by two rather than one repository. Nor does such a power in the
infringe the responsibility on the treating team to dictate the nature
of the care and treatment appropriate to a patient. An order
of the kind in
contemplation here, deals with only one aspect of the patient’s care and
treatment namely, the degree of restriction
which affects that person’s
placement. Otherwise, issues as to whether the patient must be detained in a
high security part
of that facility, whether seclusion or given types of
medication are best for the safe and effective care of that person and matters
of that kind, are still the exclusive province of the treating team, as they
should be. That must be so because events pertaining
to the degree and
seriousness of the symptoms exhibited by a patient, can vary from day to day and
are best dealt with by those who
are directly administering the care and
65. In my opinion, this construction conforms with the language of section 38
(4) and furthers the objects of (section 3 (c)) and
principles guiding
(section 68 (a) and (f)) and provides a workable combined approach which
facilitates the patient’s optimal care and treatment.
66. References to other provisions of
and to section 48 of
the Forensic Provisions Act
, are of limited assistance in construing the
precise words of section 38 (4). As the above analysis demonstrates, a reading
subsection in the context of the other subsections in section 38,
demonstrates that the Tribunal does have an implied power to order
the transfer
of a patient from one level of security facility to a lesser level of security
facility, the precise facility being
a matter for the treating team and the
facility in consideration. In short, I do not accept the argument that the only
work for section
38 (4) is as to whether there should be detention or not. The
order can encompass according to its terms: the level of restriction
broad terms, whether the detention is for observation or treatment or
SIGNED BY THE PRESIDENT ON BEHALF OF THE MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
........................................
P I Lakatos SC
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (417 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (458 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter