URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/230.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Student A by his tutor Peter Johnston v Council of Newington College [2025] NSWCA 230 (20 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Student A by his tutor Peter Johnston v Council of Newington College
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 230
Hearing Date(s):
14 October 2025
Date of Orders:
14 October 2025
Decision Date:
20 October 2025
Bell CJ; Ward P; Free JA
1. To the extent that leave to appeal is needed, leave is
2. The appeal is
3. The Appellant is to pay the costs of the First
and 26th Respondents.
Catchwords:
EQUITY – Trusts and trustees – Trust instrument –
interpretation – where the object of an 1873 deed was to
“provide an
efficient course of education for youth” – whether
“youth” referred to boys only or was
gender-neutral –
unambiguous gender-neutral meaning – “ancient document rule”
not enlivened – no compelling
surrounding circumstances
Legislation Cited:
Evidence Act 1995
Newington College Council Act
Sydney University Act 1850
Extension Act of 1884 (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Attorney-General v. Drummond
(1842) 1 Dr & War 353
Machine Tool Sales Ltd v L Schuler AG
[1973] UKHL 2
[1974] AC 235
Texts Cited:
Barclays Complete and Universal English Dictionary, new ed,
Oxford English Dictionary, 1st ed (1928)
Principal judgment
“Student A” by his tutor Peter Johnston (Appellant/Applicant on
the Summons)
Council of Newington College (First Respondent)
McDonald (Second Respondent)
Mr Chris Collings (Third Respondent)
Andrew Walsh (Fourth Respondent)
Mr Tony Bosman (Fifth Respondent)
Punam Bent (Sixth Respondent)
Rev. Ian Diamond (Seventh Respondent)
Tony King (Eighth Respondent)
Ms Rhys Kelly (Ninth Respondent)
Torrible (Tenth Respondent)
Mr Nicholas Heaton (11th Respondent)
Justine Richardson (12th Respondent)
Rev. Radhika Sukumar-White (13th
Respondent)
Ms Melissa Abu-Gazaleh (14th Respondent)
Ms Tina Morrell (15th
Respondent)
Mr Denver Don Paul (16th Respondent)
Mr Peter Crawley (17th
Respondent)
Rev. ‘Oto Faiva (18th Respondent)
Prof. Andrew Harris
(19th Respondent)
Ms Rachel Stock (20th Respondent)
Mr Mario Peter Isaias
(21st Respondent)
Mr Justin Papps (22nd Respondent)
Ms Sharon Tindall-Ford
(23rd Respondent)
Rev. Jason Kioa (24th Respondent)
Mr Justin Bosilkovski
(25th Respondent)
Attorney General of New South Wales
Respondent)
Representation:
M Izzo SC with D Barlin and A Mohseni (Appellant/Applicant on
the Summons)
N Hutley SC with B Michael and D Reynolds (First
Respondent)
Submitting Appearance (Second – 25th Respondents)
Singleton (26th Respondent)
Solicitors:
Brown Wright Stein Lawyers
(Appellant/Applicant on the Summons)
Minter Ellison (First
Respondent)
Wotton Kearney (Second – 25th Respondents)
Solicitor’s Office (26th Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/243213
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of New South Wales
Equity Division – Expedition List
[2025] NSWSC 534
Date of Decision:
28 May 2025
File Number(s):
2024/473840
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
These proceedings arose out of the decision of the first respondent, the
Council of Newington College (
the Council
), to introduce co-education and
admit girls to the historically male-only school, Newington College (
). A current student at the College (
) challenged
that decision and sought declarations and other relief on the basis that it was
contrary to the objects clause in an
1873 deed of trust (
namely “to provide an efficient course of education for youth”.
Student A’s contention was that the Deed precluded
the admission of girls
because, understood in its historical context, its reference to
“youth” was to boys and boys alone.
In support of that contention, Student A relied both at first instance and on
appeal on the definition of “youth” in the
1848 edition of
Barclays Complete and Universal English Dictionary
, as well as
a number of surrounding circumstances, including that the then existing
Newington School (a different institution from
the College instituted by the
Deed) had always been a male-only School, that the Deed referenced other Schools
also with male-only
constituencies, and the status of both Church and government
policies at the time.
Student A also sought to rely on the “ancient documents rule” to
admit evidence of subsequent conduct, as well as contemporaneous
evidence, said
to inform the meaning or usage of the term “youth” as of 1873. The
contemporaneous evidence comprised
of approximately 30 newspaper articles
stretching from the 1850s through to the 1880s (
the newspaper articles
which had been selectively chosen from a much larger number of articles (around
500) attached to an expert report. Student A, both
at trial and on appeal,
brought the court’s attention to quotations in five such articles which
were said to equate the meaning
of “youth” with “boys”.
The primary judge found that the meaning of “youth” in cl 3 of
the Deed was unambiguously gender-neutral, and dismissed
the plaintiff’s
claim for declarations and other relief. Student A appealed on four grounds. The
first two challenged the ultimate
conclusion as to the meaning of the term
“youth” in the Deed. The third and fourth grounds of appeal
contained discrete
challenges, the third to the non-admission of the newspaper
articles, and the fourth to the finding that the “ancient documents
rule” was not enlivened.
(Bell CJ, Ward P, Free JA)
dismissing the
(1) The primary judge did not err in placing no reliance on the newspaper
articles. The small and selective number of quotations which
did connect the
meaning of “youth” with “boys” were driven by the
context of the subject matter of the articles
in which the quotations appeared,
and were contrary to the significantly greater number of articles which used
in a wholly non-gendered way: [22]-[30]
(2) The primary judge did not err in finding the “ancient documents
rule” was not enlivened, given that doctrine cannot
be used to create
ambiguities which the judge construing the instrument does not consider exist:
Attorney-General v.
(1842) 1 Dr & War 353
Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd v L Schuler AG
[1973] UKHL 2
[1974] AC 235
distinguished.
(3) The primary judge did not err in ultimately construing
“youth” to be gender-neutral. This construction accorded with
ordinary English meaning of the term “youth” and was consistent
with: (1) most of the dictionaries referred to, including
the Oxford English
Dictionary which both parties agreed to be the most authoritative; (2) the use
of the gender-neutral words “children”
and “pupils”
elsewhere in the Deed; (3) the broad discretion invested in the members of the
Council in relation to the
admission of pupils and as connoted by the expression
“to provide
an efficient course
of education for youth” in
the Deed; and (4) the historical materials evincing a fluidity and changing
attitude towards the
education of girls at the time: [37]-[51].
: On 14 October 2025, the Court heard argument in an appeal brought
from a decision of Parker J (
the primary judge
) in which his Honour
concluded that the word “youth” in an 1873 deed of trust
) was used in a gender-neutral sense, and did not mandate
male-only enrolment at Newington College (
the College
Student A v
Council of Newington College
[2025] NSWSC 534
the primary
). To put the matter another way, his Honour held that
the Deed did not preclude the admission of girls to the College.
a consequence of this conclusion, his Honour dismissed the plaintiff’s
claim for declarations and other relief. Given the
public interest in the
expeditious resolution of the challenge to his Honour's decision and the fact
that the Court was in a position
to do so, orders were made at the conclusion of
the hearing on 14 October 2025 dismissing the appeal. What follows are the
reasons for making those orders.
proceedings arose out of the decision by the first respondent, the Council of
Newington College (
the Council
), to introduce co-education and admit
girls to what has historically been an all-male school. That initiative is due
to start at
the junior schools in 2026 and the senior school in 2028. The
appellant (
), a current student at the College, commenced
proceedings by his adult tutor challenging the Council’s decision on the
that it was contrary to the objects clause in the Deed, namely “to
provide an efficient course of education for youth”,
his contention being
that, understood in its historical context, the reference to “youth”
was to boys and boys alone.
College is governed by the
Newington College Council Act
) which, by
, gave corporate status to
the Council. By
of the Act, the Council is required to hold all the
property at any time vested in it by virtue of
of the Act upon trust
“to carry or cause to be carried into effect... the general objects for
which the said collegiate school
was founded as set forth in [the Deed]”.
It was common ground before the primary judge, and before this Court on appeal,
the “general objects” referred to in
of the Act are to be
equated with the statement of the object of the Trust in cl 3 of the Deed,
namely “the provision of an
efficient course of education for
fuller historical account of the background to the College’s foundation
and the Deed is set forth at PJ [26]-[75] and these
reasons assume familiarity
with that background which it is not necessary to repeat.
primary judge’s reasoning
essence of the primary judge’s reasoning may be distilled as follows.
a critical question to be determined was the meaning of the word
“youth” according to common educated usage at
the time of the Deed:
PJ [118]. Having regard to the first edition of the
Oxford English
, finalised in 1928, which his Honour noted at PJ [76] was
accepted by the parties as “the most authoritative” of several
dictionaries referred to, the primary judge concluded at PJ [120]
“the ‘plain and ordinary’ meaning of
the term, in the OED’s sense five, is gender-neutral.
It includes young
women and girls as well as young men and boys”.
The reference to “the OED’s sense five” was to the
following definition of “youth”: “Young people
creatures) collectively; the young. (With or without
always construed as plural.)”
different interpretation given to the word “youth” in the
Barclays Complete and Universal English Dictionary
(1848), and consistent with Student A’s preferred interpretation, could
not “stand against the preponderance
of the other dictionary
entries in evidence”: PJ [123].
the context, which was relevant to take into account in the construction of the
Deed, did not require a contrary conclusion.
Indeed, the immediate context,
namely the language in which the other provisions of the Deed was expressed, in
fact reinforced the
primary judge’s conclusion as to the plain and
ordinary meaning of the term “youth”. As his Honour said,
language of the Deed is gender-neutral throughout”: PJ [125].
Of particular relevance, as shall be seen, was the use of the
“children” and “pupils” elsewhere in the Deed.
the primary judge observed that the purpose of the Deed “was to provide a
governing instrument for the College for
the indefinite future” and that
“militated against any restrictive reading of the Council’s
powers”. Indeed
both this purpose, and the reference to the
“efficient course of education” in the objects clause, were
expressed in
broad language: PJ [126]. As the primary judge held at PJ
“Providing an ‘efficient course of education’ plainly allowed
for a great deal of judgment in deciding what to
teach and how to teach it. The
need to respond to changing educational theories as well as regulatory, social
and economic pressures
would have been readily foreseeable. Furthermore, the
task was to provide ‘an’ efficient course of education, which
that the course could be directed at a particular segment of
‘youth’. This in turn implied a judgment about who was to
admitted to the School, at what age, and what educational attainments were to be
the Deed only imposed two limitations on the Council in making these judgements.
The first was as to the religious doctrine
to be taught, the second was in
relation to education being “made available
to nominated
of Church ministers between
certain specified ages” (emphasis added): PJ [129]. Not
only was there no express limitation as
to the gender of the youth to be
educated but the second limitation or obligation contemplated that education
would be provided within
the College to the children of Methodist ministers
which, on its face, must have included girls.
allied to these considerations, was the power reposed in the Council under cl 7
of the Deed to “determine and regulate
from time to time the terms,
conditions and regulations upon and subject to which
respectively shall be admitted” (emphasis added). As to this, the primary
judge considered “the gender-neutral
language concerning
enrolments (‘pupils’)” to be “particularly
significant”, holding that “[i]f
a male-only enrolment policy was to
have been mandated, that is precisely where one would expect to see the use
of male-only language”:
Honour’s ultimate conclusion at PJ [132] was that:
“the meaning of the term ‘youth’ in cl 3
of the Deed is unambiguous. There is nothing to qualify its ordinary
gender-neutral
meaning. It must be presumed that that was the meaning
which the parties to the Deed intended to express”.
light of this conclusion, his Honour took the view that there was “no
occasion to consider the ‘surrounding
circumstances’
for the purpose of clarifying the Deed’s
meaning” but he nevertheless did so against the contingency that he was
in his principal conclusion: PJ [133].
surrounding circumstances relied upon by Student A at first instance (and indeed
in this Court) as indicating a male-only meaning
for “youth” in cl 3 of the Deed were as
“1. The then existing Newington School, which had always
been a male-only school, was referred to in the Deed with the new
being characterised as a continuation of it.
2. Kingswood and Woodhouse Grove schools in England were
referred to in the Deed in connection with the provision of education
children of ministers, which was also to be a function of the new College. Those
schools were likewise single-sex male schools.
3. By the time the Deed was
executed, the provision of schooling for girls and young
women had been under consideration by the
Church, but nothing had
been decided, and the issue had been held over with female education,
in counsel’s submission, being
on a separate and different track from male
4. Government policy for education at secondary level had
not embraced coeducation at the time of the Deed and only single-sex-schools
existed at secondary level.”
to these matters, the primary judge held that the Newington School (a different
institution from the College that was instituted
by the Deed) was not continued
by the Deed and, in any event, the reference to this School and the Kingswood
and Woodhouse Grove
Schools and their all-male constituencies said nothing
matters supported a broader interpretation and “reinforce[d] the
choice of language” of the Deed, preserving flexibility
for the future: PJ
Grounds of appeal and Notice of Contention
A appealed on the following grounds:
“1 The trial judge erred in finding that the word
‘youth’ as contained in the Deed of Indenture dated 23 October
("the 1873 Deed")
was used in a gender-neutral sense.
2 The trial judge ought to have found that the word
‘youth’ as contained in the 1873 Deed refers to boys and young
3 The trial judge erred in finding that a collection of
historical newspaper articles was inadmissible as evidence of the meaning
word ‘youth’ in 1873.
4 The trial judge erred in finding that the ‘ancient
documents rule’ cannot apply in the absence of a finding that
the relevant
Deed is ambiguous or obscure.”
first two grounds of appeal are two sides of the same coin, challenging the
primary judge’s ultimate conclusion.
third and fourth grounds of appeal contain discrete challenges, the third ground
relating to a particular evidentiary ruling,
the fourth to a finding that the
so-called “ancient documents rule” could not be enlivened to admit
evidence of subsequent
conduct to inform the meaning of the word
“youth” in the Deed.
Council and the Attorney General for the State of New South Wales each filed a
notice of contention (on 5 September 2025 and 9
September 2025 respectively) in
the following terms:
“Even if the meaning of ‘youth’ in the 1873 Trust Deed were
confined to boys and young men, the appellant has not
demonstrated, and it is
not the case, that the object set forth in the 1873 Trust Deed, ‘to
provide an efficient course of
education for’
boys and young men, excludes co-education”.
is convenient to deal with appeal grounds 3 and 4 first prior to addressing the
challenge to the primary judge’s ultimate
conclusion.
Ground 3 – rejection of miscellaneous newspaper
background to this ground of appeal can be stated in short detail.
first instance, Student A filed but ultimately did not read an expert report of
a Dr Laugesen to which, according to the transcript,
there were in the order of
10 volumes of attachments, largely comprising newspaper articles from the 19th
century, stretching from
the 1850s through to the 1880s, which included
references to the term “youth”.
Izzo SC, who appeared for Student A both at first instance and on appeal, had
indicated to the primary judge that he wished to
rely upon a selection of the
articles identified by Dr Laugesen, presumably with the benefit of electronic
30 in number but to which he only intended to draw
attention to five) for the purpose of demonstrating the contemporaneous usage
the term “youth”.
course was opposed by Mr Hutley SC, appearing for the College, on a number of
grounds including relevance and by reference to
Evidence Act
(NSW). His arguments included that:
the corpus of
documents identified by Dr Laugesen only represented a limited search of
contemporaneous documents;
only a small and
highly selective portion of articles from that limited search was proposed to be
referred to;
this could not
properly bear upon a consideration of usage of the word “youth” in
the Deed, and would be of no assistance
in the undertaking of a conventional
question of construction;
it would be
“beyond oppressive” to have to consider the entire corpus of
articles identified not only by reason of their
sheer number but by reason of
the need to examine the context in which the term “youth” was used
in each article; and
limitations, dictionaries were the appropriate reference source rather than
myriad newspaper articles.
the course of argument as to the admissibility of these articles, it was
established as “common ground” that “between
2 to 3% [of the
articles] were clearly gender specific and the rest - up to about 13% - were
possibly or likely to be gender specific...The
rest, about 90%, were clearly
gender non-specific.”
primary judge admitted the articles Mr Izzo sought to tender on a provisional
basis, subject to relevance, and admitted the balance
of the articles
(approximately 490 in number) tendered by Mr Hutley on a similar basis.
primary judge did not place any reliance on any of the small number of
individual quotations to which he was taken in argument
by Mr Izzo at first
instance although whether he formally rejected their tender is not entirely
clear. His Honour’s reasoning
was as follows:
“[114] It may be accepted that the Court is engaged in an
exercise of determining the meaning the words in the Trust Deed
would have had
for a contemporaneous bystander. Ultimately it is a question of recognised usage
rather than ‘correctness’.
[115] But that cannot mean that any publication in which the
word has been used with the relevant meaning is admissible into evidence.
Laugesen’s research in the present case uncovered hundreds of
contemporaneous quotations. Counsel for the College was right,
in my view, to
say that to admit those quotations could lead to an avalanche of further
argument (and perhaps, further evidence)
with that quotation’s context or the idiosyncrasies of its writer.
[116] There is a sense in which it can be said that a
dictionary is only a collection of such quotations. But the use of dictionaries
as an aid to determining the meaning of words is well established (see the
discussion by Mahoney JA in
Provincial Insurance Australia Pty Ltd v
Consolidated Wood Products Pty Ltd
(1991) 25 NSWLR 541
at 560-562). It was
accepted by all parties in the present case. The practice is based on the status
of dictionaries as authoritative
works of reference, and thus as being some
evidence (albeit not binding:
at 560G) of recognised usage.
[117] There is an analogy between a dictionary entry and an
expert opinion. This is not to say that the requirements of
satisfied. But there is still a qualitative difference between such an entry and
an individual published quotation. In my
view, the latter is inadmissible as
evidence of meaning.”
formally rejected or not, his Honour was correct not to place any reliance on
the handful of quotations to which he (and this
Court) were taken in argument.
To the extent that a small selection of references in those quotations connected
with boys, that was driven by the context of the subject
matter of the articles in which the quotation appeared and said nothing
the general meaning or usage of that expression as at 1873. In any event, the
few quotations which did align youth with male
youth were against a sea of
articles in which the expression was used in a wholly non-gendered way. These
one or two examples could
not establish a foundation for the existence of a
common usage of the term “youth” which supported the interpretation
of the term which was advanced on behalf of Student A and, in any event, do not
assist in establishing the interpretation of the
term “youth” in the
ground 3 must be dismissed.
Ground 4 – ancient documents
PJ [162], the primary judge held that:
“I think that the term ‘youth’ in cl 3 of the Trust
Deed is neither ambiguous nor obscure. In its own terms, therefore,
the ancient
documents rule cannot apply. And even if the evidence in question were
admissible on the question of interpretation of
the 1873 Deed, I do not think it
makes any difference”.
so-called “ancient documents rule” was invoked at first instance as
an exception to the general rule that a contract
cannot be construed by
reference to the parties’ subsequent conduct. As the primary judge
pointed out, one frequently cited
statement of that
exception is that of Sir Edward Sugden (later Lord St Leonards
Attorney-General v. Drummond
(1842) 1 Dr & War 353
in which his Lordship said:
“One of the most settled rules of law
for the construction of
ambiguities
in ancient instruments is, that you may resort to
contemporaneous usage to ascertain the meaning of the deed; tell me what you
done under such a deed, and I will tell you what that deed means”.
(emphasis added)
“Contemporaneous
usage” in this context refers to usage contemporaneous with the
“ancient instrument” in question.
That usage cannot be used to
create ambiguities which the judge construing the instrument does not consider
exist. In the present
case, the primary judge did not consider that the Deed
gave rise to any ambiguity as to the meaning of the word “youth”.
agree. The non-gendered meaning of the word “youth” is not a recent
development. The meaning of the word “youth”
has not “become
obscure” over time: cf.
Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd v L Schuler
[1973] UKHL 2
[1974] AC 235
at 261 per Lord Wilberforce.
agree entirely with the primary judge’s conclusion that “[i]n its
own terms ... the ancient documents rule cannot apply”
[163] ... “the fact that when the College began
operating in 1881 it had a boys-only admissions policy says nothing
the question of power which is in issue in this case. The same is so for
the establishment of MLC School in 1886. Indeed, all that
these subsequent events do is underline that in 1873 the question of
admissions policies in Church schools had not been settled in
any permanent
way, and that this was a good reason for the use of gender-neutral language
at that point. The case illustrates another
point made by Lord Simon
(at 268-269): ‘subsequent conduct is
of no greater probative value in the interpretation of an instrument th[a]n
prior negotiations
or direct evidence of intention: it might, indeed, be most
misleading to let in subsequent conduct without reference to these
the extent that Student A also sought to rely upon the ancient documents rule to
justify reliance upon the body of newspaper articles
tendered, and submitted
that ambiguity was not a pre-requisite for this form of use, the points already
made in relation to ground
3 make plain that the vanishingly small number of
quotations sought to be relied upon were quite incapable of overcoming the plain
and ordinary meaning of the term “youth” when read in the context of
the Deed as a whole and the predominant contemporaneous
understanding of that
term at large.
ground 4 must be dismissed.
Grounds 1 and 2
grounds essentially contain the challenge to the primary judge’s ultimate
conclusion, and the arguments advanced in support
of them closely mirrored those
which had been made and rejected at first instance.
Essentially
for the reasons the primary judge gave, we do not consider that his Honour erred
in his construction of the Deed or his
interpretation of the word
“youth”. On a rehearing of the matter, our view accords with his
Honour’s conclusion.
word “youth” is, on its face, gender-neutral. Nor did Student A
submit that such a usage of the term as at the date
of the Deed was heterodox.
Indeed it was supported by most of the dictionaries referred to, including that
considered by both parties
to be the most authoritative, namely the Oxford
English Dictionary.
meaning was consistent with the drafter’s use of the gender-neutral words
“children” and “pupils”
elsewhere in the Deed. If the
interpretation of the term “youth” were as contended by Student A,
those subsequent references
to “children” and “pupils”
must be read as effectively referring only to “sons” and
Not only could these terms have been used by the drafter had
it been intended that “youth” refer to “boys”
alone, but the use of the word “children” would be particularly
problematic and a source of real confusion if,
by extension, it was intended to
apply to boys alone. The rights of Ministers under the Deed to have their
children educated “
at the said Wesleyan Collegiate School
(emphasis added) would not have meant what the Deed plainly said on its face to
the extent that those children included girls.
Izzo submitted that if the word “youth” is read as being confined to
“boys” then the gender-neutral words
“children” and
“pupils” are capable of being read in a way confined to boys without
doing violence to the
language. That approach, in our view, ignores that the
Deed must be construed as a whole and it is inappropriate to construe one
(here “youth”) in a way that then drives the meaning of the balance
of the document. The interpretative significance
of all of the words used in the
Deed has to be considered when giving meaning to the Deed as a whole.
use of the expression “to provide
an efficient course
of education
for youth” (emphasis added) also supported the interpretation favoured by
the primary judge insofar as it invested
a measure of broad discretion in the
members of the Council in relation to the provision of education for youth. So,
also, it was
in the Council that authority was reposed for determining the
regulations and conditions to be attached to the admission of pupils.
arrangements were consistent with the general intention, reflected in the
recitals to the Deed, to place “the control
and management” of the
College in the hands of the Council.
the Council only proceeded to admit boys to the College did not rationally bear
upon the meaning of “youth”. It was
within the Council’s broad
discretion to confine entry to boys (as it did) but the Deed did not compel it
to do so or preclude
it from admitting girls, whether at elementary or secondary
levels. As far as the arrangement for the children of Wesleyan Ministers
concerned, the Council was obliged to admit a “certain number” of
those children to be determined by a Committee
comprised of members of the
Council and of the Committee of the Theological Institution. This in itself is a
contextual indication
that the makers of the Deed intended to confer on those
responsible for the College a discretion that was broad enough to encompass
admission of girls, but did not compel that to occur.
this context, historical materials admitted into evidence before the primary
judge evidenced a contemporaneous fluidity and changing
attitude towards the
education of girls at the time, a phenomenon which was entirely consistent with
the drafter of the Deed and
the parties to it intending to retain a degree of
flexibility as to the use of the extensive lands that were the subject of the
for the education of both boys and girls, with the deliberate use of the
word “youth” ensuring this possibility, even
if not immediately to
be taken up. Thus, in one source it was noted that, although the University of
Sydney did not admit females
until the 1880s, by 1871, junior and senior public
examinations for both boys and girls were being conducted under its auspices.
Further, it is not even clear that the
Sydney University Act
(NSW) precluded the admission of women to the University. In this context, the
recital to the
University Extension Act
(NSW) suggests
that it was passed only by reason of the perceived need to put the matter beyond
as he had done at first instance, Mr Izzo sought to rely on surrounding
circumstances to support his contention (see [15] above).
That submission may be
dealt with in relatively short measure.
resort to surrounding circumstances would be required to produce a very
compelling case for departure from the ordinary meaning
of the language used in
an instrument. The circumstances invoked in the present case were not of that
character and at best were
neutral in their effect. Thus, the fact that the
former institution known as Newington School only educated boys was not to the
Far from that institution being continued by the Deed, its ending was
confirmed and, in any event, nothing was known as to that School’s
constitutive legal framework and, in particular, whether it was expressly
required to be a school for boys only. The same observation
may be made in
respect of Kingswood and Woodhouse Grove Schools, also referred to in the
as Mr Hutley submitted, the fact that the College, following execution of the
Deed and its opening on 18 January 1880, only
admitted boys said nothing as to
the Council’s
to admit pupils of both sexes, including
children of Methodist Ministers.
consideration of the provision of schooling for girls and young women by the
Church and indeed government at the time of Deed
pointed, if in any direction,
towards keeping the possibility open that the lands secured by the Deed for the
education of youth
may also be used for the schooling of girls, whether by means
of co-education as understood in now contemporary terms, or separate
of both boys and girls on the same land and under the auspices of the same
institution. As the primary judge observed at
PJ [149], "[a]dmission of girls
would have left the Council free to choose such segregation measures as it
considered necessary or
desirable to achieve an 'efficient course of education'
for all the College's pupils".
the Wesleyan Methodist Church, the contemporaneous evidence demonstrated an open
and ongoing debate about the approach to be
taken to improving the educational
opportunities for girls. Certainly, there was nothing in the evidence to suggest
that the Church
had reached a position of opposition to facilitating new
schooling opportunities for girls, in such a way as might have provided
for a conclusion that the Deed was intended to foreclose the future use of the
College and the property being devoted to
the purposes of the College for the
education of girls.
although it was not necessary for the primary judge's determination (nor this
Court's), submissions were made contrasting
the 1872 recommendation by the
Newington School Council, which referred to "sons" and "boys", and the
resolution ultimately adopted
by the Methodist General Conference in February
1873, which used gender-neutral terms (in turn picked up by the Deed). It is
to say, in the primary judge's language at PJ [150], that the change
in language from "sons" and "boys" to "youth" and "children"
"illustrates quite
strikingly that a deliberate choice was made to use gender-neutral
grounds 1 and 2 must be dismissed.
light of these conclusions, it is not necessary to consider the Notice of
Contention.
was for the foregoing reasons that the Court made orders granting leave to
appeal (to the extent necessary) but dismissing the
appeal, and awarding costs
to the Council and the 26th respondent.
21 October 2025 - Revision made at [34], within quote, third sentence "then"
changed to "than".
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter