URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2018/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RUTHNAM, Gonasagaran [2018] NSWMPSC 3 (10 May 2018)
PROFESSIONAL
STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Gonasagaran Ruthnam
MED0001060993
Date/s of Inquiry:
19 & 20 February 2018
Committee members:
Mr Nicholas Kelly, Chairperson
Dr Jon Fogarty, registered medical practitioner Dr Karryn Koster,
registered medical practitioner Dr Rose Leontini, lay member.
Appearance for Health
Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Emma Bayley, Legal Officer
Appearance for Dr Gonasagaran Ruthnam:
Mr Stephen Barnes, instructed by Mr Tony Mineo of Avant Law
Date of decision:
10 May 2018
Dr Ruthnam be cautioned and conditions be imposed on his registration
Publication of decision:
The Chair made a non-publication direction as to evidence of the identity
of Patient A
Refer to page 29 of this decision for details of non-
publication directions
he facts of this case are not in dispute, and an agreed statement of facts
was provided to the Committee prior to the hearing of the
inquiry. In summary,
Patient A had been a patient of Dr Ruthnam in Coffs Harbour since 2002 and had a
history of anxiety and depression.
Prior to being treated by Dr Ruthnam, Patient
A had attempted suicide by deliberately crashing his car in 1998. As a result of
attempt, Patient A suffered neurological deficit and a persistent gait
disorder. It appears that Patient A’s gait had been
affected by a stroke
in 1996, but that the motor vehicle accident exacerbated the problem. Over the
course of treating Patient A,
Dr Ruthnam had prescribed anti-depressants, but
Patient A was not on anti-depressants at the time of the events set out below.
A had a history of making references to suicide and death. In 2014,
Patient A was 83 years of age.
ollowing a request for a home visit from Patient A on 28 August 2014, Dr
Ruthnam attended Patient A’s home at around lunchtime.
Patient A lived
alone in a gated complex. Patient A told Dr Ruthnam that he “wanted to
die”. Patient A showed signs of
self-neglect and refused medical
assistance. Dr Ruthnam determined that Patient A did not meet the requirements
for involuntary admission
to hospital, made references to cognitive behavioural
therapy and interpersonal therapy in his notes and decided to review Patient
r Ruthnam returned to Patient A’s home later that night, at
approximately 7:20 pm and stayed for a number of hours. Patient
A was anxious
and pacing, and wished to sleep. Dr Ruthnam discussed sedation with Patient A,
and advised that he would need to return
to monitor Patient A but that Patient A
may not be able to let him into the complex if asleep. Patient A gave Dr Ruthnam
card to enter the gated complex. Patient A pointed to an envelope on
his bedside table and said “That is for you”.
r Ruthnam initially administered 5mg Valium intramuscularly in Patient
A’s left deltoid area. Dr Ruthnam’s notes record
that at 2100,
Patient A remained agitated, could not sleep and wanted “to die”. Dr
Ruthnam administered a further 5mg
Valium intravenously in Patient A’s
left forearm while Patient A was lying in his bed. Not long after this, Dr
Ruthnam administered
a further 5mg Valium intramuscularly in Patient A’s
left deltoid area while Patient A was lying in his bed. In total, Dr Ruthnam
administered 15 mg of Valium (10 mg intramuscularly and 5 mg intravenously),
over approximately one hour. Dr Ruthnam administered
the Valium for the purpose
of assisting Patient A to sleep. Dr Ruthnam administered the Valium when Patient
A was alone in his home,
with the intention of assessing Patient A on the
morning of 29 August 2014, knowing that Patient A would remain alone
efore leaving Patient A’s home, Dr Ruthnam looked in the envelope and
saw money secured with rubber bands. Dr Ruthnam removed
the envelope containing
$2000 cash from Patient A’s home for safekeeping and took the access card
for the complex in order
to return the following morning. No record of taking
the envelope or the access card was made in Dr Ruthnam’s notes.
t approximately 8:00 am the following day, Dr Ruthnam made a third home visit
to Patient A’s home. Dr Ruthnam used the access
card to enter the gated
complex and Patient A’s home while Patient A was sleeping. Dr Ruthnam did
not wake Patient A and, after
assessing Patient A’s pulse and breathing,
left with the intention of returning to assess Patient A around lunch time that
atient A subsequently called 000 four times between approximately 1240 and
1300. He told the operator he had had an overdose and was
dying. Patient A was
taken by ambulance to hospital, after making a request for transfer to attending
ambulance officers. Patient
A was admitted, told hospital staff that he wanted
to die and was scheduled under the
Mental Health Act 2007
r Ruthnam visited Patient A in hospital later that day and again on 1
September 2014. During the latter visit, Dr Ruthnam gave hospital
envelope containing $2000 cash to return to Patient A.
atient A remained in hospital until 23 September 2014.
n 8 June 2017, a complaint was made by the NSW Health Care Complaints
Commission (the
) that Dr Ruthnam was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in the manner in which he treated Patient A. The complaint
amended on 14 October 2017. A copy of the amended complaint is attached to
these reasons and marked as
Attachment 1
ELEVANT LAW
he objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
established by the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law
) include to provide for the protection of the public by
ensuring that only health practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a competent and ethical manner are registered: s 3(2)(a). That
objective is not confined to protecting the patients
or potential patients of an
individual practitioner from any continuing risk of his or her malpractice or
incompetence. It also includes
protecting the public from similar misconduct or
incompetence by other practitioners, and upholding public confidence in the
of the profession:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
t is a guiding principle of the national registration and accreditation
scheme established by the National Law that restrictions on
the practice of the
medical profession are to be imposed under the scheme only if it is necessary to
ensure health services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate quality:
National Law s 3(c).
n exercising a function under the National Law, the Committee is required to
have regard to the objectives and guiding principles
of the national
registration and accreditation scheme established by the National Law (National
Law s 4), however, the protection
of the health and safety of the public must be
the Committee’s paramount consideration: National Law s 3A.
nsatisfactory
professional conduct
nsatisfactory professional conduct of a medical practitioner is defined in
the National Law to include the circumstances set out in
section 139B(1) of the
National Law. This definition includes, relevantly:
onduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience (National Law s
139B(1)(a));
contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of the National Law, or the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW) Regulation 2014
, whether or not the practitioner has been
prosecuted for or convicted of an offence in respect of the contravention
(National Law
s 139B(1)(b)); and
ny other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of the practitioner’s profession
(National Law s
139B(1)(l)).
he full text of section 139B of the National Law (NSW) and other relevant
provisions is attached to these reasons and marked as
Attachment 2
he phrase “significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience”
defined in the National Law. However, in
Re A Medical Practitioner and the
Medical Practice Act
(unreported, NSWMT, 3 September 2007), Deputy
Chairperson Judge Freeman stated (in relation to legislation in the
section 139B of the National Law) that “[a]s a general principle, the
use of the term ‘significant’ may in law be
taken to mean not
trivial, of importance, or substantial.”
isciplinary powers of
the Committee
he Committee may exercise the disciplinary powers conferred on it by section
146B of the National Law if it finds the subject-matter
of a complaint against a
relevant health practitioner to have been proved: National Law s 146A.
he subject matter of a complaint may be broader than individual particulars
of it, and may include the factual matters advanced in
support of it. The
Committee’s role is to conduct an inquiry into a complaint made against a
medical practitioner, informed
as it thinks necessary, and determining any
complaint it considers arises on the material before it. Subject to the
requirements
of procedural fairness, the Committee is not bound by the way in
which a complaint is particularised, or confined in the exercise
of its powers
to make findings and orders by strict reference to the terms of the complaint as
originally advanced:
Shuquan Liu v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2018] NSWSC 315
he purpose of an exercise of the Committee’s disciplinary powers is the
protection of the public and not to punish the practitioner:
Clyne v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
Nevertheless, imposing
restrictions on the practice of the medical profession by a medical practitioner
who has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct operates as a deterrent
to the individual concerned and to the general body of medical practitioners.
Such restrictions
also maintain public confidence by signalling that medical
practitioners whose conduct does not meet the required standards of the
profession will have restrictions placed on their practice:
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
of the Committee’s professional members
n written submissions before the Committee, the Commission and Dr Ruthnam
have taken issue with the extent to which the Committee
can rely upon the
knowledge and expertise of its professional members.
Dekker v Medical Board of Australia
[2014] WASCA 216
, the Court of
Appeal of the Supreme Court of Western Australia examined the authorities
relating to the circumstances in which a
specialist tribunal may rely upon the
expertise of its own members (at [50]ff). The Committee adopts the statement of
the Western
Australian Court of Appeal (at [50]) that “care must be taken
in considering the authorities, as different considerations and
principles may
apply according to the precise constitution of the relevant tribunal, the
statutory context, the statutory object
which it is required to fulfil, the
nature of the proceedings in question, and the specific matter requiring
determination.”
Nevertheless, mindful of this warning, the Court of Appeal
identified a number of principles applicable to this Committee (at [64]-[69])
which are reproduced below without reference to the relevant authorities:
t would ordinarily be appropriate for the Committee to use the knowledge and
experience of its medical members to understand and adjudicate
upon questions of
medical evidence.
he Committee’s use of the knowledge and experience of its members must
always occur with due observance of the requirements
of natural justice. The
touchstone of procedural fairness is the avoidance of practical injustice. The
specific content of the requirements
of procedural fairness depends upon the
particular circumstances of the case.
t may be expected, ordinarily, that matters of general knowledge and
experience within the medical profession may be used by the Committee
specific notice of those matters being given to the parties. Accordingly (and
generally speaking), it may be expected that
the Committee may, without specific
prior disclosure, reject arguments or assertions of medical fact which,
according to the general
knowledge and experience of the specialist members of
the Committee, are unfounded. Specific disclosure would generally be required
relation to particular medical facts or matters known to and considered relevant
by the medical members of the Tribunal, which
are outside of the general
knowledge and experience of the medical profession, so that the parties may have
a proper opportunity
to deal with them.
lso, in disciplinary proceedings it would not be appropriate for a medical
fact in respect of which there was no evidence led, and
which was material to
the proof of improper conduct against a doctor, to be positively supplied by the
Committee from its own knowledge
and experience without the doctor being put on
proper notice. Notice may be express or, in some cases, it may fairly be
that notice was necessarily implicit having regard to the
particular nature of the
allegations of the complaint and the way in which the proceedings were
he observations of Moffitt P (Glass JA agreeing) in
Kalil v Bray
[1977] 1 NSWLR 256
at 265 are also pertinent in this context:
“I should emphasize that the subtle demands of justice required of any
tribunal should not be overlooked. There are considerable
dangers in an expert
tribunal using expert knowledge in respect of which there is a genuine
difference of view within the body of
the profession concerned. The issue should
then be dealt with by evidence. In any event it is best that the subject matter
opinion considered relevant by the expert tribunal be clearly brought
to the attention of the parties at the appropriate time.”
he complaint and particulars, or details, of the complaint are set out in
Attachment 1
. The factual basis of the complaint is not in
dispute. As a result, the issues for determination are whether the facts as
satisfy the Committee that Dr Ruthnam has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct and, if they do, what orders or directions
the Committee
should make.
he role of the Committee is to make findings on questions of fact in order to
determine whether the subject-matter of a complaint
has been proven on the
balance of probabilities (having regard to the principles discussed in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
361–362). Once that task has been completed, and the Committee has found
the subject-matter of a complaint proven, the jurisdictional
door to the
discretionary powers in s 146B of the National Law is open, and the
Committee’s task is to determine whether and,
if so, how, to exercise
those discretionary powers.
he Committee was provided with a folder of documents by the Commission, which
included an expert report prepared by Dr Norman Walsh.
Dr Ruthnam provided the
Committee with a statement, written references and an expert report prepared by
A/Professor Vincent Roche,
discussed below.
he two independent experts briefed to provide reports in these proceedings
gave evidence concurrently before the Committee. They differed
in their views as
to whether Dr Ruthnam’s conduct fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or
experience or was otherwise improper or unethical. Determination of whether
the facts as agreed amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct requires
analysis of the experts’ competing views and of Dr
evidence before the Committee.
he Committee has read and considered all of the evidence before it, as well
oral evidence of Dr Ruthnam and the independent experts
given at the hearing, as
well as the submissions of the Commission and Dr Ruthnam, oral and written.
Notwithstanding this consideration,
the Committee may not have referred directly
or specifically to such evidence and submissions in these written reasons.
here are two complaints before the Committee. Complaint 1 is that Dr Ruthnam
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
pursuant to s
139B(1)(a) and/or (l). There are five particulars listed in support of this
complaint. Complaint 2 is that Dr Ruthnam
is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct pursuant to s 139B(1)(b). There is one particular listed in
support of this complaint.
Notwithstanding that the Committee is not bound by
the manner in which the complaints are particularised by the Commission (subject
to the rules of procedural fairness), it is convenient to address the competing
expert opinions by reference to the particulars,
as this is how the evidence was
presented to the Committee.
articular 1
articular 1 is directed to the first home visit and alleges that Dr Ruthnam
conducted an inadequate assessment of Patient A, in that
he failed to:
ndertake a comprehensive mental health assessment of Patient A;
rrange an assessment of Patient A by a psychiatrist;
eek psychiatric advice;
ive appropriate weight to:
atient A’s lack of support network;
atient A’s self-neglect;
atient A’s statement to Dr Ruthnam that he “wanted to
atient A’s diagnosis of depression by Dr Ruthnam on 12 August 2014;
atient A’s history of a suicide attempt that had a high level of
TTCC11,,11
PPPPgsauPPTTTTIITIIIETDaacUUTRDPABDDFT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (734 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter