URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Morcos v Deosa Enterprises Pty Limited [2020] NSWWCCPD 73 (17 December 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
v Deosa Enterprises Pty Limited
[2020] NSWWCCPD 73
Andrew Morcos
RESPONDENT:
Deosa Enterprises Pty Limited
AAI Ltd t/as GIO
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Mr J Isaksen
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
5 August 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
17 December 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Section 32A
Workers Compensation Act 1987
; no current work
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Geoffrey Parker SC
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr L Morgan, counsel
Law Partners Personal Injury Lawyers
Mr J Beran, counsel
Hall & Wilcox Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
1 of the Certificate of Determination dated 5 August 2020 is revoked.
appellant’s entitlement to weekly compensation from 12 January 2020 to
date and continuing, if any, is remitted to the Arbitrator
to determine whether
the appellant is likely to continue indefinitely to have no current work
capacity and otherwise to determine
the matter in accordance with the reasons in
this decision.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Morcos (the appellant) was employed by Deosa Enterprises Pty Limited (the
respondent) as a self-employed electrician. On 23
May 2017, he sustained an
injury to the right knee. Subsequently, on 4 December 2017, the right knee gave
way and Mr Morcos fell
onto his right arm causing a triceps tendon avulsion of
the right elbow and the need for surgery on the right arm.
appellant developed a secondary psychological condition described as an
adjustment disorder.
a result of the injury of 23 May 2017, the appellant was paid weekly payments of
compensation for 130 weeks.
letter dated 29 November 2019, the insurer informed the appellant that weekly
payments of compensation would end on 11 January
2020 due to the operation of
Workers Compensation Act
(the 1987 Act).
issue before the Arbitrator for resolution was defined
“(a) Whether the applicant has no current work capacity
since 12 January 2020 and is likely to continue indefinitely to have
work capacity (sections 32A and 38(2) of the 1987 Act).”
Certificate of Determination issued on 5 August
recorded the
Arbitrator’s determination of that issue:
Commission determines:
applicant has failed to establish that he has had no current work capacity from
12 January 2020 to the date of his decision.”
appeal is against that determination and identifies two grounds of appeal
asserting that the Arbitrator erred in fact and law
(a) determining the applicant has current work capacity, and
(b) failing to determine the application or otherwise of s 32A and s 38.
relief sought in the appeal are orders:
(a) that the determination
of the Arbitrator be set aside, and
(b) that the matter be returned to (an) alternative arbitrator for
determination.
the reasons that follow, Ground 1 of the appeal is made out and the matter is
remitted to the Arbitrator for re-determination
in accordance with the reasons
in this decision.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6; the documents that are before me, and
the submissions by the parties that the appeal
can proceed to be determined on
the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information
to proceed ‘on
the papers’ without holding any conference or formal
hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE NATURE OF AN APPEAL PURSUANT TO SECTION 352(5)
Section 352(5) of the 1998 Act provides:
“An appeal under
this section is limited to a determination of whether the decision appealed
against was or was not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to
the correction of any such error. The appeal is not a review or new
available relief is provided for in s 352(7) of the 1998
“On appeal, the decision may be confirmed or may be
revoked and a new decision made in its place.
Alternatively, the matter may be remitted back to the Arbitrator concerned,
or to another Arbitrator, for determination in accordance
with any decision or
directions of the Commission (including, in the case of a decision about the
degree of permanent impairment
resulting from an injury, a direction to refer
the matter for assessment by an approved medical specialist under Part
Raulston v Toll Pty Limited
Roche DP said:
“First, as error now defines the appeal process
under s 352, the following principles stated by Barwick CJ in
Whiteley Muir
& Zwanenberg Ltd v Kerr
(1966) 39 ALJR 505
at 506 (cited with approval
by Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ in
Zuvela v Cosmarnan
Concrete Pty Ltd
[1996] HCA 140
140 ALR 227)
are relevant (I have
substituted ‘Arbitrator’ for ‘trial judge’ where
appropriate):
(a) An Arbitrator, though not basing his or her findings on credit, may have
preferred one view of the primary facts to another as
being more probable. Such
a finding may only be disturbed by a Presidential member if ‘other
probabilities so outweigh that
chosen by the [Arbitrator] that it can be said
that his [or her] conclusion was wrong’.
(b) Having found the primary facts, the Arbitrator may draw a particular
inference from them. Even here the ‘fact of the [Arbitrator’s]
decision must be displaced’. It is not enough that the Presidential
member would have drawn a different inference. It must
be shown that the
Arbitrator was wrong.
(c) It may be shown that an Arbitrator was wrong ‘by showing that
material facts have been overlooked, or given undue or too
little weight in
deciding the inference to be drawn: or the available inference in the opposite
sense to that chosen by the [Arbitrator]
is so preponderant in the opinion of
the appellate court that the [Arbitrator’s] decision is
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator summarised the appellant’s evidence as provided in his
statement dated 15 May 2020. He observed that the appellant
left school at
17 years of age and entered the electrical trade, becoming self-employed in
2015–2016. He recorded in brief
terms the injuries sustained by the
appellant and quoted the appellant’s statement that he had worked his
entire career in
occupations requiring physical endurance and labour, that he
would not be physically capable of returning to work due to ongoing
pain in the
right knee, right elbow and right ankle. The Arbitrator also made mention of the
appellant’s statement that he
did not believe he could return to
employment due to psychological symptoms.
Arbitrator noted that the appellant had stated that he had failed multiple
medical examinations for prospective employers and
had been told by potential
employers that he would be a liability.
Thereafter,
the Arbitrator summarised chronologically part of the medical evidence before
him. The summary was of the medical evidence
from 13 May 2019 to 13 March 2020.
The Arbitrator said:
“I restricted my summary of the medical
evidence to the past 12 months. However, there is medical evidence prior to this
which supports a finding that, although the applicant could not return to
the full duties required of an electrician, he was capable
of engaging in
suitable work having regard to the injury to the right knee and condition of his
right elbow.”
Arbitrator defined the elements of the claim required to be proven by the
appellant as requiring that the appellant “not
only establish that he has
no current work capacity, but that he is likely to continue indefinitely to have
no current work
appellant’s case before the Arbitrator was that “the combination of
the applicant’s physical injuries to the
right knee and consequential
condition to the right elbow, the ongoing opioid medication that the applicant
is taking, and the secondary
psychological condition that the applicant has been
diagnosed with, means that there has been no suitable employment which the
has been suited for since 12 January 2020, and the applicant can
therefore be regarded as having no current work capacity.”
Arbitrator first considered the appellant’s physical circumstances. The
Arbitrator later considered the psychiatric evidence
in the reports of Drs Khan
and Teoh. The appellant’s case at the hearing was that he had no current
capacity because of the
combined effect of his physical and psychiatric
conditions.
said that Dr Chugh, the appellant’s general practitioner, in June 2018 had
informed the Rehabilitation Service that the appellant
could work as a Customer
Service Manager or Electrical Training Technician. On 13 May 2019, Dr Chugh
certified the appellant as having
a capacity for 5 hours of work per day for 5
days per week with a lifting limit of up to 10 kilograms. The Arbitrator
opinion to be consistent with the previous medical opinion. Thus,
although the appellant could not return to the full duties of an
electrician, he
was fit to undertake part-time work in suitable
employment.
August 2019 the treating orthopaedic specialist, Dr Kirsh, in consultation with
Dr Chugh, expressed the view that the appellant
was not fit for work. The
Arbitrator dealt with this conclusion in a manner ultimately critical to his
conclusion:
“The entry made by Dr Chugh from that consultation
was that the applicant would be unfit for work for the next three to six
If that evidence on its own were accepted as establishing that the applicant had
no current work capacity, then that would
take the period of no current work
capacity to no further than early February 2020. There is no additional evidence
from Dr Chugh
or Dr Kirsh after August 2019 which can assist in my determination
as to whether the applicant has had no current work capacity since
There is no adequate explanation from Dr Chugh or Dr Kirsh as to why they
considered the applicant was unfit for work for three to
six months from early
August 2019, particularly given the medical opinions of the previous 12 months,
including from Dr Chugh, which
considered the applicant had some capacity
for suitable employment. There is no explanation from Dr Kirsh as to
whether the jobs
that he refers to and which he understands the applicant has
failed to qualify for, involved essentially physical work or not. The
is not able to assist because his own evidence is limited to: ‘have failed
multiple medical exams that have been
conducted by prospective employers.’
No evidence is provided as to the identity of those prospective employers, and
the applicant was applying
to the appellant’s statement that he had always worked in physically
demanding jobs and would not be able to work in
a sedentary role, the Arbitrator
found that because the appellant had run his own business at the time of the
injury “it [was]
reasonable to infer that this would have involved some
rudimentary management
Arbitrator found it significant that the appellant had owned and operated a
service station from 2003 to 2016 and that such duties
“included customer
service, managing finances and stock
these essential findings, the Arbitrator reasoned:
evidence of past work experience and education, along with the medical evidence
which I have accepted in regard to the
applicant’s physical injuries,
leads me to conclude that at the very least the applicant could do a few hours
of work for a
few days per week in some menial clerical or administrative
employments regarded by the Arbitrator as suitable were level 1 employee as a
clerk under the Private Sector Award 2010; retail
employee level 4 under the
General Retail Industry Award
“I conclude from a review of the evidence that the
applicant is at least fit for part time work in basic clerical or administrative
work, or basic retail managerial work, despite the ongoing effects of the injury
to his right knee and consequential condition affecting
his right elbow. The
applicant has failed to establish that, as a result of those physical injuries,
[he] has had no current work
capacity from 12 January
concluded that the appellant could physically perform part time work, the
Arbitrator then considered the impact of the secondary
psychological injury
concluding:
“I have already given my reasons as to why I
consider the applicant has the physical capacity to undertake at least part time
work in basic clerical, administrative or retail management jobs. The findings
made by Dr Teoh that the applicant’s cognitive
functions were intact and
there was no evidence of memory impairment, leads me to the conclusion that
there is no impediment to the
applicant doing that same work, also in a part
time capacity, notwithstanding his psychological condition. The poor
concentration
which Dr Teoh accepts the applicant has, might limit the amount of
hours of work that the applicant can do, but not preclude him
from such work
altogether.”
Arbitrator said of Dr Khan’s evidence that Dr Khan did not record his own
observations of the applicant’s psychological
symptoms but merely recorded
what the worker said were his symptoms. Further, “[n]or does Dr Khan
explain why the applicant
could not return to any work within the next 12
Arbitrator concluded dispositive of the appellant’s case at [81] of the
“The practical exercise of determining whether the
applicant has been fit for suitable employment since 12 January 2020 leads
find that the applicant has not been able to establish that he has had no
current work capacity from 12 January 2020 to the
date of this
Arbitrator recorded the submissions of counsel with respect to the word
“indefinite” in s 38(2) of the 1987 Act, but
in so far as the
appellant had failed to establish that he had no current work capacity from 12
January 2020 it was not necessary
for the Arbitrator to determine that issue and
he did not do so.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant appeals from the Arbitrator’s decision as containing error in
fact and law in:
(a) determining the applicant has a current work
capacity, and
(b) failing to determine the application or otherwise of s 32A and 38
(of the 1987 Act).
brevity of the grounds of appeal may in some circumstances be commendable.
However, Practice Direction Number 6, paragraphs 17
and 18, require the
appellant to identify:
(a) the respects in which error of law, fact
or discretion is alleged to have occurred;
(b) any material findings it is said the Arbitrator should or should not have
(c) any material facts it is said the Arbitrator should or should not have
deficiency in the grounds of appeal is not well compensated for in the
appellant’s written submissions.
LEGISLATION
Arbitrator and the parties applied the legislation as it was before the 2018
amendments. The 2018 amendments affected the definitions
in s 32A. The
definition of “current work capacity” was amended. The definition of
“no current work capacity”
was unaltered. The two definitions were
removed to Schedule 3. The definition of “suitable employment” and
the provisions
of s 38(2) remained unaltered.
grounds of appeal do not raise any issue with respect to the amended legislation
and it is apparent that the parties were content
to have the Arbitrator deal
with the matter on the basis of the unamended s 32A. I set out the legislation
as considered by the parties
and the Arbitrator noting that the s 32A is
different after the 2018 amendments.
version of section 32A of the 1987 Act applied by the Arbitrator provided
relevantly:
current work capacity
, in relation
to a worker, means a present inability arising from an injury such that the
worker is not able to return to his or her
pre-injury employment but is able to
no current work capacity
, in relation to a worker, means a
present inability arising from an injury such that the worker is not able to
in the worker’s pre-injury employment or in
suitable employment.
suitable employment
, in relation to a worker, means employment
in work for which the worker is currently suited—
(a) having regard to—
(i) the nature of the worker’s incapacity and the details
provided in medical information including, but not limited to, any
certificate
of capacity supplied by the worker (under section 44B), and
(ii) the worker’s age, education, skills and work experience,
(iii) any plan or document prepared as part of the return to work
planning process, including an injury management plan under Chapter
1998 Act, and
(iv) any occupational rehabilitation services that are being, or have
been, provided to or for the worker, and
(v) such other matters as the Workers Compensation Guidelines may
specify, and
(b) regardless of—
(i) whether the work or the employment is available, and
(ii) whether the work or the employment is of a type or nature that is
generally available in the employment market, and
(iii) the nature of the worker’s pre-injury employment, and
(iv) the worker’s place of residence.”
38(2) of the 1987 Act provides:
“A worker who is assessed by
the insurer as having no current work capacity and likely to continue
indefinitely to have no current
work capacity is entitled to compensation after
the second entitlement period.”
SUBMISSIONS AND DISCUSSION
Ground 1: Determining the applicant has a current work
appellant’s conclusory submission is:
“The Arbitrator
needed in the proper exercise of his determinative powers to consider the
evidence as a whole and his failure
to do so constituted
appellant makes three principal submissions in support of that proposition and
in support of Ground 1 of the appeal:
(a) The Arbitrator “in
determining the applicant had capacity to work based on the medical evidence he
quoted failed to consider
the impact of the physical conditions (leg and arm) in
combination with the psychological nuances of the applicant’s condition
such that he ought properly have held that there was no suitable employment for
which the applicant had been suited for since 12
January 2020 such that the
applicant had no current work capacity per the approach of DP Roche in
Wollongong Nursing Home v Dewar
[2014] NSWWCCPD 55
(b) The Arbitrator “erred in considering the physical and
psychological conditions independently and not in combination and
without due
regard to the applicant’s statement evidence with respect to their
(c) In addition, the appellant complains the Arbitrator acted “in the
absence of evidence and without the proposition being
put to the applicant
inferred at [70] and [80] that the applicant had ‘administrative
skills’ despite the applicant’s
direct evidence to the
respondent submits, inter alia:
(a) The respondent says that the
appellant’s reliance on the approach in
Wollongong Nursing Home v
is incorrect that the
proper approach to the determination of suitable employment is that provided by
Popal v Myer Holdings Pty
That the ‘correct
approach’ is to undertake a practical exercise “having regard”
to the matters identified
in the definition of suitable employment. The
respondent submits that is what the Arbitrator did in his Reasons at [65].
(b) At [79] the Arbitrator turned his mind to the combination of the physical
and psychological effects of the compensable injuries,
the very question the
appellant says was not considered by the learned
Arbitrator.
The learned
Arbitrator determined that the evidence relied upon by the appellant was
insufficient to sustain such an argument.
(c) The Arbitrator turned his mind to the “worker’s age,
education, skills and work experience as required by s 32A”
asserting that
the appellant “seeks to cavil” with inferences drawn by the
Arbitrator as to the appellant’s skills
and experience without offering
substantive reasons as to why “the Arbitrator was incorrect to rely upon
the evidence of his
prior experience and education at [67] of his
(d) In relation to the decision making process when determining the skill and
experience of the appellant, the respondent submits
that the decision is factual
and that the appellant has failed to demonstrate that the learned
Arbitrator’s decision was wrong
so as to be amenable to appeal as required
Consideration and decision
Arbitrator dealt with the combined effect of the physical and psychological
impairments at paragraphs [78]–[80] of the Reasons.
Arbitrator did not accept Dr Teoh’s evidence or the assessment he provided
because he regarded the opinion as being ambiguous.
The ambiguity arises from
the impairment rating.
page 5 of Dr Teoh’s report dated 13 March 2020, the doctor expresses an
opinion with respect to a number of questions:
10. In your
opinion, is the current psychiatric condition and/or psychological problems of
our client likely to affect his future
life, including his ability to form and
maintain relationships both in the past and in the future?
His condition has become chronic, and his mental and physical condition is
likely to affect his future life.
His relationship was strained and he separated from his partner in 2019.
our client have any capacity for work as a result of his psychological injury
and any medication being administered?
He is not able to work
at all as a result of his physical and mental condition.
regard to our client’s pre-injury occupation, please comment on our
client’s fitness for work from his date of
injury to date and continuing.
In particular, please comment on the restrictions you would impose on our client
(eg type of work
and hours of work per week) should you consider him fit for
suitable duties at any point.
He is not fit to work as an
electrician, as a result of his current chronic condition.
you of the opinion, given our client’s injuries or illness, that it is
unlikely that he will ever again engage in gainful
employment on a sustainable
basis in any occupation for which he is reasonably qualified by education,
training or experience?
It is likely that he will not be able
to return to his pre-injury employment.
for the future.
His prognosis is guarded, as his condition has
become chronic.”
Notwithstanding
the answers to the posed questions, Dr Teoh when considering the impairment
rating against the box “Employability”,
gave a rating of 3 and said
“He is fit for suitable duties. He has been preoccupied with negative
thoughts, including a sense
of hopelessness. He has been worrying about his
future and his physical
condition.”
Arbitrator concluded:
“It may be that Dr Teoh considers that
it is the combination of the applicant’s physical and psychological
caused by the work injury in May 2017 that causes the applicant to
have no current work capacity ... However, I really need more
of an explanation
than the one line answer given by Dr
Arbitrator does not say what more he felt Dr Teoh should have said or upon what
other or additional basis he rejected the opinion.
report of Dr Teoh is plainly ambiguous, on the one hand offering the opinion
that the appellant is unable to work at all and on
the other hand suggesting for
the purpose of the impairment rating that he is fit for suitable duties. It was
for the appellant to
adduce evidence to resolve this ambiguity.
was no application made to adjourn the proceedings to obtain further evidence
from Dr Teoh to clarify the ambiguity. This meant
the Arbitrator was
required to resolve the ambiguity. It was open to the Arbitrator to not be
satisfied with the internally conflicting
evidence of Dr Teoh and to conclude
that he was not persuaded.
Arbitrator dismissed the treating psychiatrist, Dr Khan’s, evidence for
different reasons. At paragraph [76] of the Reasons
the Arbitrator says Dr Khan
did not record “his own observations” of the appellant’s
psychological symptoms and
did not explain why he could not return to work
within the next 12 months.
Dr Khan did not provide an explanation of his view that the appellant would not
But the antecedent question of what
was the appellant’s capacity for employment was properly answered and for
the reasons that
follow, in my view the rejection of Dr Khan’s opinion on
the ground that he had not recorded his own observations of the
applicant’s
psychological symptoms is in error and requires
correction.
Khan (report of 30 January 2020) was asked this:
your opinion, is the current psychiatric and/or psychological condition of our
client likely to affect his prospects of employment
and/or earning capacity? If
our client’s earning capacity prospects are affected, could you please
specify the extent that
you consider they are affected or reduced by?
Yes - Mr Morcos’ current psychiatric/psychological conditions are
likely to affect his prospects of employment and/or earning
capacity. Mr Morcos
has not been able to return to work since his work-related physical injury in
2017; however, it is his psychiatric/psychological
conditions that have been the
predominant barrier to his recovery. It is unlikely that Mr Morcos will be able
to return to work within
the next one year. Should he return to work in the
future, it is unlikely that he will be able manage with full-time work, which
would result in a reduction in his earning capacity.
Considering
our client’s psychological condition, please comment on our client’s
fitness for work from his date of injury
to date and
continuing.
From the date of injury to date and continuing, Mr
Morcos has not been fit for work due to his psychological conditions.
your expert opinion, will our client be able to return to any form of employment
he has performed in the past?
From a psychiatric perspective,
it is unlikely that Mr Morcos will be able to return to any form of employment
he has performed in
Khan records at page 2 in response to question 4:
has suffered psychological injuries, namely chronic adjustment disorder with
mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct
as well as an opioid use disorder.
The mental disabilities consequent upon the injury is the impact of these
psychological injuries on Mr Morcos’ functioning in
the domains of
self-care and personal hygiene, social and recreational activities, travel,
social functioning, concentration, persistence
and pace, and employability. It
is difficult to determine a likely duration of any such disability although
given that there had
been limited improvement in Mr Morcos’ functioning
since his work-related injuries on 23 May 2017, it is unlikely that these
disabilities will resolve within the next one
in the same report Dr Khan says:
“Mr Morcos’ psychiatric
conditions found on examination are the direct result of physical injuries he
sustained during
his employment. If Mr Morcos did not suffer the aforementioned
work-related physical injuries, it is unlikely that he would have
chronic pain and impairment in his social, occupational and other important
areas of functioning at this stage of his life.
It is the pervasiveness of his
chronic pain and functional impairment that resulted in a gradual deterioration
of his mental state
and caused these psychiatric
conditions.”
rejection of Dr Khan’s opinion was in error. The Arbitrator misstates
Doctor Khan’s evidence. Dr Khan did examine
the appellant and on the basis
of his examination certified the appellant as having no current capacity to
engage in work.
Khan does not in his report expressly refer to a “mental state
examination” of the appellant, but the report includes
statement referring to “conditions found on examination”. That is a
clear indication of an independent
medical examination by Dr Khan rather than,
as conjectured by the Arbitrator, a mere recitation of the appellant’s
complaints.
conclusion that the psychiatrist merely recorded what he was told by Mr Morcos
is contradicted by Dr Khan’s statement at
page 3 of his report of 30
January 2020, “Mr Morcos’ psychiatric conditions found on
examination” and the Arbitrator’s
conclusion to the contrary was in
evidence is that while the appellant may have a physical capacity for some types
of part‑time work as found by the Arbitrator,
the treating psychiatrist
expressed the opinion that he was not fit for any employment at the present time
and would not be likely
to have recovered so as to return to any employment
within the next 12 months. Accepting that there is an internal inconsistency
Dr Teoh’s report there is nevertheless a consistency with the views of Dr
Khan. The respondent called no psychiatric evidence
to contradict the evidence
of Drs Teoh or Khan. The rejection of the evidence of Dr Khan at least was an
error going to the outcome
of the proceedings that the appellant had failed to
persuade the Arbitrator.
the basis of all of the evidence, both physical and psychiatric, the Arbitrator
should have reached the conclusion that the appellant
did not have any ability
to return to work either in the pre-injury employment of electrician or in
suitable employment. It follows
that the Arbitrator should have found that as 12
January 2020 the appellant had “no current work capacity”.
completeness I add that I do not detect any error in the Arbitrator’s
approach to the determination of what should be regarded
as “suitable
employment” for the
Furthermore I do not
detect any tension in the approaches adopted to the issue of suitable employment
these reasons in my view Ground 1 of the appeal is made out.
Ground 2: Failing to determine the application or otherwise of
s 32A and s 38 (of the 1987 Act)
is unnecessary to determine Ground 2 of the appeal.
was common ground, that s 38(3) of the 1987 Act was not satisfied for the
reasons set out in the insurer’s letter of 29 November
2019. That is to
say, as the document accompanying the letter explained, if the appellant had a
current work capacity he did not
satisfy the special requirements of s 38(3) of
the 1987 Act.
Arbitrator, having found that the appellant had not persuaded him that he had no
current work capacity from 12 January 2020, was
not required to determine,
presumably, on an alternative basis the operation s 38(2) and issues relevant to
suitable employment.
my view, Ground 1 of the appeal is made out and the decision of the Arbitrator
was affected by an error of fact.
appellant has asked that the decision of the Arbitrator be set aside and the
matter returned to an alternative Arbitrator for
determination.
Arbitrator received submissions from the parties’ counsel relevant to
whether the appellant was “likely to continue
indefinitely to have no
current work capacity” within s 38(2) of the 1987 Act, but the Arbitrator
expressly refrained from
determining that issue in the circumstances of the
the appeal, neither the appellant nor the respondent has advanced submissions or
raised this issue for determination. There is
no basis upon which I can
determine that issue and it must be remitted to the Arbitrator for determination
of the issue of whether
the appellant is “likely to continue indefinitely
to have no current work capacity”. As the remittal is limited to a
discrete issue, I do not see any reason why the present Arbitrator should not
determine it.
matter back to the Arbitrator for determination in accordance
with this decision
and includes a capacity to make a direction.
1 of the Certificate of Determination dated 5 August 2020 is revoked.
appellant’s entitlement to weekly compensation from 12 January 2020 to
date and continuing, if any, is remitted to the Arbitrator
to determine whether
the appellant is likely to continue indefinitely to have no current work
capacity and otherwise to determine
the matter in accordance with the reasons in
this decision.
Geoffrey Parker SC
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
17 December 2020
Morcos v Deosa Enterprises
[2020] NSWWCC 267
NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Appellant’s
submissions, [12].
NSWWCCPD 55
15 DDCR 253
[2020] NSWWCCPD 32
to the appellant’s submissions at
Application to Resolve
a Dispute (ARD), p 40.
Reasons, [48],
[68]–[70], [73].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.72 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter