URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v EATHER (No:1) [2011] NSWCHT 1 (5 August 2011)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
CHIROPRACTIC TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
PAUL MATTHEW EATHER
MATTER NUMBER: CH01/2010
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
CH1000117579(NSW)/CHI0001175794
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE PARTICULARS AND
COMPLAINTS ONLY)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Eather (No 1)
[2011] NSWCHT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms E Brus of Counsel instructed by Ms Monica Richmond,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Paul Eather
(Respondent) initially represented by Ms Nicole Paul
of Counsel instructed by Mr Eric Oates Solicitor, of Oates Legal.
FILE NUMBER: CH01/2010
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy
Chairperson)
Dr Sue-Ellen McKelvey (Chiropractic
Dr Roger Engel (Chiropractic Member)
Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 1 – 3 August 2011
DATE OF DECISION: 5 August 2011
FINDINGS (in summary): Particulars 1, 4, 5, 8 and 9 – professional
misconduct. Particulars 2, 3 and 7 – unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
by four female patients and/or staff.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – ss139B, 139E, 167;
Care Complaints Act 1993
CASES CITED:
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Chiropractic Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional
Councils Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney
on 1 – 3 August
2011 to conduct an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in
accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of
Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 10 December
2010 in relation to a registered chiropractor, Paul Eather (the Respondent).
Complaint alleges the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct related to inappropriate
conduct by the
Respondent towards four female patients (two being also employees). The
Respondent admitted to certain conduct prior
to the Inquiry.
Inquiry proceeded in ‘two phases’ at the request of the Respondent.
The request was made on the Respondent’s
behalf on the first day of the
Inquiry. The ‘first phase’ of the Inquiry dealt with the evidence
regarding the Particulars
of the Complaint. This Reasons for Decision document
deals with findings with respect to the Particulars of Complaint and the
Complaints.
The ‘second phase’ will deal with evidence regarding
Orders flowing from these findings in the circumstances of the matter.
The Complaint
Amended Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a chiropractor under the
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law in that he has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the practice of chiropractics is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience;
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractics.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
or about August 2007, during a treatment session the practitioner engaged in
inappropriate sexual conduct with Patient A in that
his body against Patient A;
his hands on Patient A’s breasts;
his penis to Patient A; and
Patient A to touch his penis.
or about August 2007, the practitioner failed to refer Patient A to an
appropriate counsellor or other health professional when
he purportedly became
concerned about aspects of the patient’s mental health.
or about August 2007, the practitioner failed to make any clinical entries or
notes about his purported concerns about Patient
A’s mental health.
or about August 2007, the practitioner required Patient A to prepare a list
setting out those things she liked and disliked about
herself without any
clinical foundation for such a request and made no record in the patient’s
clinical notes about the purpose
or reason for the request.
or about the period June 2009 to 25 August 2009, the practitioner engaged in an
inappropriate sexual and/or personal relationship
with Patient B who was at this
time a patient of the practitioner.
the period July 2008 to August 2009, whilst treating Patient B, the practitioner
failed to keep adequate clinical notes as
to the nature, frequency and
effectiveness of the treatment he was administering to Patient B during this
or about 26 August 2009, the practitioner failed to adequately produce and
record a purported referral of Patient B to another
practitioner.
inappropriate sexual conduct with Patient C by lying on
top the patient with his
face close to that of the Patient. At the time of this incident Patient C was
also an employee of the practitioner.
at a time that she was both a patient and employee
of the practitioner.
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law (NSW) in that he has:
(i) engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration; and/or
(ii) engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct
that, when the instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
The Law – preliminary matters
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the Tribunal.
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the
consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
History of the matter before the Tribunal
Complaint was originally set for Inquiry in April 2011. At a Directions Hearing
held on 21 March 2011 application was made on
behalf of the Respondent to vacate
the Inquiry dates as the matter was not ready to proceed. The matter was vacated
and new dates
for Inquiry set for August 2011.
the week preceding the Inquiry the parties indicated that the Respondent had
objections to some of the material served by the HCCC
despite the directions of
the Tribunal that such objections should have been made by 1 July 2011. The
objections were ruled upon
and the list of witnesses required for
cross-examination settled.
the working day prior to the commencement of the Inquiry the Registry received
advice by email that the Respondent requested that
the Complaint be dealt with
by way of a ‘two phase’ process and that he did not intend to be
present during ‘phase
one’. The email indicated that the Respondent
requested to be present and represented during ‘phase two’. The
also confirmed that the Respondent maintained his denials of matters not
previously admitted.
one’ commenced on 1 August 2011. ‘Phase two’ is set for 9 and
10 August 2011.
Respondent had been notified by the HCCC that a prohibition order may ultimately
Appearances
noted above, the parties were represented as per the headnotes until the working
day prior to the commencement of the Inquiry.
Ms Paul of Counsel appeared on
behalf of the Respondent on the first day of the Inquiry to clarify the
Respondent’s position.
Ms Paul confirmed that the Respondent maintained
the admissions made in his statement dated 15 June 2011. He denied all other
allegations.
Ms Paul stated to the Tribunal that the Respondent understood the
consequences of not utilising the opportunity to cross-examine
any of the HCCC
witnesses and the potential findings that could be made by the Tribunal.
Further, he undertook not to practice as
a chiropractor until the end of the
Tribunal proceedings (T14.12-14).
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
the patients in accordance with Schedule 5D Clause
7 of the Act as indicated in
the schedule annexed hereto and marked ‘C’. Any information beyond
that contained in this
Reasons document which may identify them is also not to
be published. Annexure C will only be attached to the original Reasons for
Decision held by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
Respondent with respect
to ‘phase one’ were confirmed by Ms Paul as the Respondent’s
statement dated 15 June 2011
(exhibit R1), a CV as at July 2011 (exhibit R2) and
the report of Mr Tim Watson-Munroe dated 14 June 2011 (exhibit R3). Later in
proceedings it became apparent that the statement of Dr Linda Power dated 15
June 2011 should also come in to evidence. This
was marked as R4.
Tribunal also notes that the Confirmation of Registration dated 26 July 2011 was
a redacted version.
following witnesses were called to give evidence: Patient A, Patient C, Dr
Annica Larsdotter, Dr Melanie Eather (Unsworth), Patient
B, and Dr Rachael Weeks
(Peer Reviewer).
Background information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1971. He completed a Bachelor of Sports Science at the
University of New South Wales in 1991 and a Masters
of Chiropractic at Macquarie
University in 1997. He was first registered on 30 January 1998. The
Respondent’s CV indicates
that he has worked continuously as a
chiropractor from that time until 29 July 2011. The Tribunal was informed by Ms
Paul that the
Respondent resigned on that day from working as a chiropractor in
a near-by practice.
Background of the Complaint
Complaint arose from two notifications received by the HCCC. The first letter
received by the HCCC was a letter from Patient A.
As a result of the allegations
raised in this letter the HCCC exercised a search warrant on the
Respondent’s practice. Shortly
thereafter the Chiropractors Board of New
South Wales (as it then was) received a letter from Dr M Eather detailing
further allegations.
After the usual investigation process a formal Complaint
was forwarded to the Tribunal by the HCCC.
Admissions of the Respondent
Respondent admitted to a sexual relationship with Patient B and Patient D as
detailed in his statement dated 15 June 2011. A summary
of most of the evidence
before the Tribunal is provided below. Some of this evidence is only relevant to
‘phase two’
of the Inquiry but is summarised herein for convenience
and is not relied upon for the findings with respect to the Particulars and
Complaints.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence as well as
the attendance of a number of witnesses.
Evidence of Patient A
A wrote a letter to the HCCC recounting events that took place during a
consultation with the Respondent in around August
2007. Her handwritten letter
(exhibit 2B) is attached to her first statement to the HCCC dated 24 August 2009
(exhibit 2A). At that
time Patient A was 21 years of age. She had received
treatment for injuries she received to her tailbone as a result of a fall. She
had received treatment from the chiropractor who was the previous proprietor of
the practice (Dr Wigg) and then after he retired
Patient A received treatment
from the Respondent.
exhibit 2A Patient A gives the following account of her treatment with the
Respondent:
saw Paul four or five times. I saw him once a week. After each appointment
Paul came out with me to the reception to make a new
appointment for me. Paul
asked me about my hobbies and social life. I said I am very shy I do not go out
very much. He said I
should go out and find a boyfriend because I could easily
get one. He said I am an attractive young girl and I have a nice chest.
the treatments Paul was flirting with me.
my last visit Paul appeared to be more vigorous. He finished the clinical part
of the treatment and I sat down on the chair
next to the desk. He was sitting
at the desk. I was wearing a brown, long sleeve v-neck shirt without buttons
and jeans. You keep
the clothes on during your treatment. I have drawn a
sketch of the room, which is attached to this statement as annexure
sat down near the desk and we talked about how my pain is. Paul would write
notes in my file. I had a discussion with Paul. He
asked me if he can kiss me.
I said “no”. Paul tried to justify why we could do it. I said
something along the lines
of “This is not a good idea because you are
married, we are in your examination rooms and there are people outside”.
Paul tried to convince me for a couple of minutes.
Paul got up from his chair and knelt down in front of me. He pushed my legs
apart so he could kneel closer. His body was between
my legs. Paul was very
tall. His eyes were on my eye level or even a bit higher. Paul then started to
kiss me. I was very uncomfortable
with that. I was frozen in fear. Then he
started to grab my shirt and lifted it up above my head. I pushed it back down
him not to do this. Then he started to pull down my shirt from the top
and pulled down my shirt to expose my chest. I was scared
because he was tall
and could easily overpower me. He then pulled my bra down. It had standard
clips on the back and it was made
of lace. He pulled my breasts out of the bra
and kissed my nipples. I was horrified and said to him something like “I
not want to do this.” Paul looked up and asked “why”?
“Because I do not like it.” Paul then said
“You do like
it”. I felt like I had lost the battle.
continued to kiss my nipples and breasts. He then stopped and stood up. Paul
said he had something to show me. I asked “what
do you have to show
me?” He left his pants on but unzipped his fly and then just pulled his
penis out. He was wearing a cream
coloured pants and green jumper. The penis
was erect. I do not remember it being very big or small. I do not remember any
feature. I looked away because I was feeling embarrassed and said to Paul
“I do not want to see this.” He said “touch
said “no” and he said “come on” and I said
“no”. I sat in the chair with my
hands in my lap. Paul grabbed my
hand and put in on top of his penis. I pulled my hand away after 2 or 3
seconds. I said “that
is enough now”. Paul asked
“why?” Paul then put his penis back in his pants.
took my hand and pulled me up in a standing position. He then hugged me. Paul
whispered in my ear he wanted to teach me a lot
of things. I was very scared
when he said that, because I thought he must think that he can continue to do
this. I knew then that
I would never ever go back again. He was still hugging
me and started to push his pelvis back and forth against my pelvis, like
does but much slower. I was unable to say anything. I thought it was very
weird that he did that. After that he pulled away.
I grabbed my bag and was
heading towards the door. Paul was at the door about to open it but with his
hand on the handle. Before
he opened the door, he said something along the
lines of “When I see you next I want to help you more because I love
A also stated that she had not informed her mother of the incident until about
one year after it had occurred.
handwritten letter of Patient A contains some additional details. Patient A
records that after the adjustment as she had felt
he had used more force than he
usually did she said to the Respondent, prior to the alleged incident, words to
the effect of
‘gee, what was so wrong with me that you needed to molest
me like that’
. Her letter continues:
He replied, “aww, I wasn’t MOLESTING you...”
I replied, “I wouldn’t stop you if you tried.” (to molest
I realise this indicates I was inviting him, and it was very wrong of me to
say it, but his behaviour afterwards was still inappropriate.
He asked me to repeat what I had said, but I nervously declined. He had
obviously heard me though, because he asked, “what
if I was to kiss
I was very surprised he asked me, and I became a bit panicked.
I replied that I did not want to be kissed. He asked me why and I said,
“because I don’t like kissing and it’s
wrong.” He asked
why I thought it was wrong, and I said “because we are in your office and
there’s people outside
(the door) and you’re married.” (I
know this because the secretary told me one time earlier that Paul was unable to
make appointments because he was visiting his sick wife in hospital).
He sighed and began explaining to me that he thought it was
“unreasonable of society to expect a man to stay faithful to his
wife” due to not being “sexually satisfied for the rest of his life
by only one woman.”
A recorded that initially she had laughed off the
of the Respondent but wondered if he was
things like that to her. She stated that she did not complain because she
thought she ‘
liked that he was being nice to me’
respect to the delay in making a formal complaint about the conduct of the
Respondent Patient A stated that it was only after
she spoke to her mother that
she realised
‘it was not my fault’.
A provided a second statement to the HCCC dated 15 September 2009 (exhibit 3A)
which deals with documents she had handwritten
at the request of the Respondent
(exhibit 3B) that had been located in the clinical file held by the
Respondent’s practice.
She stated that the date
was not written on the top of each page by her, nor did she draw the
triangle with the words
‘Physical’, ‘Emotional’
on the back of one of the pages.
A confirmed that at the request of the Respondent she had written lists of
‘What I like about myself’
’What I dislike about
after they had a conversation about her personal life wherein
she stated that she was not happy with her life and her body image.
statement continued as follows (at paragraphs 6 and 7):
don’t remember Paul giving me any particular information or reason for
asking me to write either lists or what it was supposed
to achieve. Paul also
did not say how it was connected to the treatment for my back and pelvis, which
was the purpose for which
I sought chiropractic treatment. Although I spoke to
Paul about not being happy with my life I did not ask him for any type of
counselling.
thought it was unusual to ask me to write these lists as I had never been asked
to do something like this for a chiropractic appointment
before. Even though I
was unsure of why I was being asked to write these lists it was not enough for
me to question Paul or refuse
to do as requested by him. I thought it might
become more obvious when I brought the lists to him.
Tribunal notes that the lists written by Patient A show signs of vulnerability
in a general sense. For example the dislike list
included the following
frustration
How easily I
become attached to any male who is nice to
copy of Patient A’s clinical notes formed exhibit 22 and accounts
recording her treatment are at exhibit 23.
Oral evidence of Patient A
A gave evidence on the first day of the Inquiry in a forthright and clear
manner. She confirmed the content of her statement.
A did not recall having been referred by the Respondent to a psychologist,
psychiatrist or a doctor (T29.3-10, 1/8/11).
A gave evidence regarding her reluctance to seek chiropractic treatment after
the incident with the Respondent. This evidence
is not considered relevant to
‘phase one’.
Evidence of Patient A’s mother
A’s mother provided a statement dated 4 September 2009 to the HCCC
(exhibit 4). Patient A’s mother stated she
had been a patient of the
practice when it was owned by Dr Wigg and had continued as a patient of the
practice after he retired.
A’s mother included the following in her statement (at paragraphs 8
Paul finished the adjustment we had a short conversation which I do not recall
the content of, but I remember that for some reason
Paul made reference to the
size of his penis. I am not sure of the words he used but I think he said words
to the effect of, “I’m
I am not someone who is intimidated easily by that type of behaviour I recall
that I replied by saying, “That’s not
what I heard”. At this
point I got off the examination table and I remember that Paul was blushing.
Paul then said words
to the effect of, “I can’t believe I am
A’s mother confirmed that sometime in 2007 her daughter had given her a
handwritten letter to read. The letter detailed
the events at Patient A’s
last consultation with the Respondent (exhibit 2B). In her statement she
expressed the view that
she considered the Respondent’s conduct of taking
his penis out of the fly of his trousers and placing her daughter’s
on his penis as
she had read the letter she discussed with her daughter what she would like to
do about the matter. Patient A stated that she
was scared about the possibility
that the matter may end up in a court room but she was also angry that he had
made sexual advances
towards her when she knew he was married with children.
A’s mother stated that she found out how to make a complaint and gave the
information to Patient A. Eventually Patient
A had attended a solicitor but was
still reluctant to make a complaint.
copy of the clinical notes of Patient A’s mother formed exhibit 22 and
accounts recording her treatment are at exhibit 23.
Evidence of Patient B
B made a statement to the HCCC dated 1 December 2009 (exhibit 8). At the time
she made this statement Patient B was 35 years
of age. Patient B stated that she
initially consulted Dr Annica Larsdotter at the practice for back, shoulder and
jaw problems. When
Dr Larsdotter went on maternity leave in 2008 she came under
the care of the Respondent. Commencing part way through paragraph 4
continuing to paragraph 10 her statement records:
continued on with treatment that I had been receiving from Annica. During the
time that Paul was treating me, I fell pregnant
with my third child. Paul
provided treatment for back pain and general wellness care.
I would see Paul monthly and then as my pregnancy progressed, I would see him
bi-weekly and then towards the end of my pregnancy,
I think I saw him weekly,
but I’m not entirely sure of the frequency of my appointments. After I
had my baby, I think that
I saw Paul weekly because after giving birth, my
pelvis went out of alignment and was causing me a lot of pain. My pelvis slowly
came back into alignment and got better, but I don’t remember how long
I first saw Paul, I think that he looked over the treatment Annica had been
providing me and he probably did some assessments
of me so that he could get his
own baseline of where I was physically. At no time did I feel physically
uncomfortable with how Paul
examined me and adjusted me. I remember that just
before my due date, Paul did one or two NETs.
remember that when Paul explained why he was giving this treatment and that it
was to help manage my anxiety about giving birth,
which I believe most women
experience before they are due to give birth. I don’t remember what NETs
stands for, but I did
understand what the treatment was for. I also remember
that Annica had used this treatment on me in some of our appointments.
my chiropractic appointments, Paul and I discussed home births. We had these
conversations after I found out I was pregnant.
I was quite apprehensive about
having my third child because I had had such horrific experiences in hospital
giving birth to my
two sons. Paul suggested that I speak to a specific midwife
birth and so had Annica. I don’t remember any specific comments from Paul
to my husband, Mr B, that he go and
speak with Paul about home birthing. I have no idea whether Mr B did speak to
Paul about home
and I also had a conversation about immunising children and he told me that
there was other information about the pros and cons
of immunisation. I remember
that Annica had some literature about immunisation, but I was never given this
literature by the clinic.
I did get some literature from a midwife. I do
remember that Paul told me that he would never tell another person whether they
should or should not immunise their children and he was of the opinion that this
decision is something parents should make for themselves.
I don’t believe
Paul and his wife had immunised their children. I never considered Paul to be a
medical advisor and I never
said anything to this effect to other
and I never had any discussions about mental health issues or post-natal
depression.
B stated that sometime after her third child was born (2 April 2009) she
commenced attending the practice outside usual business
hours and she stayed
overnight with the Respondent at the practice on 11 September 2009. She had
stayed at the practice overnight
on one previous occasion when she had a
‘couple of drinks’
and was not able to drive her
‘car safely home’
B stated that she attended a gym with the Respondent after the birth of her
third child until the time she left Sydney on
20 September 2009. The
receptionist of the practice, Anne, would also be at the same gym. At some point
she offered to become the
Respondent’s personal trainer as she was
interested in doing the course. It appears from other evidence that Patient B
enrol in a Certificate IV Personal Training Course. She also attended French
classes with the Respondent from August 2009.
statement of Patient B continues (at paragraphs 17 – 20):
very last chiropractic appointment with Paul was around the 24 August 2009. We
had decided that he could no longer help me with
my jaw problem and we had also
decided that we wanted to see each other on a different platform and to see each
other socially and
date outside of the chiropractor/patient relationship. Prior
to this decision, there had been no sexual contact between Paul and
we did have some social contact and it was platonic. Once we had decided to
change the nature of our relationship, from
therapeutic to a more intimate
relationship, Paul referred me to another chiropractor, Keith Keen. This
referral would have been
around mid to late August. I never saw Keith Keen
because it turned out that he was retiring. I was having a turbulent time with
my estranged husband, Mr B, and I did not seek treatment from any other
chiropractor. I am still not seeing a chiropractor for treatment
since I left
my last appointment with Paul, we discussed him referring me to another
chiropractor for treatment, but it was a couple of days
after this that Paul
actually contacted me with Keith’s name and number.
late August 2009, I purchased an airline ticket to travel to Perth with Paul.
If the Commission requires the date of purchase,
and it is requested, then I can
provide this. The purpose of the trip was for Paul and I to get away and spend
some time together.
Paul had already planned his trip to Perth and he had
invited me to come with him. We had planned to travel in September 2009,
cancelled the trip because I needed and wanted to look after my children and
Paul was sick.
first date with Paul was in late September 2009 and I went with Paul to his
rugby presentation night at Epping RSL. Paul and I
first had sexual contact in
late August early September 2009. This took place at the clinic.
statement concludes (at paragraphs 23 and 24):
has never mentioned to me any female patients having made sexual advances
towards him. Although Paul has mentioned past girlfriends
with me from way
back, he has not spoken to me about any relationships with other women that have
occurred or may have occurred in
the last five years.
week, Paul moved in with me at my current address. The relationship between us
is ongoing.
evidence also contained the clinical notes kept by the practice for Patient B
(exhibit 25). These notes indicated she had received
previous chiropractic
treatment and had first attended the practice in 2007. The Initial History Form
records that her husband had
died in 2003; she had taken antidepressant
medication and lists her prior surgery (as
‘caesarean’
‘breast augmentation’)
Oral evidence – Patient B
B gave evidence on the second day of the Inquiry. Her attendance was secured by
way of a summons issued by the Tribunal at
the request of the HCCC. Leave was
granted for this witness to be cross-examined by the HCCC.
B gave the following evidence regarding the nature of her relationship with the
Respondent between May and June 2009 describing
B gave the following evidence regarding her relationship with the Respondent
around this time as follows (T77.1 – 79.8):
Q. Platonic. He was your chiropractor?
Q. You were seeing him on a weekly basis?
Q. And you were sending him text messages?
Q. Do you send text messages to any other medical providers?
Q. Well, why were you sending text messages to your chiropractor?
A. Paul has a sports science background. I was also getting back into
studying personal fitness and finishing a Certificate IV and
he was a wealth of
knowledge and helpful in that respect.
Q. Yes. So what you're saying is text messages related to that, did
A. Sure. Yeah.
Q. And when did that happen? When did you start getting back into the
Certificate IV?
A. After I recovered from basically having my daughter. I started going
Q. So the only reason you were sending Paul Eather text messages was to
do with your mutual interest in your studies?
A. Mainly, yeah.
Q. I see. Were there not occasions in June/July where you stayed at the
clinic in Old Northern Road where Mr Eather was residing?
A. Define occasions?
Q. Yes. And did that have anything to do with your sports
Q. Well what was the reason for staying with the clinic?
A. Social visit.
Q. I'm sorry I didn't hear that?
A. A social visit.
Q. A social visit with your chiropractor?
Q. Who was continuing to provide you with chiropractic service at that
Q. Is that correct?
Q. During that time did you stay at the actual clinic?
Q. Did Mr Eather stay at the clinic?
A. He was residing there.
Q. You tell us in your statement that the first time the nature of your
relationship with Mr Eather became a sexual relationship
was in late
August/early September 2009?
Q. Well is that correct or not?
Q. I don't want to mislead you; you say, "Paul and I would talk and I
first had sexual contact in late August/early September 2009"?
A. Well that's correct then.
Q. When you say, "sexual contact", are you saying sexual
intercourse?
A. Isn't that what you're indicating?
Q. No. I'm asking you to explain what you mean by sexual
A. I assume that that's what people would be requiring as a sexual
relationship.
Q. Prior to that, is it your evidence that you had not undertaken or
engaged in any form of sexual relationship with Mr Eather prior
August/early September 2009?
A. Can you simplify that question please, it sounds like you're twisting
Q. Is it your evidence that prior to late August and early September 2009
you had not engaged in a sexual relationship--
A. No we had not.
Q. It was purely platonic?
Q. On the two occasions that we know of that you gave evidence about,
that you stayed overnight?
A. What two occasions are we referring to?
Q. Did you not stay overnight at the clinic on one occasion when you had
too much to drink?
A. Yes I did.
Q. Are you saying that there was no sexual contact--
A. No there was.
Q. But clearly you had been drinking with Mr Eather?
A. Yes I had.
Q. To a point where it was unsafe for you to drive home?
T81 Patient B stated that she had suffered from post natal depression after the
birth of her first two children but not after the
birth of her third child (in
April 2009). She also stated that she had received grief counselling in the past
and had chosen to seek
the assistance of a psychologist at the end of her
marriage in around June or July 2009.
B stated that there had been no sexual contact between her and the Respondent
until late August or early September 2009. She
stated that there had been the
‘comforting hugs’
that were for the purpose of
‘terrible divorces’
B stated that the first contact between herself and the Respondent of a sexual
nature was sexual intercourse.
B stated that the Respondent had continued to treat her with chiropractic
adjustments and had adjusted her on the morning
she gave evidence (2 August
2011) (T86 & 87).
Evidence of Mr B (Patient B’s former husband)
B sent a letter to the HCCC dated 22 September 2009 (exhibit 5). Annexed to his
letter of complaint was a copy of the Respondent’s
business card with the
‘FOR A GOOD TIME, CALL PAUL’
followed by a mobile
telephone number, a home telephone number and a work telephone number (exhibit
5C). The work telephone number
is identical to the telephone number provided on
the reverse side of the card (i.e. the business card side).
B stated that Patient B consulted the Respondent between about 30 June 2008 to
28 August 2009. Patient B had told him the treatment
adjustments’.
Prior to June 2008 Patient B had received chiropractic
treatment from
. These consultations occurred only
once every four weeks.
B reports that Patient A became aware she was pregnant in about September or
October 2008 and informed him that she had been talking
to the Respondent about
B also reports that Patient A told him she had discussed vaccinating children
with the Respondent. Mr B stated that (at paragraph
told me that Paul and his wife had not vaccinated their children but used a
natural vaccination program for their children
and from the research Paul had
talked about it was a preferable way to go. I believe Patient B appeared to be
using Paul as a “medical
support person.”
statement continued (paragraphs 11 – 16) as follows:
attended one chiropractic session between Patient B and Paul Eather on 13 April
2009 at the clinic. The reason I attended this
appointment was because our baby
was 10 days old. Patient B told me that Paul had suggested that we bring the
baby in so that Paul
could check that everything was normal and she was going to
have an adjustment at the same time.
this appointment I witnessed Paul touching Patient B in a manner that I felt,
from my own experience of chiropractic consultations,
was not the normal manner
in which someone would be adjusted. For example Paul did not just touch the
outside of Patient B’s
breasts but he touched them all over. Paul also
put his hand low in her groin area, under her jeans, and adjusted Patient B from
there. Before this session Patient B had not mentioned any particular physical
problem that she had that I can imagine would require
such touching. However,
as Patient B seemed comfortable and appeared to trust Paul I did not
seemed aroused during this session in that he was smiling, jittery and excited.
He and Patient B seemed a bit over-familiar
with each other in the way they
interacted.
or about June 2009 I became suspicious about the relationship between Paul and
Patient B when I saw Paul’s business card
which is annexed and marked
“C”. I asked Patient B if she was having an affair with Paul.
Patient B said words to the
effect of, “don’t be stupid, he is my
medical adviser and I talk to him because he gives me advice”. She gave
me the impression that she told me everything including that she was seeing a
psychologist and discussed personal issues in detail
B also told me that she discussed her oldest boy’s problems with behaviour
at school and Paul had given her advice about
how to manage the child’s
behaviour issues. This discussion was a result of Paul calling our home on 3
July 2009 and asking
to speak to Patient B. Patient B explained this call by
telling me that she had told Paul about the problems with her son and this
the reason for his call.
also became suspicious of the relationship that developed with Paul and Patient
B when she started providing Paul personal training
from about 6pm on Wednesday
nights in June and July 2009 as part of her own training to become a qualified
personal trainer. Patient
B told me that she was going to the gym with Paul and
Anne from the clinic providing him with personal training sessions but she
come home around 11pm after these sessions. As there was no reason for her to
be home so late I thought there might be something
going on that was beyond what
would be a normal professional relationship.
B stated that he and Patient B separated on or about 25 July 2009 but remained
living under the same roof.
24 August 2009 Dr M Eather contacted him by SMS message and thereafter it
appears there was regular communications between them
regarding the relationship
between Patient B and the Respondent.
paragraphs 30 and 31 Mr B makes the following statements:
or about 27 August 2009 I had a conversation with Patient B at our home and told
her the information provided to me by Melanie
Eather. Patient B confirmed to me
that she was having a sexual relationship with Paul Eather and it would take
place at the clinic.
The conversation was along the lines of Patient B saying
to me, “I am having sex sometimes with Paul.” I then asked
B, “Do you go back to the clinic after French on Wednesday nights?”
Patient B replied “yes”, then
I asked “do you have sex with
him there?” She replied “yes sometimes”.
this conversation I also asked Patient B how long the relationship had been
going on and she said words to the effect of, “It
hasn’t been going
on for a long time not like before the baby was born ok”. She was
referring to our baby
who was born at home on 2 April
B refers to records that he became aware that on 18 August 2009 Patient B had
purchased a plane ticket for a return trip to Perth
for mid-September. He
understood from Dr M Eather that Patient B had been invited by the Respondent to
accompany him on a business
trip. At this point the Tribunal notes that exhibit
17 is a copy of a tax invoice from Qantas indicating the ticket was purchased
17 August 2009.
from a diary kept by Patient B forms exhibit 16.
Evidence of Dr Melanie Eather
M Eather wrote to the Chiropractors registration Board (as it then was) on 21
September 2009 (exhibit 6). Dr M Eather stated that
she was both the wife and
business partner of the Respondent. She stated that she was aware that the HCCC
were investigating a complaint
from a former patient (Patient A), noting that a
letter records the following matters:
The Respondent
moved out of their marital home on 15 June 2009 and resided in a room at the
She had been
informed by
‘an associate within the business’
that in early
2008 the associate had observed the Respondent with a patient (who was also an
employee) in one of the treatment rooms
– the patient had her shirt off
and the Respondent had one of his hands between her legs. During an interview
with the HCCC
in October 2009 (see details below) Dr M Eather identified the
associate as Annica and stated that the reporting of the incident
Annica was prompted by her saying to Annica that she suspected the Respondent
was acting inappropriately with a patient
whom Annica assumed was Patient D when
Dr M Eather was actually referring to Patient B.
On 10 August
2009 she had found a text message from Patient B on the Respondent’s
mobile telephone which stated
‘I knocked at 10pm last night. You were
obviously already asleep’.
On 18 August
2009 the Respondent informed her that he had started to date Patient B and that
he had invited her on a trip to Perth
the following month. He was to attend a
work related trip and indicated his relationship with Patient B was heading
towards being
a sexual relationship.
Around 26 August
2009 the Respondent denied to Dr M Eather that he was already having a sexual
relationship with Patient B but referred
her on to another chiropractor.
September 2009 I spoke to an associate within the Hills Family Chiropractic
Clinic. She told me that a number of patients
had mentioned to her that they
would not be adjusted by Paul again due to inappropriate touching. On checking
the files, there was
nothing in the notes to explain why Paul had spent so much
time working in the groin area’.
to Dr M Eather’s letter is a copy of an email response from the Respondent
to her email of 1 September 2009. In that
email she had requested that the
Respondent agree to
‘phase out’
his appointment book
commitments in favour of the other chiropractors already working within the
clinic. The Respondent’s reply
included a statement that he would not
phase out his appointments unless directed by either the
M Eather also gave an interview to the HCCC on 23 October 2009. A copy of the
transcript of this interview forms exhibit 7.
M Eather stated that the practice she and the Respondent owned had moved into a
new building on 1 April 2009, having been at nearby
premises for the five years
previous. The practice had been purchased from Dr Alan Wigg who had remained
working in the practice
for about three years before he retired.
M Eather was asked to review the clinical notes of Patient B. Upon reading the
notes she stated they recorded that Patient B commenced
treatment on 6 March
2007 and that her last treatment was on 24 August 2009. Up until 26 March 2008
she consulted one of the chiropractors
at the practice, Annica, and thereafter
she consulted the Respondent. Initially the frequency of visits is recorded as
once or twice
a week but after a few months she was attending fortnightly to
monthly (on average) consultations (with Dr Larsdotter). Patient B
commenced consultations with the Respondent in around June 2008. Initially
Patient B was attending
- twice a week or weekly. Dr
M Eather stated that her reading of the notes record
structural alignment’
Emotional Technique).
M Eather recounted an incident that occurred on 1 August 2009 when she informed
the Respondent that she was going to be delayed
in returning to the family home.
She stated that the Respondent had been upset by this advice and when she had
checked telephone
records she had found that there had been four telephone calls
made on the home telephone to or from Patient B’s home shortly
had informed the Respondent she was delayed.
the interview she confirmed that the
‘associate’
reported seeing the Respondent with a patient/employee was Annica. Annica had
identified the patient/employee as Patient
D. Patient D had been a patient of
the practice between 18 August 2005 and 26 March 2009. Dr M Eather stated that
Annica had reported
that she had arrived at the practice (when it was at its
former location) and found the front desk unattended and the telephone ringing.
From the kitchen she saw the Respondent and Patient D in one of the treatment
rooms that had a telephone outside the door. Annica
reported she saw Patient D
had her shirt off and the Respondent had his hand between Patient D’s legs
as he leant over to answer
the telephone.
M Eather further stated that Annica had reported to her that she had later
confronted the Respondent about the conduct she had
observed. Dr M Eather is
recorded as having stated (page 12 of the interview):
She did say that she confronted Paul and said to him, “Look, I
don’t know what type of arrangement you have with Melanie.
I assume that
Melanie and Patient D’s husband both know about this. I just request that
you keep it all out of the office,
because I have to work here as well.”
And Paul, as he does, just brushed it off, and – you know, and then I
when I found out about this just in August, I did confront Paul about
it, and he said that she didn’t know what she was seeing,
didn’t happen, and she was at least 10 metres away; she couldn’t
have seen clearly from there.
M Eather stated that Patient D had since resigned from her employment. She
stated that Anne Williams also knew that there had been
some type of
relationship between Patient D and the Respondent but had not said anything
‘her place’
M Eather provided the HCCC investigators with a copy of a document,
‘Guideline for Divorce’ that had been emailed to
the Respondent from
Patient B on 7 July 2009.
of the incident where the Respondent made statements indicating suicidal
thoughts on the evening of 11 September 2009 are
provided at page 24 of the
statement (exhibit 7).
M Eather recounted the following conversation with Patient B that occurred on
the evening of 11 September 2009 when she alerted
her to the Respondent’s
state of mind (at page 24 – exhibit 7):
[Patient B]
was obviously upset and she was very agitated. She
obviously was very concerned about Paul. I said to her, “Look, I know
don’t want to believe this allegation against Paul.” She said to
me, “No, no”, she said, “I believe
it.” She said,
“Paul’s told me all about it.” She said, “He’s
told me about all the women.”
I said, “What?” She said,
“He’s had women throwing themselves at him for years.” She
said, “He’s
told me about them all.” I said,
“He’s never thought to say no at any point?” And so
[Patient B]
then offered to swap husbands
M Eather stated that telephone records show that the Respondent rang Lifeline
shortly after he called her on the evening of 11
September 2009.
M Eather reported that the Respondent would drink alcohol when he was
M Eather stated that on the day the search warrant was executed on the practice
by the HCCC that the Respondent had rung and asked
that he be given the
telephone number for one of the patients who was a solicitor (later in the
interview she stated she could be
a barrister) named Nicole Paul who worked for
the Department of Public Prosecutions. Ms Paul had been copied in on some of the
correspondence
between her and the Respondent regarding their Family Law
M Eather stated that she understood the Respondent had met with a solicitor on
12 September 2009 as he rang her on 15 September
2009 and the following
conversation occurred (page 29):
..... He told me that I had to stop this witch-hunt that I was on, and that I
was legally responsible for what was happening in the
clinic as I was his
business partner, so that if I pursued this complaint I would be detrimentally
affected if he was charged. He
then went on to tell me that if he
couldn’t work because of what I was doing, he would no longer help me in
any way; that included
caring for the children. I told him that how – you
know, what was I meant to do with the kids? He told me I should employ
I said that would cost a lot and I couldn’t afford it. He said, “I
know,” and laughed. He then said,
“I won’t do anything to
He then only told – he told me he’d only pay child support based
on last year’s income, which was significantly
decreased due to moving
expenses. I said that would be nothing. He said, “Yes, that’s
right.” He went on to
say that he would not help me in any way if I
pursued this and would make things financially very difficult for me, which I
really think that much of it until I thought, you know, he’s
effectively threatening me. And then last week I spoke to Guild
Insurance who
is our – provides our professional indemnity insurance and also provides
legal – lawyers to pursue any
claims, which – Paul had contacted
this conversation it appeared to Dr M Eather that the Respondent thought that
she was responsible for the complaint from Patient
A. Dr M Eather stated that
she had never met or heard of Patient A until the complaint was made.
M Eather stated that she had a conversation with Annica on 15 September 2009
wherein Annica had stated she had received complaints
from patients regarding
the treatment provided by the Respondent and had offered to assist them to make
complaints. Annica also told
her that Dr Wigg had received complaints from
patients regarding the Respondent.
M Eather stated that Anne Williams had reported to her a conversation she had
with Patient C some time prior to May 2008. Patient
C asked Ms Williams if she
had personally ever had any problems with the Respondent’s inappropriate
behaviour and MS Williams
had replied ‘No’. Ms Williams reported to
Dr M Eather that Patient C then stated that she had problems of this nature
the Respondent and that Patient C stated
‘I have, and I just
don’t like it at all’
M Eather provided details of the multilevel marketing the Respondent was
involved in with respect to Goji juice (page 36-37) (The
Tribunal notes this
issue is not subject of the Particulars of Complaints in this matter).
M Eather stated that the Respondent had strong personal views on the
immunisation of children and that by mutual agreement they
had decided not to
immunise their children.
M Eather provided the HCCC with copies of emails that had passed between Patient
B and the Respondent (exhibit 13). Patient B had
sent a joke with a heading
‘Would you remarry?’
regarding a husband inadvertently
informing his wife he had a mistress. This email was sent on 21 May 2009. In the
same email chain
was a message from the Respondent recounting a conversation he
had with Annica wherein she had advised she was aware that he and
Patient B had
lunch plans for ‘Wednesday’. The other email provided was sent by
the Respondent to Patient B. It was comprised
of a series of photos of one fully
dressed man and one fully dressed woman in positions associated with the act of
sexual intercourse.
The heading is ‘
Which would you prefer?’.
The punch line after 12 photos reads ‘
Because all these clothes are now
available at Kmart’.
14 is an email from Patient B to the Respondent dated 7 July 2009 providing a
copy of two pages of information regarding divorce
with the introduction
‘This is aimed for women but still good info’
Oral evidence – Dr M Eather
M Eather gave evidence on the second day of the Inquiry.
M Eather gave the following evidence regarding her knowledge of any
inappropriate conduct of the Respondent prior to the execution
of the HCCC
– Dr M Eather gave evidence that
she had spoken to Guild Insurance by
telephone):
Q. And they recommended you to another solicitor.
Q. And that solicitor said that you have a legal duty to notify the
registration board.
Q. Prior to that.
Q. Did you know - when you brought this matter to a head, was
there any period prior to that when you were aware of something going
may be inappropriate?
A. Not until we - look, I heard things over the years that, you
know, Paul had upset a patient or had upset a staff member, but I
supported Paul. I never thought - I honestly never thought that he
had done anything wrong. It wasn't until we separated
that I started to suspect
he was having an affair. So, yeah, it would - so, it wouldn't have
been until July, the end of July, start
of August that I even started to suspect
he was seeing someone - a patient.
Q. July, which year are we talking about?
A. And then he confirmed that in August. And - no, so, there
was nothing I thought I should have reported prior to that.
Q. When you say you heard that he upset patients and staff
Q. Did you ever inquire as to the nature of that upset?
A. Look, I knew about the nature of it with
[Patient C]
, that Paul
had - she suggested that Paul had propositioned her, but, again, I
just thought - look, I don't know what I thought, but
I supported
Q. That was prior to July 2009?
A. This is, yeah, much earlier than that, and I had just heard that there
were a number of patients that didn't want to see him or
were uncomfortable with
him, but I never - no one ever discussed details with me.
Q. In relation to
[Patient C]
Q. The incident that you heard about prior to 2009.
Q. Did you ever discuss it with Paul?
Q. And what was the explanation given to your question - or
what was the answer given to your question?
A. He just said too that he thought that she had an ulterior motive, and
she was after money, and he didn't do anything, and he was
sick of these women
bringing - you know, saying these things about him, and, look, he
always had fabulous reasons for everything.
Q. Did she ever try to pursue money after,
[Patient C]
Q. As a practitioner, as a chiropractor.
Q. You just said that he said all these women are complaining about him,
whatever. Did you ever suspect - I mean, it's difficult,
you're his wife at the time as well as a practitioner, but as
a - wearing your practitioner's hat for the moment, did you
suspect that where there's smoke, there's fire, that kind of thought?
A. No. I can honestly say I didn't. I supported him through everything.
Look, I knew - he had the type of personality that he was
always very
controversial in that you either really liked him or you didn't. He was very
flirty and he - I always said he had boundary
issues, and we did
discuss that a lot, that he had to respect people's boundaries, and he agreed
Q. Is that around - those discussions at the time of discussing
[Patient C]
or prior to that?
A. Look, it's been a thing we've discussed from the moment we've met,
basically, because, you know, even when we were at uni, there
were problems with
someone suggested he was having an affair with a lecturer, or something, and
there was - so, from the time we
met, it had always come up in
discussion, and he admitted it himself that he had the type of personality that
would get him into
trouble one day.
Q. You just mentioned when you were at uni together.
Q. Did you actually study with him, as in the same year?
A. Well, I was part time, so we did do some subjects together, but not a
Q. So, you knew him--
A. That's how I met him, yeah.
MS MCKELVEY
Q. Just one more question. Obviously, you were aware - you
were married to him when he was working with Linda Power, weren't you?
A. We married in June 99 and it was probably around that time he stopped
working for Linda. I'm just trying to think. Yeah, but
I did say, look, we're
engaged and, you know, had spent a lot of time together prior to that. So, I
was aware of him working with
Q. And how would you describe their professional relationship?
A. I think they had a very good professional relationship. Linda always
said openly that she viewed Paul as a son and Paul's always
called her Aunty
Linda and, yeah, he, yeah. But professionally, I think their relationship was
good, and they also had, yeah, quite
a close personal relationship.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. When you say he called her Aunty Linda.
Q. Was there in fact any familial relationship?
Evidence of Patient C
C provided a statement to the HCCC dated 18 March 2010. At the time of making
the statement she was 48 years of age. Commencing
in about October 2006 she
worked as a chiropractic assistant at the practice for about six months. Prior
to this she had been a patient
of the practice, being originally a patient of Dr
C reports that when she had been working at the practice for about two or three
months she asked the Respondent for an adjustment
as she had a sore back. The
Respondent agreed to undertake the adjustment.
C’s statement continues with the following description of what then
occurred (paragraphs 7 – 15 with 14 omitted):
short time later Paul and I walked into one of the treatment rooms. I
can’t recall what I said but I think I would have told
him where the pain
on my back was. I then laid on my back on the chiropractic table.
recall that there was some further conversation between Paul and myself but I do
not recall what was said. I do remember that Paul
said something like,
“It is good to have affairs”.
after that I remember that Paul threw himself on top of me. I cannot
specifically recall but I think that his legs were along
my legs and body was
along my body and his face was near my face.
was only on top of me for me a second as I immediately pushed him off me. I
cannot recall what I said but it would have been
something along the lines of,
“what are you doing? I am not interested in this.” I then got off
the table, left the
room and went back to work.
do not recall that Paul and I discussed this incident any further that day. I
think that we both just went back to work and finished
next day I remember that I spoke to Paul about the incident that had occurred
the day before. I remember telling him that I thought
what he had done was
totally inappropriate. Paul responded with words to the effect of, “it
was only a joke”.
long after the incident with Paul I spoke with Anne about the incident that
occurred with Paul. Anne is another chiropractic
assistant who I worked with at
the clinic and who I believe had worked at the clinic for a long time. I said
to Anne something like,
“Paul behaved unprofessional towards me when we
were here alone.” Anne did not ask me about what happened. She did
seem like she wanted to know what had actually
the incident with Paul I do not think he wanted anything to do with me. Paul
hired another receptionist to work in the afternoons.
I think he was trying to
get rid of me. I decided to leave anyway as I only liked working for Alan and
he retired not long after
the incident with Paul.
clinical notes kept by the practice for Patient C formed exhibit 26.
Oral evidence – Patient C
C gave evidence on the first day of the Inquiry in a forthright and clear
manner. She confirmed the content of her statement.
Patient C stated that prior
to the incident with the Respondent she had received adjustments from Dr Wigg.
She described lying flat
on the treatment table, being asked to cross her arms
over her chest so that her hands were on the opposite shoulder and then Dr
standing at the head of the treatment bed and placing his hand on her elbows to
effect the adjustment.
C provided a more detailed account of the incident that occurred with the
Respondent. Patient C described lying on the treatment
bed in the same fashion
as when adjusted by Dr Wigg. She then described how the Respondent proceeded to
lie on top of her rather
than perform an adjustment from the head of the bed as
she recalled was the technique used by Dr Wigg. Patient C confirmed that when
she spoke to the Respondent the following day about his behaviour he commented
that his conduct had been
. Patient C gave the
following account of this conversation (T40.3-8):
Q. Do you recall what, if anything, you said to him in response
to him indicating that it was only a joke?
A. I arrived at work for my shift the next day and I told him that what
had happened the previous day was not acceptable, that it
was totally out of
bounds, irresponsible, because he was our boss and I said it could never happen
again. That's when he turned
and said to me, "It was only a joke."
Evidence of Patient D
D’s letter of resignation dated 23 April 2008 formed exhibit 21. The
letter was sent as an email and refers to her intended
last date as being 7
April 2008.
clinical notes kept by the practice for Patient D formed exhibit 27.
D was unable to be located by the HCCC at the time of the Inquiry.
Evidence of Anne Williams
Williams provided a written statement to the HCCC dated 14 January 2010 (exhibit
10). Ms Williams started working for Dr Wigg as
a chiropractic assistant in
December 2000 and continued to work once the Respondent and Dr M Eather took
over the practice in about
2007. She noted that the practice had moved to new
premises in early 2009.
Williams provided the following background information regarding the practice at
paragraphs 5 and 6:
clients were resistant to seeing Paul, I do not know why specifically. When you
compared Paul to Alan they had quite a different
approach to handling clients.
Alan’s style is focused while Paul is more gregarious. Clients commented
to me on occasions
that Paul did not spend enough time with them and that they
felt rushed. I mentioned this to Paul because I thought it was something
should pay attention to. I made it apparent that everybody is an individual and
that they deserve the attention. Paul did not
give me the impression that he
wouldn’t consider my advice. Paul often had a strong argument to support
his actions, rather
than the advice offered, but after further consideration
would take the advice on board and even acknowledge that he had.
at the front desk of the practice were encouraged by all practitioners during
weekly staff meetings instigated by Paul on purchase
of the practice, to be
adjusted by all practitioners so they would be fully conversant with their
methods of treatment. Hence it
was common that staff members were also clients
of the practice.
respect to Patient C Ms Williams stated that she had also worked in the
practice. She thought this had occurred in about 2007.
Sometime within the first
six months that Patient C was working in the practice she spoke privately to Ms
Williams. Ms Williams gives
the following account of this conversation and the
events that followed in her statement as follows (part paragraph 8 and 9 then
asked me if Paul had ever behaved inappropriately to me, essentially if he had
ever come on to me. I replied “Are you
kidding?” Patient C then
advised me that Paul had placed her in an embarrassing position. I believe it
would have happened
at the end of a working shift and may have been in and
around an adjustment, but I am not sure. I did not inquire as to what exactly
occurred but did point out to her that Paul could often be misinterpreted.
Patient C was adamant there was no mistake in this case.
I asked her if she was
ok, and she confirmed that she had dealt with the situation at the time.
I believe Patient C would have told Paul that she was not happy with
his behaviour at the time of the incident. Paul is flirty and
his intentions
can be misconstrued. I checked with Patient C, if she was sure that he was
trying to get onto her, and that Paul
was being inappropriate. Patient C was
very sure about it.
Patient C had previously told me she had just come out of a really bad
employment situation having to fight for outstanding
pay, super and holiday
entitlements, I had been very keen for her to get her confidence back whilst
working with us in a pleasant
and supportive environment (or so I thought). She
gave me the impression that she was ok and that she was not going to take the
incident with Paul any further. If there was a recurrence she promised, she
would come to me. Patient C really liked the job and
she did not want to lose
the incident Patient C no longer had treatments with Paul, preferring only Alan
Wigg and eventually chiropractor Annica Larsdotter
when she started working with
Patient C stopped having treatments with Paul, I remember that Paul stated to me
that Patient C could not promote wellness care
confidently because she was no
longer adjusted by him. Paul said to me that he preferred to have a CA more in
tune and knowledgeable
in wellness care than Patient C. I felt this was a thin
argument as her hours had been reduced and she was not at the clinic often
enough to be able to receive regular adjustments by Paul even if she had wanted
to. I also thought that it is also a person’s
choice, if they want to
have an adjustment or not. It also seemed after Patient C told me about this
incident with Paul, that suddenly
there were many issues where Paul was at odds
with Patient C’s handling of a situation. I thought Patient C was
unfairly treated
after, Patient C’s hours were dramatically reduced by Paul and she left
the practice. I believe that Patient C thought
that she was put in a position
where she could not survive financially on the hours that were left, giving her
little choice but
to leave the practice.
Williams also recounted having been told by Annica of her observation of
inappropriate contact between the Respondent and Patient
D. At the relevant time
Patient D was also employed at the practice as a chiropractic assistant, having
been a pre-existing patient
of the practice. Ms Williams recalled that Patient D
left her employment at the practice around the time Dr M Eather returned to
at the practice after maternity leave in about September 2008.
respect to Patient B, Ms Williams recalled that she had been a patient of Dr
Annica Larsdotter until she went on maternity leave
at which time the Respondent
took over Patient B’s care. The Respondent also provided chiropractic care
to Patient B’s
Williams described the frequency and nature of the consultations with Patient B
and her family as follows (paragraphs 19 to 22):
believe that Patient B and Paul had a good rapport as they seemed to enjoy each
other’s company. Initially I did not notice
anything different in their
interactions to the interactions Paul generally has with his clients. Just
prior to the birth of Patient
B’s daughter, Baby B, at the beginning of
April 2009, Patient B started attending appointments with Paul more frequently.
Eventually Patient B made weekly appointments for herself. It was my
understanding that Patient B was receiving Neuro Emotional
Treatment from Paul
after the birth of Baby B. Paul also adjusted Baby B. Patient B normally came
in Monday mornings. Then she
would come in Wednesday/Thursday with her two
sons. She paid for all adjustments.
never saw anything totally obvious happening between Paul and Patient B, though
appointments without her sons lasted longer and
longer. At some point after the
appointments started getting longer, Paul pointed out to me that I did not need
to stay until the
end of Patient B’s appointment. At this time Patient B
was always the last appointment on the Monday morning, however, she
always billed and did not always pay for the appointments at the same time as
she attended the appointments.
these appointments from about the beginning of June 2009 with Paul, Patient B
left her daughter, Baby B, who was only a couple
of months old, in her stroller
and later on a blanket just outside the closed door of the treatment room while
she was in with Paul.
I felt extremely uncomfortable leaving the practice with
Baby B alone in the reception area. Baby B was placed where Patient B
could probably have seen her when they opened the door, but she was an amazing
little girl and often managed to move herself
some considerable distance for
such a little person.
remember one day after returning from a two hour lunch break, I found Patient B
still at the practice with Paul. When I came in,
Paul and Patient B were
standing in the kitchen having a cup of tea, it all felt a bit too cosy to me.
This was the last time I
saw Patient B.
Williams stated that she would see Patient B frequently at the gym between 2007
and 2009 and after they joined a new gym in 2009
she saw Patient B and the
Respondent working out together. At no time was there any arrangement for her to
meet or join them at the
Williams recalled that Patient A’s family had been long term clients of
the practice, from the time of Dr Wigg. Dr Wigg’s
partner and Patient
A’s mother were friends. Dr Wigg had treated Patient A from when she was
quite young.
Patient A’s clinical records she can see where the final appointment made
by Patient A for 16 August 2007 had been cancelled.
Williams could not remember having any conversation with Patient A as to the
reason for the cancellation but she did recall that
Patient A had brought
beautiful homemade cupcakes’
in to the practice on one of
her last visits.
Evidence of Dr Annica Larsdotter
Larsdotter provided a statement to the HCCC dated 30 November 2009 (exhibit 12).
Dr Larsdotter stated that she had worked at the
practice for three years from
March 2007, the last nine months of which she had been part time. She recalled
that Dr Wigg had retired
in March 2007 after a transition period of a few months
handing the practice over to the Respondent.
Larsdotter gave the following account of the practice after Dr Wigg retired
(paragraph 5):
After Alan retired it seemed that a large number of ladies who had seen Alan
did not want to see Paul. These patients seemed to have
an issue with Paul but
they did not say why. I asked them if there was a particular reason but they
would say no, there is no specific
reason, they just did not want to see Paul.
This would have happened with around 15 or 20 female
Dr Larsdotter went on maternity leave and a number of her patients expressed
concern regarding the Respondent taking over their
Larsdotter stated that some male patients informed her that they did not wish to
consult the Respondent as they were not satisfied
with the treatment provided or
were concerned with the frequency of treatment recommended by the Respondent. Dr
Larsdotter expressed
the view that the Respondent had a low retention rate of
patients compared to her and Dr Wigg.
Larsdotter gave details of three occasions when she had cause to speak to the
Respondent regarding what she considered to be unprofessional
of these incidents was the contact that she observed between the Respondent and
Patient D. Dr Larsdotter gave the following account
of her observations
(paragraphs 16 and 17):
second professional behaviour issue related to an incident that occurred when I
came in one morning, shortly after I started to
work in the clinic at Showground
Road that was bought from Alan Wigg. (A copy of the layout of the clinic is
annexed to the statement
and marked “A”.) I think it was within the
first six months I was working here, in 2007 between March and July. For
reason, I arrived earlier than I normally do to the clinic. It was empty and
really quiet but the phone was ringing. I went
to the kitchen and put my bag
down. When I looked down the hall from the kitchen area I saw Paul standing in
view in the treatment
room at the other end of the clinic and he had answered
the phone. I also saw our receptionist Patient D, who was also a patient
practice, standing near Paul only wearing her bra. She then reached from behind
Paul and touched him on the crouch (sic).
I thought “what is this?”
I know that sometimes staff requested to have an adjustment during work hours
and Paul would
sometimes do it, but it did not look like an adjustment was what
was going on.
Paul stopped talking on the phone him and Patient D went out of my sight to the
back of the treatment room and stayed there for
a few more minutes. Paul and
Patient D did not see me. I was just disgusted. Three minutes later Paul came
out of the treatment
room and walked down the hall to another treatment room and
a patient was in the room. I assume the patient was on the blocks.
cushions, which are put underneath the specific areas of the pelvis to assist
realignment allowing gravity to do the work.
There is a certain time frame,
usually around the five minute mark where you can leave the room. When I saw
that the patient was
in the room, I was absolutely appalled. I am sure the
patient had been left there for much longer than 5 minutes given the time
had past (sic) since I arrived at the clinic.
Larsdotter stated that when she confronted the Respondent about what she had
observed about six weeks later he stated that they
‘just great
friends mucking around’.
Larsdotter also expressed concern about comments made by the Respondent at the
reception desk in front of patients (people who
had been acquainted with Dr Wigg
for 20 years). Ms Larsdotter heard the Respondent say how awful it was that Dr
Wigg was ‘kicking’
them out of the building.
Larsdotter reviewed the clinical notes of Patient A. She recognised the notes
she had made regarding the treatment she had provided
to her. She also read that
the Respondent had made an eight week treatment plan (one visit per week),
however it appeared Patient
A only attended for the first three weeks. She also
reviewed the two handwritten lists headed
‘What I like about
‘What I do not like about myself
Larsdotter stated that she had never seen lists like these being used in NET
work. She herself had received regular NET
work for two years.
respect to Patient C, Ms Larsdotter recalled that she left employment at the
practice shortly after Dr Wigg retired. She was
of the view that Patient C
‘could not stand Paul at all’
. She had also noted that the
Patient C’s work hours around so
that they did not suit Patient C.
Larsdotter stated that initially Patient B and her children were her patients.
After she went off on maternity leave they came
under the care of the
Respondent. On reviewing the clinical notes of Patient B she observed that the
frequency of treatment increased
without any supporting notes regarding changes
in her state of health, possible accident, aggravation of an existing condition.
also noted that the documentation of progress made by the treatment
throughout pregnancy was
‘scarce if not non existent’
Oral Evidence – Dr Larsdotter
Larsdotter gave evidence on the first day of the Inquiry. Dr Larsdotter stated
that she had qualified as a chiropractor after completing
a course in London 12
years ago. Prior to coming to Australia in 2006 Dr Larsdotter worked in New
Zealand. As her partner was transferred
to Australia she sought sponsorship for
a visa from the Respondent. She commenced employment in the Respondent’s
practice in
March 2007 and as soon as her visa requirements changed in March
2010 she left the employ of the Respondent.
Larsdotter confirmed the content of her written statement.
Larsdotter stated that she was employed to take over Dr Wigg’s patients,
Dr Wigg intending to retire and travel.
Larsdotter stated that she asked the Respondent about the observations she had
made of the Respondent’s conduct with Patient
D. He stated that it was
Nothing, we are just great friends and mucking around’
Larsdotter was then asked whether or not she had accepted this explanation from
the Respondent and she answered (T48.10-18):
A. What do you do? I took advice from a highly regarded
colleague and member of our profession as to how do I go about this, I'm
disturbed, and this particular person suggested "You might want to bring this up
with Paul" and he said there was nothing going
on and I think around that time
is when Leanne left, I didn't see her very much. I was there to work, I was
there to look after
patients, I had absolutely no desire to support people doing
complaints or having to pull up my principles on how to behave and manage
patients. It was quite a predicament because of my visa status, I had nowhere
to go, so just trying to make the best of a situation
really and that is why
they do that.
Larsdotter noted that Patient D was paying for treatment in July 2007 and that
she observed the conduct between Patient D and the
Respondent in about March or
April 2007.
Other Evidence – telephone records
bundles of tax invoices (and the accompanying information) for mobile telephone
services formed part of the evidence. The records
relating to Patient B formed
exhibit 18. Those relating to the Respondent formed exhibit 19. Exhibit 20 are
further telephone records.
Report of Dr Bruce Westmore
Respondent attended Dr Westmore, a forensic psychiatrist, at the request of the
HCCC. Dr Westmore’s report dated 22 June
2011 is exhibit 42.
report recorded that the Respondent had attended Dr Westmore’s office on
17 June 2011. The Respondent is recorded as stating
he had been separated for
two years and was in a
‘new relationship of 15 – 18 months
. He was living with his new partner and her three young
the heading
‘Presenting Complaint’
Dr Westmore recorded the
I asked him to tell me the history leading up to his difficulties. He said
“a person made a complaint about me, my ex-wife
decided to jump on the
band wagon and make as many complaints as she
He said the ex-partner of his current partner also became involved and that
man also made complaints about him.
I told him I understood that the allegations were that he had had a sexual
relationship with one of his patients. He confirmed that.
I asked him was he
denying those allegations and he said yes.
I told him I also understood that there were allegations that he had had
consensual but inappropriate sexual relationship with 2 other
patients, one of
whom was an employee. He said “I think that is what they say, I’m
pretty sure that is what they say”.
Mr Eather went on to indicate that he
also denied those allegations.
I told him I understood that there is an allegation that the first person I
referred to was somebody he thought suffered from some
He said “well, it is a possibility. I’m not qualified to make that
judgment on my own.”
I told him it was alleged that he had not made any
notes in relation to his concerns nor did he refer that person on to somebody
appropriately qualified. He said “the problem is I’m not
qualified”. He said he did ask that particular person
to see somebody but
they said they lived too far away. He said he had not been confronted with that
was not sure what to do. He told me he could not
force somebody to go and consult another person. He said he believed he could
not tell the patient that he felt they had a mental illness because he said they
could sue him. He said he also did not think he
would get a positive reception
from a general practitioner if he called a general practitioner about his
concerns in relation to
the patient.
Respondent is recorded as informing Dr Westmore that he had been diagnosed with
in 1996 and been treated with Dexamphetamine. The
Respondent stated that the medication caused him to suffer migraines and
with his studies so he consulted a chiropractor and modified his
diet. He stated that he rarely drank alcohol, took Mersyndol for
migraines and
did not smoke or use illicit drugs.
Respondent reported completing a Masters in Chiropractic in 1997. He married at
aged 29, his wife being 26 years of age. His wife
had been married previously.
The marriage had lasted 10 years and they have three children.
Respondent stated that he had not seen his children since November 2010 and that
the Family Court
‘will be involved in these difficulties’
Respondent is recorded as informing Dr Westmore that the person he was living
with had been a patient and was one of the patients
referred to in the HCCC
Complaint. He gave the following account of the commencement of the
relationship:
He said at the end of August 2009 he suggested to this lady that she see
somebody else for treatment because he and she were becoming
“friendly”. He said their first date occurred at the end of
September 2009. He said her husband alleges that a sexual
relationship had
commenced while she was still one of his patients, he denies
report contains the following record of the Respondent’s reaction to the
HCCC Complaint:
He said, because of the current investigation by the HCCC, he now finds work
to be a “nerve racking experience”. He said
for example he worries
that his eye contact with patients might be held for too long. He wonders did
he shake the patient’s
hand too hard, too softly or for too long. He said
he is now wondering “when is the next complaint going to come in against
me”. He said he was good at what he did as a chiropractor and he has
enjoyed his work as a chiropractor. He said he likes
to his current mood the Respondent is recorded as having informed Dr Westmore as
I asked him about his current mood and he said it was “as well as could
be expected”. He said he had not slept well however
for 2 years but his
appetite and weight were stable although he was not exercising as much now. Of
his energy levels, he said “I’ve
lived on adrenaline for 40
years”. He described a reduced libido but denies any thoughts of
When asked about aggressive thoughts towards others, he said “no (but)
I’m verbally aggressive”. He said when upset
he will swear
“but then it is out, I’m done, move on, try to live my life. I
don’t hate any of the people who
have done this to me over the last 2
Westmore records the following under the heading ‘Mental State
Examination’:
Mr Eather presented punctually, he was neat and tidy and pleasant and
cooperative. Eye contact was reduced. He spoke spontaneously
and expansively
and the rate, flow, form and tone of his speech patterns were normal. His
affect was intense, anxious and, I thought,
angry. His mood state was
restricted but appropriate. He was not suffering from a Major Depressive
Disorder. No psychotic symptoms
were identified. He was alert and
Westmore expressed the view that he did not believe the Respondent’s
current mental state was likely to detrimentally affect
his capacity to practise
as a chiropractor. Further, Dr Westmore agreed with the opinion of Mr
Watson-Munro that the Respondent did
not suffer from any specific psychiatric or
psychological issues although he was somewhat eccentric and had symptoms of
anxiety and
depression.
Evidence of Dr Rachael Weeks
peer review evidence on behalf of the HCCC was given by Dr Weeks. She provided a
report dated 13 January 2010. A further report
dated 11 February 2010 (exhibit
31) dealt in part with the subject matter of the Particulars of Complaint before
this Tribunal. It
is only that part of this report that is considered by the
Tribunal (part of page 482 and page 483).
13 January 2010 report of Dr Weeks also covers matter beyond the subject of the
Particulars of the Complaints. The Tribunal has
only considered the opinions of
Dr Weeks where it relates to a Particular of the Complaints.
Particular 1
Weeks commented upon the allegations detailed in Particular 1 on page 6 of her
report (exhibit 29, page 462). She expressed the
view that if the allegations
are found to be true then the conduct would be significantly below the standard
reasonably expected
of a practitioner and the departure attracts her strongest
Particular 2
Weeks commented upon the allegations detailed in Particular 2 on page 5 of her
report (exhibit 29, page 461). Dr Weeks notes that
the Respondent had identified
Patient A as having a ‘yellow flag’ for possible depression and had
resolved to refer her
for further help. In these circumstances Dr Weeks is of
the view that the Respondent then had an obligation to make the referral
appropriately. Dr Weeks is of the view that the conduct is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner.
In her report dated 11
February 2011 at page 5 (482) she stated that this conduct did not attract her
strongest criticism.
Particular 3
Weeks comments upon the allegations detailed in Particular 3 on page 7 and 8 of
her report (exhibit 29, page 463-4). Dr Weeks noted
that there did not appear to
be any notation in Patient A’s clinical notes regarding her mental state
or the request for and
receipt of the lists (‘like/dislike’) which
were attached to Patient A’s clinical notes. The opinion of Dr Weeks
respect to this Particular was clarified in her oral evidence. In the
circumstances of this matter Dr Weeks is of the view that
the conduct of failing
to make any notes regarding the mental health issue is significantly below (page
463) the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of the
Respondent’s training and experience. In her report dated 11 February
2010, and in her oral
evidence Dr Weeks confirmed that she considered the
conduct was significantly below the standard expected. At T 104.17-26 she gave
the following evidence:
Q. Yes, but the failure to record anything about his
observations of her mental - of her presentation and his decision to
referral onto a mental health practitioner, what is your criticism of his
failure to make an entry in the notes of that kind?
A. Thinking about it in the way you have expressed it, what would happen
to the patient if he was hit by a bus, then I think I would
more - I would say that it's significantly below, given what would
happen to the patient if her care wasn't able to be continued
on the mental
health issues. Yes, I think I would change my mind on that point and say it was
significantly below what is expected.
page 5 of her second report (482) she stated that this conduct did not attract
her strongest criticism and this was maintained
in her oral evidence.
Particular 4
Weeks commented upon the allegations detailed in Particular 4 on page 6 of her
report (exhibit 29, page 462). Dr Weeks noted that
the Respondent had identified
he had requested Patient A to write these lists so he could
‘how high up the referral list, so to speak, I had to go’
Weeks noted that the Respondent stated he had counsellors to whom he could refer
patients. Dr Weeks stated she was unclear what
information these lists were
expected to provide the Respondent. Dr Weeks noted the availability of
standardised and validated questionnaires
to assist with the detection of issues
such as depression. In her report Dr Weeks expressed the view that the conduct
of the Respondent
was below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner.
In her report dated 11 February 2010 at page 5 (482) she stated that
not attract her strongest criticism. Although Dr Weeks stated in her oral
evidence that she could see no reason why the
Respondent would ask Patient A to
complete these lists if he had already formed the view that she suffered from a
mental issue that
would be assisted by referral to a mental health practitioner.
She was asked to assume a number of variables about a patient’s
Dr Weeks stated that having considered the variables she was of the view that
the conduct was significantly below the
conduct reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience. She maintained
the strength of her
criticism in her oral evidence.
Particular 5
Weeks comments upon the allegations detailed in Particular 5 are on page 471 of
her report (exhibit 29, page 15). Dr Weeks notes
that the evidence as to the
existence of the relationship between the Respondent and Patient B is
inconsistent. However, Dr Weeks
had formed the view from the record of interview
with the Respondent that he believed that beginning a sexual relationship with
B about the time of referring Patient B on to another practitioner was
acceptable. Dr Weeks expressed the view that this was not
acceptable for two
reasons. The first reason was that the Respondent should not have put himself in
a situation with a patient where
a sexual relationship may begin. The second
reason was that a professional relationship does not end on the day of referring
patient to another chiropractor. Dr Weeks clarifies the point that an
interval is necessary between the end of care and the beginning
of a personal
relationship.
Weeks expressed the view that the conduct is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner. In her report
dated 11 February 2010 at
page 5 (482) she stated in the last paragraph that ‘this invites my
strongest criticism.’
Particular 6
Weeks’ comments upon the allegations are detailed in Particular 6 on page
12 of her report (exhibit 29, page 468). Dr Weeks
noted that the Respondent does
not provide any indication of a treatment plan or any reason for a change in
scheduling. There are
only lists of treatment provided. In Dr Weeks’s
report she notes the level of detail required should provide any chiropractor
with sufficient information to enable them to pick up the notes and understand
what treatment had been provided and why.
the opinion of Dr Weeks, this conduct is below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner.
Particular 7
Weeks’ commented upon the allegations detailed in Particular 7 on page 13
of her report (exhibit 29, page 469). Dr Weeks
noted that the Respondent made a
note at the end of the file dated 26 August 2009 recording that a referral to
Keith Keen had been
made at 8:30 am. There was no copy in the file of a written
referral or a reason as to why the referral was made. It was not clear
whether the Respondent had telephoned the other chiropractor at 8.30am or spoken
to Patient B at that notated time. Dr Weeks
noted that the chiropractor to whom
Patient B was referred was some distance from where Patient B resided which
implies that the
condition suffered by Patient B was so difficult to treat that
the travelling distance was warranted. Dr Weeks also expressed the
given the personal nature of the relationship between the Respondent and Patient
B it would have been highly appropriate
for the Respondent to have spoken to the
other chiropractor regarding the circumstances of the referral.
her report dated 11 February 2011 at page 13 (469) Dr Weeks stated that in her
opinion the standard of documentation regarding
this referral was below what is
reasonably expected of a practitioner of the same standard and experience.
Particular 8
Weeks’ was not asked to comment upon the subject matter of Particular 8.
She gave oral evidence as to how an ‘Anterior
Dorsal Adjustment’ was
performed demonstrating the degree of contact between the chiropractor and the
patient during such an
adjustment. Her evidence was that the physical contact
between the patient and the practitioner was focused on the placement of the
practitioner’s hand on the elbow/elbows of the patient. Dr Weeks clearly
described the adjustment as involving the placement
of one of the
practitioner’s hands behind the back of the patient. At no time should the
practitioner be ‘on top of’
the patient. Rather the practitioner
should be standing on the floor square on to the side of the treatment table.
Particular 9
Weeks’ commented upon the allegations detailed in Particular 9 on page 16
of her report (exhibit 29, page 472). Dr Weeks
noted that the Respondent
commented during his interview with the HCCC that he had no ethical concerns
regarding having sex with
Patient D because she was a staff member. She noted
that he stated it would have been ideal to have another chiropractor treating
her but this had not occurred due to
‘convenience’
expressed the view that it was not ‘just ideal’ to have another
person treating Patient D but necessary for
him not to treat a patient he was
having sex with. Dr Weeks expressed the view that the Respondent should not have
been having sex
with any patient. Dr Weeks expressed the view that the conduct
was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner.
her report dated 11 February 2011 at page 5 (482) she stated that this conduct
attracted her strongest criticism.
The Respondent’s evidence
Documentary evidence
Respondent replied to a letter from the HCCC dated 8 September 2009 by letter
dated 13 October 2009 from his solicitors Walter
Madden Jenkins (exhibit 33).
This letter essentially was a request for ‘further and better
particulars’.
Respondent replied to a letter dated 15 October 2009 from the HCCC by way of a
letter dated 11 November 2009 from his solicitors
– Walter Madden Jenkins
(part exhibit 34).
this letter the Respondent advised that he had provided seven adjustments to
Patient A between 2 July and 9 August 2007. The Respondent
then provided the
following explanation about the ‘like/dislike’ lists (part paragraph
...Patient A presented as someone who (based on her demeanour) may have been
suffering from mental health issues. She volunteered
that she had low self
esteem, low self worth and unhappiness with her body. As has been noted, many
of the problems centered around
the L4 area. The L4 area in many different
techniques is related to the large intestine which from an emotional standpoint
to the emotions of a dogmatic positioning, grief and sadness. Mr Eather
requested and received a list from Patient A that she titled
dislike about Myself”.
On reviewing the list Mr Eather formed the view that Patient A might benefit
from a referral to a mental health practitioner. After
he raised this issue
with Patient A, she did not keep any further
appointments.
paragraph 4 of this letter the Respondent confirmed that he did comment to
Patient A that not all men required women to be thin
and that what was important
was to be healthy.
paragraph 5 there are further details of the conversations between the
Respondent and Patient A as follows:
Any questions that Mr Eather may have asked Patient A about her personal life
were concerned with her thoughts on why she had such
a poor body image; why she
didn’t go out at all, whether on dates or socially; was there a need that
she felt it best to be
housebound; how did her previous relationships work out;
if she was unhappy; what sort of plans she was making/had she made to get
change happening in her life; was she looking forward to her new job and did she
feel that it might open some new doors for
These questions were all derived from comments that Patient A had made to Mr
Eather during the consultations about how she was and
how things were
paragraph 6 the Respondent denied
‘each and every one’
Patient A’s allegations.
paragraph 9 the Respondent stated that he ‘
has and still does
occasionally’
sell Goji juice in his practice but denied ever
encouraging patients to sell the product. He has however informed them that he
‘can receive commission from the sale of the product’
10 of the letter reads:
The only time Mr Eather’s genitals have been the topic of conversation
in the clinic occurred following him undergoing a vasectomy
in 2006. Some
people sought his opinion on vasectomies, which changes your hormones and
affects your prostrate (sic) and other
second letter dated 11 November 2009 also came from Walter Madden Jenkins (part
exhibit 34) in response to a letter dated 12 October
2009 from the HCCC. This
letter dealt with the complaint relating to Patient B. The letter recorded that
Patient B had been referred
to the Respondent for treatment but had initially
been treated by Dr Larsdotter until she left the practice for maternity leave.
Thereafter the Respondent treated Patient B with
‘adjustments for lower
back pain and associated problems as well as TMJ Dysfunction’,
as providing care during Patient B’s pregnancy.
respect to the number and timing of treatments provided the letter written on
behalf of the Respondent stated:
Mr Eather provided a total of 60 adjustments to Patient B.
Between 30 June 2008 and October 2008 the adjustments were directed at
instability (sprain of the sacroiliac joint on the left). Between October 2008
and December 2008 the adjustments were directed
at lower back pain. Between
December 2008 and April 2009 the adjustments were directed at her
As a general rule, all adjustments last between 5 and 20 minutes unless an
emergency dictates otherwise.
Patient B’s clinical records are available.
letter records that the Respondent cannot recall details of the conversations he
had with Patient B apart from stating that the
conversations ‘related to
the treatment provided at the time’.
letter records that Patient B visited the practice between June and August 2009
and that these visits were of a
‘private nature’
receiving assistance completing an assignment for a Certificate IV in Personal
letter also records the denial by the Respondent of touching Patient B’s
breasts and massaging her lower pelvic region in
a manner inconsistent with
chiropractic care, and that be became sexually aroused during a consultation or
made inappropriate comments
or sexual advances to Patient B. The Respondent
denied he engaged in a sexual relationship with Patient B
‘until such
time as he had referred [Patient B] to another chiropractor’
letter also confirmed that the Respondent had intended to travel to Perth to
teach a technique seminar in September 2009, however
the trip ultimately did not
occur. The letter confirmed that Patient B had purchased her own plane ticket.
The letter described the
relationship of Patient B to the Respondent as
‘girlfriend’
letter states that the Respondent was only aware of one other complaint
regarding his conduct being that of Patient A.
HCCC sent a section 40 letter to the Respondent (through his solicitors) on 6
May 2010 (exhibit 40). The Respondent replied through
his solicitors on 2 June
2010 (exhibit 41). The relevant parts of the response were as follows:
denies that on or about late 2007 during a consultation with Patient C he
attempted to initiate sexual contact with her.
(b) He denies that on or about August 2007 during a
consultation with Patient A, he behaved in a sexual manner towards her.
(c) He denies that on or about 2008 he was involved in a sexual
relationship with Patient D at a time when she was a patient.
(d) He denies that on or about mid 2009 he was involved in an
inappropriate and sexual relationship with Patient B while she was
letter submitted that the complaints outlined were based on
‘inaccurate
or unsustainable facts’
and he rejected that his conduct demonstrated
that his knowledge, skill or judgment possessed or care exercised by him in the
of chiropractic was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
the letter states that the Respondent did refer Patient A to a ‘qualified
psychologist’ who worked in North
Sydney and that Patient B had stated
that it was not convenient for her to travel to North Sydney. As Patient A did
not return for
treatment he was unable to provide her with a further referral.
Respondent’s comments regarding the peer review report are also contained
in the letter dated 2 June 2010. With respect
to the ‘First Review’
the following comments are made on behalf of the Respondent:
the heading
‘Further Comments’
the Respondent denies that he
ever said anything to Patient A about the size of his penis.
respect to his conduct with Patient B he rejects his conduct is below the
requisite standard (so that it does not amount to unsatisfactory
professional
Respondent rejected the opinion of the Peer Reviewer that his conduct regarding
Patient D was significantly below the requisite
Respondent accepts that he may have said words to the effect that Dr Wigg was
‘kicking us out of the building’
and he did not consider that
such a statement had any bearing on Dr Wigg’s reputation or competence as
a chiropractic practitioner.
respect to the ‘Second Review’ the following comments are made on
behalf of the Respondent:
The Respondent
rejected the opinion expressed by the Peer Reviewer that the level of
documentation he maintained was below the requisite
With respect to
the opinions expressed by the Peer Reviewer at paragraph 4 of her report dated
11 February 2010 the Respondent rejects
her opinion and rejects that any
criticism of his conduct ‘”strongest” or otherwise’ is
relation to paragraphs 5 and 6 of Opinion 4, Mr Eather rejects he had a personal
relationship with
[Patient B]
that was inappropriate. In relation to
[Patient D]
, likewise he rejects the contention that the relationship he
had with her was inappropriate, therefore no criticism, strongest or
is warranted.
Mr Eather’s position is that
the criticisms, findings and opinions in both reviews that are adverse to him,
are based on inaccurate
or unsustainable facts’.
Record of Interview with the HCCC dated 18 November 2009
Respondent was interviewed by the HCCC on 18 November 2009 (Ms Ford being the
investigator on this occasion). A record of this
interview is found at exhibit
35. Mr Madden, solicitor, accompanied the Respondent.
Respondent stated that he had trained in
‘Diversified, Gonstead, Sacro
Occipital Technique and Neuro-Emotional Technique’
. He also used a bit
‘activator work’
to the philosophy of care he applied he stated that he saw his role as removing
the ‘interference’ and allowing the
body to express health (page 3).
answer to questions as to the frequency care should be provided the Respondent
replied that it was possible that consultations
would be required daily. An
example of such an extreme case would be where a patient had suffered a nucleus
pulposus explosion (recorded
asked how he would approach having to touch a patient in a sensitive area such
as the groin, the Respondent stated that he would
be ‘very bloody
careful’. By this he meant he would inform them about what he wanted to
do, why he wanted to do it, how
it would help them and then seek the
patient’s permission.
Respondent stated that he had completed both the
NET seminars. He did not use all parts of this technique;
rather he used the parts where the organs
‘need to be
. He also used a
‘lot of the kinesiology from
it’ e.g the muscle testing to identify organ problems or nutritional
deficiencies
the interview the Respondent denied using any NET or kinesiology on Patient A.
With respect to the ‘like/dislike’
lists the Respondent gave the
following evidence (pages 7 and 8):
FORD: No. Okay. In a response that we received it states that
you requested Patient A to write a list.
EATHER: Yes.
FORD: Okay. What was the list that you asked her to write?
EATHER: From memory, I asked her to write a list about what she
didn’t like about herself.
FORD: Okay. And what was the purpose of that?
EATHER: She presented as somebody with emotional issues.
FORD: What – in what way? What emotional issues?
EATHER: Well, again, I’m not qualified, and it’s not my
background, and it was more she presented as someone depressed.
FORD: She presented as depressed?
EATHER: Yeah. Not suicidal, more just very unhappy. Depressed,
FORD: Okay. So you asked her to write a list of actually what she
didn’t like about herself.
EATHER: Yes.
FORD: Is that what you said? And so – sorry, what were you trying
to achieve with that?
EATHER: I figured I would have to refer her on to somebody else.
FORD: Okay.
EATHER: So at that time my job was to find out just how high up the
referral list, so to speak, I had to go.
FORD: And does that relate to chiropractic care at all?
EATHER: Yes.
FORD: How does that relate?
EATHER: Well, I have a duty of care to the patient.
FORD: Okay. So it’s not actually a chiropractic technique or
anything. It’s more in a general duty, is that what you
EATHER: Yes.
FORD: Okay. So have you ever asked any other patients to write such a
EATHER: A few.
FORD: A few?
EATHER: Yeah.
FORD: Okay. How many would you say?
EATHER: I don’t recall.
FORD: Okay. And you don’t recall any particular patients that you
EATHER: No.
further questioning the Respondent was unsure whether such documents would still
be attached to the relevant patient files if a
he thought he would so attach such a list.
Respondent stated that he had referred Patient D to a mental health practitioner
– a counsellor hypnotherapist called Nick
Kovacs. He recalled the name of
another patient he had referred on (page 10). He could not recall if he used the
method to determine whether these two patients required a
referral to a mental health practitioner.
Respondent stated that after he reviewed the lists provided to him by Patient A
he thought he would refer her to a psychiatrist.
He confirmed that he had
written the date ‘26/07/07’ at the top of the lists written by
Patient A. He also noted the
records indicated that Patient A returned for two
consultations after this date. He may have mentioned that he was considering
her on but had not mentioned who he was considering referring her on
to. He expressed the view that he thought she was the most serious
mental illness he had come across in his practice. He agreed that despite this
being the case he had not documented these
concerns in her notes.
Respondent stated that he could not explain why Patient A had stopped consulting
him. He stated he had no idea why she would make
a complaint of the nature she
had and denied the allegations.
Respondent stated that he had no knowledge of any other complaints about his
conduct of the nature of inappropriate touching.
until 11 September 2009 the Respondent had been working Mondays, Wednesdays,
Thursdays and Saturday mornings. Thereafter he cut
Wednesday afternoon and Thursdays because he was told to do so by his
‘business partner’
. He complied with her request in an
‘keep the peace’
as he was in the middle of an
‘acrimonious divorce’
Respondent claimed in the week prior to his interview with the HCCC (18 November
2009) that Dr M Eather changed the locks of the
practice so that he was
effectively
‘locked out’
Respondent stated that Patient B had required the high frequency of adjustments
primarily because
‘she was in pain all the time’
– exhibit 35). She suffered from an unstable pelvis as well as problems
with her jaw.
Respondent stated that he referred Patient B on as the adjustments he was doing
to Patient B’s jaw were not
‘getting anywhere’
as the development of their relationship. The Respondent stated:
We had developed a very close friendship over the couple of
years that she’d been coming to the clinic – particularly
months prior to me even adjusting her when she saw Anaka – and it was
becoming apparent that it would probably develop
further and so I rang Guild
Insurance Legal Department and said, “I am in this situation. What am I
supposed to do?”
And then they said, “Well, if that’s the
situation – you can’t adjust that person at your clinic you must
refer them out. They must stay at arm’s length and basically can’t
be in your clinic for professional reasons.”
- ie to receive adjustments.
Respondent gave explanations as to why Patient B might have been observed to
have been at the clinic for a number of hours when
she attended for an
adjustment. Firstly the Respondent notes that at the time Patient B was
breastfeeding her youngest child and
he would have offered her a room to feed
the baby in. Secondly, he had offered to assist Patient B with her assignment
work for her
Certificate IV course in Personal Training. He agreed that she
would also have spent time in the practice because she was a
(page 35 – exhibit 35). She also visited the practice
after hours when he was residing in the practice rather than his marital
Respondent stated that he referred Patient B to Mr Keith Keen, an experienced
chiropractor, for continued treatment of her jaw.
He also provided Patient B
with the name of a home birth midwife, the name of a naturopath and the name of
a website from which she
could obtain information regarding immunisation of
children (the Australian Vaccination Network).
Respondent stated that he used some NET adjustments on Patient B focused on the
‘the concept of giving birth naturally’ (
exhibit 35).
the birth of Patient B’s baby the Respondent did not consider that she
might have suffered from post-natal depression.
He did not consider that she was
at any time vulnerable or suffering from mental health issues.
Respondent stated that his first date with Patient B occurred on 26 September
2009 when they attended a rugby club presentation
Respondent was unable to state precisely when he commenced a sexual relationship
with Patient B. He was able to say that it commenced
at the time he was residing
in the practice and that he had contacted Guild insurance to discuss the matter
at around the time the
sexual relationship commenced. He described his
relationship with Patient B as
exhibit 35).
Respondent admitted during the interview that he gave Patient B a business card
with the word
‘FOR A GOOD TIME CALL PAUL’
written on the back
. He stated that he would have given her this card
sometime prior to April 2009.
Respondent identified a number of emails and diary entries that he had written
in August and September 2009. He gave the following
evidence with respect to a
part of one of these documents (page 54 – exhibit 35):
BENNETT: Did you have a sexual relationship with Patient B prior to you
referring her to Mr Kean on the 26 August
EATHER: And I will give you the same answer. That until I referred her on or
around the end of August – no.
BENNET: Okay. Were you in any sort of relationship with
EATHER: Yeah. We had a casual relationship
BENNETT: A casual.
EATHER: Yes.
BENNETT: Okay. All right. What – I just want to bring back to –
this email Monday, 4 August that says, “Mary’s
still concerned
I’m seeing someone else. Everybody says that I must be. Am I seeing
Patient B? No proof of that. I am seeking
someone but I have to be
carefully.”
EATHER: Yes.
BENNETT: And what are you talking about
EATHER: Well, obviously I’d been out on a couple of dates with
BENNETT: Okay, but not Patient B.
EATHER: One may have been with her.
BENNETT: Okay.
EATHER: There were – I do have other
BENNETT: Okay. So you could – you could have had a date with –
EATHER: Could have.
in the interview the Respondent clarified that although his ‘first
date’ with Patient B had been to the rugby presentation
on 26 September
prior to that time. He did not consider
going for coffee with someone as a date.
after he received the letter from the HCCC detailing the complaint made by
Patient A he informed Patient B that there was
a complaint lodged against him.
He stated that he did inform Patient B that he was ‘pretty down’ but
denied informing
her that he was suicidal.
Respondent was asked about another entry an email dated 24 August 2009 recording
the fact that he had received a phone call from
Patient B’s husband and
described Patient B as
‘a lady I am dating’
. By way of
clarification, the Respondent stated that he was by that time having a
relationship with Patient B and they had seen each
other socially (outside of
the practice).
Respondent stated that he had never received a complaint from a patient and he
had only ever heard from Dr Larsdotter that one
patient had concerns about how
he had touched her in the groin area during an adjustment.
also agreed that Patient C had made a complaint about his conduct. She had
complained about his sense of humour and told him she
did not think he was
funny. He could not recall anyone else having raised with him a complaint made
by Patient C regarding his conduct
towards her.
Respondent stated that he thought Patient C had left her employment at the
practice because a reorganisation of hours had resulted
in her receiving less
respect to Patient D the Respondent stated that he did not have concerns
regarding her mental health, he did however consider
she was under stress as her
husband was a chronic gambler. When asked what his relationship was with Patient
D the Respondent relied
that they were ‘great friends’ and they
still were in contact. He further stated that they had a sexual relationship
commencing after she started working at the practice. The sexual relationship
sometimes occurred in the practice during the lunch
break or after hours. He
described the relationship as a
‘very laid back thing’
stated that Dr Larsdotter had asked him if he was having a relationship with
Patient D and he had replied ‘No’ as
the relationship had not
commenced at that time. He stated that he did not have any ethical concerns
regarding having a sexual relationship
with Patient D as he saw her as a staff
member (rather than a patient).
respect to the massage therapist that occasionally worked out of the practice,
Ms Annabelle Campbell the Respondent stated that
she was a ‘great friend;
and a sexual relationship with her
‘may have well crossed my
because they had just got along so well.
Respondent stated that after the locks had been changed on the practice he had
worked since the previous Friday (prior to 18 November
2009) out of nearby
premises (a room in a residential home) owned by some clients.
Respondent provided a copy of his CV to the HCCC when interviewed (exhibit 39).
An updated CV was provided to the Tribunal in
the week before the Inquiry as is
exhibit R 6.
Documents written by the Respondent
documentary evidence before the Tribunal indicates that at some point the
Respondent commenced a diary. Entries from this diary
are transcribed in exhibit
15. The entry for 4 August reads:
Mel is still concerned that I am seeing someone else, everybody says that i
must be, am i seeing Patient B, no proof that I am seeing
someone but i have to
be careful there.
entry for 24 August states that he is ‘dating’ Patient B. Another
entry for the same day records a telephone conversation
he had with Dr M Eather
wherein she asked him if he had a sexual relationship with Patient B and when he
replied that he considered
it was none of her business Dr M Eather stated that
she considered it was as Patient B was a patient of the practice. They discussed
an incident where an ex-patient had recently attended the practice and attempted
to hit the Respondent.
entry written on 25 August records that Dr M Eather stated the only reason she
was interested in what was happening with Patient
B was because of the potential
impact upon the practice. It also notes that Patient B will be seeing
‘other people’ (being
a reference to other chiropractor) as he and
Patient B had formed the view they should observe
. The entry for 26 August reads:
I rang Patient B at
and referred her to Keith Keen
for her jaw and the kids to Gerald for their NETS and cranial stuff.
I think that is actually the best thing to do for all of them anyway and
it should make things clearer around here and according to
Melanie will get her
off my back for good about this whole issue
Respondent’s evidence regarding the Peer Reviewer
Respondent addressed the opinions expressed by Dr Weeks in a letter from his
solicitors dated 2 June 2010 (exhibit 41) as well
as by way of a statement dated
15 June 2011 from Dr Linda Power. This statement took the format of comments on
selected parts of
Dr Weeks’ comprehensive Peer review report. The Tribunal
notes at this point that the statement was not accompanied by a statement
Dr Power had read and agreed to be bound by the Code of Conduct for expert
witnesses nor the usual declarations regarding conflicts.
comments made in these documents have been summarised and collated below:
Particular 1
a letter to the HCCC on behalf of the Respondent (exhibit 41) the Respondent
stated that this incident did
‘not happen’
(page 598). Dr
Power’s statement dated 15 June 2011 does not address this matter.
Particular 2
letter dated 2 June 2010 written on behalf of the Respondent to the HCCC
(exhibit 41) stated that he had given Patient A the name
of a counsellor
‘at North Sydney’
who was also a
psychologist’
(page 596). It was further stated that he had been
informed that this location was not convenient for Patient A and he did not
seeing Patient A after this occurred, although he may have seen her on
one or two occasions. This letter also notes that Dr Weeks
expressed the view
that the conduct did not attract her strongest criticism. The letter states that
the Respondent rejected that
his conduct was significantly below, or below what
was reasonably expected of a practitioner with the same level of training or
and also rejects that any criticism of him is warranted,
‘strongest’ or otherwise (page 602).
Power’s statement dated 15 June 2011 does not address this matter.
Particular 3
the letter dated 2 June 2010 to the HCCC written on behalf of the Respondent
(exhibit 41) it was indicated on behalf of the Respondent
that he rejected the
opinion of Dr Weeks that he had not fulfilled his duty of care to Patient A. Dr
Power’s statement dated
15 June 2011 does not address this matter.
Particular 4
the letter dated 2 June 2010 to the HCCC written on behalf of the Respondent
(exhibit 41) it was indicated that he rejected the
opinion of Dr Weeks that he
had not fulfilled his duty of care to Patient A. Dr Power’s statement
dated 15 June 2011 contains
the following regarding this Particular:
While the lists that Mr Eather used are not complete, they were a point to
start in order to determine further forms to be used
Particular 5
the letter to the HCCC on behalf of the Respondent (exhibit 41) the Respondent
rejected the opinion of Dr Weeks that he had had
a personal relationship with
Patient B that was inappropriate. Dr Power’s statement dated 15 June 2011
does not address this
Particular 6
a letter to the HCCC on behalf of the Respondent (exhibit 41) it was asserted
that ‘his record keeping and note taking is
of sufficient level to record
the history and examination procedures that he followed in relation to each
client’. He rejected
the opinion of Dr Weeks that he had not fulfilled a
professional standard of record keeping in regard to Patient B. Dr
statement dated 15 June 2011 contains the following statement
regarding a patient’s written record:
when the notation ‘Category II OK’ is written on a
patient’s record, this signifies a significant recorded improvement
... [Point 15] and
...Category II LUF ethically requires much more care
to stabilise weight-bearing sprain of the sacro-iliac.
Power was of the view that the expert (i.e. Dr Weeks) did not understand SOT.
Particular 7
the letter to the HCCC on behalf of the Respondent (exhibit 41) it was indicated
that it was not the Respondent’s practice
to prepare a written referral.
Later in the same letter the Respondent rejected that the level of documentation
he maintained was
below what was reasonably expected of a practitioner of the
same level of training and experience.
she does not comment directly on the lack of a referral in her statement dated
15 June 2011 Dr Power’s states:
Ignorance of the expert witness of SOT and Keith Keen’s particular work
is no reason to say the notes were inadequate.
Particular 8
the report of Dr Weeks did not contain a comment regarding Particular 8 it
follows that exhibit 41 did not contain any comments
of the Respondent in this
Particular 9
the letter to the HCCC on behalf of the Respondent (exhibit 41) it was stated
that he rejected the opinion expressed by Dr Weeks
(page 601). Later in the same
letter the comment made by Dr Weeks in her second report regarding the conduct
attracting her strongest
criticism is addressed by a statement that the
Respondent rejected
‘the contention that the relationship he had with
[Patient B]
was inappropriate’.
Dr Power’s statement does
not deal with the subject matter of this Particular.
The Respondent’s statement dated 15 June
copy of the statement provided to the Tribunal (exhibit R1) forms annexure B
Respondent did not appear before the Tribunal and therefore did not give any
oral evidence.
Report of Mr Tim Watson-Munro dated 14 June
Respondent attended Mr Watson-Munro, a forensic psychologist, on 31 May 2011 for
the purpose of obtaining a report (exhibit R5).
The report notes that Mr
Watson-Munro was provided with a copy of the Complaint and a ‘Letter of
Instruction’ (presumably
from Ms Paul as the report is addressed to her)
and ‘Other relevant material’.
report records the Respondent as providing the following details to Mr
Watson-Munro regarding the Complaint:
I note by way of background that proceedings commenced when Patient A made a
complaint to the HCCC. Patient A was a patient of Hills
Family Chiropractic
which was a business operated by your client and his former wife Melanie Eather.
As a result of that investigation
I note that his former wife informed the HCCC
of her concerns that your client had engaged in inappropriate sexual conduct
with patients.
Significantly these disclosures were made at a time when the
parties had recently separated. I note that Patient B is a person
with whom Mr
Eather ultimately commenced a domestic relationship and Patient C was a staff
member of the practice. Patient D is
a person who was working within the
Mr Eather strenuously denies any unprofessional conduct at any time in
relation to his professional career. I note that you seek
my diagnosis
concerning his mental state and how this may have in turn impacted upon his
presentation in dealing with patients.
In relation to this I note that Mr
Eather has suffered from Attention Deficit Disorder (“ADD”) since
childhood although
this does not appear to have affected his academic capacity.
I note that when he commenced Post Graduate studies as a Chiropractor
prescribed both Dexamphetamine and Ritalin which was of considerable assistance
to him. Certainly there was nothing from
my clinical observations of him nor
indeed as reflected through appropriate psychometric testing to indicate any
psychopathology
in this case beyond his current levels of understandable anxiety
and depression referable to these proceedings and how an adverse
finding may
impact upon his career and livelihood.
the heading ‘Social History’ Mr Watson-Munro recorded that the
Respondent was born in 1971 and completed the HSC
in 1988. Specifically with
respect to his practice as a chiropractor the following is recorded:
He has consequently been in practice for the past 15 years. Mr Eather stated
that he has continued studying as a consequence of his
keen interest in
Sacro-Occipital Techniques (“SOT”). He stated that he has lectured
and has become a primary educator
in his profession. He is also actively
involved in research and is hoping for some of his findings to be published in
the USA later
Watson-Munro recorded the Respondent as informing him that during the course of
his marriage he discovered that his wife was having
an affair and that she had
now married that person. The Respondent informed Mr Watson-Munro that he had
asked his then wife to seek
professional help in the last 12 to 18 months of
their marriage
‘to no avail’
Watson-Munro records that the Respondent had been ‘romantically’
involved with a woman (Patient B) for 18 months. He
records that Patient
B’s first husband had been tragically killed in a motor vehicle
report records the following history:
Mr Eather stated that following the breakdown of his marriage he developed
severe depression and dealt with this through comfort eating.
He acknowledged
some temporary but now resolved suicidal ideation at that time stating “I
thought I could eat myself into
an early death”. He described ongoing
strains in the marriage which he found increasingly difficult to cope with in
the context
of attempting to establish his professional
It would appear that your client works long and hard and is involved in two
(2) chiropractic businesses. One is situated at [omitted]
and another one
elsewhere on the [omitted]. There was also a third practice which he shared
with his former wife. That is based
at [omitted] but he has now been locked out
Mr Eather stated that he has always been very happy in his professional life
and specifically denied any claims of inappropriate sexual
behaviour against
him. His presentation at interview was somewhat eccentric which I would
attribute to his general personality construct
and ADD rather than reflecting
gross psychopathology. He acknowledges at times that he can speak off the cuff
but never with malicious
or forethought.
When seen he was well oriented in time, place and person and able to provide
a coherent account of his life and his problems. In
this regard he concedes
escalating anxiety referable to the complaints against him in terms of his
strong love of his profession
and his fear that he may be precluded from working
in this capacity should an adverse finding be made. This in turn is causing him
a degree of reactive depression.
Watson-Munro administered the Beck Depression Inventory to the Respondent. The
testing confirmed a degree of depression and anxiety.
Mr Watson-Munro noted that
the Respondent’s presentation at interview was somewhat
‘eccentric’
but not reflective of any psychopathology.
Watson-Munro expressed the view that the Respondent’s situation was
compounded by long working hours which were a result
of having to look after the
three children from his marriage. The report continues:
His symptoms were galvanised by his claim that his former wife instigated the
current complaints against him allegedly he was having
an affair with her now
. Clearly in the absence of interviewing the relevant
parties I cannot attest to the validity or liability of this claim. By his
account however this had a dramatic impact upon his self esteem which has been
further affected by the serious nature of the complaints
against him. His
reaction however is entirely normal against the backdrop of the circumstances he
is currently facing.
report concludes with positive features of the Respondent’s circumstances
being his continued work as a chiropractor, his
continued involvement in
research and his re-partnering with a partner who is fully aware of the
complaints made against him.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions which were supplemented by oral
submissions. The transcript reflects the oral submissions
Respondent’s Submissions
submissions were received from the Respondent as he did not appear during
‘phase one’.
Findings re Particulars
Particular 1
Tribunal notes that the Respondent denies he behaved in a sexual manner towards
Tribunal is of the view that the evidence given by Patient A is credible. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A set out
above. The Tribunal accepts
the views expressed by Dr Weeks with respect to the conduct detailed in
Particular 1.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 1
occurred and finds this Particular established. The
Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the judgement possessed and care
exercised by him was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal
also finds that the conduct was improper and unethical conduct relating to the
practice of chiropractic.
Particular 2
Tribunal notes that the Respondent had formed the view from his observation of
Patient A’s demeanour that she
‘may have been suffering from
mental health issues’.
The Respondent also stated that he had formed
the view that it was possible that Patient A would benefit from a referral to a
health practitioner. There is no evidence before the Tribunal that
Patient A was referred to an appropriate counsellor or other health
professional
apart from the Respondent’s evidence that he had suggested a counsellor
located in North Sydney and that Patient
A had indicated this location was not
practical for her to travel to and then was trying to find a ‘suitable
practitioner’
to refer her to. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of
Patient A that such a ‘referral’ was not made. Even if the referral
had been made, the manner in which the Respondent describes it having been made,
would not be sufficient to be considered as a referral.
Tribunal is of the view that the evidence given by Patient A is credible. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A set out
above. The Tribunal accepts
the views expressed by Dr Weeks with respect to the conduct detailed in
Particular 2.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 2
occurred and finds this Particular established. The
Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the knowledge, skill and
judgement possessed and care
exercised by him was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of
training and
experience. The Tribunal also finds that the conduct was unethical
conduct relating to the practice of chiropractic as he did not
refer Patient A
to a mental health practitioner once he had formed the view she might benefit
from such a referral.
Particular 3
Tribunal notes that the Respondent admits that he did not make a separate entry
in the clinical notes of Patient A regarding his
views of her mental health
presentation. He stated that he dated the ‘like/dislike’ list and
placed it into her file.
Tribunal accepts the views expressed by Dr Weeks with respect to the conduct
detailed in Particular 3.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 3 is
established. The Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct of the Respondent
demonstrated that the skill and judgement possessed and care exercised by him
was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an
equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal also finds that the
conduct was unethical conduct relating to the practice of chiropractic as an
appropriate standard of record keeping is an essential
element of professional
Particular 4
Tribunal notes that the Respondent admits that he requested and received from
Patient A the ‘like/dislike’ lists.
He stated that he requested the
list because he considered it was possible she would benefit from a referral to
a mental health practitioner
and the list would assist in determining whether
the referral was warranted and to whom the referral should be made.
Respondent stated that he observed that Patient A’s presentation was flat
and withdrawn and had volunteered that she had
low self-esteem and was unhappy
with her body. The Tribunal is of the view that this does not constitute
sufficient clinical foundation
for him to make such a request on the basis that
it is inappropriate for such a list to be requested by a chiropractor in the
circumstances
of this matter. The Tribunal considers that the conduct of the
Respondent should be viewed with a higher degree of criticism because
time he asked Patient A to prepare the lists he had already formed the view that
‘it was possible she would benefit from a referral to a mental health
practitioner’
Tribunal accepts the views expressed by Dr Weeks that the conduct of the
Respondent was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected. The
Tribunal however is of the view that the conduct should attract strong criticism
for the reasons set out in the paragraph
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Particular 4 is established. The Tribunal
is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent
demonstrated that the skill
and judgement possessed and care exercised by him was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected
of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of
training and experience. The Tribunal also finds that the conduct was improper
and unethical
conduct relating to the practice of chiropractic.
Particular 5
Tribunal notes it is common ground that Patient B and the Respondent currently
reside together and have been involved in a sexual
relationship from at least
late August or early September 2009. It is also common ground that Patient B
remained a patient of the
Respondent at the practice until 26 August 2009. The
Tribunal notes that the Respondent continued at least until the second day of
the Inquiry to provide chiropractic treatment to Patient B.
are parts of the evidence that allow the Tribunal to form the view that an
inappropriate personal relationship had commenced
at a much earlier time, and
for the inference to be drawn that a sexual relationship also occurred prior to
late August or early
September 2009.
HCCC made the following submission on this point:
The respondent and Patient B both deny that their relationship
was a sexual relationship until sometime in late August/early September
after treatment had ceased. The Commission accepts that there is no absolute
proof that the relationship was sexual in nature
in the period June to August
2009, however there is an abundance of evidence which would enable the Tribunal
to draw such an inference.
It is clear
from the telephone records of both Patient B and the respondent that these two
people maintained frequent contact with
each other outside of the scheduled
appointments at the clinic.
Both Patient
B and the respondent admit that Patient B stayed overnight at the Clinic with
the respondent on at least 2 occasions.
One of those occasions was described by
Patient B as “an awesome night” in her diary entry for 25 July.
There is also
evidence that Patient B visited the respondent at the clinic
– after hours, on other occasions ( after gym lessons and French
which the respondent also attended).
unchallenged evidence of Patient B’s estranged husband is that Patient B
had confessed to him that she had been in a sexual
relationship with the
to 27 August.
diary of the respondent wherein he alludes to “dating” Patient
unchallenged evidence of Ms Unsworth that she found long strands of hair of a
colour similar to Patient B’s hair on a sofa
bed at the clinic.
Even if the Tribunal is not able to draw an inference that the
nature of the relationship was sexual in nature, the Commission submits
evidence overwhelmingly indicates that the relationship was highly
inappropriate.
There is no dispute that the respondent provided regular and frequent
treatment to Patient B throughout the entire period. The continued
provision of
such treatment by the respondent in circumstances where it was clear that the
nature of the relationship had moved beyond
that of practitioner and patient was
clearly inappropriate.
Although the evidence would indicate that Patient B was a consenting party
to the relationship with the respondent the tribunal should
note that during the
relevant period she was visiting a psychologist and had been prescribed
anti-depressant medication. She confirmed
in oral evidence that she had
previously suffered from post-natal depression. These facts were known to the
respondent.
Tribunal accepts the submissions of the HCCC. The Tribunal also notes that there
is evidence that an airline ticket to Perth was
purchased on 17 August 2009 in
the name of Patient B for the purpose of intended travel with the Respondent.
The Tribunal also notes
the notation on the back of the Respondent’s
business card that he says he handed to Patient B sometime prior to April 2009.
The two emails that were exchanged by the Respondent and Patient B (exhibits 13
and 14) in June and July 2009 are also indicative
of an inappropriate personal
relationship. Another factor contributing to the Tribunal’s view that an
inappropriate personal
relationship had developed in the period relevant to the
Particular is the nature of the advice provided by the Respondent to Patient
The advice fell outside his scope of practice and therefore was not part of the
expected therapeutic relationship.
Tribunal also notes the admission of the Respondent in his record of interview
to the HCCC (exhibit 35) that he may have had a
‘date’ with Patient
B prior to 4 August 2009 (page 548).
Tribunal accepts the views expressed by Dr Weeks with respect to the conduct
detailed in Particular 5.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent and Patient B formed an
inappropriate personal relationship in or about June
2009 to 25 August 2009. The
Tribunal finds this Particular established. The Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct of the Respondent
demonstrated that the judgement possessed and care
exercised by him was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal
also finds that the conduct was improper and unethical
conduct relating to the
practice of chiropractic.
Particular 6
Tribunal notes that the Respondent was of the view that the notes he kept with
respect to Patient B were
‘sufficient to record the nature, frequency
and effectiveness of the treatment’
Tribunal accepts the views expressed by Dr Weeks with respect to the conduct
detailed in Particular 6.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 6 is
established and considers that it is below (but
not significantly) the standard
reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and
experience. Some form
of care plan and information regarding the change in
frequency of treatment should have been noted. The Tribunal is of the view that
an appropriate standard of record keeping is an essential element of
professional practice. The Tribunal is critical of the quality
of the records of
the Respondent regarding Patient B.
Particular 7
Tribunal notes that the only written record regarding the referral of Patient B
is a short note in the clinical notes dated 26
August 2009 (8.30am). There is no
evidence from the Respondent as to how this referral was effected. There is
nothing to indicate
that the Respondent telephoned the other chiropractor or
provided a written referral letter. The Respondent did give evidence that
referral was only for the purpose of treatment to Patient B’s jaw. There
is nothing to record a referral with respect to
treatment of Patient B’s
other conditions. It was the evidence of Patient B that when she contacted the
other chiropractor
he was not available to provide treatment as he was about to
Tribunal accepts the comments made by Dr Weeks in her reports and oral evidence
but does not accept the views she expressed with
respect to the conduct detailed
in this Particular. The Tribunal is of the view that it was incumbent upon the
Respondent to make
a full and detailed record in Patient B’s clinical
notes as to how and why he was referring her on. The inadequate nature of
record of the referral is compounded by the reason for the referral.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Particular 7 is established. The Tribunal
is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent
demonstrated that the
knowledge and judgement possessed and care exercised by him was significantly
below the standard reasonably
expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level
of training and experience. The Tribunal also finds that the conduct was
conduct relating to the practice of chiropractic as he gave evidence
that he only referred Patient B for treatment of her jaw.
Particular 8
Tribunal notes that the Respondent denies he engaged in any inappropriate sexual
conduct with Patient C.
Tribunal is of the view that the evidence given by Patient C is credible. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient C set out
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s statement ‘
possible that I performed an Anterior Dorsal Indicator Test and
Adjustment’
as described in paragraph 33 of his statement (R1).
Tribunal notes that Dr Weeks was not asked to express a view regarding the
conduct detailed in this Particular.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 8
occurred and finds this Particular established. The
Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the judgement and skill
possessed and care exercised
by him was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and
experience.
The Tribunal also finds that the conduct was improper and unethical
conduct relating to the practice of chiropractic.
Particular 9
Tribunal notes that the Respondent ultimately admitted he engaged in sexual
activity with Patient D. The Respondent stated that
the sexual activity occurred
when Patient D was an employee of the practice. The Tribunal notes that Dr
Larsdotter observed inappropriate
sexual contact between the Respondent and
Patient D in the practice during business hours.
Tribunal accepts the views expressed by Dr Weeks with respect to the conduct
detailed in Particular 9.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 9
occurred and finds this Particular established. The
Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrated that the judgement possessed and care
exercised by him was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal
also finds that the conduct was improper and unethical conduct relating to the
practice of chiropractic.
Findings re Complaints
Tribunal makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
each of Particulars 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9.
While the conduct set out in
Particular 6 is established to be below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training and experience it is not
significantly below.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in each of Particulars 1, 4,
5, 8 and 9 is of such a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or
cancellation of the Respondent’s registration. The Tribunal finds
professional misconduct with respect
to each of Particulars 1, 4, 5, 8 and 9.
Tribunal reserves on making any Orders until after ‘phase two’.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Chiropractic Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales
5) The Chiropractic Council of New South Wales,
Dated: 5 August 2011
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Sue-Ellen McKelvey
___________________
Roger Engel
___________________
Jacqueline Milne
Annexure A – Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Statement of the Respondent dated 15 June 2011 (R1)
Annexure C –
Schedule of Names Suppressed
HCCC v EATHER
INDEX TO DOCUMENTS
Documents relied upon by HCCC for ‘Phase One’
FORMAL DOCUMENTS
Page Number
(a) Complaint & Amended Complaint
(b) Certificate of Registration (redacted) dated 26 July 2011
WITNESS STATEMENTS and INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPTS
Statement of Patient A of 24 August 2009, attaching:
(a) Sketch of treatment room;
(b) Complaint from Patient A to the Commission of July 2009
Statement of Patient A of 15 September 2009, attaching:
(a) Two lists contained in Patient A’s clinical records
Statement of Mrs A of 4 September 2009
Statement of Mr B of 22 September 2009, attaching:
(a) Complaint from Mr B to the NSW Chiropractors Board of 15 September 2009
(b) Document supplied by Mr B regarding the basis of complaint
(c) Copy of Mr Eather’s business card Mr Bfound in Patient B’s
wallet in July 2009
(d) Two emails between Mr B and Patient B of 1 September 2009
(e) Omitted
Complaint from Ms Melanie Eather to the NSW Chiropractors Board of 21
September 2009 (referred to in interview with Ms Eather)
Transcript of interview between the Commission and Ms Melanie Eather of 23
October 2009
Statement of Patient B of 1 December 2009
Statement of Patient C of 18 March 2010
Statement of Ms Anne Williams of 14 January 2010
Statement of Ms Annica Larsdotter of 30 November 2009
Transcript of interview between the Commission and Mr Alan Wigg of 11
November 2009 - Omitted
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
Emails from Mr Eather to Patient B of 21 May 2009 and 26 June 2009
(provided by Ms Eather)
Email from Patient B to Mr Eather of 7 July 2009 (provided by Ms Eather and
referred to in her interview)
Five emails from Mr Eather’s work email address to his hotmail
address of 4, 24, 25, 26 August and 11 September 2009 (provided
by Ms Eather and
referred to in her interview)
Pages from Patient B’s 2009 diary (provided by PB and referred to in
her statement)
Receipt for purchase of a flight for Patient B to travel to Perth (provided
by Patient B and referred to in her statement)
Telephone records for Patient B’s mobile phone (provided by Patient
Telephone records for Mr Eather’s mobile phone (provided by Mr
Telephone records for Mr and Ms Eather’s home and business landline
(provided by Ms Eather)
Email from Patient D to Mr Eather of 23 April 2008 (provided by Ms Eather
and referred to in her interview)
RECORDS FROM HILLS FAMILY CHIROPRACTIC
Ms Patient A’s clinical records from 2005 to 2007
Mrs A’s clinical records of 2007
Tax invoice statements for Patient A and Mrs A (obtained from clinic
computer system)
Patient B’s clinical records from 2007 to 2009
Patient C’s clinical records from 2007 to 2009
Patient D’s clinical records from 2005 to 2009
Letter to expert of 18 December 2009
Expert Report of 13 January 2009
Supplementary report from expert of 11 February 2010 (partially
GUIDELINES / POLICIES (incl. date in force)
(a)NSW Chiropractors Registration Board Code of Professional Conduct of
February 2004
(b)Code of Conduct for Chiropractors – Chiropractic Board
of Australia
Letter from Walter Madden Jenkins (Mr Eather’s legal representatives)
to the Commission of 13 October 2009
Letters from Walter Madden Jenkins to the Commission of 11 November
Transcript of Interview between the Commission and Mr Eather of 18 November
Letter from Walter Madden Jenkins to the Commission of 23 December
Letter from the Commission to Walter Madden Jenkins of 22 February
Letter from Walter Madden Jenkins to the Commission of 23 March 2010
Mr Eather’s CV
S40 letter to Mr Eather of 6 May 2010
S40 response from Mr Eather of 2 June 2010
Report of Dr Bruce Westmore dated 22 June 2011
Documents relied upon by Respondent for ‘Phase One’
MATERIAL FILED 16 JUNE 2011
Statement of Respondent dated 14 June 2011
CV of Respondent – July 2011
Report of Tim WATSON-MUNRO dated 14 June 2011
Statement of Linda POWER dated 15 June 2011
HCCC V EATHER
Statement of the Respondent dated 15 June 2011 (R1)
statement made by me accurately sets out the evidence which I would be prepared,
if necessary, to give in Court as a witness.
The statement is true to the best
of my knowledge and belief.
am 40 years old.
am a Chiropractor. Bachelor of Sports Science (UNSW), Masters of Chiropractic
(Macquarie University). I am trained in Diversified,
Gonstead, Sacro Occipital
Technique and Neruo Emotional Technique. I utilise an activator in performing
adjustments.
2001 I completed my Basic and Advanced S.O.T Certification. From 2001 until
2007 I assisted as an Assistant and then Primary Table
Educator at
Sacro-Occipital Technique Organisation Australasia (S.O.T.O.A.) seminar series.
In 2004, I lectured at Macquarie University
in S.O.T. I also obtained my
Craniopaths Certification from S.O.T.O.A. during this period. From 2007 until
2009 I was a Primary
Educator. This involved me checking, updating re-writing
and presenting the S.O.T.O.A. seminar series around Australia. From 2005
– 2009 I was on the S.O.T.O.A. Board and during this time helped to
implement policy and procedure as well as re-writing all
S.O.T.O.A. exams, from
Basic through to the Craniopaths Exam.
well as participating in team sports, in 1993 I coached the Queensland Olympic
Handball Association U18 Men’s team. During
1994 and 1995 I coached the
Queensland Olympic Handball Association U21 Women’s team. In 2001 I
coached the New South Wales
Olympic Handball Senior Men’s Team. In 2001
and 2002 I was the coach of the Australian Olympic Handball Team U21 Men’s
team and in 2002 I also coached the New South Wales Olympic Handball Association
U21 Men’s team. 2005 saw a shift in my community
sports focus and I
coached the Beecroft Rugby Union Football 3
senior side as well as completing the Australian Rugby Union (A.R.U.) Foundation
Coaching Course and the A.R.U. Level 1 Coaching
Course. In 2006 in coached the
Blue Mountains Grammar School U16’s and completed my A.R.U. Level 2
Coaching Course. In 2007
I was the Skills and Technical Coach for Bankstown
Rugby Union Football Club. In 2008 I was the coach of the Chatswood Rugby Union
Football Club 1
Grade side and in 2009 and 2010 I was
the Beecroft Rugby Union Football Clubs 2
Coach. In 2010 and 2011 I completed A.R.U. Advanced coaching seminars and in
2011 I was appointed Lake Macquarie Rugby Clubs
Club and First Grade Coach.
relation to the adjustments performed on Patient A, the treatments provided to
Patient A on 3 and 4 July 2007 were for pain to
an underlying sacroiliac joint
sprain on the left hand side. The adjustment delivered on 4 July was to make
sure the adjustment
from 3 July had held and more was done to strengthen the
area. A common finding on both of these occasions was severe irritation
jamming in the lumbar spine at the level of L4.
purpose of the adjustments between 17 July 2007 and 9 August 2007 inclusive was
to strengthen and improve the function of the
lumbar spine in particular as the
adjustments delivered earlier for the sacroiliac joint had by this time
Discussions
with Patient A during her consultations centered on the cause of the complaint
and what was being done to relieve symptoms
and improve function.
formed the view during the consultations that Patient A presented as someone who
based on her demeanour may have been suffering
from mental health issues. Her
presentation was flat and withdrawn. She volunteered that she had low self
esteem and unhappiness
with her body.
of Patient A’s problems centered around the L4 area. The L4 area in many
different techniques is related to the large
intestine which from an emotional
standpoint can relate to the emotions of dogmatic positioning, gried and
requested and received from Patient A a list that she titled “What I
dislike about myself” I requested that list because
I considered that it
was possible that Patient A would benefit from a referral to a mental health
practitioner. I considered that
the provision of a list would assist in
determining whether Patient A warranted referral and to whom that referral
should be made.
The list was dated 26 July 2007. I believe that I dated the
list in the consultation on that date.
did not make a separate entry on the clinical notes of Patient A regarding my
views regarding her mental health presentation. I
placed the list in her
believe that I would have reviewed the list after Patient A left the
consultation. On reviewing the list I formed the view that
Patient A might
benefit from a referral to a mental health practitioner.
a further consultation with Patient A I spoke to her about the list. I said
words to the effect of “Do you want to do something
the list?” I initially suggested Nic Kovacs, a counsellor and N.E.T.
practitioner. Patient A told me
that it was not practical to travel to where
Nic Kovacs was practising. At that time I could not think of any other suitable
practitioners.
I advised Patient A that I was going to try and find a suitable
practitioner to whom to refer her.
considered that the contents of the list indicated that a referral to a
psychologist or psychiatrist may be warranted. I did not
provide Ms Valvl with
the name of a practitioner at that time because I was unsure whether general
medical practitioners were the
only type of practitioner who could make a
referral to a psychiatrist.
best recollection is that Patient A had no further consultations after I
discussed the referral with her but I accept that my recollection
erroneous and that it could be that I saw her for two further consultations
thereafter.
only comment that I made to Patient A that I believe could be construed as
personal was to convey to her (when she expressed loathing
the fact that she needed to be thin) was to say in words to the following effect
“Not all men require women
to be thin. What is important is to be
questions that I may have asked Patient A about her personal life were concerned
with her thoughts on why she had such a poor
body image, why she didn’t go
out at all, if she was unhappy, what sort of plans she was making to get some
change in her life,
whether she was looking forward to her new job and matters
of that nature. The questions were all derived from comments that Patient
made to me during the consultations about how she was and how things were
deny that on or about August 2007 during a consultation with Patient A, that I
behaved in a sexual manner towards her.
B first attended Hills Family Chiropractic on or about 6 March 2007. Patient B
consulted an associate of the practice, Ms
Annica Larsdotter. I became Patient
B’s treating practitioner from on or about 30 June 2008 when Ms Larsdotter
went on maternity
provided a total of 60 adjustments to Patient B. Between 30 June 2008 and
October 2008 the adjustments were directed at pelvic
instability (sprain of the
sacroiliac joint on the left). Between October 2008 and December 2008 the
adjustments were directed at
lower back pain. Between December 2008 and April
2009 the adjustments were directed at her pregnancy and the low back pain that
reject the contention that there is no evidence that Patient B showed signs of
improvement in relation to the conditions for which
she sought treatment from me
and that I should have made attempts to utilise other techniques and exercises
or arrange timely and
appropriate referrals.
the period of her treatment, Patient B was fitted with a dental plate by Dr
Grant Hawkins. A number of Patient B’s ongoing
problems were caused by
the structural changes in her jaw caused by the placement of her dental
clinical notes during the period July 2008 to July 2009 were sufficient to
record the nature, frequency and effectiveness of the
treatment I was
administering to Patient B. I reject the opinion that the standard of my
documentation and clinical notes were significantly
below the standard expected
of a chiropractor of my training and experience.
referring a client to another practitioner it was not my practise to prepare a
written referral. By referring a patient to another
practitioner it was my aim
to have the second practitioner form his or her own opinion without the opinion
of the referring practitioner.
I assumed that the client would provide a
history of the complaint(s).
referred Patient B to Mr Keen because I considered that he had particular
experience in treating clients with jaw problems. I reject
the opinion that
this referral was below the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of my
training and experience.
or about 1 June 2009 Melanie Eather said words to the effect “I think we
should take a break”. I understood from that
point my wife and I were
Eather and I were both directors and shareholders of the Eather Family
Enterprises Pty Ltd trading as Hills Family Chiropractic.
The company operated
of premises at 165 Old Northern Road, Castle Hill. The premises were owned by
myself and Melanie Eather.
We rented residential premises at 33 Lurline Street
Wentworth Falls.
therefore commenced residing at the clinic at 165 Old Northern Road Castle Hill.
Melanie Eather and I would have shifts at the clinic
that allowed us to share
care of the children. So even though I was predominately residing at the
clinic, when I was caring for
the children I would stay overnight at the
residential premises and Melanie Eather would stay at the clinic.
June and August 2009 Patient B would visit me at the clinic. These visits were
of a personal nature.
nature of my relationship with Patient B.
21 November 2009, I moved into rented premises with Patient B and her three
children at Speers Point. Patient B and I remain in
a committed
relationship.
relation to my adjustments of Patient C, it is possible that I performed an
Anterior Dorsal Indicator Test and Adjustment. The
Anterior Dorsal Adjustment
involves the person sitting with their legs lengthways along the table. They
fold their arms across their
chest, giving themselves a bear hug. I then ask
them to “Take a deep breath in, put your head forward and unroll towards
table.” As the person gets closer to the table, I position my torso
across them and ask them to “Keep your head up near
mine” and I use
my bodyweight over the top of this person to deliver a force in an anterior to
posterior direction. Mostly
my upper body weight is enough to complete this
adjustment, at other times, I have to position myself right over the person on
table to achieve the desired outcome.
deny that I engaged in any inappropriate sexual conduct with Patient C.
D and I engaged in sexual activity. I do not recall when this sexual
relationship commenced other than it was when she was
employed at Hills Family
Chiropractic Clinic. I cannot recall when she worked for us.
considered that Patient D was a staff member as opposed to a patient. I
provided chiropractic care to all of my staff and did not
expect the staff to
pay for any adjustments.
Working as a chiropractor
were a number of personal experiences that led me to want to study chiropractic
care. The first experience was when I was a
child my mother would suffer from
migraine headaches, fainting spells and blood pressure problems. After years of
consulting a variety
of health care practitioners, she consulted a chiropractor.
After consulting with a chiropractor, I did not recall my mother suffering
debilitating migraines that left her bedridden. I thought this was
second experience was when I sprained my ankle in 1991. I heard a loud snap and
the pain made me think it was broken. I consulted
a general medical
practitioner who advised me to stay off the ankle for six weeks. My mother
advised me that if I had been able
to have a consultation within 15 minutes that it was possible to reverse all of
the damage. I
was able to walk without the aid of crutches immediately after
the first adjustment which occurred approximately 4 days after the
injury. I was studying for a Bachelor of Sports Science at this time and I
considered that the difference in conventional
and chiropractic treatment was
interesting.
1996 I was familiar with Alan Wigg, Chiropractor and his work with cranial
adjustment and behavioural and learning difficulties.
I recommended to my
cousin that he consult with Alan Wigg regarding the behavioural issues of one of
his children. My cousin reported
a rapid and marked improvement in the
presentation of his child. I considered that this improvement was life
changing. These experiences
were the catalyst for me undertaking chiropractic
study. I was inspired to help people.
I relocated to the Newcastle area, I worked at Healing Wave Chiropractic,
Mayfield. My hours were very restricted due to my
being the fourth chiropractor
at this clinic. I found employment at Lake Spa and School of Integrated Body
Therapy. At my current
location, I practice mainly S.O.T. I also conduct my
research as well as liaise with the massage therapists and teaching staff on
manner of health issues. I also provide administrative aid in the form of
policy and procedure directly related to my position
and am a valued member of
staff. Unfortunately there is not yet sufficient work for me to be engaged in
providing chiropractic care
fulltime. Despite the financial strains I am under
given I only work part-time, I enjoy this position.
2006 I have been undergoing clinical research into pelvic instability. To date,
it has been presumed that pelvic instability
was a major mechanical distress in
the body for all sorts of musculo-skeletal malfunction. My hypothesis is that
the pelvis is not
the sight (sic) of the malfunction even it testing indicates
that pelvic instability is a problem. For example, sciatic nerve inflammation
can cause calf pain. As you would treat the cause (Sciatic Nerve Inflammation)
and not the site (Calf), my hypothesis when applied
to the pelvis means that you
would not treat the pelvis (Site of instability); you would be able to identify
the cause and adjust
the source.
apply this hypothesis I developed a testing protocol from 2008 – 2010 to
rule out false positives. I have communicated my
hypothesis to Dr Charles Blum,
Director of Research of Sacro Occipital Technique Organisation, U.S.A.
(SOTO-USA). I did this on
2 June 2011. Dr Blum has agreed to oversee this
research. I anticipate that Dr Blum will require further validation of the
which will require clinical tests.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (895 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter