URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v PEATLING [2010] NSWCHT 1 (21 January 2010)
CHIROPRACTORS ACT 2001
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
MATTER NUMBER: CH02/2009
REGISTRATION NUMBER: CP
JUSTIN PAUL PEATLING
FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Peatling
[2010] NSWCHT 1
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms Louise McManus (of Counsel) instructed by Mr Stephen Cox,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Justin Paul Peatling
(Respondent) represented by Mr Mark Lynch (of
Counsel) instructed by Ms Kate Hickey, Solicitor, Guild Legal.
FILE NUMBER: CH02/2009
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy
Chairperson)
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
– Ellen McKelvey (Chiropractor Member)
Mr Warwick Bateman
OAM (Chiropractor Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 10, 11, 12 & 13 November 2009
DATE OF DECISION: 21 January 2010.
FINDINGS (in summary): The Respondent is reprimanded and conditions placed
upon his registration for a minimum period of two years.
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – failure to fully explain nature
of treatment
– failure to offer presence of third person – inappropriate touching
of female patient during treatment.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Chiropractors Act
, schedule 5 – clause 6.
CASES CITED:
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported):
NSW Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Chiropractors Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professionals
Registration Boards (HPRB) Tribunal Hearing Room in
Sydney on 10, 11, 12 &
13 November 2009 to conduct an inquiry into a complaint made by Karen Mobbs,
Director of Proceedings,
Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 6
March 2009 in relation to a registered chiropractor, Justin Peatling
(Respondent).
Respondent has conducted his own practice called the ‘Joshua Wellness
Practice’ in the Sydney suburb of Toongabbie
since 2001.
Complaint relates to treatment provided to an employee who was also the
Respondent’s patient prior to commencing employment
with the Respondent.
The Complaint
Complaint as amended, alleges that the Respondent, being a registered
chiropractor under the Act:
Complaint One
Has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
in that he has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgement possessed, or care
exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice of chiropractic
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level
of training or experience and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
or purported practice of chiropractic.
Particulars of Complaint One
On 13 July 2007 the chiropractor treated a female employee of his chiropractic
practice, Ms A. In the course of providing chiropractic
treatment to Ms A the
chiropractor:
to fully explain to Ms A the nature of the treatment to be undertaken;
to offer Ms A the option of having a third person present during the treatment;
Ms A under her clothing in the area immediately surrounding the entrance to her
vagina in circumstances where the accepted
technique was to request the patient
to apply traction in this area.
Complaint Two
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
of the Act in that he has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgement possessed, or care
exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice of chiropractic
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level
of training or experience and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
or purported practice of chiropractic.
Particulars of Complaint Two
As per Particulars of Complaint Two.
Relevant Law
Unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct
of the Act relevantly defines ‘unsatisfactory professional
conduct’ as:
For the purposes of this Act, "unsatisfactory
professional conduct", in relation to a registered chiropractor, includes any of
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice
chiropractic is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the chiropractor of a provision of this Act or the
regulations or of a condition of the chiropractor’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the chiropractor to comply with a
direction by the Board to provide information with respect
to a complaint under
this Part against the chiropractor,
(d) a failure by the chiropractor to comply with an order made or a direction
given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the chiropractor of section 34A (4) (Power of
Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of the
Care Complaints Act
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a chiropractor in the course
of the practice or purported practice of chiropractic.
‘Professional
misconduct’ is defined in the
of the Act as being:
For the purposes of this Act, "professional misconduct", in
relation to a registered chiropractor, means unsatisfactory professional
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
chiropractor’s registration.
Standard of proof required
standard of proof required to establish this Complaint is the civil standard,
however because of the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their
consequences, the Tribunal needs to be reasonably satisfied that the Complaints
have been established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) said at 362–363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR
at 250-251). The object is not to punish the practitioner but to protect
the public and to maintain proper standards in the profession.
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High
Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Tribunal not only has to protect the public but it is in the community interest
that the profession of chiropractic should retain
and be entitled to retain the
respect and high regard in which it is held. Deterrence is also a relevant
trust placed in chiropractors is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the chiropractor in the course of treatment and the
necessity for there to be physical contact
with the patient. In a passage cited
with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal,
15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Suppression Orders
Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the
name of Ms A, Ms B and Ms C in accordance with
Schedule 5 Clause 6 of the Act.
Ms A, Ms C and Ms D are identified in the Schedule annexed hereto and marked
any information that may identify them are not to be
published. The Tribunal notes that the fact that Ms B and Ms C were also
of the practice that received treatment of a similar nature from the
Respondent is not suppressed as it is relevant to the factual
matrix of this
matter. The Schedule of suppressed names is only to be attached to the original
of this document and the copies provided
to the parties. It is not to be
Respondent admitted the conduct set out in Particular 3 and that such conduct
was unsatisfactory professional conduct.
documents received into evidence are set out in Annexure ‘A’ hereto.
A statement dated 7 October 2009 made by Ms D
was filed and served by the
Respondent, however, as Ms D was not available for cross-examination the
Tribunal did not admit the statement.
Annika Jende, Mr Roger Engel (peer reviewers), Mr Adam Debenham (by telephone),
the Respondent, and Ms A.
Background information
Background of the
Respondent was born in 1972. After completing a Bachelor of Science at Griffith
University in 1993 and a Bachelor of Science at
Macquarie University in 1996 and
the Respondent completed a Master of Chiropractic at Macquarie University in
1998. The Respondent
was first registered as a Chiropractor on 18 December 1998.
The Respondent worked as an employed chiropractor from 1999 to January
establishing his own practice, the Joshua Wellness Centre (Practice) in
September 2001.
Respondent has attended a number of continuing education courses. A certificate
provided by the Respondent record his name as
‘Dr Justin Peatling’
(exhibit 15). The Tribunal notes that one of the Peer Reviewers provided a copy
of a certificate
from the same organisation issued some 12 months later and the
title Dr does not appear on that certificate (part exhibit 22).
Background of the Complaint
A wrote to the Board on 23 April 2007 making a complaint about treatment
provided by the Respondent on 13 July 2006. Ms A was a
patient of the
Respondent’s practice from 22 November 2004 to 4 February 2005 and then
from May 2006 until around late July
2006. From May 2006 to July 2006 Ms A was
employed in the Respondent’s practice. The letter from Ms A reported that
week the Respondent provided ‘free adjustments’ to his
letter from Ms A reports that on 12 July 2006, Ms A told the Respondent that she
had been receiving treatment from a counsellor
for compulsive exercising. Ms A
stated that the Respondent indicated he would commence treatment for this
complaint during the regular
chiropractic treatment and would also commence
auriculotherapy. The Respondent advised Ms A that if this did not alleviate this
he would refer her to a counsellor he had an association with.
A’s letter reported that the Respondent called her into his office on 13
July 2006. The Respondent recommended that Ms A
take a supplement called
‘Baseline’ and provided her with an explanatory brochure. The
Respondent then commenced to treat
Ms A by way of adjustment.
A reports that the first two adjustments preceded as on previous occasions,
being a LAI (Annexure A to the Respondent’s statement
indicates this is a
left anterior and inferior sacrum adjustment) and a L/COR (left lateral occiput
with right torque). Ms A then
records that the Respondent then tested her knees
and adjusted her right knee. The Respondent then proceeded to check her organs
and reported to Ms A that her pubic bone ‘seemed a little out’. The
Respondent informed Ms A that the next adjustments
‘personal’ and asked her if this was ‘OK’. Ms A replied
that she was fine.
next adjustments occurred in the Respondent’s office with the door closed.
Ms A stated that this was unusual as usually
the other staff member was present
when the Respondent’s adjusted an employee. The letter continued:
He began checking my organs again, and then said that the
following adjustments may seem a little invasive, but that was ok. He then
feeling around my pelvic area and testing, and then he asked me to lift my right
knee. He then said that he hoped that the
next adjustment would work through my
clothes; otherwise I would have to do the adjustment without them. This was when
feel even more uncomfortable. He then grabbed me on the right-hand
side and then left-hand side of my vagina, while asking me to
cough at the same
time. I found this extremely uncomfortable. He then said that he couldn’t
work out exactly what the problem
was. He seemed confused, so he started to move
his hand around my pubic area pressing down on different parts. He then put his
down my pants and was feeling along the top of my pubic area and also down
the right hand side. He then said he still wasn’t
sure, but maybe we had
adjusted too much and he would recheck that again next time.
He then asked me to roll over onto my stomach, where he proceeded to check
along my spine. He then started to press around my backside
and hips. He stated
that my muscles around there were very tense. He then asked me if I had ever
been massaged and suggested I should
get a massage. He even recommended that he
could massage me too.
Once this was over, it was getting very close to our first appointment for
the afternoon so as I stood up and walked out, I asked
him what to write down
since we always wrote down people’s adjustments on their files. He said
not to worry about it.
I then told the other employee,
what had happened as I felt
extremely uncomfortable.
A reported that she felt so uncomfortable about the situation that she resigned
from her employment with the Respondent This was
conveyed to the Respondent by
way of a Ms A’s friend telephoning the Respondent on 25 July 2006.
Board, in consultation with the HCCC, referred this matter for investigation on
29 May 2007. Subsequently the Tribunal received
the complaint dated 6 March
2009 as noted above.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Statements -
Mr John Watters
Watters is a close friend of Ms A, having met her while they were both employed
as teachers. Mr Watters made a statement to the
HCCC on 11 July 2007 (exhibit
Watters recounted a conversation he had with Ms A in mid July 2006 wherein she
described to him an incident involving the respondent.
Watters recalled that Ms A had said to him
‘He [the Respondent] put his
hand underneath my underwear and touched me around my vagina’
similar words.
A also reported to Mr Watters that the Respondent had not wanted her to record
the treatment in the ‘log’ and that
she had told the receptionist at
the Practice.
Watters records that Ms A was distressed when she reported to him what had
happened and that she said the following (or similar
‘I told my friend the receptionist that there
what happened and she told me the same thing had happened to her and that she
should have warned me about it before’
Watters states that at the time this incident occurred Ms A had an eating
disorder and was ‘quite vulnerable’.
Ms Linda Cheal
Cheal has known the Respondent for a few years as he is a member of her local
church congregation. Ms Cheal states that she has
previously worked for a
chiropractor and as she was aware that the Respondent worked with children she
has taken her three children
to the Respondent for treatment. Both she and her
husband have also received treatment from the Respondent.
Cheal states that the receptionist of the Practice called [Ms D] told her that
Ms A had left the employ of the Respondent.
Cheal also worked as a receptionist for the Respondent at the Practice at the
relevant time. She is now a chiropractic assistant.
Subsequent to completing a
course organised by the Respondent, Ms Cheal now performs auricular therapy on
patients using micro currents
through the ear.
Ms Cheal’s duties include going through ‘a form’ with patients
then connecting them to an ‘Invision’
machine. The machine
‘measures the nervous system’ and records it on a computer. After
this is completed Ms Cheal disconnects
the machine and calls the Respondent
‘to do his part’
Cheal expressed the view that it was not in the Respondent’s nature to
compromise his practice or make anyone feel uncomfortable
otherwise she would
not take her children to the Respondent to receive treatment.
Ms Michelle Hogan
Hogan provided a statement to the HCCC dated 24 September 2007 (exhibit 8). Ms
Hogan became a registered chiropractor in 1994.
Hogan is a director on the Board of the Chiropractic Association of New South
Wales and in that role she handles ethical complaints
received by the
association that cannot be handled by office staff.
Hogan made a record of her telephone conversations with the office staff of the
Chiropractors Association of Australia, New South
Wales (CAANSW) and Ms A and
these form an annexure to her statement (exhibit 8b).
Hogan also made a statement to the HCCC on 13 July 2007 (exhibit 8a) (although
the heading of the statement indicates it was made
statement records Ms Hogan receiving notification of Ms A’s complaint to
the office of CAANSW by way of an email. Ms Hogan
responded to the email by
Hogan indicates she was informed,
amongst other things, that Ms A was concerned
to know whether an adjustment she had received to her ‘groin’ was
appropriate.
Ms Hogan then contacted Ms A and was given a general description of
the interaction between Ms A and the Respondent. Ms Hogan recorded
that she was
informed by Ms A that the Respondent had touched her over her lower abdominal
area and genital region over her clothes.
A informed Ms Hogan that as the adjustment did not work, the Respondent advised
her it would have to be done without clothes. The
Respondent then put his hand
down Ms A’s underpants and contacting her genital area and feeling her
public hair while her right
leg was bent. The Respondent was standing on her
right hand side at the time. The Respondent then commented that he may have
too much’, that ‘he wasn’t sure what the
problem was’ and that ‘he would get it next week’.
A also told Ms Hogan that she had thought it unusual that the Respondent had
told her not to make a record in the treatment notes
on the computer about the
adjustment, that there had not been a witness present during the adjustment and
that she had not seen this
technique used on any patients.
27 October 2006 when Ms Hogan followed up the initial contact made by Ms A, Ms A
confirmed she wanted the matter to remain anonymous
and confidential. Ms Hogan
described Ms A as presenting as anxious, nervous and embarrassed and very unsure
as to how to handle the
the handwritten notes attached to Ms Hogan’s statement she recorded that
Ms A told her that the Respondent said to Ms A words
to the effect of
‘I’m so glad you shave there , it makes it easier’ and then
stopped the adjustment when she asked
if she could use her own hand.
handwritten notes record that Ms A informed Ms Hogan that when she walked out of
the office the receptionist said words to the
effect of ‘
tell me he adjusted you “down there”, the other receptionist warned
me about that’
Ms Christine McGillion
McGillion is the Executive Administrator of the CAANSW and in that role she
manages the day-to-day running of that organisation.
She provided a statement
to the HCCC on 2 October 2007 (exhibit 9).
McGillion supplied a statement dated 4 July 2007 (exhibit 9a) to the HCCC
regarding telephone conversations she had with an unidentified
male who she
spoke to on the telephone on 13 July 2007 and a female caller (Ms A) who she
spoke to on 17 July 2007.
McGillion recorded in her statement dated 4 July 2007 that the male caller
indicated that he was calling on behalf of a young female
who was concerned to
know if an adjustment was a legitimate technique or if it was sexual
misconduct.
McGillion indicated that she would have one of the female chiropractors in the
Association (CAANSW) speak to the young woman regarding
whether or not it was a
legitimate technique. She also informed the male caller that a complaint could
be made in writing and that
sexual misconduct would be considered as a serious
matter. Contact details for the registrar of the Board were provided.
Ms A rang a few days later she stated that she was an employee of the
chiropractor in question and requested confidentiality.
Ms A was particularly
concerned that she would be identified to the Respondent as a person who had
made a complaint about his conduct.
McGillion gave contact details for Ms Hogan, the HCCC and the registration Board
9b and 9c are a file note and an email created by Ms McGillion regarding this
Statement dated 27 June 2007
A provided a statement to the HCCC dated 27 June 2007 (exhibit 4a). Ms A stated
she used typed notes that she commenced to keep
on 14 July 2006 about the
incident on 13 July 2006 and further relevant matters to assist in the
production of the statement.
A indicated she worked on a part-time basis for the Respondent, being usually
Mondays and Fridays, sometimes Tuesdays the arrangement
being ‘quite
flexible’. Ms A also worked part-time for her cousin.
statement confirms the matters set out in the complaint letter written to the
Board by Ms A.
the evening of 13 July 2006 Ms A made a report of the treatment she had received
from the Respondent to her friend Mr John Watters.
Ms A worked for a few days
between 13 July and 24 July 2006 and resigned on 25 July 2006.
paragraph 35 of her statement, Ms A describes walking out of the Respondent
office on 13 July 2006 ‘really flustered’
‘embarrassed’ that she could not look at the Respondent as she left
the office.
paragraph 38 Ms A recounts a conversation she had with a person at the practice
shortly after she received the treatment from the
Respondent. As parts of the
statement were deleted by agreement between the parties, the Tribunal had to
clarify with Ms A the identity
of the other party to the conversation when Ms A
gave oral evidence.
issue was raised on Ms A’s behalf on 17 July 2006 with the Chiropractors
Association of Australia and a recommendation made
that her complaint be put in
A records that she considered that she had already had a ‘horrible
year’ and that the incident with the Respondent
was the ‘icing on
the cake’ so she travelled overseas for a few months before returning to
work for her cousin full time.
Ms A – 6 August 2007
A provided a further statement to the HCCC on 6 August 2007 (exhibit 6a). At
paragraph 4 Ms A states that the Respondent did not
explain ‘anything
much’ about what he was going to do on 13 July 2006. He did tell her that
he would touch her around
the ‘top bit’ over my clothes and if that
did not work that he would have to ‘do it’ under her clothes. He
informed her it would be a little invasive.
paragraph 5 of exhibit 6a Ms A states that on 13 July 2006 she informed the
Respondent about the problems she had related to shin
splints, sore knees and
ankles, but did not state she had pain in any other area of the body. Other
evidence indicated that Ms A
had also informed the Respondent that she had been
exercising compulsively and seeing a counsellor for assistance.
paragraph 9 Ms A clarified the actions taken by the Respondent. Ms A states that
the Respondent grabbed the right side of her vagina
through her clothing and
then asked her to cough and then grabbed the left side of her vagina and asked
her to cough. By the word
‘vagina’ Ms A refers to her external
genitalia including the labia majora and the labia minora but not the area
the anus (see paragraph 13). Ms A said that the Respondent did not have
gloves on at any time. Ms A said the Respondent attempted
to put his hands down
her trousers but his fingers only reached to top of her underwear.
The Respondent -
Letter dated 9 July 2007
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 9 July 2007 (exhibit 11) expressing his regret
that Ms A had interpreted his examination and treatment
as anything other than
appropriate. He indicated that he wished to apologise for any discomfort he had
caused as that had not been
his intention.
Respondent reports that in response to Ms A’s disclosure that she was
compulsively exercising, he offered her a
‘supplement to aid in
balancing the brain chemistry that may have helped with her strong compulsion to
include exercise excessively
the Respondent examined Ms A he looked at her spine, lower limbs and did muscle
and organ testing before undertaking spinal adjustments
which were recorded. The
Respondent stated that when he tested Ms A’s muscles there was a weakness
in her pelvic floor muscles.
The Respondent noted that this can lead to pelvic
instability, local organ dysfunction and weakness of lower limb muscles. The
To address a weakness, tension on the affected area plus
coughing can be used to strengthen muscles and restore organ ptosis (using
Pascal’s Principle). This is a principle applied to many procedures in
Applied Kinesiology, and Sacro Occipital Technique.
Restoration of normal tone
in the pelvic floor muscles, providing greater pelvic stability which in turn
would aid in the decrease
of the lower limb and back pain was the intended
As this is an area of sensitivity, I explained that the procedure would be
her holding inferior tension to the skin through her clothing
under the pubic
bone and she would be asked to cough. The contact is very close to the vagina
but is not directly on it. For
initial examination room. She agreed and we moved into this room. Once in the
initial examination room I asked
was Ok to proceed. She agreed
to proceed and the procedure was performed as explained above.
asked to hold inferior tension to the skin through her clothing under the public
bone and cough, firstly on one side and then
this was repeated on the other
side. The indicator for the muscle weakness was re-tested, at this stage it had
not corrected.
It is claimed that I grabbed and squeezed on the on the right hand side
and then the left hand side of her vagina, I did not grab
and squeeze her on the
vagina. This was performed by
holding the skin under the pubic
bone through her clothing.
I re-palpated and organ tested the lower abdominal area, superior to the
pubic bone for any changes, I explained to
that our next option
was to try the procedure again but with more accurate tension and direction on
the skin contact to correct her
muscle weakness, and that this meant holding the
skin directly not through the clothing but underneath her clothing. I asked if
was OK to proceed and she again agreed. I put on a disposable plastic glove,
located the appropriate skin contact on the right side
underneath her clothing,
held mild inferior tension on the skin and asked her to cough. To locate the
appropriate skin contact I
began palpating from superior to the public bone down
as I did not want to place my hand in the wrong position due to the personal
nature of the area. On completion of the procedure the muscle weakness was
re-tested showing improvement.
letter notes that the Respondent had only performed this adjustment on two
previous occasions. In each case he obtained verbal
consent and the adjustment
was performed through the clothing. The Respondent stated that he had proceeded
with the adjustment with
his hand on Ms A’s skin because the initial
procedure had not ‘
strengthened the pelvic floor weakness’
He considered that this may have been due to there being incorrect contact or
tension by Ms A on the area. The letter continues:
In an attempt to nullify any of these potential errors I judged
that if I was to hold the contact and control these variables it would
a greater degree of clinical success as it did.
Respondent stated he had not done this type of adjustment on Ms Cheal but he had
done so on the receptionist called [Ms D].
Respondent stated that he had ‘to clear a neuro-lymphatic reflex (also
known as a Chapman reflexes) for the adductor muscle
which can weaken due to a
dropping of the medial foot arch’. The Respondent stated that it was
performed with Ms A’s
consent and Ms A’s hand was ‘on the
location’ with his hand ‘directing the pressure’. The
stated that the adductor muscle is located behind the areola.
Letter dated 11 March 2008
the Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 11 March 2008 (exhibit 13) to answer its
letter dated 11 February 2008 (exhibit 12) he disputed
that his conduct amounted
to unsatisfactory professional conduct and that he had not obtained Ms A’s
Respondent addressed issues raised in the peer review report. He stated that he
did not agree that the treatment of 13 July 2006
indicated that he had
‘dramatically’ changed his treatment approach towards Ms A. The
Respondent points to the notation
in December 2004 that indicates and adjustment
to address pelvic instability.
Respondent stated that when Ms A disclosed to him that she was compulsively
exercising on a daily basis he thought it was appropriate
to test her body,
‘particularly with respect to pelvic stability’. This involved
testing for pelvic floor muscle weakness.
Respondent stated that he only records in his notes ‘positive
findings’ and that he would also have tested Ms A’s
gluteus maximus,
tensor fasciae latae, abductors and quadriceps.
Respondent indicated that his knowledge of Applied Kinesiology came from the
completion of one 80 hour course and two 100 hour
courses conducted by the
International College of Applied Kinesiology (Australasia) as well as an
examination in 2003. With respect
to Sacro-Occipital techniques the Respondent
stated that he studied this subject in his final year at University and had
an external course conducted through the ‘Sacro-Occipital
Technique Organisation of Australia’.
Respondent stated that the technique he used on Ms A was based on Applied
Kinesiology principles and he was not aware of any other
way of stretching
pelvic floor muscles. The procedure involves stretching the adjacent tissues
connected to the pelvic floor and
then asking the patient to cough to create a
further stretch.
Respondent stated that he believed he had adequately explained the procedure to
Ms A and obtained her consent and again offered
an unreserved apology due to Ms
A not understanding the process he undertook.
Respondent commented that he thought the two peer reviewers had ‘differing
philosophy in applying chiropractic principles’
to him. He continues:
The technique I performed may not be considered to be
‘main stream’ but it is based on principles of Applied Kinesiology
and I believe it does have a sound basis.
Statement dated 8 October 2009
Respondent provided a statement for the purpose of this Inquiry dated 8 October
2009 (exhibit R1). This statement is reproduced
at Annexure B hereto.
Other documentary evidence
clinical notes held by the Respondent for Ms A form exhibit 10. Ms A indicated
in the ‘tick box’ section she suffered
neck, back and hip pain as
well as possibly suffering from low blood pressure. In the ‘Current
status’ part of the form,
Ms A indicated that she suffered from shin
splints that had prevented her from walking, dancing and jogging.
Respondent referred Ms A for an x-ray and the report provided to the Respondent
indicated no abnormalities
treatment notes made by the Respondent consist of a list of adjustments that
were performed on each occasion in a short hand fashion,
e.g. LS2/L, LIA
notation for the treatment provided on 13 July 2007 is different to the entries
for the other dates as there is an additional
notation, not being a short hand
record of the adjustment provided but rather an observation, with the words
‘pelvis floor weakness
’ recorded.
Peer Reviewers –
Mr Roger Engel
report dated 13 September 2007 was provided by Mr Roger Engel. Mr Engel
qualified as a chiropractor in 1982. He worked full time
in private practice
until 2000 and his practice now includes a number of teaching, consulting and
managerial roles within chiropractic.
report stated that he was unclear from the notes and the material from the
Respondent why he had chosen to investigate this matter
and administer this form
of treatment on this occasion. Mr Engel does not consider the information
provided by Ms A that she was
exercising excessively to be a foundation for
‘suddenly suspecting the pelvic floor muscles as a possible cause for her
when she had no clinical signs thereof.
Engel also commented that the Respondent’s view that applying indirect
tension to one end of a muscle can create immediate
reversal of weakness in that
muscle is at odds with current understanding of muscle physiology. Mr Engel was
referring to the Respondent’s
statement that he ‘...held mild
inferior tension on the skin and asked her [Ms A] to cough...On completion of
the procedure
the muscle weakness was re-tested showing improvement’. Mr
Engel expresses the view that the Respondent’s rationale for
the procedure was ‘grossly misguided’.
Engel was of the view that any course or continuing education course that would
be dealing with the procedure undertaken by the
Respondent would emphasise the
need for either a female assistant to be in the room during the procedure or for
diagrams to have
been used to clearly explain the procedure. Mr Engel also
raises questions about whether consent was obtained prior to the Respondent
touching the area rather than Ms A holding the area.
HCCC sought clarification of several areas of Mr Engel’s report in a
letter dated 9 October 2009 (exhibit 18). Mr Engel
provided a further report
dated 5 November 2007 (exhibit 19).
Engel is critical of the description provided by the Respondent in his letter
dated 9 July 2007 regarding the examination, assessment
and treatment all
provided during the single consultation on 13 July 2006.
Engel maintains his concern that the Respondent did not clearly explain the
‘personal’ nature of the adjustment he
proposed. He was further of
the view that informed consent required the person knowing the full and true
nature of the procedure
before providing consent. Mr Engel expressed the view
that the Respondent had not fully explained the procedure to Ms A and therefore
had not obtained informed consent.
Engel was also critical of the Respondent treating Ms A on 46 occasions over the
18 months prior to 13 July 2006 for ‘back
pain and shin splints’
without determining a cause for these persisting symptoms, re-assessing his
chiropractic adjustment
management plan or referring her for a second opinion
(apart from the initial x-ray). Tests such as ultra-sound investigations of
lower limbs may have been used. The Tribunal notes this is not the subject of
any of the Particulars of Complaint.
Engel expressed the view that not only was the treatment inappropriate as there
was no justification for this particular adjustment,
the adjustment was also
performed in a manner that was below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner, matters which attracted
his strong criticism.
Ms Annika Jende
Jende provided a Peer Report to the HCCC (exhibit 22). Ms Jende became a
registered chiropractor in NSW in 1997 having completed
the relevant training
overseas in 1996. Ms Jende completed a Postgraduate certificate in Applied
Kinesiology in October 2004 and
is a member of the International College of
Applied Kinesiology as well as a member of the Chiropractors Association of
Jende was asked to accept the Respondent’s evidence with respect to the
matter and make comment. She expresses the view that
the examination technique
described by the Respondent in his letters is consistent with applied
kinesiology practice. This was somewhat
qualified in her oral evidence,
particularly with respect to the procedure only being used after less invasive
procedures have been
reattempted without success.
report continues at paragraphs 2 and 3 as follows:
2. Mr. Peatling does describe using techniques and principles
consistent with applied kinesiology principles, specifically techniques
address pelvic floor weakness (even though the rationale is not the one taught).
Please refer to the explanatory notes 1 for a
closer description of these
techniques and principles. It must be noted that the technique used is not in
fact a basic applied kinesiology
procedure, but an advanced one developed by Dr.
Victor Portelli and Dr. Frank Marcellino and shared amongst practitioners
it is so effective. However, the technique does
call for the
practitioner applying traction to the patient’s pudenda*
elsewhere in the report as meaning external genetalia)
; if it is necessary to
do this, the patient can do it adequately herself. Palpation of the posterior
pelvic musculature is common
practice in both chiropractic and applied
kinesiology practice.
3. From the information provided, my impression is that Mr. Pealting did
in fact provide correct treatment for the problem he found.
However, it is
always recommended practice to have a witness in the room when performing
treatments of a delicate nature (Walther,1).
It seems that Mr. Pealting did the
opposite by inviting her into the initial examination room. Furthermore, when
the technique is
taught it is always to presented as the patient applying the
traction not the practitioner (see point no.2).
Jende expressed the view that as a practitioner of a number of years standing he
should have been aware of the issues of the vulnerability
of Ms A and provided
her with the same treatment options as any other patient i.e. having a witness
present and allowing her to apply
the traction herself.
Jende was also asked to accept Ms A’s version and make comment. Ms Jende
stated that three things strike her about Ms’s
account, being:
1. She did not really at any time really understand the
treatment she was given. It makes the issue of informed consent a problematic
one, as truly informed consent can only be given if the patient really
understands what the procedure is really going to be (Walter
This is probably a more common problem than practitioners realize; having
studied the subject and worked with it for as long
as they have, it is second
nature to them, and probably forget how little the lay person actually knows
let alone chiropractic or applied kinesiology
procedures. It is important that the practitioner always explain the procedure
rationale to the patient (Walther,1), and to allow opportunity for the
patient to ask questions. It seems that
did not ask for
clarification, even though she did not understand the procedure or its
rationale; whether it was because Mr. Pealting
did not give her the opportunity
or because she had decided to trust him is unclear.
was not treated in the way she had seen other patients
being treated, i.e. having someone else in the room when the treatment was
performed; in fact, not only was nobody else present, but she was also out of
the line of sight of the other receptionist, in a separate
room with the door
closed. Mr. Pealting should be aware that his Chiropractic Assistant is a
patient like any other when he is providing
her with chiropractic care.
3. Mr. Pealting touched her external genitalia with his hands, which is
not part of any treatment protocol within applied kinesiology
or chiropractic
that I am aware of. The particular advanced applied kinesiology technique he
used does call for traction across the
inguinal ring (explanatory notes 1), but
in the first instance the contact is superior* to and inferior* to the inguinal
at least 5 cm away from the pudenda (diagram 4). If this first
approach does not work, the traction on the labia majora (diagram
indicated, but this is always performed by the patient, not by the
practitioner.
Jende summed up her view as follows:
Mr Pealting’s deviation from the accepted advanced
applied kinesiology protocol combined with the lack of ensuring that
knew exactly what was going to happen and why as well as deviating from
his normal practice procedures is certainly not what is expected
experienced chiropractor and applied kinesiologist, even if the procedure itself
was indicated.
Character witnesses
Respondent tendered a bundle of references (R5). One reference came from Mr Adam
Debenham who also gave evidence by telephone.
The reference indicated that he
was a close personal friend of the Respondent, as well as a patient and knew him
as a ‘community
leader in his church’. Mr Debenham is a part-time
youth pastor of a non-denominational church. Mr Debenham stated he had observed
the Respondent ‘
interacted with healthy boundaries and great
communication with those around him’
. Mr Debenham expressed the view
‘...his wide experience with [the Respondent] eliminates the
possibility of him doing anything inappropriate in regards to a
cross-examination Mr Debenham stated he was not aware that the Respondent had
made an admission with respect to one of the
Particulars. He agreed that all he
could really say was that the Respondent had never acted inappropriately with
him (T12.11.09,
page 59.30-37).
reference dated 2 November 2009 addressed ‘to whom it may concern’
was provided to the Tribunal from Mr Jonathan Moore,
chiropractor. The reference
annexes the Particulars of the Complaint. The reference states that he met the
Respondent in 1994 while
they were both enrolled in the Bachelor of Science
degree at Macquarie University and details their very close personal
relationship.
Mr Moore expresses the view that as the Respondent held an Applied
Kinesiology Certificate he was ‘extremely confident’
that he would
have worked in an appropriate manner. Mr Moore states that he had not witnessed
any level of ‘unprofessionalism’
and certainly nothing that could be
considered unsatisfactory professional conduct.
reference from Ms Sue Banks dated 4 November 2009 is also addressed ‘To
whom it may concern’. The reference notes that
Ms Banks was aware the
Respondent was facing the Chiropractors Tribunal regarding a complaint made by a
female patient. Ms Banks
has been a visitor in the home of the Respondent, work
in leadership together with the Respondent in the church as well as being
patient of the Respondent’s. On a number of occasions she was accompanied
by a support person who was present while she undertook
treatment. Ms Banks
states that she has had a number of conversations with the Respondent regarding
the courses he is undertaking,
his involvement in peer mentoring and general
health and wellbeing. Ms Banks states that she would have no hesitation in
recommending
the Respondent to clients of her counselling practice.
reference dated 4 November from Mr Michael Dunn came into evidence on the basis
that the Respondent would make Mr Dunn available
for cross-examination. Despite
several attempts to contact Mr Dunn it appears he was travelling in rural South
Australia following
the sale of his practice and was not able to be contacted
either through the practice he identified as being the Director of or on
mobile telephone.
Tribunal has taken this into account when considering the weight that should be
placed on this reference.
reference states that Mr Dunn had worked with the Respondent since 2004 when the
Respondent attended the Wellness Centre in Newcastle
on a part time basis and
instigated a development program for Learning and Behaviourally challenged
children. Mr Dunn states that
he entrusted the care of his children and
grandchildren to the Respondent and observed his professional approach to
practice. Mr
Dunn states that he is aware of the allegations made against the
Respondent but has
‘no doubt that [the Respondent] would have applied
the appropriate technique for the patient’
Brad Dennett also provided a reference which forms part of exhibit R5. The
reference dated 7 November 2009 states that he has known
the Respondent for 15
years through the church and more recently as his treating chiropractor. Mr
Dennett states that he is aware
of the serious allegations that have been made
against the Respondent. Mr Dennett states that although he was originally
from the Respondent had led to significant health benefits.
He also entrusts the
care of his wife and daughters to the Respondent. Mr Dennett provides details of
a free clinic established by
the Respondent to treat homeless persons in the
Parramatta area. The Respondent has also coached and/or managed a number of
sporting teams.
Submissions made by the HCCC
HCCC made submissions dated 3 December 2009.
HCCC submission provided a brief history of the matter from paragraphs 7 to 14
as follows:
Peatling works as a Chiropractor at the Joshua Wellness Practice at Toongabbie
(the Practice). He is the owner of the Practice
(Exh R1 para 2) and the only
Chiropractor employed at the Practice.
A] was a patient of the Practice from 22 November 2004 to 4 February 2005 and
again from May 2006 until about late July 2006.
She was employed in the Practice
from May 2006 to about 26 July 2006 as an Assistant.
11 July 2006 or 12 July 2006 [Ms A] told Mr Peatling that she was exercising
compulsively and was seeing a counsellor about this.
13 July 2006 Mr Peatling treated [Ms A]. During this consultation Mr Peatling
conducted on [Ms A], what has been referred to in
evidence as the “tug
technique”.
or about 13 July 2006 [Ms A] told her then boyfriend, Mr John Watters, about
what had occurred during the consultation. About two
days later Mr Watters
McGillion. On 17 July 2006 [Ms A]
spoke to Ms McGillion. On 18 July 2006 [Ms A]
had a conversation with Ms Michelle Hogan of the Chiropractors Association of
late July 2006 [Ms A] resigned from the Practice.
9 May 2007 [Ms A] provided a written complaint dated 23 April 2007 to the
Chiropractors Registration Board (
Exh A Tab 3
) and on 27 June 2007 and 6
August 2007 provided written statements to the Health Care Complaints Commission
Exh A Tab 4
Peatling provided a letter dated 9 July 2007 to the Health Care Complaints
Commission: Exh A tab 11. On 11 February 2008 the Health
Care Complaints
Commission wrote to Mr Peatling inviting him to make a submission pursuant to
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
. In response he
provided a submission dated 11 March 2008: Exh A tabs 13, 14 and 15. He
provided a written statement to the Tribunal
dated 8 October 2009: Exh R 1.
HCCC made the following submissions with respect to Particular 1 at paragraphs
is alleged that Mr Peatling failed to fully explain the nature of the treatment
to be given to [Ms A].
Engel, chiropractor, who provided reports as a peer reviewer, criticised Mr
Peatling’s explanation to [Ms A]. He stated at
Exh A Tab 19 p 81 (see also
T2.66 line 42 – T2.67 line 20):
in the context of any chiropractic procedure is considered
‘informed’ consent. Informed consent requires
the person who is
giving the consent to know the full and true nature of what they are consenting
to. If for some reason this is
not completely possible then an attempt to
explain the procedure as thoroughly as possible is required before
consent can be considered as being obtained.
Peatling did not explain the procedure he was contemplating as thoroughly as
possible to [Ms A] on 13 July 2006. He therefore did
Administering
treatment in the absence of consent is a breach of basic procedures and in this
instance would invite my severe criticism.
Jende, peer reviewer and chiropractor and applied kinesiologist, also criticised
Mr Peatling. She stated that [Ms A] “
... did not really at any time
really understand the treatment she was given. It makes the issue of informed
consent a problematic
one, as truly informed consent can only be given if the
patient really understands what the procedure is going to be ...
A tab 22 p94.
evidence-in-chief Ms Jende was asked “
As far as when this treatment is
given, what explanations are given to the patient about the treatment?”
Mrs Jende replied “
Well, generally you would explain what the
pelvic floor is, why its important and why it is you need to correct it and the
in which its going to be corrected.”
T2.35 lines 9 –
Jende also stated that she usually explains the procedure as she goes along as
There’s not much point in explaining the whole thing unless
you’re actually going to be applying it.”
T2.40 lines 7 –
A] has consistently given evidence that she did not understand the treatment
that was to be undertaken. Her actions afterwards
are consistent with her not
understanding the treatment.
A] evidence at the Tribunal was consistent with her statements. She stated
had not had the tug treatment applied to her before;
had not seen it before;
the open examination room:-
Peatling undertook torque release treatment;
pressed down on her abdomen: T21.41 to T.22.42 line 10;
pressed down on her pubic bone. He said words to the effect – that seems
a little out of place, that the next procedure
would be a little personal and
would she mind moving into the office: T1.22 lines 25 to 41;
then moved to his office
she was on her back he again pressed down on her abdomen and pubic bone: T1.23
lines 1 – 4;
he pressed down on her pubic bone he said that the next procedure may seem a
little invasive: T1.23 lines 15;
asked her to lift her right knee: T1.23 line 21 to 27;
stated to her that he hoped it would work with clothes but otherwise she may
have to take them off or have the procedure without
them: T1.23 lines 30
he held her on the labia on the right hand side he asked her to cough (T1.23
line 41 to 43, T1.24 lines 38 – 39, T1.63
line, T1.14 – 19, T2.11
lines 7 - 9), and he repeated this on the left hand side:
the time she was working at the Practice she had only seen Mr Peatling in the
office with a patient by himself at most on three
occasions: T2.25 line 50 to
T2.26 line 27.
Peatling conceded that [Ms A] did not understand: T3.94 lines 26 - 28. He did
not accept that the information that he provided
to her was deficient.
Peatling conceded that [Ms A] would not have seen the tug treatment before and
he had not treated her in this way before: T3.16
lines 31 – 33. He agreed
that he used the words “
”. In cross-examination [Ms A] is questioned about
her knowledge of “personal” and “invasive”: T1.52
40 to T1.54 line 19. It is clear that despite these words being used she did not
know what was to occur.
Peatling did not explain that the treatment was for pelvic floor weakness: T3.20
lines 1 – 4, lines 13 – 14.
his written statements Mr Peatling stated that prior to performing the procedure
[Ms A] was asked to “
hold inferior tension to the skin through her
clothing under her pubic bone and she would be asked to cough
repeated this at the Tribunal but also stated that he could not remember the
exact words that he used. He did not use
(T3.14 line 10 – 15) but thinks he used the word
”(T3.46 line 22, T3.47 line 1 – 3).
Mr Peatling stated that the area he directed [Ms A] to was not overly
complicated (T3.27 line 31 – 32), his description
is complicated. He had a
specific position in mind even though the description was very general. Mr Engel
criticises his use of jargon:
T2.69 lines 1 – 10. Mr Engel also stated
that the information “under the pubic bone” would not lead a lay
to assume “genitals”: T2.69 lines 12 – 19.
Peatling did not tell [Ms A] directly that he would hold her on or near her
genital area. [Ms A] did not agree to this happening.
his letter at Tab 11 Mr Peatling does not refer to telling her that he would be
placing his hand directly on to [Ms A]. This is
criticised by Mr Engel at
Annexure A tab 17 p 75. It is also identified by Ms Jende who stated in evidence
He doesn’t actually mention doing it with his hands in this
particular document, does he. So from what he just to said her,
my assumption
would be the patient would be doing that herself. ...”
T2.41 lines 26
– 31. She stated “...
if you’re going to be touching the
patient in what’s generally considered private areas, you need to let them
” T2.41 lines 36 – 40.
his later letter dated 8 October 2009 Mr Peatling for the first time states that
he told Ms A that he would be applying tension
Peatling apparently relied on his clients speaking up if they did not
understand. In cross-examination [Ms A] was asked and agreed
that she could ask
questions, could object to treatment and could tell Mr Peatling that the
treatment was not working, could ask
him to stop and tell him that she was
uncomfortable: T1.38 lines 1 – 27; T1.54 lines 21 - 23, T1.55 lines 5
lines 30 – 35, T2.8 lines 1 - 7.
A] proffered a number of reasons why she did not speak up – she trusted Mr
Peatling (T1.54 line 23), he was her employer
(T1.70 lines 30 – 33), she
had to work with him (T1.59 lines 1 – 5, and T2.26 line 37 - 38), she was
not comfortable
saying that (T1.70 lines 34 – 35), she is not a very
confrontational person and she did not have the courage: T2.26 lines 29
of these are valid explanations as to why a patient may not speak up.
Peatling conceded that he had the opportunity to explain the procedure to [Ms A]
but stated “..
the need I didn’t feel was there”
line 1 – 21. In this case it was an intrusive procedure (requiring on Mr
Peatling’s evidence for the patient to
hold herself near her genitals, and
later for Mr Peatling to hold the patient on the bare skin near her genitals.
On [Ms A]’s
evidence it was for Mr Peatling to hold the patient on her
labia over her clothes.) It was imperative that [Ms A] was aware of what
occur. She was not.
that the patient understands is the responsibility of the chiropractor. Mr Engel
stated that if a person does not understand
what the chiropractor is talking
HCCC made the following submissions with respect to Particular 2 at paragraphs
particular alleges that Mr Peatling did not offer to have a third person present
and he should have done so. It is not alleged
that he should have ensured that a
third person was present, although this would have been advisable.
is not in dispute that Mr Peatling did not offer [Ms A] the opportunity to have
a third person present during the tug procedure
and that there was in fact no
third person present.
Jende stated that it is always recommended practice to have a witness in the
room when performing treatments of a delicate nature.
She cites David S
Walther’s Applied Kinesiology Synopsis 2
edition: Exh A tab 22 p 93. She stated “
It seems that Mr Peatling did
the opposite by inviting her into the initial examination room
Engel stated that generally it is recommended that a third person be in the room
any time when treatment is of a sensitive nature:
T2.69 line 47 – T2.70
evidence Ms Jende stated that if [Ms A] had been doing the tug procedure on
herself then it is not necessary to have a third person
present but if the
practitioner is doing the procedure then it is necessary to have a witness:
T2.36 lines 31 – 37, T2.48 lines16
Jende stated that the reason a third person is present is for both the
practitioner’s and patient’s peace of mind:
T2.48 lines 22 –
34. Mr Engel agreed: T2.70 lines 17 – 35. Mr Engel stated his criticism of
Mr Peatling not offering
to have someone present in this case is as follows
In this case it doesn’t appear that he’s explained
adequately what he’s going to do to her, so a third person in
situation certainly would have made the patient, I think feel a bit more
comfortable...” T2.72 lines 9 – 11.
is an additional reason as admitted by Mr Peatling. The presence of a third
person in the room may have prevented Mr Peatling
from doing what he did and
touching [Ms A] under her clothes in the area of her genitals in that he would
have thought twice: T4.8
lines 9 – 12.
the end of the hearing Mr Peatling admitted that he should have offered [Ms A]
the option of having a third person present during
the treatment: T4.64 line 50
to T4.65 line 2. This was on the basis that it would put the patient at greater
ease and to provide
an independent witness for both parties: T4.67 lines 10
submission also notes the inconsistency in the evidence of the Respondent and Ms
A (paragraphs 47 to 49) as to the manner in which
the procedure was
undertaken.
submissions set out the context in which the procedure was undertaken noting the
following (paragraph 50):
had seen the procedure when it was conducted on his wife by Mr Keene.
the time Mr Peatling was looking after his 2 year old child;
was at the end of the examination bed;
was unable to remember what was said by Mr Keene: T3.67 line 6 – 8;
did not know what was being tested for: T3.62 lines 31 – p 63 lines
2003 he had been taught the procedure as an “add-on” to the basic
applied kinesiology course.
procedure was performed on a male: T3.67 lines 9 - 37.
had no notes or handouts on the procedure.
was unable to say what Mr Keene was teaching when he added on the tug procedure.
Mr Peatling did not believe that it was about
the pelvic floor but it was
something to do with the pelvis”: T3.54 line 30 – 35. He later
stated that as he remembered
it Mr Keen referred to pelvic floor weakness when
teaching the procedure”: T3.68 line 13 – 18.
Peatling stated that he did not learn the rationale for the procedure but had to
assume it for himself”: T3.55 line 9 –
had only performed the procedure twice before;
had only performed it on staff members.
submission also notes the evidence of the Respondent that he had never tested
any other patient’s pelvic floor prior to
this procedure with Ms A and it
was submitted that the Respondent did not provide an adequate or satisfactory
explanation of why
he undertook the procedure on Ms A. The two other occasions
on which he had performed the procedure were on members of staff that
presented with period pain. Ms A did not present with period pain.
HCCC submitted that the Respondent had departed from the normal practice for a
chiropractor using applied kinesiology by not utilising
the least invasive
procedure first. It was the evidence of Ms Jende that the ‘tug’
procedure was the last to be tried
after the less invasive method had been
tried. Further, it was submitted that the Respondent did not understand the
basis for the
procedure or the manner in which it should have been performed.
The submissions details the deficiencies in the manner in which the
undertook the procedure (paragraph 58).
HCCC noted that a number of the assumptions made by Ms Jende when she had read
the material provided by the Respondent had not
in fact been supported by the
ultimate evidence of the Respondent. The HCCC submission detailed the assumption
made by Ms Jende as
to the purpose of the Respondent putting his hand down the
underpants of Ms A. Ms Jende had assumed the Respondent had done this
for the purpose of palpating the pubic bone to find out which direction the
‘shear’ had gone when the evidence
of the Respondent was that he had
done so for the purpose of placing his hand into the position for the
‘tug’ procedure.
The HCCC submit that caution should be given by the
Tribunal to the judgments made by Ms Jende as the ‘tug’ procedure
the Respondent differed greatly from the accepted ‘tug’ process that
she was aware of at the time she gave her evidence.
65 to 72 of the HCCC submissions deal with the insight of the Respondent as
Peatling has accepted that he should not have undertaken the tug procedure
himself and should not have placed his hands directly
on [Ms A]’s skin as
this was not required by the technique.
Peatling did not accept that he had not undertaken the procedure correctly:
T4.15 line 5 to T4.6 line 25, T4.64 lines 9 –
17. It is clear that he did
not undertake the procedure correctly as set out above.
did not accept that it was inappropriate for him to have applied direct tension
onto [Ms A]’s skin: T4.25 line 37 to T4.26
did not accept that he had insufficient training and knowledge in the procedure
prior to performing it on [Ms A]: T4.14 line 11
13, line 20, lines 32 –
35, T4.15 lines 1 – 3, T4.60 line 50 to T4.61 line 19. He had been taught
the technique once
as an add on. He had performed it twice over a period of
in the wrong place.
accepted that his rationale for the tug procedure was different to Ms Jende and
conceded that he
be incorrect but did not accept that his rationale
incorrect: T3.87 line 37 – 45, T3.89 line 11 – 4. This is
despite the fact that he formed his rationale for the procedure
on his own,
without asking Mr Keene, and without asking anybody else: T4.40 lines 14 –
he accepted that Ms Jende stated that tension should be applied to the labia
majora (T4.41 lines 12 – 14) he was reluctant
to admit that the point at
which he applied pressure was different to the point stated by Ms Jende: T4.61
line 33 to T4.63 line 50.
did not accept that he failed to explain the procedure adequately: T3.93 lines
40 – 50, T3.94 lines 14 – 24, T3.95
lines 11 – 23, T4.64 lines
23 – 32. A full explanation of the treatment to be undertaken was not
provided to [Ms A]
and she did not understand or consent to the treatment that
was provided.
did not accept that there was a deficiency in the way he applied the procedure
in averting his eyes while [Ms A] applied pressure:
T4.13 lines 17 to 21.
73 to 76 of the HCCC submissions deal with the remorse and contrition
demonstrated by the Respondent as follows:
Peatling has apologised to [Ms A] through his statements and through his
Counsel: T2.15 lines 16 – 19.
some extent he has minimised the effect on [Ms A] by referring to her being made
“uncomfortable”.
A] stated her frame of mind on a number of occasions during the hearing: T1.64
lines 8 – 18; T2.12 lines 27 – 36,
T2.17 lines 39 - 40. She stated
that she trusted Mr Peatling and he was her employer. It affected her to the
extent that she had
considered resigning ever since it happened and did in fact
resign from her employment: T2.14 lines 17 – 20.
Mr Peatling has remorse and contrition for what has occurred as set out above he
is still resisting taking full responsibility.
77 to 79 of the HCCC submissions deal with the insight of the Respondent as
Peatling tendered a number of statements which attest to his good character. The
evidence supports Mr Peatling’s assertion
that he is of general good
the referees step outside the area of general good character their evidence
should be given little weight. Mr Debenham was required
for cross-examination.
Mr Dunn was not available. Mr Debenham’s reference should be given little
weight except in general terms.
He did not accept the possibility that Mr
Peatling could do anything inappropriate towards a patient when in fact Mr
Peatling had
admitted to the third particular: T 12/11/09 line 12 – 13.
Dunn was required for cross-examination but was not available. He has made a
number of claims that he would have no doubt as to
Mr Peatling’s skills in
applying the technique and that he would have applied the appropriate technique
for the patient. These
are matters for the Tribunal to assess and in light of
the evidence it is submitted that the technique was not applied correctly
even if it may have been an appropriate technique there may have been other less
intrusive techniques available. In view of the
assumptions that he made and that
he was not available for cross-examination his evidence should be given little
to no weight.
submissions of the HCCC note the Respondent admitted unsatisfactory professional
conduct. By failing to obtain informed consent
prior to conducting an invasive
technique involving the inappropriate touching near the genital area in the
context of using a technique
that he did not know how to apply it was submitted
that the Respondent demonstrated his knowledge, skill or judgment or care
were significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of his training and experience.
HCCC submitted that the conduct was of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
the suspension or cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration.
HCCC submissions as to protective orders continue at paragraphs 82 to 85 as
Peatling has not adequately explained why he chose to perform the tug technique
on his employees only and on Ms A in particular.
Mr Peatling was unable to
adequately explain why he chose to place his hand down Ms A’s underpants
and touch her directly on
her skin. Ms Jende’s assessment was that it
appears to have been a case of extremely bad judgement with no
ulterior motives”
Exh A tab 25 p 120. Mr Peatling denied that he was
experimenting on staff: T3.83 lines 1 - 40. He denied that he had touched Ms A
with sexual intent: T4.21line 7 to T4.22 line 48. It is open to the Tribunal to
find that Mr Peatling touched Ms A in the way he
did for any of these three
reasons: bad judgment with no ulterior motives, to experiment on a staff member,
or for sexual gratification.
Whatever Mr Peatling’s reasons for acting in
this way, it could be said that he has abused the trust Ms A placed in him and
abused the power he had over her.
Peatling is the sole Chiropractor in his practice. He does not belong to any
associations. He meets with colleagues regularly
in relation to a new piece of
equipment but otherwise does not maintain professional associations with
Chiropractors or applied kinesiologists
to discuss treatments and other related
issues. He undertakes continuing education.
breaches involve a breach of trust of Mr Peatling’s patient and employee.
Mr Peatling lacks insight into his behaviour.
In particular despite hearing
from the peer reviewers he does not have a proper understanding of informed
consent. The conditions
relating to the suspension and reprimand take into
account the need for Mr Peatling to be mentored and to undertake education into
a number of issues which he appears to still have difficulty in understanding.
Commission submits that if the Tribunal finds Mr Peatling acted with sexual
intent or for sexual gratification, it should make
a de-registration order. The
Commission submits that, if the Tribunal does not make such a finding, the
conduct is still sufficiently
serious to warrant a suspension of three months
with subsequent conditions. If the Tribunal thinks a suspension inappropriate,
it should reprimand Mr Peatling and impose the conditions proposed.
HCCC submitted that, depending upon the findings of the Tribunal, the
appropriate orders would be de-registration with a period
of one year before the
Respondent could apply for registration. Alternatively, a suspension for a
period of three months followed
by a minimum period of one year when conditions
would apply to the Respondent’s registration.
HCCC submitted that the Respondent should be ordered to pay the costs.
The Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent provided a detailed submission to the Tribunal dated 17 December
submissions note and provide detail of the inconsistency between the account of
the incident given by Ms A and the account given
by the Respondent.
is submitted on behalf of the Respondent that while he conceded that he had not
‘adequately’ informed Ms A about the
procedure, that a
‘full’ explanation was not warranted. It was submitted that a full
explanation would presumably require
a comprehensive description of the nature
of the treatment in accordance with Applied Kinesiology technique. It was
submitted that
a full explanation was not warranted and that failure to
‘fully explain’ could not amount to conduct which is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
Respondent admits that he failed to offer to have a third person present during
the treatment alleged in Particular 2. At paragraph
3 the following submission
is made on behalf of the Respondent:
Whilst the respondent admits as a matter of fact that he failed
to offer the patient the option of having a third person present during
treatment as alleged in particular 2, the obligation on the part of the
chiropractor to have a third person present during treatment,
which should, if
properly done, have been restricted to the patient herself applying tension to
the area of her labia over her clothing,
is not such as would sensibly warrant a
requirement that a third person be present, the non-compliance with which
amounts to unsatisfactory
conduct. The fact that the respondent departed from
the recognised technique by himself applying tension to the patient’s skin
near the labia does not sensibly translate into an obligation that a third
person should have been present during his inappropriate
procedure. The fact is
he should not have undertaken the inappropriate procedure. The failure to offer
the patient the option of
having a third person present does not amount to
“significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of training or experience”
The presence of a third person would not have ameliorated the inappropriateness
of the respondent himself effecting the tug technique
notwithstanding the
respondent’s acceptance in 2009 at the hearing that he should have offered
the patient the option of having
a third person present during the treatment (T4
– 65.2) in order to put the patient at greater ease and provide an
independent
witness to the parties – T4 – 67.15.
Respondent made the following submission with respect to Particular 3:
A fair analysis of the evidence would demonstrate that the
motivation for the respondent’s unsatisfactory professional conduct
not for the purpose of his own sexual gratification. Rather it was a misguided
and apparently impetuous attempt to try and better
effect the technique which
was not satisfactorily effected by the patient’s own first attempt. See
Ex.R1 – [19] and T4
– 48.50 – 49.14 where the respondent said
he thought about adopting the unorthodox technique
“just probably a
matter of seconds”
after the initial procedure did not work and also T4
Respondent’s submission notes that the Respondent did not perform the
procedure correctly, that it is inherently unlikely
that the procedure was being
performed for any sexual or other sinister purpose and the HCCC
not seriously contend that the evidence proves such a sinister motive to the
requisite standard’
submission emphasises the extremely short duration of the inappropriate
Respondent listed specific evidence to support this submission at paragraph 12
as follows:
The following evidence of patient all tend to confirm there was
no sexual gratification motivating the respondent:
the respondent foreshadowed that
“the procedure may seem a little
– at T1 – 23.16; and
her agreement at T1 – 53.21 - 29 that she understood that
“a personal and invasive examination usually involves your private
the evidence at T1 – 27.47 as to the location of the treatment -:
“It wasn’t in the inside. It’s just on the skin that
–yes- is that – that bit. It’s hard to tell
with this diagram
but it wasn’t in –
it’s just the bits on the outside, there
was no – nothing in the middle, so the skin on the outside”
at T1 -28.26
but I’m talking where he
touched me wasn’t in the inside, it was just on the
that the patient’s clothes were never undone (T1 – 32.22) and
she remained fully clothed the entire time with no buttons
undone (T1 –
50.25) and the respondent never asked her to take off her clothing (T1 –
that the respondent’s hand was inside her pants for not very long
“between about five and ten seconds” (T1 –
Respondent’s submission stated that it was not open to the Tribunal to
make a finding that the Respondent’s conduct
was sexually motivated
relying on their being no foundation provided for the statement that the HCCC
did not have evidence of
‘at this stage’
any specific
motivation and that of the
‘myriad of possible motivations’
was that he was practicing a new technique on his staff.
Respondent’s submits that the evidence given by Ms Jende point to poor
judgment rather that a sinister motivation as the
reason for the Respondent
engaging in unsatisfactory professional conduct. Further, the Respondent denied
he had any sexual motivation
and it was submitted on behalf of the Respondent
that it was not
‘seriously suggested to the contrary in his
cross-examination’
Respondent submitted as Mr Engel lacked the necessary qualifications to opine
with authority as to the nature of the technique.
It is further submitted that
Mr Engel’s opinion regarding the failure of the Respondent to ‘fully
explain’ the
treatment ‘is an exaggeration of the requirements which
could reasonably be expected of competent and reputable chiropractors’
(paragraph 16). Specific reference is made to Mr Engel’s evidence that
the Respondent should have explained the procedure
he was contemplating
‘as thoroughly as possible’. It was submitted that there could be no
‘reasonable obligation
on a chiropractor to explain a procedure as
‘thoroughly as possible’, it was not warranted or reasonable.
submission acknowledged that Ms A did not understand the treatment undertaken by
the Respondent. The Respondent acknowledges he
failed to adequately or
sufficiently explain the treatment before undertaking it, and although this may
be seen as a failure on his
part, it is not what the Particular alleges.
Respondent made the following submission at paragraph 20:
It was plainly imprudent of the respondent to undertake the
treatment in the way he did when his experience of it was so limited.
seen Mr. Keene, the Applied Kinesiologist Diplomate, perform it on his (the
respondent’s) wife and had employed the
conventional application of the
treatment on only a few occasions. Nevertheless, it was a technique recognised
in Applied Kinesiology
although not in conventional chiropractic. The
application of the respondent’s own hand in the area of the
labia plainly demonstrated a lack of judgment and care which
fell significantly below the standard expected of him as an experienced
practitioner. It was not the undertaking of the tug technique which fell below
the standard but his unconventional manner of doing
it using his own hand rather
than the patient’s. The invasive and private nature of his application of
the treatment led, understandably,
to the patient’s distress and
embarrassment for which he has apologised, both in his early correspondence to
the HCCC (Tab
11) and at the hearing through his counsel, to
personally (T2 – 15.15 – 20).
Respondent submitted that the appropriate orders for the Tribunal to make would
be for a reprimand to be issued and for conditions
regarding educational courses
as to the correct applied kinesiology technique be imposed on his registration.
If the Tribunal made
an adverse finding on the issue of consent, that is also a
matter that could be covered by conditions regarding further education.
paragraph 22 the Respondent submitted that if a finding of professional
misconduct was made then there would be no basis for making
a finding that the
practitioner was probably permanently unfit to practice and therefore should not
proceed to make an order for
de-registration (see
NSW Bar Association v
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
at 285 – [25] – [28]).
was submitted that the Respondent showed genuine remorse and contrition and
there was evidence to demonstrate that he was a person
of good character.
Particulars 1 and 2 are not proven, it was submitted on behalf of the Respondent
that each party should pay its own costs.
Submissions in reply made by the HCCC
HCCC made submissions in reply dated 24 December 2009.
submission addressed the issue of ‘fully’ explaining the nature of
the treatment. The Respondent admitted he provided
an inadequate explanation of
the nature of he treatment and the HCCC submitted that he did not provide enough
information to obtain
informed consent.
to the criticism of the evidence of Mr Engel regarding informed consent, the
HCCC submitted that his evidence was substantially
the same as that of Ms Jende
on this issue.
HCCC also provide the references in the evidence referring to Ms A being made
‘uncomfortable’.
Findings in relation to the Particulars of
inconsistencies in the evidence of Ms A and the Respondent with respect to the
incident are noted by the Tribunal. Both parties
made detailed submissions
regarding these inconsistencies. The Tribunal has substantially relied upon the
Respondent’s account
of the incident in reaching the findings made herein,
particularly in relation to Particular 3. Aspects of the evidence of Ms A and
her demeanour in the witness box indicated to the Tribunal that she was
embarrassed by the incident which she had put behind her
and moved on with her
life. The Tribunal notes at least one other witness made the observation that Ms
A appeared to be embarrassed
by the situation.
Particular 1
Tribunal accepts the submission made by the HCCC with respect to Particular 1.
While a number of different terms were used in
the evidence before the Tribunal,
the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent did not
explain the nature of the procedure to Ms A at any time (either prior to or
after the procedure).
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Engel that prior to commencing a procedure a
chiropractor should obtain informed consent from
consent requires the person who is giving consent to know the full and true
nature of what they are consenting to’
(see paragraph 81 exhibit 19
and T11.11.09, 66.43). Given the nature of the procedure undertaken by the
Respondent it is in the Tribunal’s
view imperative that Ms A understood
exactly what the treatment entailed, the purpose for the treatment and the
likely outcome of
the treatment. This was not a procedure that the Respondent
had performed on Ms A previously, it was not merely a matter of refreshing
A’s memory as to the rationale for the procedure and the manner in which
it was to be carried out. Given the ‘invasive’
nature of the
procedure additional care with the explanation given to Ms A would have been
Tribunal notes the strong submission made on behalf of the Respondent regarding
the wording of Particular 1. The submission raises
the question of whether the
was intended to read
‘adequately’
. The submission states that on the evidence
there is no real issue that the Respondent did not adequately explain the nature
treatment to Ms A (paragraph 2 of the submission dated 17 December 2009)
and it was not necessary or possible for a procedure to
be fully explained to a
it is incumbent on all health care providers to obtain informed consent before
undertaking procedures on a patient, the nature
of that informed consent will
obviously change with the particular circumstances. Factors such as whether or
not the patient/client
has undertaken the procedure previously, the
patient/clients level of understanding of the problem being addressed by the
the nature of the treatment, the risks for the particular patient will
influence the process appropriate for obtaining informed consent.
informed consent is providing an appropriate explanation for the procedure.
Given the nature of the procedure the Respondent
intended to undertake on Ms A,
the Tribunal is of the view that a full explanation was required, only a full
explanation would be
adequate for the circumstances. This was required not only
because it was required for informed consent to be provided but is also
appropriate professional practice.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent failed to fully explain to
Ms A the nature of the treatment to be undertaken.
Tribunal notes the provisions of Schedule 5 of the Act that allows the Tribunal
to add or substitute complaints on its own motion.
The Tribunal is of the view
that the conduct of the Respondent as admitted (i.e. failing to adequately or
sufficiently explain the
procedure) would be sufficient for an adverse finding
to have been made. If the Tribunal was not also of the view that the particular
procedure required a ‘full’ explanation (and that the conduct set
out in Particular 1 amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct) then it was
open to the Tribunal to have substituted or added a complaint regarding the
inadequacy or insufficiency of the
explanation.
Particular 2
Tribunal does not accept the submission made by the Respondent with respect to
this Particular. The Tribunal accepts that the
Respondent departed from the
recognised technique by applying tension to Ms A’s skin near the labia.
Despite the fact that
the procedure was inappropriate, it was a procedure that
involved touching the patient in an intimate manner. Prior to engaging in
opportunity to have a third party present. The
fact of the Respondent
undertaking an inappropriate procedure cannot result in the evaporation of the
obligation to offer the patient
the presence of a third party given the intimate
nature of the procedure.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent failed to offer Ms A the
option of having a third person present during the
Particular 3
Respondent admitted the conduct set out in this Particular. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that the evidence supports this
Findings in relation to the Complaint
Tribunal is of the view that the failure of the Respondent to fully explain the
procedure to Ms A demonstrated that the knowledge,
skill and judgement
possessed, and care exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice of
chiropractic is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and experience.
Tribunal is of the view that the failure of the Respondent to offer Ms A the
option of having a third party present during the
treatment demonstrates that
the knowledge, skill and judgement possessed, and care exercised, by the
chiropractor in the practice
of chiropractic is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and
experience.
Tribunal is also of the view that such conduct is improper and unethical.
Submission made by the Respondent at paragraph 20 to the effect that it was not
the undertaking of the tug technique that fell
below standard rather it was the
unconventional manner of the Respondent using his own hand instead of the
patient’s hand that
fell below standard. The Tribunal notes that the
manner in which the procedure was performed is not the subject of a Particular.
Having noted that matter carefully when considering the appropriate findings to
have been made, the Tribunal expresses the view that
this matter cannot be seen
as a mere inappropriate application of the technique. The degree of departure
from the accepted manner
of performing the procedure renders it outside the
realm that could be considered as being any part of the utilisation of an
kinesiology technique whether within the practice of chiropractic or
is nothing in the Respondent’s evidence to explain why the Respondent
needed to place his hands inside the underwear of
Ms A to hold an area of her
skin that was accessible without going under the waistband of her underwear.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the Respondent as set out in
Particular 3 demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and
judgement possessed, and
care exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice of chiropractic is
significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an
equivalent level of training and experience.
Tribunal is also of the view that such conduct is improper and unethical.
Respondent submitted that the conduct of the Respondent should not be viewed by
the Tribunal as motivated by sexual gratification
but rather a result of the
Respondent’s
‘apparently impetuous attempt to try and better
effect the technique’
Tribunal is of the view that the question of whether the Respondent’s
conduct had a sexual motivation does not have to be
resolved for the purpose of
determining the Complaint or appropriate Orders.
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission that a sexual motivation
would result in the Tribunal characterising the conduct
as more serious.
Objectively, without any consideration of the motivation for the conduct, the
conduct is considered by the Tribunal
to be so far outside the bounds of
acceptable practice that it amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct of an
extremely serious
Tribunal is of the view that the nature of the conduct would allow it to be
characterised as sexual by both the patient and objectively.
A similar situation
arose in the matter of
HCCC v Shelley
(Nurses and Midwives Tribunal of
New South Wales, 22 May 2006, 20 July 2006). In that matter the Tribunal found
that while under
the influence of the drug pethidine, Ms Shelley, then a
registered nurse, acted in a manner that was so outside normal conduct that
was open to the patient to interpret her actions as sexual. In that matter the
Tribunal specifically held that it was not of the
view that the conduct was
sexually motivated.
light of the high regard that the Respondent is held by his referees a mere
momentary departure from the accepted manner of performing
the procedure renders
this explanation less likely. The failure of the Respondent to fully explain the
procedure and to offer the
presence of a third person add to the possibility
that the conduct of the Respondent being misinterpreted. In any case, the
reaffirms its view that the motive of the Respondent does not have to
be resolved, it is sufficient that the conduct is inherently
serious and is of
such a nature that it was open for it to be interpreted as something other than
appropriate professional practice.
Tribunal has found that each of the Particulars is established and each
individually amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a serious nature.
Tribunal notes the two peer reviewers are representative of the broad knowledge
of chiropractic. Ms Jende endeavoured to explain
the procedure described by the
Respondent in terms of accepted Applied Kinesiology procedures. The Tribunal
notes that the peer reviewers
did not have the benefit of hearing the entire
evidence of either the Respondent or Ms A. It is the view of the Tribunal that
is no way in which the procedure described by the Respondent could be
reconciled with the description of the procedure described
by Ms Jende.
it is troubling that the majority of the references come from members of the
Respondent’s religious community, the
Tribunal accepts that the Respondent
is of otherwise good character and has not come to the attention of the Board in
relation to
any other misconduct.
Tribunal does not consider that de-registration or a period of suspension is
warranted in the circumstances of this matter. There
are a number of aspects of
the Respondent’s conduct that require orders to be made to address the
defects identified by the
Tribunal. A reprimand in the strongest terms will be
issued by the Tribunal and will remain permanently on the registration of the
Respondent.
that the Tribunal may be satisfied that the public is protected, that the
reputation of the profession is protected and that the
public may place
confidence in the profession of chiropractic, the Tribunal is of the view that
the practice of the Respondent requires
the close monitoring that a Mentor will
provide. It is the view of the Tribunal that the Respondent also requires more
detailed education
in the ethical obligations of a registered health care
professional to assist him to remain within professional boundaries in the
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent’s description of his
consultation with Ms A on 13 July 2006 demonstrates he
has poor communication
skills. As part of the continuing education expected of all professional people,
the Respondent should look
for training to improve his communication skills.
Another aspect of the Respondent’s practice that requires attention is his
understanding of informed consent.
is of significant concern to the Tribunal that the Respondent does not engage in
continuing education with any of the chiropractic
professional organisations.
Respondent gave evidence that he is currently involved in the introduction of a
machine called the Neuro Infiniti into his practice.
While he no longer attended
general chiropractic conferences and seminars he was attempting to establish a
group of four or five
colleagues to discuss the use of the Neuro Infiniti.
the Respondent maintains his registration as a chiropractor he should ensure
that he adheres to the professional standards of
practise required, including
the Code of Conduct. The public is entitled to expect that a person holding
registration as a health
professional will be working within accepted
professional boundaries and within the scope of the profession. Any further
of the Respondent outside accepted procedures will likely be viewed in
the future as a serious matter given the findings made herein.
is also of concern that the Respondent was prepared to utilise the particular
technique when the instruction he had received was
extremely limited. Further,
he used the technique when he was not clear as to the purpose of the technique.
The Tribunal accepts
the detailed analysis of the deficiencies in the manner in
which the Respondent undertook this procedure set out by the HCCC in its
submissions. While this is not a matter particularised in the Complaint (and
therefore has not been considered by the Tribunal with
respect to the findings
or Orders made herein) it is of concern to the Tribunal and the Respondent
should take care to ensure that
all of his practice is in accordance with
accepted techniques.
Section 53 Orders
Tribunal hereby orders:
Respondent is hereby reprimanded (see Annexure B hereto).
Registration of the Respondent is subject to the following conditions:
Respondent must write to the Board proposing the name of a registered
chiropractor to act as his mentor for its approval within
28 days of the date
hereof. The Approved Mentor is to be a senior registered chiropractor with
appropriate knowledge of applied kinesiology.
The Board will determine whether
the person proposed by the Respondent is suitable, of sufficient seniority to
undertake this task,
and the level of knowledge of applied kinesiology
appropriate.
7 days of receipt of written confirmation from the Board of a suitable mentor
for his practice (Approved Mentor), the Respondent
is to contact the Approved
Mentor to arrange an initial meeting and provide the Approved Mentor with a copy
of this Reasons for Decision
14 days of receipt of the written confirmation from the Board of a suitable
mentor for his practice the Respondent is to provide
written confirmation to the
Board that he has undertaken an initial meeting with the Approved Mentor and
agreed on a plan for the
mentoring (Mentoring Plan). The Respondent is to
forward a copy of the Mentoring Plan to the Board along with a copy of the
authority and direction to the Approved Mentor to provide reports to the
Board on a third monthly basis. The Mentoring Plan must
include face to face
meetings on at least a monthly basis.
21 days of receipt of the written confirmation from the Board of a suitable
mentor for his practice the Respondent is to provide
the Board written
confirmation from the Approved Mentor of receipt by the Mentor of the written
authority and direction from the
Respondent to provide reports to the Board and
the Mentor’s agreement thereto.
28 days of the date hereof the Respondent is to write to the Board seeking
approval from the Board for a course on study focused
on ethics. The Respondent
should not commence any such course until he has received written confirmation
of the Board’s approval
Respondent’s practice is to be mentored by the Approved Mentor for a
minimum period of two years. The Respondent is to provide
the Board with written
confirmation from the Approved Mentor that they have been authorised and
directed to inform the Board of any
issues of concern they have identified in
the Respondent’s practices. The Respondent is to request, authorise and
Approved Mentor to provide to the Board a report every three months
on the Respondent’s practices. The Respondent is to fully
co-operate with
the Approved Mentor including providing the Approved Mentor with access to his
clinical notes and patients. The Respondent
is to carefully consider all advice
and recommendations made by the Approved Mentor.
Respondent is to provide written reports to the Board on a third monthly basis
reporting on all aspects of his practice and the
progress he is making with the
Approved Mentor and the ethics course (if same is not at the time satisfactorily
completed) for the
period of time that Condition 3 remains on his
registration.
Respondent is to provide the Board with written confirmation of the satisfactory
completion of the Approved Ethic Course within
a period of 18 months of the date
Ethics course must cover at least the following elements of professional
The explanation
of proposed and actual treatment to patients;
Informed consent
to treatment;
Appropriate and
inappropriate touching of patients;
The appropriate
treatment of employees;
Practising only
within areas of competency.
Respondent is to provide a copy of the major essay undertaken as part of the
Approved Ethics Course to the Board within 14 days
of receiving it back from the
a period of two years, the Respondent may apply to the Board to remove the
condition requiring mentoring of his practice.
at any time the Respondent works as an employee or contractor he is to advise
the relevant person in authority of any of the conditions
that may be at that
time remaining on his practice. If the Respondent enters a professional
relationship or partnership with another
health care professional he is to
advise them of the conditions on his practice.
Respondent is not to perform the ‘tug’ procedure or any other
procedure that involved the touching of a patient in
the genital region until he
provides the Board with written confirmation of having undertaken an appropriate
education course with
an Applied Kinesiologist Diplomate (ICAK). Once the Board
has received such written confirmation this condition may be removed.
Respondent is to meet all costs associated with compliance with these
Respondent is to pay the HCCC costs as agreed or assessed. If the parties cannot
agree on the costs the parties have leave to
apply for the Tribunal to reconvene
for the purpose of determining costs.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for
Decision (with respect to Particulars) document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:
1) The Respondent and his legal advisers
2) The HCCC and its legal
3) The Board and as the Board sees fit
4) In accordance with
statutory requirements.
Dated: 21 January 2010
__________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Frances Taylor
___________________
Sue-Ellen McKelvey
___________________
Warwick Bateman OAM
Annexure A – Schedule of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Statement of the Respondent dated 8 November 2009
Annexure C –
Annexure D - Schedule of names suppressed
HCCC V Peatling
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS IN EVIDENCE
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY THE HCCC
(a) Complaint dated 6 March 2009
(b) Amended complaint
Certificate of registration
Letter from Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW to HCCC dated 31 May
2007 with attachment:
(a) Letter from Ms A to Chiropractor’s Registration Board dated 23 April
Statement of Ms A dated 27 June 2007 with attachments:
(a) Three pages of type-written notes
(b) Diagram of Joshua Wellness Practice
Statement of John Watters dated 11 July 2007
Statement of Ms A dated 6 August 2007 with attachment:
(a) Letter from Ms A to Chiropractors Registration Board dated 23 April
Statement of Linda Cheal dated 24 August 2007
Statement of Michelle Hogan dated 24 September 2007 with attachments:
(a) Statement dated 13 July 2007 with the name of Ms A on the front page
(b) Four pages of handwritten notes dated 17 July 2006
Statement of Christine McGillion dated 2 October 2007 with
attachments:
(a) Statement dated 4 July 2007 with the name Ms A on the front page
(b) One page of typewritten notes dated 17 July 2005
(c) Email from Christine McGillion to Michelle Hogan dated 17 July
Clinical records for Ms A from Joshua Wellness Practice
Letter from Justin Peatling to Jennifer Jannson, HCCC dated 9 July
Letter from Bret Coman, HCCC to Justin Peatling dated 11 February
Letter from Justin Peatling to HCCC dated 11 March 2008
Curriculum Vitae of Justin Peatling
Certificate from International College of Applied Kinesiology for basic
post graduate 100 hour course in Applied Kinesiology in the
name of Dr Justin
Peatling dated 1 November 2003
Letter from Jennifer Jansson, HCCC to Roger Engel dated 30 July 2007
(a) Expert report of Roger Engel dated 13 September 2007
(b) Curriculum vitae of Roger Engel dated 29 October 2009
Letter from Jennifer Jansson, HCCC to Roger Engel dated 9 October
Supplementary report of Roger Engel dated 5 November 2007
(a) Two emails from Jennifer Jansson, HCCC to Roger Engel dated respectively 14
and 15 November 2007
(b) Email from Roger Engel to Jennifer Jansson, HCCC dated 15 November
Letter from Jennifer Jansson, HCCC to Annika Jende
Expert report of Annika Jende [25 pages]
Statement of personal, financial, professional connection of Annika Jende
dated 15 May 2008
Email from Jennifer Jansson, HCCC to Annika Jende dated 21 May 2008, and
two emails from Annika Jende to Jennifer Jansson, HCCC dated
respectively 21 and
25 May 2008
Supplementary expert report from Annika Jende received by HCCC on 27 May
Email from Annika Jende to Jennifer Jansson dated 26 May 2008 with
Marked pages from
Grays Anatomy
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY THE RESPONDENT
R1. Statement of the Respondent dated 8 October 2009
R2. Diagram of the
R3. Diagram of the Practice with the location of the receptionist at the time
Ms A spoke to her after the procedure.
R4. Diagram of the Practice with the location of the treatment table
identified by Ms A.
R5. Bundle of references.
HCCC V Peatling
STATEMENT OF JUSTIN PEATLING
statement is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and
accurately sets out the evidence that I intend to give
before the Chiropractors
graduated with a Master of Chiropractic from Macquarie University 1998 having
previously completed a Bachelor of Science from Macquarie
University 1996 and a
Bachelor of Science from Griffith University 1993. In 1999 I took an associate
position with Terry Coulits
at Maroubra, later that year I ran Sydney Spinal
Care, Parramatta for Terry Coulits and Terry Notaras through till January 2002.
In September 2001 I opened my own practice in Toongabbie, part time until
January 2002. It was named Joshua Wellness Practice in
2004 and continues to
this day. Joshua Wellness Practice operates as a multidisciplinary practice
which currently offers chiropractic,
massage therapy, auriculotherapy and
neurodevelopmental therapy.
am the respondent to a complaint which is listed for hearing before the Tribunal
on 10 November 2008. The matter relates specifically
to treatment which I
performed on [Ms A], a former employee of my practice, on 13 July 2007.
Specifically, I note that the allegations
are that I:
to fully explain to the patient the nature of the treatment to be
undertaken;
to offer the patient the option of having a third person present during the
treatment; and
the patient under her clothing in the area immediately surrounding the entrance
to her vagina in circumstances where the accepted
technique was to request the
patient to apply traction in this area.
patient who is the subject of this complaint,
, first attended as a
patient on 22 November 2004 having been referred by another patient of the
presenting complaint was back pain (moderate)
and shin splints. She stated these complaints had commenced two to three years
previously.
have recorded in the subjective case history taken on 22 November 2004 that
twice in the past year
could not walk and dance. She was also
unable to jog. I also recorded that her secondary complaints were low back/neck
Although she said these complaints did not have a big effect, she did
comment that sometimes she was unable to lie straight in bed
due to it. She had
not sought treatment from other professionals for these complaints.
examination took place on 22 November 2004. The findings of note were as
left L3/4 deep tendon reflex and diminished right L3/4 deep tendon reflex;
cervical range of motion in lateral flexion bilaterally and decreased cervical
changes; left low hip, right low shoulder, right low occiput and decreased
thoracic kyphosis;
Bilaterally
weak upper trapezius and 10 vertebral subluxations.
for an x-ray which was performed on 25 November 2004.
This showed no obvious structural abnormalities.
first adjustment was performed at the next appointment on 2 December 2004.
this consultation prior to the first adjustment I explained the above findings
and recommended a course of treatment which consisted of two
adjustments per week for six weeks.
was happy to proceed on that
over the following 18 months consisted of various adjustments. The adjustments
were based on torque release technique and
applied kinesiology and ranged in
location from cranial, spinal, pelvic, coccyx and peripheral areas as well as
concentrating on
specific muscles. A copy of my clinical notes which details
each adjustment is contained in the HCCC’s documents behind tab
transcript of these adjustments is attached and marked ‘Annexure A’.
progress was reassessed at the end of the recommended six week
schedule on 4 February 2004 and new recommendations of weekly adjustments
months were commenced. At the end of these recommendations her progress was
again reassessed on 6 May 2004 and a fortnightly
schedule was followed until
January 2006.
4 February 2005,
completed a Practice Care Progress report in
which she reported that she now rarely suffered from back pain and that her shin
had resolved. She also reported improvement in her activities and
general lifestyle. She rated her level of improvement on a scale
of 1-10 as an
returned in May 2006 after 4 months’ break from treatment,
she commented to me that she was looking for part time work. At
that time we
were looking for an assistant to help with improving patient flow and efficiency
within the practice with the aim being
to have the assistant enter clinical
notes into the system based on my specific instructions.
29 May 2006 we employed
on a part time basis during our busier
shifts. She was employed Mondays 2.15pm-6.15pm, Tuesdays 8.45am-12.45pm &
2.15pm-6.15pm
Thursdays 2.45pm-7.15 and Fridays 8.45am-12.45pm &
1.45pm-5.15pm.
Tuesday, 11 July 2006,
came and saw me privately and explained
that her compulsive need to exercise was impacting greatly on her quality of
life. I remember
that this was during the World Cup and due to her Italian
background she was heavily involved in watching games at all hours with
family and this meant she was having to get up in the very early hours of the
morning to fit in her running. She was concerned
that was making her exhausted
and unable to cope with her day to day activities. She stated she was seeing a
counsellor for assistance
with this issue. I supported this approach and spoke
to her about how chiropractic and other forms of care may also assist her.
also advised her that I had professional relationships with two counsellors and
suggested that if needed I could also provide
her with their names. She also
advised me that due to this compulsion to exercise she was suffering from mild
lower limb and back
pain again.
consultation about which this complaint arises was on 13 July 2006. At this
consultation I offered
a supplement “Baseline” which
is specifically formulated to assist with brain reward deficiency. This is
present in disorders
such as anxiety, ADD, compulsive disorders all the way
through to addictions to food, drugs, gambling and alcohol. I also examined
for causes of her symptoms which included spinal, lower limb, muscle and organ
testing in this order.
was adjusted in the main adjusting area of
the clinic with torque release technique, followed by checking her feet and
lower limbs
for subluxations using applied kinesiology muscle testing, as had
been performed on many previous occasions. Unilateral gluteal/hip
weakness can be associated with navicular subluxation. Navicular commonly
subluxates in an anterior and medial direction
causing collapse of the medial
longitudinal arch of the foot which creates genu valgum or patella approximation
at the knee and anterior
translation of the pelvis. This testing led to a
finding of weakness of the pelvic floor muscles. Poor muscle control in this
can lead to pelvic instability, local organ dysfunction and weakness of
lower limb muscles. To address a weakness, tension of the
affected area plus
coughing can be used to strengthen muscles and restore organ ptosis (using
Pascal’s principle). This is
a principle applied to many procedures in
applied kinesiology and sacro-occipital techniques. Restoration of normal tone
pelvic floor muscles provides greater pelvic stability which in turn can
aid in the decrease of the lower limb and back pain, which
was my intended
outcome with this treatment.
this weakness was found, I offered
the option of using the initial
consultation room which is a closed room as opposed to the main adjusting area
which is open plan.
I explained to her that the procedure would involve her
holding inferior pressure/tension to the skin under the pubic bone and that
would then be asked to cough. Due to the more personal nature of the procedure,
I therefore offered the privacy of the initial
examination room to which she
in the initial examination room, I asked
if she understood and was
OK to proceed. She confirmed she was ok to proceed and the procedure was
performed as described above
through her clothing under the pubic bone followed
by a cough, firstly on one side and then repeated on the other side. The
for the muscle weakness was re-tested. It did not appear to have
corrected satisfactorily. I therefore advised her that we may
need to try the
same procedure by holding the contact directly onto the skin rather than over
her clothing. I explained to her that
this would involve the use of my hand
rather than her hand as I thought the procedure may have been ineffective due to
the incorrect
direction of tension or not an adequate degree of tension being held,
all controlled by her. In an attempt to nullify any of these potential errors,
I judged that if I was to hold the contact
and control these variables, it would
result in a greater degree of clinical success, as it ultimately did. Again I
if it was OK that I proceed in that way and she agreed. I
put on a disposal plastic glove on my right hand, palpated from the lower
abdomen down to locate the contact, held inferior skin tension and asked for her
to cough. The contact is close to the vagina but
is not directly on it. I then
removed my hand, rechecked the indicator which had improved but was still not
ideal which is where
a strong muscle gives a locking feel. I note it is claimed
that I grabbed and squeezed on the right hand side and then the left
of her vagina. I did not grab and squeeze
on the vagina at all.
My hand was next to the vagina but not directly on it.
check the balance of the posterior muscles of the pelvis, [Ms A] was then asked
to lie face down. I palpated the gluteals, lumbar
paraspinal muscle and
hamstring muscles. All showed elevated levels of tension and I recommended that
a massage may be of benefit
to her. At that time, the massage therapist for the
practice was Peter Cutland. I do not perform massages myself and I believe
there has been a misunderstanding in that regard as I was suggesting the massage
therapist perform the massage rather than myself.
was the conclusion of this appointment.
did ask what she should
write into the notes, but as there was a computer in the room I said I would do
is a very infrequent procedure having only been performed twice previously by
me. In both previous cases the patient held the
tension on the skin through
their clothing. Both had previously corrected at that point.
case, she never expressed to me that she was uncomfortable
at any time during or after the session and she worked until we finished
evening at 7pm.
in her complaint states that
receptionist, had told her that I had performed this procedure on Linda, another
employee. I have never performed this procedure
on Linda. I cannot comment on
did or did not say. All I can say is that I have performed a
similar procedure on
previously and that she did not express any
discomfort or concerns.
has worked as the receptionist in the
practice for over three years.
received a telephone call approximately two weeks after the consultation on 13
July 2006 from a male friend of
informing me that she
would not be returning to work. I enquired as to the reason for her resignation
and as to why she had not
phoned herself to notify me of this. No reason for
her resignation was given and I was told that she did not want to speak to me
and that he had been asked to phone on her behalf. No further contact was made
on my behalf towards
and there was never any mention that her
resignation had anything to do with the adjustment which was performed on 13
also note that
claims that I massaged around her breast on one
occasion for a foot problem. I believe she is referring to a procedure where
neuro-lymphatic reflex (also known as the Chapman reflex) for the adductor
muscle is palpated to assist with strengthening its weakness.
At no point did I
do this without explaining the procedure to
and obtaining
her consent. Her own hand was always placed on the location and then my hand
directed the pressure. The reflex point
for the adductor muscle is located
behind the areola. Other neuro-lymphatic reflex points on the body for
different muscles would
have been corrected without the use of her hand as they
are not in what are considered sensitive areas.
note I am criticised for supposedly suddenly changing my treatment plan at the
13 July consultation. There was a valid rationale
for this. This was as a
advising me of her compulsion for daily strenuous
excessive exercise. This then lead to a discussion about supplements which
assist with such compulsion and I thought it appropriate to examine her to
see what effect this compulsive exercising was having
on her body, particularly
with respect to pelvic stability and particularly as she had complained of back
and leg pain. In my clinical
judgement and in light of her presentation I
considered it to be advisable and reasonable to test pelvic floor muscle
weakness as
this can have an effect on pelvic stability and the lower leg
function. I only record positive findings in my records however I
also tested her gluteals, TFL and abductors and quadriceps in this process.
respect to the sacro-occipital technique, I studied this in my final year of
university which was in 1998. I attended an external
course through the Sacro
Occipital Technique Organisation of Australia. With respect to Applied
Kinesiology, I completed one 80
hour course and two 100 hour courses conducted
by the Applied Kinesiology Association of Australia (ICAK-A) between 1999 and
I also completed an exam in 2003.
treatment that I performed was based on Applied Kinesiology principles. An
understanding of muscle physiology includes the application
of stretching which
improves muscle function and recovery as well as prevention of injury. Due to
the location of the pelvic floor
muscles, they are very difficult to stretch.
The technique that I used I saw in an Applied Kinesiology seminar. I do concede
the way I saw the technique performed was with the patient using their own
hand with the practitioners hand guiding the pressure,
however as I have
explained above I did use this technique initially on
did not seem to produce the desired result in her case. In those circumstances
I considered it to be reasonable to attempt
the procedure again using my own
hand. I do concede however that this is not the recognised technique and that
with the benefit
of hindsight I should not have proceeded on that basis. I did
believe at the time however that it was reasonable to do so, that
adequately explained the procedure to
, and that she was
comfortable with the procedure being performed in that way.
note that one of the particulars of the complaint relates to my failure to have
a third person present while I performed this adjustment.
As the majority of my
adjusting is performed in an open plan area, there is always someone in the
immediate vicinity. On occasions
patients do request the opportunity to be
adjusted in a private room and we have a sign displayed in the practice advising
of their option in that regard. A photocopy of that sign is attached
and marked ‘Annexure B’. With respect to
adjustment on 13 July 2006 I offered her the option of the private room as I was
focussed on her privacy and making her more comfortable
due to the more personal
nature of the procedure. It did not occur to me to have a third person present.
With the benefit of hindsight,
I concede that offering to have a third person
present would have been advisable.
respect to the issue of consent, I believe that I did adequately explain the
procedure to
and that I did obtain her consent to proceed. It is
apparent from her complaint however that [Ms A] had not fully understood the
treatment, and for that I again wish to offer her my unreserved apology. I am
sorry for the embarrassment which she has suffered
however I reiterate that the
treatment was performed with the best of intentions and in an effort to treat
her presenting symptoms
and the impact of her compulsive exercising.
have practised as a chiropractor for 10 years and have never received such a
complaint and remain devastated that this has occurred.
This complaint has
impacted greatly on me as from the age of nine all I have ever wanted to do was
be a chiropractor. My health
has began to suffer due to constant worry since
receiving this complaint and therefore impacted on my family, my confidence as a
practitioner and ultimately my practice. For me the professional reward is being
a part of helping the patient, through chiropractic
to enjoy a greater quality
of life by allowing their body to function at its peak. I take my profession and
the obligations it demands
very seriously and would never knowingly or
intentionally put a patient in this position.
HCCC V Peatling
Justin Peatling, as a registered chiropractor you are hereby reprimanded by
this Chiropractors Tribunal in relation to findings of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct arising from your treatment of Ms A on 13 July 2007.
Your failure to fully explain the nature of the treatment, your failure to
offer the option of having a third party present and your
inappropriate touching of the patient are all matters that tend to bring the
profession of chiropractic into disrepute.
Your conduct demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill and judgement possessed and care exercised by you in the
practise of chiropractic
was significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a registered chiropractor of an equivalent level of training and
experience.
Your conduct caused Ms A to feel uncomfortable and her distress and
embarrassment over the incident was still patently obvious when
evidence before the Tribunal over two years after the event.
The Tribunal considers it appropriate that your practice be closely monitored
and guided by a Mentor for a minimum period of two years,
that you successfully
complete an ethics course within the next eighteen months and that you do not
perform any technique involving
touching a patient in the genital region until
you have provided the Board with proof of having undertaken a remedial education
with a Diplomate.
The Tribunal is of the view that your professional practice may benefit from
involvement with a professional body appropriate to the
profession of
chiropractic.
The Tribunal notes that the treatment you provided to Ms A did not comply
with accepted practises. You must ensure that all your practises
in the future
comply with appropriate professional standards. The findings of three counts of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
in this matter may well be taken into
account when orders are considered if there are any further breaches of
professional standards.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (723 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter