URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/585.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Botros v CIC Allianz Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPIC 585; (30 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Botros v CIC Allianz Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPIC 585
Ursula Botros
CIC Allianz Insurance Limited
Bianca Montgomery-Hribar
DATE OF DECISION:
30 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; claim for
damages; late claim; whether claimant has a full and satisfactory explanation
for the delay in making her claim for damages;
consideration of
sections 6.2
; statutory declaration provided by claimant;
Walker v Howard
Russo v Aiello,
Figliuzzi v Yonan,
Karambelas v Zaknic,
Rahman v Al-Maharmeh
considered and applied;
has not provided a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making a
claim for damages.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
claimant has not provided a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in
making her claim for damages, such that a late
claim cannot be made in
accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
insurer is to pay the claimant’s legal costs in the amount of $2,031 plus
A statement setting out the Personal Injury
Commission’s reasons is included with this certificate.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Botros (claimant) was involved in a motor accident on 29 November 2018 in the
underground carpark of Bankstown Shopping Centre.
Ms Botros was returning her
trolley to the trolley bay in the direction of oncoming traffic. A car that was
driving towards her hit
her trolley and she was propelled backwards onto the
ground (accident).
11 December 2018, Ms Botros lodged an application for statutory benefits under
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(NSW) (MAI Act) on CIC Allianz
Insurance Limited (the insurer).
24 August 2023, she made an application for damages on the insurer. The current
dispute regards Ms Botros’s damages application.
Relevantly,
the insurer has denied liability on the basis that Ms Botros’s application
was lodged outside the required timeframe
and without a full and satisfactory
explanation. Ms Botros accepts that her application for damages was lodged
outside the required
timeframe. However, she submits that it should be accepted
as her explanation is both full and satisfactory.
matter requires determination of whether Ms Botros’s explanation is full
and satisfactory for the purposes of s 6.14 of
the MAI Act, such that a late
claim can be made.
dispute constitutes a miscellaneous claims assessment matter under schedule 2,
cls 3(h) and (l) of the MAI Act.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
6.14 of the MAI Act provides for the time for the making of a claim for damages
“6.14 Time for making of claims for damages
(1) (Repealed)
(2) A claim for damages must be made within 3 years after the date of the
motor accident to which the claim relates. The regulations
may amend this
subsection to change the period within which the claim must be made.
(3) A claim for damages may be made after the time required by subsection
) if the claimant provides a full and
satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim. The explanation is
to be provided
in the first instance to the insurer.
(4) Evidence as to any delay in the onset of symptoms relating to the
injury suffered by the injured person as a result of the
motor accident may be
given in any such explanation.
(5) If a late claim for damages is made, the claim cannot be referred for
assessment under Division 7.6 unless—
(a) the insurer has lost the right to reject the claim on the ground of delay,
(b) the Commission has determined that the claimant has a full and
satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim,
(c) the claim is referred only for a certificate of exemption from assessment
under Division 7.6.
(6) The insurer loses the right to reject a late claim on the ground of
delay if the insurer—
(a) does not, within 2 months after receiving the claim, reject the claim on
the ground of delay or ask the claimant to provide
a full and satisfactory
explanation for the delay, or
(b) does not, within 2 months after receiving an explanation for the delay,
reject the explanation.
(7) The insurer may apply to the court in which proceedings on a late claim
for damages are commenced to have the proceedings dismissed
on the ground of
(a) the application to have the proceedings dismissed is made not more than 2
months after the statement of claim is served on
the defendant and received by
the insurer, and
(b) the insurer has not lost the right to reject the claim on the ground of
The court must dismiss the proceedings unless satisfied that the claimant has
a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in
making the claim.
(8) In this section, insurer includes the person against whom a claim for
damages is made.”
definition of “full and satisfactory explanation” for the purposes
of Part 6 of the MAI Act is set out in s 6.2 and
“6.2 Meaning of “full and satisfactory
explanation” by claimant
(1) For the purposes of this Part, a full and satisfactory explanation by a
claimant for non-compliance with a duty or for delay is
a full account of the
conduct, including the actions, knowledge and belief of the claimant, from the
date of the accident until the
date of providing the explanation.
(2) The explanation is not a satisfactory explanation unless a reasonable
person in the position of the claimant would have failed
to have complied with
the duty or would have been justified in experiencing the same delay.”
On the papers
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(NSW) (PIC Act)
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that sufficient
information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
the preliminary conference on 29 August 2025, I made directions listing the
matter for an assessment conference. Subsequently,
both parties submitted that
they considered it appropriate for the dispute to be determined on the papers
and without holding a formal
considered s 52 of the PIC Act, Procedural Direction PIC2 and the documents
before me, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information available to me to
allow me to determine the issues in dispute ‘on the papers’ and
without holding a formal
hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
Botros has put on written submissions dated 25 November 2024 and 3 September
Botros notes that the insurer has accepted that Ms Botros has a full explanation
for the delay, but alleges that the delay is not
satisfactory.
Botros notes that, since she lodged her late claim application, she has been
assessed as having non-threshold psychological and
physical injuries.
Botros acknowledges that an explanation is not satisfactory unless a reasonable
person in the position of the claimant would have
failed to have complied with
the duty or would have been justified in experiencing the same delay. She refers
to the comments of
Buller v Black
(2003) NSWCA 45
(2009) 78 NSWLR 161
[2009] NSWCA 408
Russo v Aiello
[2003] HCA 53
(2003) 215 CLR 643
Figliuzzi v Yonan
[2005] NSWCA 290
Botros refers to her application for statutory benefits and the advice she
received from Ms Spasojevic dated 17 December 2018.
It is acknowledged by Ms
Botros that this advice clearly set out that she must commence proceedings
within three years of the motor
claimant’s submissions refer to her subsequent correspondence with the
insurer following that advice and that the insurer
was attempting to close her
file. It also refers to her statement.
Botros submits that, while she accepts she was provided with advice about
lodging a damages claim when she first saw her solicitor
at the end of 2018,
this advice was contingent upon her having more than a minor injury. The insurer
determined she had a minor injury.
She submits that a reasonable person in her
position would have done exactly what she did. Her submission continues
told there was a time limit and she acknowledges that, but she
was also told that in the solicitor’s opinion she had suffered
submits that, within 24 hours of seeing her current solicitor, her claim form
was lodged.
submits that the following medical reporting is relevant, being:
(a) the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder by Medical Assessor Verma in the
medical assessment certificate dated 24 July 2025;
(b) the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder and the psychological
symptoms recorded by Dr Kumar in his medicolegal report
of 8 August 2025;
(c) the diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder and post-traumatic stress
disorder, and the psychological symptoms in the report
of Nezihe Ali,
psychologist, dated 5 September 2023, and
(d) ongoing pain recorded by Medical Assessor Shazhad and his finding of motor
accident related injuries in the cervical spine and
Botros submits that she was justified in experiencing the delay and a reasonable
person in her position would also be so justified.
Botros further submits that the insurer was on notice of the accident, Ms
Botros’s injuries and her claim for statutory benefits,
as this was lodged
approximately two weeks after the accident. Ms Botros submits that the insurer
has not raised any issue in relation
to prejudice and she submits there is no
prejudice or potential prejudice to the insurer if her late claim were allowed.
Insurer’s submissions
insurer relies on written submissions dated 18 December 2024. The insurer has
conceded that Ms Botros has provided a full explanation
for her delay by way of
her statutory declaration dated 25 May 2024. However, the insurer maintains that
Ms Botros’s explanation
is not satisfactory.
Relevantly,
the insurer submits that a reasonable person would not have failed to comply
with the duty or would not have been justified
in experiencing the same delay.
insurer submits that
Dijakovic v Ferez
[2015] NSWCA 174
establishes that
the “satisfactory” element of the predecessor to s 6.2 of the MAI
Act was by reference to an objective
standard, given the claimant’s
insurer submits that on 17 December 2018, being less than a month after the
accident, Ms Botros was provided with a written advice
from Ms Spasojevic of
Slater and Gordon Lawyers, referencing a conference on 30 January 2018 (which
appears to be a typographical
error). In that advice, Ms Botros was informed of
her potential entitlement to both statutory benefits and common law damages.
insurer submits that the advice sets out the time limits imposed by the MAI Act
in the following
Report motor accident to police
Within 28 days of the motor accident
Lodge claim form – “statutory benefits”
Within 3 months of the motor accident but within 28 days for maximum
Lodge damages claim
Not before 20 months post-accident but within 3 years of motor
Commence proceedings
Within 3 years of motor accident
insurer submits that, at the time of the advice being provided in 2018, Ms
Botros’s injuries were considered to fall within
the definition of
“minor injury” (now “threshold injury”).
the accident occurred on 29 November 2018, the insurer submits that Ms Botros
would have been required to lodge her claim for damages
by 29 November 2021, so
as to comply with s 6.14 of the MAI Act. Ms Botros’s claim for damages is
dated 24 August 2023, being
almost two years out of time. The insurer submits
this is significant, as it is not a delay of days or months, but years.
Ms Spasojevic’s written advice reflects her preliminary assessment that Ms
Botros’s injuries were likely to be threshold
injuries, she invited Ms
Botros to contact her office in the event there was a change or deterioration of
her injuries.
insurer submits that it appears there was a worsening of Ms Botros’s
condition as she was referred to Dr McKechnie, neurosurgeon,
whom she initially
saw in February 2019. The insurer submits that Ms Botros consulted with Dr
McKechnie on a “couple of occasions”
during 2019 and again in 2020.
the insurer submits that Ms Botros presented to Bankstown Hospital complaining
of left knee pain in November 2019.
2022, Ms Botros was again referred to Dr McKechnie who referred her to Dr Yu,
pain management specialist.
the above, which the insurer submits would indicate a worsening of her
condition, Ms Botros did not contact Ms Spasojevic.
insurer submits that, in mid-2023, Ms Botros contacted Slater and Gordon Lawyers
for advice in relation to payment of treatment
expenses. She spoke with Mr
Mithieux on 23 August 2023, who urged her to lodge a damages claim. The claim
was lodged the next day.
insurer refers to
Karambelas v Zaknic
, and the test for whether an
explanation is full and satisfactory.
insurer submits that, within three weeks of the accident, Ms Botros had
consulted with a solicitor in relation to her potential
entitlements and was
informed about making a claim for both statutory benefits and damages.
insurer submits that, while Ms Botros is not a solicitor, she was informed about
her prospective common law entitlements within
three weeks of the accident. She
was informed about the timeframes associated with lodging a claim for damages in
a clear and straight
forward manner, which a reasonable person would have been
able to understand. Finally, she was invited to contact her solicitor in
circumstances where her condition deteriorated and, presumably, where a further
decision could be made as to whether she had a non-threshold
insurer notes that, in her statutory declaration, Ms Botros concedes that she
had been provided with advice about lodging a damages
application at the end of
2018 and had been informed that the claim should be lodged within three years of
the accident. The insurer
submits that a reasonable person in the
claimant’s position would have observed this date and, in the case of
uncertainty,
insurer rejects that Ms Botros did not lodge a damages claim, despite being
informed of the timeframe, because she was “primarily
focused on having my
treatment expenses paid for”. The insurer submits that the test is not
what Ms Botros elected to focus
on, but rather, what a reasonable person in Ms
Botros’s position would have done.
insurer disputes that Ms Botros’s explanation is satisfactory for the
purpose of s 6.2(2) of the MAI Act.
Application for personal injury benefits
Botros’s application for personal injury benefits dated 11 December 2018
records the accident date as 29 November 2018.
Botros describes the accident as:
“I was returning a trolley
to the trolley bay after unloading my groceries to my car. I had crossed over
the lates (where cars
drive) as the trolley bay was on the other side and was
walking (pushing the trolley) as close to the parked cars as practicable.
walking ‘against traffic’. A car came around the corner in the
middle of the driving lanes. I noticed it was headed
towards me and not slowing
down. I looked at the driver and saw that she was facing her passenger and not
where she was driving.
The car hit the trolley, which hit me and propelled me
backwards onto the ground.”
Application for damages
Botros’s application for damages dated 24 August 2023 has been reviewed.
Claimant’s statement
statutory declaration of Ms Botros dated 25 May 2024 has been considered and
states that the statutory declaration was made in relation to her claim for
damages, and to provide an explanation for not lodging
this claim within three
Botros’s statement extracts the explanation of the accident from her
application for statutory benefits. She states that
she was transported to
Bankstown Hospital via ambulance and was discharged from hospital the following
day. She states that she obtained
a medical certificate from Bankstown Hospital
indicating that she was unable to attend work from 29 November 2018 to 4
December 2018.
She obtained a subsequent medical certificate certifying that she
was unfit for work on 6 and 7 December 2018.
obtained a medical certificate from Dr Nosir at NAS Advanced Medical Centre who
certified her to have capacity to work 20 hours
per week until 31 December 2018.
Botros stated that she attended NAS Advanced Medical Centre several more times
in December 2018. In addition to the injuries described
in her application for
statutory benefits, she states that she noticed a considerable amount of lower
back pain, and pain and restriction
in her right ankle. She also said her right
wrist and shoulder were sore.
states the accident was having a significant impact on her, and she was referred
for treatment with a physiotherapist and a psychologist.
was certified as being totally unfit for work from 22 December 2018 to 4 January
2019. Thereafter she was certified to work for
20 hours per week.
Botros stated that it was obvious to her that she was going to need ongoing
treatment and decided to get into contact with a lawyer.
She had a conference
with Zorana Spasojevic at Slater and Gordon Lawyers. Ms Spasojevic provided her
with some written advice, which
is annexed to the statement.
Botros stated that, having spoken to Ms Spasojevic and looking at her advice,
she understood that she had two potential claims,
and that she could not make a
damages claim if she had a minor injury. She notes that she was advised at that
point that she had
minor injuries. She concentrated on recovery and
rehabilitation.
Botros said that she hoped with appropriate treatment she would recover, so her
treatment expenses and wage loss were her main
concern. At that time, the
insurer was covering these expenses.
Botros notes that she was referred to Dr McKechnie and saw him in February 2019
for neck pain and headaches. The insurer paid for
these consultations. Dr
McKechnie told her she had disc protrusions in her neck and lower back and
recommended non-operative treatment.
Ms Botros said she was hopeful that she
would recover with appropriate treatment.
March 2019, the insurer wrote to Ms Botros indicating that her payments would be
stopped at 26 weeks post-accident as she had sustained
minor injuries. At this
point in time, Ms Botros notes she was working reduced hours and receiving some
weekly wage payments from
the insurer.
Botros states that in about 2019, she started working as an Accounts Officer at
Nude by Nature. She was certified fit to work for
40 hours per week. She said
she could no longer manage her role at Bamm Group due to not being able to focus
and retain information,
nor deal with the high levels of stress that was part of
Botros says that, while she was disappointed in the insurer’s decision,
she was back at work full-time and earning more in
her new role than she was
pre-accident.
Botros notes that she continued to submit claims for treatment expenses and the
insurer paid for some of those expenses. In June
2020, she says that she lodged
an internal review in relation to some treatment expenses which had not been
paid for by the insurer.
November 2019, Ms Botros presented to Bankstown Hospital regarding pain in her
left knee. She had been at the beach the day prior
and experienced pain when she
went to get up off the sand.
Botros noted that she saw Dr McKechnie on a couple of occasions in 2019 and was
referred back to see him in 2020. She was prescribed
Lyrica but it did not
provide her with any relief. She ceased taking it as it made her drowsy and she
had difficulty doing everyday
tasks while taking it.
was still complaining of significant pain in her right knee, ankle and foot. She
was referred for investigations and saw Dr Suthersan
in 2021. Dr Suthersan
recommended conservative treatment and physiotherapy.
Botros notes that the insurer would close or attempt to close her file on
occasion, and she would always ask that her file remain
open or be re-opened.
Botros states that in October 2019, the insurer attempted to finalise her claim.
She asked that her claim be re-opened and noted
the difficulties she was having
with her injuries.
Botros says she recalls that, in the second half of 2020, she was told by the
insurer that if she wanted her medical expenses paid
she would need to proceed
with a dispute in the DRS. She says her response indicated that she was
struggling to find the mental capacity
to manage her chronic pain, attend
appointments and organise her claim.
states that in August 2021, the insurer again sought to close her claim. She
advised that she was attempting to obtain legal advice
but it had been delayed
due to lockdown restrictions. She says that she did not end up seeking legal
advice, and instead tried to
cope with her injuries as best she could.
Botros says that one of the consequences of the accident was that work became
“very difficult”. She says she could
not maintain her position at
Nude by Nature and instead obtained a role as an Assistant Accountant at St
Andrew’s College.
This role was not paid as well as her Nude by Nature
says that in 2022, she was again referred back to Dr McKechnie. He recommended
and performed an injection into her cervical spine.
Ms Botros states that she
found the injection very painful and that it didn’t provide any
significant ongoing relief. Dr McKechnie
indicated that a cervical discectomy
was an option for her and referred her to Dr Yu, a pain management specialist.
Botros notes that she has not followed up on the suggestion of surgery but did
consult with Dr Yu and underwent further injections
into her lower back.
Botros also stated that, in 2021, she began to see a psychologist, Nezihe Ali,
in relation to psychological symptoms. Ms Ali diagnosed
Ms Botros as suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder and that she tries to avoid doing anything
to do with the accident.
Botros said that, in mid-August 2023, she made a further inquiry with Slater and
Gordon Lawyers. By this time, she was becoming
despondent about how she was
going to pay for the treatment recommended by Dr McKechnie and Dr Yu. She wanted
to know if there was
a way she could get the insurer to pay for her treatment
23 August 2023, Ms Botros states that she spoke with Mr Mithieux and was advised
that she may have ongoing rights and entitlements.
Mr Mithieux urged Ms Botros
to lodge a damages claim form. Ms Botros said that this was the first time she
had considered aspects
of a potential claim other than coverage of treatment
expenses. Ms Botros lodged an application for damages on the insurer on 24
August 2023. Unfortunately, page 3 of the application was missing. She lodged a
complete application on 29 August 2023.
Botros states that she accepts she had been provided with advice about lodging a
damage claim towards the end of 2018, and that
the advice indicated she should
lodge a claim within three years of the accident. She says this advice was
contingent upon her having
more than a minor injury and that the insurer had
determined she had a minor injury.
says she was primarily focused on having her treatment expenses paid for and did
not focus on the damages claim at all. She said
that after having spoken to Mr
Mithieux the importance of lodging a claim for lump sum compensation was
stressed on her and, at that
point, it became apparent to her that she needed to
focus on both her treatment expenses and how the injuries were going to affect
her earning capacity for the rest of her life. Once she understood the
significance, she says she worked diligently to lodge the
application.
Claim documents and correspondence with the insurer
Liability Notice – benefits after 26 weeks from the insurer dated 11 March
2019 states that the insurer does not accept
liability for payment of statutory
benefits beyond 26 weeks, as it determined Ms Botros’s injuries fell
within the definition
of “minor injury”.
3 October 2019, the insurer emailed Ms Botros attaching a letter said to be in
relation to the finalisation of her claim.
8 October 2019, Ms Botros responded to the insurer and stated that she was under
the impression her claim was finalised in May.
She stated that she would
appreciate not receiving “these unnecessary emails as I am still dealing
with the injuries not only
sustained in the accident but issues that continue to
develop as a result of said injuries, not to mention the mental and financial
toll this accident continues to have”.
26 November 2019, Ms Botros emailed the insurer requesting she be re-sent
documentation regarding re-opening her claim, noting
she is still dealing with
the injuries sustained in the accident and developing issues directly related to
those injuries.
Internal Review application determination dated 16 June 2020 upheld the decision
to decline liability for “further psychology
and physiotherapy
consultations, reimbursement of acupuncture, dental treatment and crutches and
for the left knee MRI”.
26 November 2020, the insurer emailed Ms Botros and noted that she had said she
was going to pursue a DRS application. The insurer
had not seen this come
through and noted it would proceed to finalise her claim if she was no longer
going to pursue this application.
It requested an update on her claim.
27 November 2020, Ms Botros responded to the insurer, noting “I have been
spending a lot of time trying to fix these ongoing
injuries and haven’t
had the mental capacity to deal with the chronic pain, attend appointments and
organise the claim. I will
try to make it a priority in the next little while.
Please do not finalise the claim”. She also referred to a referral for
cortisone injection.
30 August 2021, the insurer emailed Ms Botros and noted that, due to the
extended period of inactivity, the insurer would be closing
on 30 August 2021, Ms Botros responded to the insurer and stated that “As
previously advised, I will be pursuing legal
advice regarding this claim, which
has been delayed due to the Covid lock down restrictions” [sic].
Liability Notice – claim for damages dated 24 October 2023 from the
insurer advises liability had been denied. This is on
the basis of Ms
Botros’s injuries from the accident having been assessed as threshold
injuries. The insurer also notes that
Ms Botros did not lodge her claim for
damages in compliance with s 6.14 of the MAI Act and she was yet to respond to
the requests
for a full and satisfactory explanation, which were issued on 5
September 2023, 19 September 2023 and 4 October 2023.
email from the insurer to the claimant’s legal representatives dated 3
June 2024 maintains the decision to deny Ms Botros’s
claim for damages on
the basis that her explanation is not satisfactory.
certificate of determination – internal review dated 27 June 2024 by the
insurer upheld the decision to decline Ms Botros’s
claim for damages on
the basis that, while her explanation was full, it is not satisfactory and
therefore is not a full and satisfactory
explanation.
letter of advice dated 17 December 2018 addressed to Ms Botros from Zorana
Spasojevic, Associate – Accredited Specialist
in Personal Injury Law from
Slater and Gordon dated 17 December 2018 has been considered.
letter refers to a conference on 30 January 2018. It is accepted that this date
is a typographical error, however there is no
evidence before me as to the
actual date this conference occurred. I find that it occurred between the date
of the accident, being
29 November 2018, and the date of the letter of advice,
being 17 December 2018.
letter contains a summary of Ms Botros’s instructions and notes that Ms
Botros has lodged a “CTP claim” with
the insurer.
letter sets out Ms Botros’s potential rights and entitlements. This
includes a section titled “statutory benefits”,
which says that the
focus of statutory benefits is on the timely benefits of incapacity payments,
treatment and care needs. It notes
they are payable for at least 26 weeks and
can, in certain situations, continue for life. It states there are a number of
entitlement
periods depending on her accident and injuries.
section titled “damages claims” states that the focus of a damages
claim is compensating her in a once-and-for-all
settlement for past income
losses, future income loss and for pain and suffering. It states that the
entitlement to claim damages
is only available for injuries which are not
considered “minor” and where there is a person responsible for the
that is not Ms Botros.
section titled “Time Limits” states that “The Act imposes
strict time limits on when a claim must be made for
motor accident
‘statutory benefits’ and ‘damages’ claims. I ask that
you please take note of these time limits
for your information as they are very
important”. The advice then sets out the table extracted above at
paragraph [
“Advice” it is noted “I have formed the preliminary view that
your injuries fall within the definition of
‘Minor Injury’ within
Should this situation change and your injuries worsen please contact
” (emphasis in original).
to the advice is a summary of the statutory benefits entitlement periods and the
definition of “Minor Injury”.
It states that:
minor injury is a soft tissue injury or minor psychological injury which is not
likely to persist beyond 6 months after the
accident occurred or has good
prospects of resolving without proper treatment. Examples of a minor injury
include (but are not limited
Muscular injury (excluding muscle wasting)
Temporary Bruising or swelling
Minor tendon injury
Acute stress disorder (6 months or less)
Minor ligament injuries
Adjustment disorder (6 months or less)
Minor menisci injury (such as to the knee)
“Whiplash” injury
Medical records
referral from Dr McKechnie to Dr Yu dated 14 September 2022 has been considered.
This refers Ms Botros for Dr Yu’s expert
opinion and treatment
recommendations.
letter from Dr McKechnie to Dr Yu dated 8 August 2023 notes that the previous
referral has expired, and confirms the letter is a
new referral.
radiology reports, including the MRI of Ms Botros’s cervical spine
collected on 13 October 2023, have been considered.
Assessment Certificates
Medical Assessment – Threshold Injury (Physical)
Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical Assessor Farhan Shahzad dated 13 July
2025 certified that Ms Botros’s injuries
to her lumbar spine and skin were
threshold injuries for the purposes of the MAI Act, and her cervical spine and
right ankle injuries
were not threshold injuries for the purposes of the MAI
Act. The Medical Assessor also certified that Ms Botros’s right knee
injury was not caused by the accident.
reasons set out in the Medical Assessor’s certificate have been considered
and evaluated.
Medical Assessment – Threshold Injury
(Psychological)
Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical Assessor Surhabi Verma dated 25 July
2025 certified that somatic symptom disorder caused
by the accident is not a
threshold injury for the purposes of the MAI Act.
Assessor Verma noted that she disagreed with Dr Kumar’s diagnosis of
post-traumatic stress disorder, given Ms Botros
did not report any
re-experiencing or symptoms related to the accident, and that the accident did
not fulfil criterion A. Medical
Assessor Verma also noted that Ms Botros did not
report any intrusive symptoms, nightmares, flashbacks, distressing memories or
intense or prolonged psychological distress or psychological reactions to
internal or external cues. Medical Assessor Verma noted
that Ms Botros shows no
significant avoidance symptoms and has been able to visit shopping malls and
complexes as she did before.
Assessor Verma noted that she had also considered the diagnosis of major
depressive disorder but did not believe it accurately
reflected Ms
Botros’s current condition. Ms Botros reported feeling angry and
frustrated due to the pain not improving and
did not report feeling depressed.
Ms Botros attributed her frustration to the insurance company, which did not
approve the treatments,
and her lack of interest in activities is due to her
physical injuries, not her mood.
Assessor Verma opined that Ms Botros’s presentation is consistent with
somatic symptom disorder and her psychological
symptoms are directly associated
with the excessive thoughts and behaviour related to her chronic pain.
Other Medical Reports
Dr Mukesh Kumar
report of Dr Mukesh Kumar, psychiatrist, addressed to the claimant’s
lawyer dated 8 August 2024 has been considered and
Kumar diagnosed Ms Botros with post-traumatic stress disorder, with a whole
person impairment of 17%.
letter of Nezihe Ali, psychologist, to Dr Nosir dated 1 September 2021 notes
that “upon further assessment”, Ms Botros
reported symptoms
consistent with major depressive disorder, single episode, moderate, adjustment
disorder with depressed mood.
letter of Ms Ali dated 5 September 2023 notes that, in addition to her physical
pain, Ms Botros has been diagnosed with persistent
depressive disorder, and that
she displays symptoms that are suggestive of post-traumatic stress disorder. It
is noted that Ms Ali
has been providing treatment since mid-2021.
DETERMINATION
is accepted that Ms Botros did not comply with s 6.14(2) of the MAI Act. The
three-year anniversary of the motor accident occurred
on 29 November 2021. Ms
Botros sent her claim for common law damages to the insurer on 24 August 2023,
and sent a complete claim
on 29 August 2023. Her damages claim was therefore
made approximately four years and 9 months after the accident, making it
approximately
21 months late.
Botros’s claim for damages may only be made if she provides a full and
satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the
a damages claim made after the third anniversary of the accident cannot be
referred for assessment unless the insurer has
lost the right to challenge the
claim (it is accepted it has not) or a party is referring the claim for
exemption from assessment
(it is not), or the Commission has determined that the
claimant has a full and satisfactory explanation for the
meaning of “full and satisfactory” for the purposes of Part 6 of the
MAI Act, being the part in which s 6.14 appears,
is provided by s 6.2 of the MAI
Is Ms Botros’s explanation full and
satisfactory?
is considerable case law regarding the meaning of the phrase “full and
satisfactory”.
v Zaknic (No. 2)
[2014] NSWCA 433
discussed the meaning of s 66(2) of the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
(the MAC Act) which is the
predecessor to s 6.2 of the MAI Act. Justice Meagher (with whom Basten and
Simpson JJA agreed) stated:
“[16] An explanation is
‘full and satisfactory’ within s 66(2) if it satisfies two
requirements. First, it must
include a full account of the conduct, including
the actions, knowledge and belief of the claimant, from the date of the accident
until ‘the date of providing the explanation’. In the case of a late
claim under s 73(1) that is the date on which the
explanation is first provided.
Secondly, the explanation must be such that a reasonable person in the position
of the claimant ‘would
have been justified in experiencing the same
is accepted that “[t]he provision does not call for perfection, or ... for
prolix or burdensome recounting of every moment
“conduct” is an account of the acts and omissions of Ms Botros and
all relevant persons whose conduct is relevant
to the explanation for the delay,
however this does not broaden the meaning of “claimant” in the first
sentence of s
insurer has conceded that Ms Botros’s explanation is full. Section 42 of
the PIC Act provides that the Commission must give
effect to the guiding
principle, being to facilitating the just, quick and cost effective resolution
of the real issues in the proceedings.
Accordingly, I directed the parties to
confirm on or before 1 October 2025 whether the “fullness” of the
explanation was in dispute. If it was in dispute, then I
proposed to hold an assessment conference with the parties. On 1 October
the insurer confirmed that it consented to the matter being dealt with on the
papers, being that the “fullness”
of the claimant’s
explanation was not in dispute.
Accordingly,
while s 6.14(5)(b) of the MAI Act requires the Commission to be satisfied that
Ms Botros has both a full and satisfactory
explanation for the delay, I have
approached the analysis of the “fullness” of her explanation in
light of the above.
Is Ms Botros’s explanation full?
to whether Ms Botros’s explanation is “full”, the word
“takes its meaning from the context. It refers to
the conduct bearing upon
the delay, and the state of mind of the
Rahman v Al-Maharmeh
(2021) 95 MVR 394
[2021] NSWCA 31
Brereton JA noted, in respect of the predecessor to s 6.2 of the MAI
“[39] While the ‘full account of the conduct’
referred to in the first sentence of s 66(2) MAC Act is not confined
the claimant personally but extends to the conduct of those who have acted or
purported to act on behalf of the claimant,
so far as it is relevant to the
delay, this does not mean that the explanation is required to include ‘the
actions, knowledge
and belief’ of the solicitors, as distinct from the
claimant: it is the claimant who must provide the explanation for the
delay in commencing proceedings.”
Accordingly,
the explanation for the delay is to be provided by Ms Botros.
Botros’s claim was made on 24 August 2023. Pursuant to s 6.2 of the MAI
Act, Ms Botros’s explanation must account for
the period 29 November 2018
to 24 August 2023.
note Ms Botros’s statutory declaration dated 25 May 2024 and the documents
annexed thereto, which I have summarised in detail
above. I find that Ms
Botros’s explanation is full for the requisite period because it accounts
for her actions, knowledge
and beliefs in sufficient detail to explain how and
why the delay occurred.
I accept that Ms Botros’s evidence is relatively high level, and there are
some gaps in the periods of time, it provides
me with sufficient basis to
understand what she was doing throughout the entire period of delay. As noted in
Ms Botros’s account does not need to be prolix, nor account
for every moment that has elapsed.
Is Ms Botros’s explanation satisfactory?
6.2 of the MAI Act requires that Ms Botros’s explanation be both full and
satisfactory. The legislation states that
an explanation is not a satisfactory
explanation unless a reasonable person in the position of Ms Botros would have
failed to comply
with the duty or would have been justified in experiencing the
same delay. This is an objective
persuasive onus is on the insurer to demonstrate that a reasonable person in Ms
Botros’s position would not have been justified
in experiencing the same
and as recognised in
, while the nature and character of the injury
caused by the accident must be taken to be part of the “position of the
Parliament has not seen fit to suspend the running of time even
in circumstances where the claimant’s injury has impacted their
comply with s 6.14 of the MAI
They must still provide a
full and satisfactory explanation complying with s 6.2.
while it is accepted that Ms Botros was dealing with her injuries throughout the
time since the accident, Ms Botros’s
activities, knowledge and belief must
also be examined.
determining whether a reasonable person in the position of Ms Botros would have
been justified in experiencing the delay, I note
her position as follows:
(a) she was injured in a motor vehicle accident as a pedestrian;
(b) there are no certificates of fitness before me. However, based on Ms
Botros’s statement, on which she was not cross-examined,
I find that Ms
Botros had a short period off work following the accident, being to 4 January
2019. She then commenced work in a part-time
capacity, before returning to work
full time in or around early 2019 when she was certified to have capacity to
work 40 hours per
week. This was in a new role. She subsequently sought new
employment at an unspecified time at St Andrew’s College, allegedly
because of the impact of her accident caused injuries on her ability to work;
(c) she was able to and did lodge a claim for statutory benefits on 11 December
2018, being within the statutory timeframe;
(d) she sought legal advice from solicitors within three weeks of the accident.
This advice clearly stated that she only had three
years in which to make a
claim for damages. She was advised the time limits were very important and to
diarise these. She was also
advised to contact her solicitors if her injuries
worsened. This part of the advice was emphasised by being underlined;
(e) the legal advice also set out a table with examples of minor injuries. It
explained that a minor injury is one not likely to
persist beyond six months
after the accident;
(f) Ms Botros’s psychological injuries are said to have progressively got
worse, resulting in her attending a psychologist
in 2021 and being diagnosed
with major depressive disorder, and
(g) Ms Botros’s physical injuries are said to have progressively
deteriorated, resulting in several specialist referrals throughout
2019 to 2022.
Botros’s evidence is that she understood the 2018 legal advice. Analogous
, there is no basis for concluding that Ms Botros did not receive
prompt and competent legal
It is accepted that Ms
Botros was aware of the time limitations shortly after the accident. This is not
a matter where Ms Botros’s
claim is out of time because her lawyer has
allowed this to happen. Rather, Ms Botros was advised by her solicitor as to the
of the limitation period. She ignored that advice.
Botros reports that the insurer kept attempting to close her file, despite her
continuing difficulties with her injuries. In October
2019, the insurer
attempted to finalise her claim. Ms Botros asked that her claim be re-opened and
noted the difficulties she was
having with her injuries. A similar email
exchange occurred in November 2019 and again in November 2020.
August 2021, the insurer again sought to close Ms Botros’s claim. While Ms
Botros responded on the same date to advise that
she was attempting to obtain
legal advice, her evidence is that she did not end up seeking legal advice.
email exchanges with the insurer occurred after six months following the
accident. Ms Botros refers to developing issues directly
related to the injuries
sustained in the accident. I find that a reasonable person in Ms Botros’s
position would have reached
out to her solicitor at this time to seek an opinion
as to whether her injuries still fell outside the definition of “minor
injury”, noting the definition provided in the 2018 legal advice.
respect of her developing psychological injuries, Ms Botros states that she
commenced seeing a psychologist in 2021. Ms Botros’s
statement in this
regard simply notes:
“She diagnosed me as suffering from
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. One of the things we spoke about was the fact
to avoid anything to do with the accident. Ms Ali has advised me that
this is one of the symptoms associated with Post Traumatic
is otherwise no elaboration or further evidence to support this statement or how
the impact of the claimant’s alleged
suffering of post-traumatic stress
disorder impacted her behaviour in relation to her damages claim.
note that the letter dated 1 September 2021 from Ms Ali does not refer to
post-traumatic stress disorder or any avoidant behaviour.
Rather, it diagnosed
“major depressive disorder, single episode moderate adjustment disorder
with depressed mood”.
letter of Ms Ali dated 5 September 2023 also does not diagnose post-traumatic
stress disorder, but rather diagnoses persistent
depressive disorder and notes
“Ursula also displays symptoms that are suggestive of post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD),
such as intrusive thoughts, flashbacks, hyperarousal,
and emotional numbing”. There is again no reference to avoidant behaviour.
note that Medical Assessor Verma certified that she disagreed with a diagnosis
of post-traumatic stress disorder for several reasons,
including that Ms Botros
did not report any intrusive symptoms, nightmares, flashbacks, distressing
memories or any intense or prolonged
psychological distress or psychological
reactions to internal or external cues, nor did she show significant avoidance
any event, as Ms Botros’s diagnosis of major depressive disorder in
September 2021 was a new injury said to be caused by
the accident, it is unclear
why she did not seek legal advice at this time or shortly after.
respect of her developing physical injuries, Ms Botros’s evidence is that
she was referred to Dr McKenchie in 2019, 2020
and 2022, and Dr Suthersan in
2021. Surgery was recommended to Ms Botros in September 2022. She was also
referred to a pain management
specialist at this time.
legal advice provided to Ms Botros in 2018 would have put a reasonable person in
the position of Ms Botros on notice that, if
her injuries persisted beyond six
months, they may fall outside the definition of minor injury. Further, a
reasonable person in the
position of Ms Botros, comparing her injuries with
those in the example table, would have been on notice that her injuries may fall
outside the definition of minor injury such that she could make a claim for
current circumstances can be distinguished from
Blackburn v Allianz Insurance
Australia Ltd
(2004) 61 NSWLR 632
[2004] NSWCA 385
as here Ms Botros knew
of the need to make an application for damages, and the time limits for doing
so, within three weeks of the
accident. The circumstances of Ms Botros can also
be distinguished from the position of the claimant in
Botros was aware she had a potential claim in damages if her injuries were not
“minor injuries”.
to the circumstances in
, Ms Botros had been informed of the time
limit which she was required to comply. She experienced recurrent symptoms, the
of which became gradually more apparent to her, and yet she failed to
make a claim which she knew should have been made within three
years of her
I accept Ms Botros’s submissions that her solicitor advised she had minor
injuries, I note that this was stated to be
her solicitor’s
“preliminary view”. Her solicitor also emphasised that Ms Botros
should be in contact should her
injuries worsen. There is no real explanation
provided as to why Ms Botros ignored both the advice in respect of the
limitation period
and the advice in respect of contacting the solicitors if her
injuries got worse until August 2023.
accept that Ms Botros was dealing with her injuries throughout the period from
the accident in November 2018 to when she lodged
her claim for damages in August
2023. However, I do not accept that a reasonable person in her position, being a
person who was on
notice of the relevant time limitations, able to work
full-time, and whose symptoms from the effects of her injuries had not
but had in fact worsened, would continue to delay obtaining legal
advice or lodging a claim.
the period from the date of the accident to August 2023, Ms Botros managed to
action other aspects of her claim, including
responding to emails from the
insurer, submitting treatment and care requests and lodging internal reviews.
She also managed to lodge
a claim for statutory benefits within the requisite
timeframe and seek legal advice within three weeks of the accident.
6.2 requires examination of what a reasonable person in the position of the
claimant would have done. It is not a question
of whether the claimant had a
bona fide belief that her injuries were not sufficient to make a damages claim.
Rather, would a reasonable
person, whose injuries have allegedly been getting
worse, ignored the possibility that they may be considered no longer to be
injuries” and taken the very basic step of getting back into
to have been
justified in experiencing a delay of almost five years from the date of the
accident before seeking further legal advice
or lodging a damages claim
find that Ms Botros’s behaviour, viewed holistically, point to a failure
on her part to measure up to the standard of the
reasonable person in her
position, such that they would not have been justified in experiencing the same
note Ms Botros’s submissions that the insurer has not suffered prejudice
by the delay. As noted by Gleeson CJ in
, what the MAI Act requires
is a satisfactory explanation that justifies the delay, not demonstration that
the delay caused no harm.
event, I respectfully note the comments Gleeson CJ as to the potential prejudice
that may be caused to insurers due to a late
I have accepted that Ms Botros’s explanation is “full”, I do
not consider it to be “satisfactory”
because I have found that a
reasonable person in her position would not have been justified in experiencing
the same delay.
Botros has not provided a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in
making a claim for damages in accordance with ss 6.2
and 6.14 of the MAI Act.
the preliminary conference on 29 August 2025, I directed the parties to file
further submissions which should deal with the issue
this direction, neither party provided submissions addressing costs.
the circumstances and noting the work undertaken by the claimant’s
solicitors in preparing this application, I find it is
appropriate to allow
costs in accordance with Schedule 1, Part 1 of the Motor Accident Injury
Regulation 2017, being $2,031 plus
It is noted that the
claimant’s submissions are dated “3 September 2015”. It is
assumed this is a typographical
error and the year should read
claimant’s submissions dated 3 September 2025 at [26].
See sub-s 6.14(3) of the MAI
See sub-s 6.14(5)(b) of
the MAI Act.
(2009) 78 NSWLR 161
[2009] NSWCA 408
Russo v Aiello
[2003] HCA 53
per Gleeson
at [64], [108],
See the comments in
at [65]-[66].
See the discussion in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (619 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter