URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fathullah v Varma (RLD) [2013] NSWADTAP 39 (8 August 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Fathullah v Varma (RLD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 39
Hearing Date(s):
22 May 2013
Decision Date:
08 August 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
M Chesterman, Deputy President
D Bluth, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
1. (a) The appeal against the Tribunal's decision given on 15 November 2012
is allowed.
(b) The order made in that decision is set aside and the
following order made: 'The Respondents are to pay to the Appellant the sum
$23,950.39, comprising $20,550 as principal and $3,400.39 as interest.'
(a) The appeal against the Tribunal's decision given on 23 January 2013 is
(b) The order made in that decision is set aside and the following
order made: 'The Respondents are to pay to the Appellant the sum
of $8,239 in
respect of the costs of the proceedings.'
3. The Respondents are to pay to
the Appellant the sum of $9,044 in respect of the costs of these appeal
proceedings.
Catchwords:
Retail lease - failure by lessor to grant possession - assessment of
damages payable to lessee - costs
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Business Names Registration
Legal Profession Act 2004
Local Court, Practice Note Civ
Retail Leases Act 1994
Suitors' Fund Act 1951
Cases Cited:
ACN 079 830 596 Pty Ltd (trading as Jolly Joe's Fish 'n' Chips) v Wallis
Lake Fishermen's Co-operative Ltd
[2007] NSWADT 297
Ali v Nationwide News
[2008] NSWCA 183
B & L Linings Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (No 5) (RD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 21
B & L Linings Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue (No 6) (RD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 26
Professionals Board v Hans (GD)
[2008] NSWADTAP 13
Commonwealth of Australia
v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1992) 174 CLR 64
Coogee Bay Village
Pty Ltd v Profilio (No 2) (RLD)
[2011] NSWADTAP 67
Cripps v G & M Dawson
[2006] NSWCA 81
Fathullah v Varma
[2012] NSWADT 237
Fathullah v
Varma (No 2)
[2013] NSWADT 13
G & M Dawson Pty Ltd v Cripps & Ors
[2004] NSWADTAP 38
Hull v Thompson
[2001] NSWCA 359
Jonamill Pty
Ltd v Alramon Pty Ltd (No 2) (RLD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 3
Karacominakis v Big
Country Developments Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
O'Neill v Henry (RLD)
NSWADTAP 40
Sarker and anor v World Best Holdings Limited and anor
Torchia v Swanton (RLD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 5
Trowbridge v Morris
[2010] NSWADTAP 70
Uszok v Henley Properties (NSW) Pty Ltd
World Best Holdings Limited v Sarker
[2010] NSWCA 24
Principal judgment
Nihad Fathullah (Appellant)
Arun Deo Varma (First Respondent)
Kamlush Deo Varma (Second Respondent)
Aranesh Deo Varma (Third
Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
H Soltan (Agent for Appellant)
A D Varma (In person, and as agent for
Second and Third Respondents)
File Number(s):
129040, 139006
Decision Under Appeal
Retail Leases Division
- Citation:
Fathullah v Varma
[2012] NSWADT 237Fathullah
v Varma (No 2)
[2013] NSWADT
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
decision relates to appeals filed against two decisions of the Retail Leases
Division of the Tribunal. They were delivered on
15 November 2012 and 23 January
2013 respectively.
the first of them,
Fathullah v Varma
[2012] NSWADT 237
('the principal
decision'), the Tribunal held that the Applicant, Nihad Fathullah, was entitled
to recover damages totalling $9,658.38
(which included a sum of $646.38 on
account of interest) from the Respondents, Arun Deo Varma (hereafter 'Mr Varma')
, Kamlush Deo
Varma and Aranesh Deo Varma. The hearing on which this decision
was based had taken place on 5 October 2012.
the second,
Fathullah v Varma (No 2)
[2013] NSWADT 13
('the costs
decision'), the Tribunal rejected an application by Mr Fathullah for the costs
of the proceedings and ordered that the
parties should bear their own costs. The
Tribunal arrived at this decision 'on the papers', i.e., without a hearing. It
account submissions on costs that Mr Fathullah had filed, but it had
received no submissions within the specified period from the
Respondents.
the proceedings in the Tribunal, Mr Haney Soltan has represented the Appellant,
in the capacity of an agent. Mr Varma has
represented himself and acted as the
agent for the Second and Third Respondents (who are his sons).
Relevant procedural matters
a Notice of Appeal filed on 10 December 2012, Mr Fathullah appealed against the
principal decision. He did not question any aspect
of the Tribunal's
determination that the Respondents were liable to pay damages to him. But he
maintained that on account of certain
errors of law, the amount awarded by the
Tribunal was insufficient.
Notice included an application for leave to be granted for the appeal to extend
to the merits under
section 113(2)(b)
Administrative Decisions
Tribunal Act
30 January 2013, the Respondents filed a Notice of Reply to Appeal. In it, they
disputed certain aspects of the Notice of Appeal
and alleged that they had
themselves suffered financial loss on account of Mr Fathullah's conduct.
Respondents claimed also that the Notice of Appeal had been filed out of time.
This claim, which was not pressed subsequently,
is clearly unfounded, since the
Notice was filed within the period of 28 days allowed by
section 113(3)
7 February 2013, Mr Fathullah filed submissions relating to his appeal against
the principal decision, together with submissions
contesting the correctness of
the costs decision.
a directions hearing on 18 February 2013, the Appeal Panel directed as follows:
(a) any notice of appeal against the costs decision
(this having been
foreshadowed by Mr Soltan) should be filed within 48 hours; (b) within 21 days,
the Respondents should file and
serve either a notice of cross-appeal (which Mr
Varma had foreshadowed) or a notice that they did not wish to institute such a
proceeding;
(c) within 28 days, the Respondents should file and serve their
submissions relating to both the principal decision and the costs
decision; and
(d) on 22 May 2013, a one-day hearing of all appeals that had been instituted
should take place.
a second Notice of Appeal filed on 20 February 2013, Mr Fathullah filed a Notice
of Appeal relating to the costs decision.
8 March 2013, the Respondents filed a one-page handwritten document stating that
they wished to file a cross appeal and that they
sought leave to file 'the
documents' within seven days. Save in this respect, the Respondents did not
comply with the directions
to file and serve documents given on 18 February
9 May 2013, Mr Varma advised the Registry by fax that the Respondents sought
leave to vacate the hearing date, on the ground that
he would not be available.
He proposed that the matter be listed before the Appeal Panel on or after 12
Registry, having contacted Mr Soltan to ascertain Mr Fathullah's response to
this request, left a message on Mr Varma's telephone.
This was to the effect
that Mr Fathullah did not consent to it, that any further request for an
adjournment should be put before
the Appeal Panel at the commencement of the
hearing and that reasons in support of an adjournment should be furnished.
hearing of Mr Fathullah's appeal took place before us on 22 May 2013. Mr Soltan
was present at the hearing. Mr Varma's attendance
was by telephone.
the start of the hearing, Mr Varma repeated his application for an adjournment.
He alleged that he did not receive any communication
from the Registry about his
prior request. He also indicated that he wished to put on further evidence. His
submissions did not include
any reasons why the hearing should be adjourned. Mr
Soltan advised us that Mr Fathullah maintained his opposition to any
adjournment.
given consideration to the matter, we ruled that Mr Varma's request to adjourn
should be refused and that the hearing should
the hearing, we granted leave to Mr Fathullah to adduce, by way of fresh
evidence, a witness statement signed by him on 27
November 2012. With the
assistance of an interpreter, he attested to the truth of this statement and was
briefly cross-examined by
Mr Varma. In addition, Mr Soltan addressed us on both
of the appeals brought by Mr Fathullah and Mr Varma addressed us relatively
briefly with regard to Mr Fathullah's appeal against the principal decision.
the conclusion of the hearing, we gave leave to Mr Varma to file and serve, on
or before 19 June 2013, any further submissions
that the Respondents might wish
to advance on either or both of the appeals, and we directed that any
submissions in reply by Mr
Fathullah should be filed and served by 3 July
accordance with these directions, submissions from both sides have been filed,
and have been taken into consideration in the preparation
of the reasons that
THE APPEAL AGAINST THE PRINCIPAL DECISION
Outline of facts
following outline of the facts relevant to this appeal is chiefly drawn from
paragraphs [1] to [16] of the principal decision.
Respondents were the owners of retail shop premises located in Liverpool ('the
Premises').
some point during 2011, Mr Fathullah discovered that the Premises were available
for lease. On 6 August 2011 he paid the sum of
$3,700 into the trust account of
the Respondents' agents, PRD Nationwide Cabramatta ('PRD'). This amount is
slightly less than the
monthly amount for rent that the parties later agreed
23 August 2011, the Respondents' solicitors forwarded disclosure documents, a
retail tenancy guide and a draft lease to PRD. The
Lessor's Disclosure Statement
prepared on behalf of the Respondents relevantly indicated as follows: (a) the
estimated handover date
for the Premises was to be 28 September 2011; (b) the
Premises were to be used as a mixed business and grocery store; (c) the term
the lease was to be for a period of 3 years; (d) the annual rent was to be
$45,000 plus GST; and (e) there would be an initial
three week rent free period.
the Lessor's Disclosure Statement, a question as to whether there were 'current
legal proceedings in relation to the lawful use
of' the Premises was given the
following answer:-
Yes - Challenge to mortgagee's default enforcement judgment in the
Supreme Court.
22 September 2011, having received these documents from PRD, Mr Fathullah signed
the Lessee's Disclosure Statement.
a letter to Mr Fathullah's solicitor dated 6 or 26 October 2011 (the date is not
clear on the copy tendered to the Tribunal), the
Respondents' solicitors
enclosed duplicate copies of a lease for signature by Mr Fathullah and indicated
(inter alia) that a bank
cheque for three months' rent was required from him.
They also stated as follows:-
The Lease is conditional upon successful outcome of lessors' action
in the Supreme Court to set aside Mortgagee (
) default judgment with
regard to the property subject of the Lease.
executed the memorandum of lease (hereafter 'the Lease'), received a key from
PRD and paid them a further sum of $7,500, Mr
Fathullah took possession of the
Premises on or about 19 November 2011. The commencement date shown on the Lease
was 24 October 2011.
an email dated 22 November 2011 to PRD, Mr Varma advised them that Mr Fathullah
had 'moved in', having claimed to have paid them
'2 plus 1 months rent'. He
asked PRD whether they had 'the Deposit and the Bank Guarantee in order' and
requested that they deposit
two months' rent into the Respondents' nominated
account 'by today'.
Subsequently,
PRD forwarded a payment of rent to the Respondents and also applied part of the
funds received from Mr Fathullah to
payment of their 'letting fee' and other
order to prepare for trading, the Applicant purchased a counter, shelving and a
hot food bar and set about having these items installed.
the end of his first week of occupation, there was heavy rain. It caused the
ceiling of the toilet inside the Premises to
collapse partially. This in turn
allowed water to penetrate into the Premises.
29 November 2011, a postal envelope addressed to the Respondents was delivered
to Mr Fathullah at the Premises whilst he was undertaking
his fit out work. He
passed it on to the Second or the Third Respondent, who opened the envelope in
Mr Fathullah's presence and made
observations leading him to understand that he
needed to speak to Mr Varma about the Premises. He gained the impression that
had been some form of communication of an adverse nature from the
Respondents' mortgagee.
the following day, Mr Varma told Mr Fathullah to cease using the Premises or
undertaking any activities within it. He claimed that
the Respondents needed to
have their insurance company repair the damage that had been caused by the rain.
Following this conversation,
Mr Fathullah returned the original set of keys to
or about 2 December 2011, Mr Fathullah obtained a bank guarantee in the sum of
$12,375 in favour of the Respondents.
legal proceedings referred to in the Lessors' Disclosure Statement and in the
letter of 26 October 2011 from the Respondents'
solicitors to Mr Fathullah's
solicitor did not conclude favourably for the Respondents.
to be admitted back into the Premises, Mr Fathullah continued unsuccessfully to
ask about progress with the repairs that he
understood to have been required by
the Respondents' insurer.
24 January 2012, he tried to enter the Premises, using a copy key. But he
discovered that the locks had been changed. At about
this time, he learnt that
the change had been effected by the Sheriff, as a result of action taken by the
Respondents' mortgagee.
Fathullah succeeded later in recovering the sum of $2,950 from PRD. While giving
evidence before the Tribunal, he conceded that
he was also able to recover the
hot food bar, counter and shelving from the mortgagee.
The claims advanced by the parties
his Application, filed on 27 August 2012, Mr Fathullah sought from the Tribunal
an order for payment of the sum of $8,250, representing
the balance of the rent
that he had paid to PRD and had not been refunded.
24 September 2012, after he had received assistance from Mr Soltan, he filed an
Amended Application. This included additional claims
of $7,500 for lost fixtures
and fittings, $760 for the cost of mediation and $21,450 for the loss of 33
weeks' wages.
a letter sent by Mr Varma to the Tribunal on 29 August 2012, the Respondents
made a claim for 'balance of rental payments due in
an amount of $11,250, and a
further amount for interest'. A number of documents relating to the dispute
between the parties were
attached to this letter.
2 October 2012, the Respondents filed a document entitled 'Amended Application
for Original Decision'. It set out claims for 'liquidated
and unliquidated
damages for the sum of $13,800' and 'compensation for the sum of $300,000' and
sought an order to 'restrain Applicant
(Nihad) from entering and causing any
future disruptions to our principle (
) place of business and
residence".
The issue of liability
Tribunal's reasons.
It was not disputed that the Lease was governed by the
Retail Leases Act
the principal decision, the Tribunal dealt relatively briefly with questions of
liability. The relevant passages are at paragraphs
[6] and [26 - 30] of its
[26] and [28], it described the claims made by the Respondents as 'nebulous' and
'fanciful' and 'not supported by any cogent evidence'.
The reasons that it gave
(at [27 - 28]) were as follows:-
27 The Respondents claim an entitlement to payment of rent from the
Applicant in circumstances where at no time was exclusive possession
use and enjoyment of the Premises given to the Applicant. The Respondents say
that the reason why the Applicant was unable
to return to the Premises was due
to his breach of the lease agreement in not providing an insurance certificate
and a security deposit,
but this alleged reason was never communicated to the
Applicant; it is also contradicted by the fact that the Applicant was allowed
into possession of the Premises in order to effect installation of fittings
during a three week rent holiday period but subsequently
was asked to leave the
Premises to permit repairs to take place and was unable to again re-enter due to
locks being changed by the
Respondents' mortgagee.
28 The Respondents' claim that it was the Applicant's failures which caused
the Premises to be taken by their mortgagee is fanciful.
There is simply no
evidence to support such an assertion. Further, it is quite clear from the very
documents which were provided
by the Respondents to the Tribunal that the
Respondents' bank had taken legal proceedings against them for previous alleged
and that it was likely to seek to take possession of the Premises some
time shortly after the Applicant had entered into the subject
[6], the Tribunal dismissed a specific argument that the Respondents had
advanced by way of defence to Mr Fathullah's claim:-
6 Despite the Respondents' submission made during the hearing that
the Respondents' stated requirements were not met by the Applicant
suitable security for rent was provided, it should be here noted that the
Tribunal is satisfied from the evidence that
a Bank Guarantee dated 2 December
2011 in the sum of $12,375 was obtained by the Applicant in favour of the
Respondents and that,
in accordance with
section 16B
Retail Leases Act
this form of security was valid and appropriate.
[29 - 30], it endorsed, in very brief terms, one of the grounds on which Mr
Fathullah claimed that the Respondents were liable
29 It is clear from the evidence that the Applicant executed the
lease documents which were provided to him on behalf of the Respondents,
that these executed documents were provided to the Respondents' agent who then
allowed the Applicant into possession of the Premises
pursuant to the terms of
the lease agreement between the parties in order to undertake the agreed fit out
30... Due to the Respondents' mortgagee taking possession of the Premises,
preceded by the Respondents' request that the Applicant
vacate the Premises
during the rent free period, the Applicant simply did not obtain any
consideration for the rent payments made
Fathullah's submissions.
In his submissions to us, Mr Soltan did not
question the Tribunal's decision that the Respondents were liable to pay damages
Fathullah. He did however claim, in the course of challenging the
Tribunal's assessment of the damages payable, that it erred in
not holding the
Respondents liable on three further grounds in addition to total failure of
consideration: namely, equitable fraud,
pre-lease misrepresentation under
and misleading or deceptive conduct under
sections 62D
of this Act.
to Mr Soltan, the Tribunal had erred in not dealing at all with these grounds,
even though they had been elaborated in supplementary
written submissions that
he had filed after the Tribunal hearing. Accompanying those submissions was a
copy of a Supreme Court judgment,
reported as
Perpetual Trustee Company
Limited v Varma
[2011] NSWSC 1322.
This revealed that on 21 October 2011 the
Court had dismissed a Notice of Motion that the Respondents had filed, seeking
setting aside a default judgment that the mortgagee had obtained
against them in proceedings for possession of the Premises and (b)
granting them
leave to file a cross claim. Mr Soltan pointed out that this judgment was
delivered three days before the date of commencement
stipulated in the Lease to
Mr Fathullah.
the principal decision at [23- 24], the Tribunal mentioned that at the
conclusion of its hearing it had rejected an application
by Mr Soltan to file
supplementary submissions, that Mr Soltan had nonetheless filed such
submissions, that the Respondents had done
likewise, but that neither of these
sets of submissions added anything to the evidence or oral submissions that the
parties had provided
and that they should not have been filed.
Respondents' submissions.
Mr Varma submitted at the hearing that Mr
Fathullah had not complied with the terms of the lease, in particular through
rent as required, and that if the mortgagee had not obtained
possession of the Premises the Respondents would have terminated the
submitted also (as we understood him) that the Disclosure Statement placed on Mr
Fathullah, as lessee, the duty of checking
the situation with regard to
possession of the Premises.
his submissions filed after the hearing, Mr Varma did not supplement these
submissions in any way.
conclusions.
For several reasons - including that the Respondents did not
file a Notice of Appeal or any documentary evidence purporting to substantiate
these claims - this challenge by them to the Tribunal's decision on liability is
wholly unmeritorious.
deal below with Mr Soltan's claim that the Tribunal should have taken into
consideration the supplementary submissions that he
had filed and held, as
argued in those submissions, that the conduct of the Respondents had amounted to
equitable fraud, pre-lease
misrepresentation and misleading or deceptive
The issue of damages
[30], the Tribunal held that Mr Fathullah was entitled to recover the full
amount of the rent that he had paid to the Respondents.
Since this amount was
$11,200 and he had received only $2,950 from PRD by way of repayment, the
Tribunal's award of damages to him
included the balance ($8,250).
[37], the Tribunal held that Mr Fathullah should also recover the amount of a
fee ($760) that he paid for an unsuccessful mediation
of his dispute with the
Respondents that had been conducted by the Registrar of Retail Tenancy Disputes
, Division 2 of the
remainder of the total award of $9,656.38 determined by the Tribunal comprised
interest on these two amounts from 19 November
2011 to the date of the principal
noted earlier, the grounds of Mr Fathullah's appeal concerned the quantification
of the damages payable to him. They stemmed from
the Tribunal's rejection of a
number of additional heads of damage for which he had sought compensation.
is convenient to deal with these heads of damage one by one, outlining the
Tribunal's rulings on each of them, the basis on which
Mr Fathullah challenged
these rulings, the competing arguments put by the Respondents and our
conclusions.
Cost of fixtures and fittings
Tribunal's reasons.
At [31 - 32], the Tribunal gave the following reasons
for rejecting Mr Fathullah's claim, in his Amended Application, for an amount
$7,500 representing the cost of the fixtures and fittings that he had
installed:-
31 The Applicant seeks payment of a sum of $7,500 in respect of
fixtures and fittings. Of this amount, a sum of $600 is said to refer
items" in respect of which no satisfactory evidence of has been provided to
establish the nature or cost of such items.
This component of the claim cannot
therefore be allowed.
32 The balance amount of $6,900 relating to fixtures and fittings is for the
claimed costs of a counter, hot food bar and shelves.
A receipt from Petra
Equipment in the sum of $400 being the cost of the hot food bar was placed into
evidence, as was a hand written
piece of paper which seems to be dated 22
February 2012 from someone called "Yacine.a" which refers to sale which took
place at Liverpool
of "46 bays with 6 shelves" for a total amount of $3,500. In
relation to the counter, a receipt dated 3 February 2012 from a person
indicating that on that date there was a cash payment of $3,000 made by "Nehad",
was put into evidence. These post dated and
somewhat vague receipts are clearly
an unsatisfactory basis for establishing any loss suffered by the Applicant.
What further complicates
this component of the claim is that, during giving
evidence at the hearing, the Applicant conceded that he been able to
successfully
recover these items from the mortgagee. There was no further
evidence as to what the Applicant had done with these items or whether
items had subsequently been sold or otherwise utilised by him. In these
circumstances, there is simply insufficient evidence
to establish the extent of
any loss suffered by the Applicant in relation to the fixtures or fittings which
were installed at the
further aspects of the evidence on this question are usefully mentioned here.
Mr Fathullah's affidavit contained assertions by him that he paid the amounts
claimed in respect of the hot food bar ($400),
the shelves ($3,500) and the
counter ($3,000). These assertions were not challenged in cross-examination or
contradicted in the Respondents'
the evidence included a number of photographs showing the counter and shelves in
place at the Premises. The Tribunal accepted
that they had been taken during the
week commencing 21 November 2011.
on the receipt for $3,000 signed 'Raj' and referring to the counter, the surname
'Singh' is discernible. The relevance of
this will appear shortly.
Fathullah's case in the appeal.
In the witness statement that we admitted
into evidence at the hearing of the appeal (see [18] above), Mr Fathullah
testified as follows:
(a) during June 2012, he retrieved his fixtures and
fittings from the mortgagee of the Premises; (b) he stored them until November
2012 in a garage belonging to a friend, Muhaini Ismail; (c) he paid a total of
$1,000 in cash as removal and storage fees; and (d)
on or about 5 November 2012,
he sold the fixtures and fittings to M & N Halal Meat & Indo Pak
Groceries for the sum of $3,000.
to this witness statement were (i) a statement by Mr Ismail that he rented his
garage to Mr Fathullah from June to November
2012 at a monthly rental of $200;
(ii) a statement by Tahsin Syed, on the letterhead of M & N Halal Meat &
Indo Pak Groceries,
that on an unspecified date he bought 'a service counter and
the shelves' from Mr Fathullah for $3,000; and (ii) a copy of a photograph
according to Mr Fathullah, showed the counter and shelves after their
installation in Mr Tahsin's premises.
cross-examination by Mr Varma, Mr Fathullah stated that he had advertised the
fixtures and fittings for sale on a website and
that Mr Tahsin had responded to
this advertisement.
his submissions, Mr Soltan argued that the Tribunal had erred in law in stating
at [32] that 'These post dated and somewhat vague
receipts are clearly an
unsatisfactory basis for establishing any loss suffered by the Applicant'. He
claimed that this reflected
'a legally erroneous view that a post dated receipt
for a service will disentitle the recipient of the receipt from using it as a
basis to quantify his loss'.
submitted also that (a) the photos tendered by Mr Fathullah depicted the service
counter that had been purchased, (b) 'common sense'
led to the conclusion that
'this service counter has incurred cost to the Applicant' and (c) it was
'natural' that the receipt for
the counter should be post-dated.
response to a claim (made in Mr Varma's submissions filed after the hearing)
that the cost of the counter was only $600, Mr Soltan
argued that the
photographs were sufficient in themselves to show that the counter must have
cost significantly more than that amount.
reference to the observations made by the Tribunal (at [32]) about Mr
Fathullah's retrieval of the hot food bar, shelves and
counter from the
mortgagee, Mr Soltan argued as follows: (a) in view particularly of the
Respondents' conduct in granting a lease
to Mr Fathullah when they knew that in
all probability the mortgagee would take possession of the Premises, he should
have been awarded
the full value of these items, without being subject to any
duty to try to resell them; (b) it was not his fault that he did not
selling these items until after the Tribunal's hearing; and (c) if the amount
obtained on his resale of them did have
to be taken into account, his witness
statement provided sufficient evidence to enable the Appeal Panel to calculate
how much should
be deducted from his costs incurred in purchasing them.
this basis, Mr Soltan maintained, as his primary submission, that we should
award under this head of damages the total figure of
$6,900 spent by Mr
Fathullah in purchasing the hot food bar, shelves and counter. In the
alternative, he maintained that the proceeds
of the sale of these items ($3,000)
should be deducted from the claim, but the cost of storage ($1,000) should be
added to it, producing
a figure of $4,900. He further submitted that interest
should be added.
support of these submissions, Mr Soltan cited the Appeal Panel's decision in
O'Neill v Henry (RLD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 40.
In this case, a sublessee of
retail shop premises (Mr O'Neill) who had been locked out of them unlawfully by
the sublessor (Mr Henry)
claimed damages representing (amongst other things) the
cost of equipment that he had recently purchased ('Head 2') and the value
stock on hand ('Head 3'). At [46 - 58], the Panel dealt as follows with these
heads of damage:-
Reassessment of Heads 2 and 3
46 On both of these matters, Mr O'Neill's submissions are: there was
uncontested evidence as to the value of the goods, most of which
were purchased
within a relatively short time prior to the lockout; he had been denied access,
by virtue of the lockout, to the goods,
thus denying him an opportunity to have
them valued; any alleged difficulty in having them valued should not be a bar to
given that the courts have acknowledged that difficulty in quantifying
damages is no bar to recovery. As to the last point, the submissions
Australian Commercial Law
(23rd ed), 203 which cites
[1971] HCA 52
(1971) 124 CLR 303
at 308 per Menzies J;
[1911] 2 KB 796; and
Howe v Teefy
[1927] NSWStRp 41
(1927) 27 SR (NSW) 301.
47 We will begin with Head 3, and then turn to Head 2, where there is a
difference of opinion.
. Mr O'Neill's first affidavit filed in the proceedings
referred to the loss of the 'value of food and like items' and said, as to
amount, 'not yet ascertained'. At this point, there was no satisfactory evidence
of loss. In his second affidavit (Ex B), he
attached what he described as a
'true copy of a list of food and other stock which was on the Premises at the
time I was locked out'.
He said 'I have put the list together from my records
and memory of what was in the Premises and have priced the stock and other
from purchase records and from my recollection of the costs thereof'. He claimed
a total of $6,320. The main item was for drinks
49 He did not file any business records, receipts or other documentation
supporting the stock claims. Mr O'Neill's solicitor asked
him at hearing to
explain why he did not have any formal financial records and had not completed a
tax return re the business. He
said that he was waiting for these proceedings to
come up, and that left in the shop was a drawer full of invoices that he would
need to file tax returns (tspt, 16/03/09, 11.04).
50 This explanation was not rejected. It is a plausible explanation, and
should be accepted. In our view, no serious issue as to present
value arises.
These are all items of a usual kind in a business of this type. There is a mix
of perishable (e.g. food ingredients)
and non-perishable items (e.g. bottled
soft drinks). He was not challenged on these valuations. In our view, Mr O'Neill
compensated in full for the items claimed under this head.
. Mr O'Neill's proof is contained in his second affidavit (Ex
B), at annexure 'B'. They are all, in our view, items of a usual kind
business of this type. He states at para 11 of his affidavit that the amounts he
gives represent their 'approximate value'.
Receipts were provided for
approximately $4,600 worth of the amount claimed.
53 There is a division of views on whether any damages should be awarded to
Mr O'Neill in respect of these items. The amounts claimed
by Mr O'Neill are
supported by receipts. They show the purchase price of the various items, and
these amounts are claimed.
President's Opinion
. As the subject items were ones used in the
business, they would, I think, have lost much of their value by the time of the
In my view, Mr O'Neill got the benefit of his expenditure during the
entire period his business was a going concern. It was not 'wasted
expenditure'
in the way identified by cases such as
Amann Aviation
Commonwealth Disposals Commission
[1951] HCA 79
(1951) 84 CLR 377.
55 As noted earlier, the Tribunal found that Mr O'Neill had ceased to operate
the business as at the date of the lockout. It is not
appropriate for there to
be an award compensating a tenant in these circumstances for the original price
paid for the equipment.
Such an award would deliver him a windfall exceeding his
actual loss.
56 Subject to adequate proof, Mr O'Neill would, I consider, be entitled to
the present value of those items. I do not consider it
appropriate for me to
attempt an estimate as to the likely value of used goods of this type. This is a
matter, it seems to me, that
could have been the subject of evidence from Mr
O'Neill as a person with some experience in the industry. None was provided. I
not think I should hazard my own guess. It is likely, I suspect, that most of
the items would have had little or no market value.
So for different reasons to
the Tribunal below, I would also not make any award in respect of Head 2.
57 My colleague, Judicial Member Molloy, has a different view. As the
difference is one of law, and the judicial members are equally
divided, my
opinion, as President, must prevail. See
Judicial Member Molloy's Opinion
. The claim for loss of the "value
of food and like items" is made by the owner/proprietor of the business (see Mr
O'Neill's second
affidavit). It was not traversed by either respondent and Mr
O'Neill was not cross-examined on the matter. Both Mr O'Neill and Mr
in the same business and would be expected to know, or be able to express an
educated opinion on, this issue. Thus, absent
some disentitling factor, Mr
O'Neill's evidence ought to be accepted. It is unremarkable and within his
knowledge. In my view this
head of damage should be allowed in full.
Soltan placed particular reliance on paragraphs [46], [50], [53], [54] and
Respondents' case in the appeal.
In their Notice of Reply to Appeal, the
Respondents maintained that Mr Fathullah was not entitled to any damages under
this head because
he had removed all his fixtures and fittings from the
Premises. They added that the photographs were 'irrelevant' because they could
have been taken at any time.
the hearing, Mr Varma did not address this issue. In their submissions filed
after the hearing, the Respondents argued that the
Tribunal 'correctly denied'
Mr Fathullah's claim for damages under this head, on the grounds that the
invoices were 'vague and unsatisfactory,
being post-dated and not genuine' and
that he 'failed to provide relevant evidence on actual costs, supported by
authentic documents'.
Respondents also alleged in these submissions that the actual amount paid for
the counter was only $600, not $3,000 as claimed.
They attached to the
submissions a typewritten one-page statement, headed 'To Whom It May Concern'
and displaying the typewritten
words 'R Singh' in a location where one might
expect to find a signature. The gist of the statement was that the maker of it,
been approached by 'Mr Nihad' to provide 'a quote to make a front service
counter and few miscellaneous work' at the Premises, had
quoted a total figure
of $3,000 but had only installed the 'front service counter', for which the sum
of $600 was paid.
conclusions
. We reject this 'tender' by the Respondents, made in appeal
submissions filed by leave after the hearing, of an unsigned document
to provide evidence on a disputed factual matter. We also attach no weight to
their assertion that Mr Fathullah himself
removed the fixtures and fittings
because there is no evidence to support it and the finding of the Tribunal was
that the mortgagee
had removed them.
agree with Mr Soltan that the passage that he cited from
O'Neill v Henry
[2010] NSWADTAP 40
lends significant support to his submissions. It
provides authority for the following propositions: (a) any alleged difficulty in
having Mr Fathullah's goods valued should not be a bar to recovery, given that
the courts have acknowledged that difficulty in quantifying
damages is no bar to
recovery (see
O'Neill v Henry
at [46]); (b) the case for accepting his
evidence on this question is strengthened by the fact that it was not contested,
a very late 'tender' that we have rejected (see [46], [50] and [58]);
and (c) the receipt accompanying his verified evidence as to
the prices that he
paid can and should be taken to constitute sufficient evidence (see [51], [53],
[54] and [58]).
agree also with Mr Soltan's submission that the President's decision in
O'Neill v Henry
against awarding damages under Head 2 was not based on
the informal nature of the evidence as to value adduced by Mr O'Neill, but
the consideration that this evidence related to the value of the goods at the
time of purchase and did not take into account that
through being utilised in
his business they had become 'used goods'. Because Mr Fathullah was compelled to
remove the hot food bar,
shelving and counter from the Premises very soon after
he had installed them, and did not at any stage use them for the purposes
business, this consideration does not arise in the present proceedings.
accordingly conclude that the Tribunal, in ruling at [32] that the 'post dated
and somewhat vague receipts' were 'clearly an unsatisfactory
establishing any loss suffered by the Applicant', did not take sufficient
account of the propositions that we have just
extracted from the Appeal Panel's
decision in
O'Neill v Henry
. They produce the outcome that informal
documentary evidence of a price paid to a supplier of goods or services, coupled
with verified
and unchallenged evidence from the purchaser that this price was
actually paid, should not be ruled out as insufficient evidence
of value in
retail tenancy proceedings in the Tribunal.
stance taken by the Tribunal constitutes a sufficient error, in our opinion, to
warrant granting leave, as sought by Mr Soltan,
for this appeal to extend to the
merits under
section 113(2)(b)
do not, however, accept Mr Soltan's submission that the award of damages to Mr
Fathullah under this head should take no account
of the proceeds of his sale of
the relevant items to M & N Halal Meat & Indo Pak Groceries. To do so
would be in conflict
with the well-established and fundamental principle - to
which the President specifically referred in the final sentence of paragraph
O'Neill v Henry
- that damages should reflect the 'actual loss'
sustained by the person to whom they are awarded. It follows that the amount
by Mr Fathullah through reselling the hot food bar, shelving and
counter and the amount paid by him for storage must be taken into
calculating damages under this head.
the final sentence of paragraph [32] of the principal decision, the Tribunal
observed that by virtue of Mr Fathullah's disclosure
that he had retrieved these
items from the mortgagee, there was 'simply insufficient evidence to establish
the extent of any loss
suffered by the Applicant in relation to the fixtures or
fittings which were installed at the Premises'.
evidence has, however, been put before us, in the form of Mr Fathullah's witness
statement dated 27 November 2012 and his answers
given in cross-examination. It
is undoubtedly relevant to the assessment of the actual loss that he sustained.
Having admitted it,
we are bound to take account of it, because once an appeal
has been extended to the merits, the task of the Appeal Panel is to determine
'what the correct and preferable decision is having regard to the material then
before it' (see
section 115(1)
and the discussion of these matters in
Building Professionals Board v Hans (GD)
[2008] NSWADTAP 13).
the question that we have been considering - namely, Mr Fathullah's claim for
damages representing his loss sustained on account
of purchasing fixtures and
fittings that he intended to use in his business in the Premises - the award
should take the form for
which Mr Soltan argued in the alternative. It should be
for $4,900, representing the purchase price of the goods ($6,900) and the
of their storage ($1,000) less the proceeds of their resale ($3,000).
Loss of wages
Tribunal's reasons.
Mr Fathullah claimed compensation from the Respondents
for wages that he would have earned but for their conduct. The Tribunal rejected
this claim. At [33 - 36], it summarised the evidence on the matter and its
reasons for so deciding:-
33 The Applicant also claims a loss of wages at $650 per week for a
period of 33 weeks from the beginning of November 2011 until the
2012. He claims that when he left his job with MRM Supermarket in order to begin
setting up his new business at the Premises,
he was earning $650 per week.
Within his affidavit evidence, the Applicant says that, in relation to this part
of his claim:
"This experience has left me traumatised emotionally and financially and I
could not resume my normal life for another 4 months".
34 In support of this claim for loss of wages, the Applicant also relies upon
a letter dated 13 September 2012 from a person by the
name of Mahmoud Kahdir who
describes himself as the general manager and proprietor of MRM Supermarket. The
letter states that the
Applicant had worked for Mr Kahdir for one year prior to
31 October 2011 and had "earned a weekly wage of $650". Mr Kahdir further
in his letter that "I'm happy to give evidence to that effect in any court";
however, Mr Kahdir did not attend to give evidence
during the hearing. This
absence is not of itself fatal to the Applicant's claim for loss of earnings,
but may have addressed the
problems outlined below.
35 The claim for loss of earnings is quite unsatisfactory. There is no
apparent reason why payslips or banking records, a group certificate
return have not been provided to the Tribunal to support the amount claimed. It
is also unclear whether the "weekly wage
of $650" is a gross figure or a net
figure. The evidence given by the Applicant does not satisfactorily explain why
he did not return
to MRM Supermarket or to any other type of employment at least
by late January 2012 when it was abundantly clear that he had been
denied access
to the Premises. Within his affidavit as recited above, the Applicant says that
he was unable to return to employment
because he was "traumatised emotionally
and financially"; a quite different reason for the Applicant not returning to
work was put
forward upon his behalf by Mr Soltan, who submitted that the reason
why the Applicant did not return to employment until June 2012
was because his
legal position in relation to the Premises and the lease was unclear.
36 The Tribunal is not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
Applicant has lost the amount claimed nor can the amount
of any loss of income
be determined with any satisfactory precision. Further, the Applicant has failed
to show that he has mitigated
any loss of income. Accordingly, the claim for
loss of income is not allowed.
Fathullah's submissions
. In challenging this decision, Mr Soltan relied
again on the proposition that any difficulty experienced by a court or tribunal
quantifying damages should not be treated as a bar to recovery. As additional
authorities, he cited
Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1992) 174 CLR 64
Uszok v Henley Properties
(NSW) Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 31
second proposition that he repeated was that unchallenged evidence should prima
facie be accepted, unless it has been contradicted
by other evidence or is
inherently illogical or improbable. He referred here to
Hull v Thompson
[2001] NSWCA 359
Ali v Nationwide News Ltd
[2008] NSWCA
specific reference to the Tribunal's observation (at [35]) that there was 'no
apparent reason why payslips or banking records,
a group certificate or a tax
return have not been provided to the Tribunal to support the amount claimed',
and its ruling (at [36])
that the amount of any loss of income could not be
'with any satisfactory precision', Mr Soltan relied on a passage in the
decision in
ACN 079 830 596 Pty Ltd (trading as Jolly Joe's Fish
'n' Chips) v Wallis Lake Fishermen's Co-operative Ltd
[2007] NSWADT 297.
this case, the Tribunal was constituted by its President, O'Connor DCJ, sitting
with two advisory members. The Tribunal found that
the respondent, which was the
lessor of retail shop premises, had unlawfully evicted the applicant lessee in a
manner that it held
to amount to unconscionable conduct. The lessee was, in the
Tribunal's words, 'Mr Morris's family company'. In assessing the damages
paid by the lessor, it said (at [117 - 125]):-
117 Mr Morris presented as an experienced operator of businesses of
fish and chips-type takeaway businesses. Through the years at
the Co-op he had
one regular employee, Mark Davies. His wife assisted as needed. He also engaged
other casuals from time to time,
the main one mentioned in these proceedings
being a Mr McNally. His practices in relation to keeping records of inputs
appeared to
be of a usual kind...
118 He was not able to produce at hearing the original vouchers and till
tapes, or other source documents that had been used by his
accountants. His
evidence was that since being evicted from the takeaway he had moved home. In
the course of the move he left out
for collection four boxes of business
records, including the kind of records sought. His evidence was that they were
mistakenly dumped
by the removalist rather than moved to his new home. The
Tribunal accepts this evidence.
119 There was substantial 'secondary' documentation made available (via a
notice to produce) and before the Tribunal. They included
the earlier statements
prepared by Mr Atkinson and Mr Edmunds that preceded their final reports; and
banking records of electronic
transfers to the Morris's business and personal
bank accounts. The Tribunal has no reason to doubt the evidence of Mr Lindfield
Mr Atkinson that they prepared statements in the usual way relying on
documentation of an appropriate kind supplied by Mr Morris.
Both Mr Lindfield
and Mr Atkinson presented as credible and reliable.
120 Mr Morris acknowledged candidly at a number of points in
cross-examination that his record keeping practices were of a relatively
rudimentary kind, and that, as to the treatment of items of expenditure and
income, he left that to his accountants. He was also
candid in acknowledging
that some of his practices, especially in dealing with payment of the wages and
the like, may have implicated
him in conduct that was not in compliance with
external obligations.
121 In the Tribunal's opinion, it will often be the case that businesses of
the kind under notice in this case will not readily withstand
the 'blowtorch' of
scrutiny across the range of legal obligations that bear on the employment of
staff, maintenance of records, and
taxation requirements. The business was a
small one, it relied on seasonal trade, it dealt overwhelmingly in cash,
customer purchases
would have been, overwhelmingly, in small amounts of cash,
and it employed staff as needed with the exception of one or two regulars.
122 The Tribunal is not in the best position in an inquiry of this kind to
reach final conclusions of the degree of specificity urged
by counsel for the
Co-op in relation to particular issues of legal compliance. The obligations to
which attention was drawn are sometimes
complex, and the ultimate determination
of compliance lies with other regulatory bodies and processes.
123 The Tribunal must, in the end, make the best assessment of all the
evidence before it:
Fink v Fink
[1946] HCA 54
(1946) 74 CLR 127
Co v Permanite Ltd
[1951] 1 KB 422
; and recently,
Uszok v Henley
Properties (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 31
per Beazley JA at [135]-[137]. The
evidence in this case, in my opinion, is adequate to that task. I do not regard
this as a case
where the applicant has failed to adduce evidence that might have
assisted the Tribunal in its task: see further,
Placer (Granny Smith) Pty Ltd
v Thiess Contractors Pty Ltd
[2003] HCA 10
, (2003) 77 ALJR 768 at
per Hayne J.
124 Mr Atkinson was pressed by counsel for the Co-op on what evidentiary
basis he had for accepting Mr Morris's advice that he and
his wife took $600 a
week in cash from the till in drawings. He said that this was consistent with
what, in his experience dealing
with small businesses of this kind, was a likely
level of drawings.
125 In my view, Mr Atkinson's estimate in this regard fits in with the
break-up seen in the set of figures with which he and Mr Morris
connection...
further element in the reasoning of the Tribunal in the present case that Mr
Soltan claimed to involve error on its part was its
statement (at [36]) that Mr
Fathullah had 'failed to show that he has mitigated any loss of income'. Mr
Soltan submitted that the
duty of an innocent party to mitigate his or her
damage is 'not a high one' and that it was 'not obvious' what a reasonable
in Mr Fathullah's position could have done in this regard. On this
question, he again cited
ACN 079 830 596 Pty Ltd (trading as Jolly Joe's Fish
'n' Chips) v Wallis Lake Fishermen's Co-operative Ltd
, referring to
paragraph [137]:-
137 The Co-op submitted that a discount should be made on the basis
that the applicant had failed in its duty to mitigate its loss.
The closing
submissions state: 'The Applicant has failed in all respects to take any steps
to mitigate its loss and damage arising
for [sic] the asserted conduct of the
Respondent. No attempt has been made by it to take possession or start any
business using the
equipment which it had in the premises. This should mitigate
against any award of damages or compensation.' As the applicant notes
closing submissions, the duty of the innocent party not to mitigate is not a
Sacher Investments Pty Ltd v Forma Stereo Consultants Pty Ltd
[1976] 1 NSWLR 5
at 9. It is not obvious to me what 'reasonable steps' that a
'reasonable man' in the shoes of Mr Morris could have taken to mitigate
in the present circumstances.
Soltan accepted the validity of the Tribunal's observation (at [35]) that it was
'unclear whether the "weekly wage of $650" is
a gross figure or a net figure'.
He submitted that the award that we should make under this head should be
calculated on the basis
that it was a gross figure.
Respondents' submissions.
In their Notice of Reply to Appeal, the
Respondents stated that they 'did not agree' that Mr Fathullah was out of work
'during the
period mentioned' and that one of them had seen him working at MRM
Supermarket.
Varma did not address this question at the hearing of the appeal. In their
submissions filed after the hearing, the Respondents
argued that Mr Fathullah
had failed to substantiate his claim because his alleged employer had not
attended to give evidence before
the Tribunal.
conclusions.
To a significant degree, we agree with Mr Soltan's submissions.
The authorities on which he relied illustrate, in our opinion, that
the factors
listed by the Tribunal as its grounds for making no award at all under this head
of damages were insufficient to justify
this conclusion. Our reasons are as
there was unchallenged evidence by Mr Fathullah, supported by a letter from Mr
Mahmoud Kahdir, to the effect that he received
a weekly wage of $650 from MRM
Supermarket during the year preceding his brief period of occupation of the
Premises. It was open
to the Respondents to cross-examine Mr Fathullah on this
matter and/or to object to the admission of Mr Kahdir's letter into evidence.
They did neither of these things.
the considerations outlined by President O'Connor in the passage quoted above
(at [92]) from
ACN 079 830 596 Pty Ltd (trading as Jolly Joe's Fish 'n'
Chips) v Wallis Lake Fishermen's Co-operative Ltd
- notably, his
observations at [121] - indicate that a rate of remuneration in employment of
this nature may be sufficiently established
even though the evidence does not
include any payslips, banking records, group certificate or tax return. The
practical reality may
well be that these documents are never prepared. The
Tribunal's apparent view in the present case was that their absence was fatal
Mr Fathullah's claim under this head.
the Tribunal's comment that Mr Fathullah 'has failed to show that he had
mitigated any loss of income' is at odds with the
principle that in contract law
the onus on the question of mitigation of damages lies on the 'wrongdoer' (i.e.,
the party who has
been held liable to pay damages), not the 'innocent party'.
Furthermore, as Mr Soltan submitted, the standard of the 'duty to mitigate'
following passage in the judgment of Giles JA in
Karacominakis v Big Country
Developments Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
at 187 makes these points clear:-
187 A plaintiff who acts unreasonably in failing to minimise his
loss from the defendant's breach of contract will have his damages
the extent to which, had he acted reasonably, his loss would have been less.
This is often misleadingly referred to as
a duty to mitigate, although the
plaintiff is not under a positive duty. The plaintiff does not have to show that
he has fulfilled
his so-called duty, and the onus is on the defendant to show
that he has not and the extent to which he has not (
TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd v
Hayden Enterprises Pty Ltd
(1989) 16 NSWLR 130).
Since the defendant is a
wrongdoer, in determining whether the plaintiff has acted unreasonably a high
standard of conduct will not
be required, and the plaintiff will not be held to
have acted unreasonably simply because the defendant can suggest other and more
beneficial conduct if it was reasonable for the plaintiff to do what he did
Banco de Portugal v Waterlow and Sons Ltd
[1932] UKHL 1
(1932) AC 452
Pilkington v
(1953) Ch 770
Sacher Investments Pty Ltd v Forma Stereo Consultants
(1976) 1 NSWLR 5).
further matter on which we are in accord with Mr Soltan's submissions is that in
the absence of any evidence as to whether the weekly
rate of $650 was a gross or
a net figure, the former alternative is to be preferred. To adopt this approach
is not unfair to the
Respondents because it leads to a lower award under this
head. According to the income tax rates applying to the 2012 tax year, the
on a taxable income of $33,800 ($650 x 52) was $4,170. The net annual income
that Mr Fathullah was earning before he left MRM
Supermarket to take up
occupation of the Premises may therefore be taken to have been $29,630.
part company with Mr Soltan on the question of the period over which an award
should be made. The Tribunal said at [35] that Mr
Fathullah's evidence did not
'satisfactorily explain why he did not return to MRM Supermarket or to any other
at least by late January 2012 when it was abundantly clear
that he had been denied access to the Premises'. At [36], it expressed
which we share, about the conflicting reasons suggested to it: namely (a) that
Mr Fathullah was 'traumatised emotionally
and financially' (b) that 'his legal
position in relation to the Premises and the lease was unclear'. Mr Soltan's
submissions to
us contained nothing to allay these doubts. In particular, we are
not prepared to make a finding of incapacity to work based solely
on a claim,
unsupported by medical evidence, of emotional and financial 'trauma'.
our judgment, the period over which Mr Fathullah should receive compensation for
loss of wages is the three-month period between
31 October 2011 (when he stopped
working for MRM Supermarket) and 31 January 2012 (this is shortly after he knew
that his chances
of regaining possession of the Premises were nil, or virtually
nil). The appropriate amount is therefore one quarter of the figure
that we have
determined as his net annual income from his prior employment. Rounded down
slightly, this amount is $7,400.
Loss of expected profits
the conclusion of his written submissions relating to the appeal, Mr Soltan
indicated that the orders sought by Mr Fathullah were
that the Respondent pay
him (i) damages 'on account of fixtures and fittings' and for lost wages, (ii)
interest and (iii) his costs
at first instance.
in his written submissions, however, and also in oral submissions, Mr Soltan
argued that the Tribunal erred in failing to
compensate Mr Fathullah for 'all
his losses' caused by the Respondents' termination of the Lease. He maintained,
as we indicated
above at [49 - 50], that it should have made findings against
them of equitable fraud, pre-lease misrepresentation and misleading
or deceptive
conduct, but failed to do so. In this connection, he relied on the fact that at
paragraph [60] of its decision in
G & M Dawson Pty Ltd v Cripps & Ors
[2004] NSWADTAP 38
, the Appeal Panel appeared to accept a proposition
that counsel for the appellant had put to it, to the effect that 'a fraudulent
defendant was liable for all damage caused by his or her fraud and could not be
permitted to complain that any such damage was not
reasonably foreseeable' (see
the decision at [46]).
this starting-point, Mr Soltan developed the argument that we should make a
further award of damages to Mr Fathullah, in order
to compensate him for
deprivation of the profits that he would have made if the Respondents' wrongful
conduct had not prevented him
establishing and conducting his business in the
Premises. Mr Soltan contended that the period covered by this award should not
limited to the three years stipulated in the Lease but should include a
further two years, by virtue of the statutory extension of
retail shop leases to
five years effected by
asked by the Appeal Panel what evidence was available as to the scale of any
such profits, Mr Soltan pointed to a statement in
Mr Fathullah's affidavit in
the following terms:-
Based on my experience working as an assistant manager at MRM
Supermarket I estimate that my proposed business would have generated
income in excess of $1500 for the whole family.
have no hesitation in rejecting this argument put by Mr Soltan. The following
three considerations provide ample justification.
it was not until Mr Soltan addressed us at the appeal hearing that this claim
was clearly formulated as being for damages for
loss of profits, or 'expectation
damages'. Earlier formulations - for example, in the Amended Application and in
the Notice of Appeal
- had used vague and unhelpful phrases such as
'unliquidated damages' or 'all losses'. For this reason, the Respondents had
insufficient
notice of the nature of the claim being pressed.
the statement just quoted from Mr Fathullah's affidavit, standing alone,
manifestly falls far short of providing acceptable
evidence as to what might
reasonably constitute the future profits of any business, let alone of a
business that never commenced
to operate.
it has been established that when the wrongful conduct of a party to a
commercial contract prevents another party from carrying
on a proposed business
for a sufficient period to enable its profitability to be assessed, any award
made must be of 'reliance damages',
not 'expectation damages'. The following
extract (at [38]) from the judgment of Mason CJ and Dawson J in a case that Mr
Soltan cited,
Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
(1992) 174 CLR 64
, provides ample authority:-
It should be observed that, in a case where it is not possible to
predict what position a plaintiff would have been in had the contract
performed ... it is not possible as a matter of strict logic to assess damages
in accordance with the principle in
Robinson v Harman
... But the law
considers the just result in such a case is to allow a plaintiff to recover such
expenditure as is reasonably incurred
in reliance on the defendant's promise. In
this case, the law assumes that a plaintiff would have at least recovered his or
her expenditure
had the contract been fully performed. It will still be open to
a defendant, however, to argue that, notwithstanding it is impossible
what profits, if any, the plaintiff would have made had the contract been fully
performed, the expenditure claimed by a
plaintiff would nevertheless not have
been recovered ...
a case decided in the Tribunal under the
Sarker and anor v World Best
Holdings Limited and anor
[2008] NSWADT 75
, this passage was adopted and
applied (see [236 - 248]). The Court of Appeal endorsed the Tribunal's approach:
World Best Holdings Limited v Sarker
[2010] NSWCA 24
will mention finally that the awards relating to specific heads of damage that
we have held appropriate in this case - repayment
of rent, net cost of fixtures
and fittings and loss of wages - are all instances of 'reliance damages'.
The mediation fee
mentioned above, the damages awarded to Mr Fathullah by the Tribunal included
the amount ($760) of a fee that he had paid for an
unsuccessful attempt by the
Registrar of Retail Tenancy Disputes to resolve his dispute with the Respondents
by mediation.
Tribunal held to this effect without any discussion of the matter. There was
also no discussion of it in the appeal.
our opinion, such an award should not be made. It is in conflict with the
following provision
(section 66(2))
governing mediation by the
Registrar:-
(2) The costs of and associated with formal mediation before a
mediator of a retail tenancy dispute or other dispute or matter under
arrangements made by the Registrar are to be paid by the parties to the
mediation in such proportions as they may agree among themselves
or, failing
agreement, in equal shares.
there was no agreement between the parties as to the payment of these costs,
this provision states that the parties must pay
them in equal shares. In the
absence of any authority on the matter (so far as we are aware), our opinion is
that the provision precludes
any claim by a party succeeding in later litigation
to recover them from an unsuccessful party.
we said earlier,
section 115(1)
requires to reach the 'correct
and preferable decision' on the material before us, since we have granted leave
for this appeal to
extend to the merits. Accordingly, we should correct this
error (as we perceive it) by the Tribunal, even though neither party referred
it in their submissions.
Our orders relating to the principal decision
the foregoing reasons, the award of damages made to Mr Fathullah by the Tribunal
should be set aside and the damages should be
recalculated as follows.
principal amount to be awarded should have the following components: Refund of
rent, $8,250; Loss on fixtures and fittings, $4,900;
Loss of wages, $7,400. The
total of these is $20,550.
should be added, as from 19 November 2011, being the date on which Mr Fathullah
moved into the Premises. It is an appropriate
starting-point, because it lies
roughly midway between 6 August 2011, the date of his earliest loss (i.e., his
first payment of rent),
and the date of his last loss (on or about 31 January
2012, when he would have received his last instalment of wages).
rates to be applied should not exceed those payable on a judgment debt of the
District Court: see
section 72A(3)
. These rates of the District
Court are commonly employed in decisions of the Retail Leases Division.
Calculated up to the date of
the present decision, the amounts of interest
payable on the principal sum of $20,550 are as follows:-
19.11.11 to 31.12.11 - 42 days @ 10.75% - $254.20
01.01.12 to 30.06.12 - 6 months @ 10.25% - $1,053.19
01.07.12 to 31.12.12 - 6 months @ 9.5% - $976.12
01.01.13 to 31.06.13 - 6 months @ 9% - $924.75
30.06.13 to 08.08.13 - 39 days @ 8.75% - $192.13
Total amount for interest - $3,400.39
total amount of damages to be awarded is accordingly $23,950.39.
THE COSTS DECISION
The Tribunal's reasoning
the costs decision, as indicated earlier, the Tribunal rejected Mr Fathullah's
application for a costs order against the Respondents.
It commenced its
discussion of the matter by reproducing the terms of
By virtue of
section 77A
, this is the applicable provision.
is sufficient here to quote subsections (1), (1A) and 2 of section 88:-
(1) Each party to proceedings before the Tribunal is to bear the party's own
costs in the proceedings, except as provided by this
(1A) Subject to the rules of the Tribunal and any other Act or law, the
Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before
it, but only if it is
satisfied that it is fair to do so having regard to the following:
(a) whether a party has conducted the proceedings in a way that unnecessarily
disadvantaged another party to the proceedings by conduct
(i) failing to comply with an order or direction of the Tribunal without
reasonable excuse, or
(ii) failing to comply with this Act, the regulations, the rules of the
Tribunal or any relevant provision of the enactment under
which the Tribunal has
(iii) asking for an adjournment as a result of a failure referred to in
subparagraph (i) or (ii), or
(iv) causing an adjournment, or
(v) attempting to deceive another party or the Tribunal, or
(vi) vexatiously conducting the proceedings,
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the time
taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or
(d) the nature and complexity of the proceedings,
(e) any other matter that the Tribunal considers relevant.
(2) The Tribunal may:
(a) determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid, and
(b) order costs to be assessed on a basis set out in Division 11 of
Legal Profession Act 2004
or on any other basis.
Tribunal then described the main features of subsections (1) and (1A). In the
course of doing so, it referred (at [4]) to the
list of factors in paragraphs
(a) to (e) of subsection (1A) as 'non-exhaustive'. Such a description is
justifiable because under
paragraph (e) the Tribunal is to have regard to 'any
other matter that the Tribunal considers relevant'.
outlined some of the established principles regarding the application of the
criterion of 'fairness' to proceedings in the
Retail Leases Division, the
Tribunal turned its attention to the status of Mr Soltan as Mr Fathullah's agent
in the present proceedings.
It noted that under
section 77C
Fathullah was entitled to appoint Mr Soltan as an agent to represent him without
being required to obtain the leave of the Tribunal.
section 77C
leave would be required under
. The Tribunal pointed
out also that according to the Appeal Panel's decision in
B & L Linings
Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (No 6) (RD)
[2012] NSWADTAP
, the Tribunal may award costs to a successful party who was represented by an
agent who was not an Australian legal practitioner.
Tribunal then outlined (at [15 - 20]) a number of aspects of Mr Soltan's
representation of Mr Fathullah that, in its view, militated
against any award of
costs being made to Mr Fathullah. For the purposes of the present decision, it
is necessary to reproduce these
paragraphs in full:-
15 At the hearing of these proceedings, the Tribunal did not
restrain the right of audience of Mr Soltan. However, material filed
of the Applicant indicated that the Applicant was being represented by a
business called "The Retail Leases Doctor" that
was owned by an incorporated
entity of which Mr Soltan was a director. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr
Soltan confirmed to
the Tribunal that he was appearing for the Applicant as the
representative of the registered business "The Retail Leases Doctor";
undertook to file a copy of the registration document for this business with the
Tribunal within the ensuing week. It transpired
from the document then later
filed by Mr Soltan that no such registered business existed prior to or at the
date of the hearing,
and that this business name was registered by him some days
16 The fact that the Tribunal was misled by Mr Soltan as to the registration
of the business "The Retail Leases Doctor", when such
business had been put
forward as representing the Applicant in these proceedings, is another factor
which may be taken into account
when considering whether it is fair to make a
costs order in favour of the Applicant pursuant to
17 The Applicant's claim for costs is specified to be in the sum of $10,197;
this amount is a relevant factor to take into account
pursuant to
when considering the Applicant's application for a costs order, particularly in
these circumstances where the amount claimed for
costs exceeds the amount of
compensation which has been ordered in the original decision to be paid to the
Applicant by the Respondents.
18 The total costs amount is said to be based upon a costs agreement which
has been filed with the Applicant's submissions. The relevant
document recites
that the parties entering into the agreement are the Applicant and a business
referred to as "The Retail Leasing
Doctor", which is a trade name different to
the business name which was subsequently registered some weeks later by Mr
behalf of his company Wentworth Warehousing Pty Ltd.
19 The costs agreement contains some provisions which are common in costs
agreements entered into between lawyers and their clients,
but also contains
provisions which are uncommon in such agreements, are expressed in quite complex
language, and include a purported
Soltan or the business "The Retail Leasing Doctor" for any negligent advice, a
limitation of liability on the part of Mr Soltan or the business set at
such amount of costs as may be payable by the Applicant under
the agreement, and
a right of novation or assignment of rights under the agreement reserved to Mr
Soltan or his business.
20 It is clear to the Tribunal, having observed the Applicant giving evidence
during the proceedings, that his knowledge of English
is very poor; the written
submissions filed upon his behalf also assert this to be the case. No material
has been provided which
can comfortably satisfy this Tribunal that the costs
agreement is fair, or that it has been properly understood by the Applicant
before he apparently signed the document on an unspecified date. For the reasons
set out above in this and the preceding two paragraphs,
the Tribunal is not
satisfied that the costs agreement is enforceable against the Applicant;
accordingly, neither the agreement nor
the amount of costs claimed to be payable
by the Applicant to his agent should be taken into account in deciding whether
should be made that the Respondents pay the Applicant's costs.
[21 - 23], the Tribunal compared the relative strengths of the parties' claims.
It stated that the Respondents' case 'certainly
lacked legal foundation or real
factual basis', but that Mr Fathullah's claims for loss of fixtures and fittings
and for loss of
earnings 'also failed, due to a substantial lack of evidence'.
It described as 'impermissible' Mr Soltan's attempt, in his submissions
to costs, to introduce fresh evidence in support of these claims. At [23], it
summarised its views on the merits of the
parties' cases as follows:-
23The conclusion reached by the Tribunal is that each of the
parties succeeded to a degree in these proceedings, and that each of
the parties
also failed to establish a significant proportion of their respective claims
against the other. The compensation claim
brought by the Respondents was
certainly the least meritorious of any of the claims brought by either of the
parties, and this is
a factor which may be balanced against the other factors
considered within this decision.
[24 - 25], the Tribunal rejected claims by Mr Soltan that the Respondents had
unreasonably prolonged the hearing of the case and
had engaged in misleading
conduct during the proceedings.
[26], it stated its conclusion that it was 'not satisfied that it would be fair
to depart from the statutory presumption that each
party should bear its own
The parties' submissions in the appeal
challenging this decision of the Tribunal, Mr Soltan presented arguments
regarding its treatment of seven topics. These arguments
were to the following
1. In discussing his own position as agent for Mr Fathullah, the
Tribunal erred in taking into consideration the fact that his business
'The Retail Leases Doctor', was not registered until 9 October 2012, four days
after the Tribunal hearing. Registration of
an entity was not a pre-requisite
for trading, but was merely a 'cosmetic' factor that should have been
2. The Tribunal should not have had regard to the relationship between the
amount that he had claimed for his costs and the amount
that it had awarded to
Mr Fathullah by way of damages. If this was a matter of concern, it was always
open to the Tribunal under
section 88(2)
to award a lesser sum
than he had claimed.
3. The Tribunal erred by giving consideration to the fairness of the costs
agreement between himself and Mr Fathullah and ruling that
it was in fact
unfair. The reasons why this amounted to error by the Tribunal were as follows:
(a) the enforceability of this agreement
was not within its jurisdiction; (b)
there was no evidence before it that the agreement was not fair or was not
understood by Mr
Fathullah; (c) the onus lay on the Respondents to establish
that the agreement was unfair or unenforceable, but they had not filed
submissions on costs for the Tribunal to consider; and (d) the Tribunal, if
concerned about this matter, was empowered to make
a lesser award of costs under
section 88(2).
4. The Tribunal did not properly compare the relative strengths of the
parties' cases for the purpose of determining whether paragraph
was applicable. It gave insufficient weight to its own description of the
Respondent's claim in the principal decision as 'fanciful'
and 'nebulous' and to
the fact that this claim was for the 'astronomical' sum of $300,000.
5. The Tribunal erroneously failed to consider a submission by Mr Soltan that
the Respondents, by bringing such a claim, had acted
vexatiously, within the
meaning of paragraph (a)(vi) of
section 88(1A).
6. The Tribunal erroneously failed to take into consideration the fact that
the Respondents had committed 'equitable fraud' by concealing
from Mr Fathullah,
prior to the commencement of the Lease, the fact that the Supreme Court had
rejected their attempt to file a cross
claim against the mortgagee. Their
conduct in this regard gave grounds for a costs order against them under
, by virtue of the Court of Appeal's decision in
Cripps v G & M Dawson
[2006] NSWCA 81.
7. The Tribunal erroneously failed to take account of the fact that until 30
August 2012, the date of the first directions hearing
in the proceedings, the
only claim made by Mr Fathullah was for $8,250 (being the balance of the rent
that he had paid), but because
the Respondents refused to refund even this
amount he had been compelled to engage representation and have his case heard by
Respondents' submissions in reply were prepared with the assistance of a
solicitor who, they indicated, was 'not on the record'.
The main arguments made
in these submissions were as follows:-
(a) The Tribunal never gave leave, pursuant to its discretion under
, for Mr Soltan to appear before it as agent for Mr
(b) It was Mr Fathullah, not the Respondents, who acted 'vexatiously'. He did
so by including in his Amended Application his additional
claims for loss
relating to fixtures and fittings ($7,500), loss of wages ($21,450) and the
mediation fee ($760). The first two of
these claims were dismissed.
(c) Mr Soltan who had no formal qualifications of relevance, displayed his
lack of professionalism by (i) 'presenting' a legal entity
that did not exist
(thereby misleading the Tribunal) and (ii) filing supplementary written
submissions after the Tribunal hearing
without having obtained leave to do
Respondents contended that by virtue of these matters the costs decision was
correct and Mr Fathullah's appeal against it should
be dismissed.
Our conclusions
giving careful consideration to these competing submissions, we have decided
that the appeal by Mr Fathullah should be allowed
and a costs order in his
favour should be substituted for the Tribunal's costs decision.
reasons for so deciding can be summarised as follows. In the first place, we
agree with the first five of the seven arguments
by Mr Soltan that we summarised
above at [133]. (The remaining two of his arguments do not, in our opinion,
carry significant weight.)
Secondly, we find the Respondents' submissions to be
unpersuasive. Thirdly, our decision upholding Mr Fathullah's claims for losses
relating to fixtures and fittings and to wages adds significant support to his
claim for costs in so far as it is based on
section 88(1A)(c)
wish to add the following observations relating to Mr Soltan's arguments (nos. 1
to 3) concerning his status as agent for Mr Fathullah.
having given consideration to the statute governing the registration of business
Business Names Registration Act
(Cth)), we are bound to
say that in our opinion a failure to register an entity under this Act does not
have the significance that
the Tribunal appeared to attach to it. Nothing in the
Act suggests that a failure to register should detract from the rights of the
entity concerned so far as its business operations are concerned.
the Tribunal's ruling, at [20], that it was 'not satisfied that the costs
agreement is enforceable against the Applicant'
was made with no detailed
consideration of the applicable legal principles and without any opportunity
being offered to Mr Soltan
to argue to the contrary.
and perhaps most significantly, the person most harmed by the Tribunal's rulings
on these two matters could well be Mr Fathullah.
To the extent that these
rulings contributed to its dismissal of his costs application, they diminished
his chance of recovering
from the Respondents some part (at least) of the amount
that he would remain obliged to pay to Mr Soltan if either (a) he decided
contest the validity of the costs agreement, or (b) he contested it, but
contrary to the Tribunal's expectation was unsuccessful
in doing so.
reference to the Respondents' submissions, our observations are these: (a) as
the Tribunal itself made clear,
section 77C
eliminated any
requirement on Mr Soltan to obtain leave to represent Mr Fathullah as his agent;
(b) any claim that Mr Fathullah's
Amended Application was 'vexatious' is
nullified by our decision increasing the amount of damages to be paid by the
Respondents;
and (c) any 'lack of professionalism' on Mr Soltan's part is far
from sufficient to constitute a bar to his client obtaining a costs
turn now to the framing of the costs order that in our judgment should be made
against the Respondents. We deal with this topic
at some length because a number
of the issues have not, so far as we know, been discussed in any detail in any
Tribunal decision
on the costs of proceedings brought under the
B & L Linings Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (No 5)
[2010] NSWADTAP 21
, the Appeal Panel held that the Appellants, who had
engaged a firm of accountants (Byrons) to act on their behalf in proceedings
against the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue and had been substantially
successful, could obtain an order under
requiring the
Commissioner to pay an amount in respect of the costs charged to them by Byrons.
The employee of Byrons (Mr Eager)
who appeared for them at the Tribunal hearings
and did most of the work required to prepare their case was in fact a legal
practitioner.
So far as relevant here, the terms of the costs order made by the
Appeal Panel were as follows:-
1. The Respondent is to pay the Appellants' extra costs occasioned
by the following aspects of its conduct in the course of these
proceedings...
2. The Respondent is to pay 75% of the remainder of the Appellants' costs of
the proceedings, both at first instance and on appeal.
3. These costs are to include amounts in respect of
(a) fees paid or payable by the Appellants to Byrons, Chartered Accountants,
for work done by its employees as agents of the Appellants
in these proceedings
(b) any additional out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Appellants in
consequence of the conduct identified in Order 1.
4. If the parties cannot agree as to the amount of these costs, the
Appellants have liberty (within 42 days of the date of these reasons)
to the Tribunal for an order to be made by the Appeal Panel determining the mode
of assessment and for any other order required
to give effect to this decision
regarding their application for costs.
parties were unable to agree as to the amount of the costs ordered. Following a
further hearing, the Appeal Panel held, in
B & L Linings Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue (No 6) (RD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 26
amount to be paid to the Appellants under clause 3(a) of this order should be
assessed under Division 11 of
Legal Profession Act
('the LP Act 2004') by a costs assessor appointed under that Division.
particular provision of the LP Act 2004 on which the Appeal Panel relied in
determining that this mode of assessment was available
was section 367A. This
367A Determinations of costs assessments for party/party
A costs assessor is to determine an application for an assessment of costs
payable as a result of an order made by a court or tribunal
by making a
determination of the fair and reasonable amount of those costs.
Appeal Panel further decided that in the circumstances with which it was
dealing, the regime for assessment provided by this Act
was more appropriate
than any competing alternative. Its discussion of this question included the
following passages, being extracts
from paragraphs [102] to [118]:-
102 Because we have the power, under
section 88(2)
to order assessment other than under the LP Act 2004, the question whether some
alternative approach to assessment would be more
appropriate in this case
requires consideration.
103 There are actually two distinct issues within this question. The first is
whether the
of the assessment to be undertaken should be, to adopt
the formulation in
section 88(2)(b)
), 'a basis set out in'
Division 11 of Part 3.2 of the LP Act or 'some other basis'. The second is as to
to be adopted in obtaining an assessment.
104 With regard to the first and most important of these issues, we believe
the following to be factors of major importance. The costs
that we are
considering are 'costs in relation to proceedings' before the Tribunal (see
section 88(1A)).
The proceedings with which we are dealing, while lengthy
and protracted, did not have any unusual feature suggesting that costs
under the LP Act 2004 would be inappropriate, other than the fact
that the Appellants employed an accountancy firm (Byrons), rather
practice, to conduct their case. The spreadsheet and other evidentiary material
tendered by the Appellants at the hearing
before us reveal that a very high
component of the work undertaken by Byrons for the purposes of the proceedings
was performed by
Mr Eager, a solicitor holding a practising certificate. There
is nothing in this material, or in any other evidence put before us,
that the tasks carried out by Mr Eager differed in any material respect from the
tasks normally performed by barristers
and/or solicitors pursuant to
instructions from clients to represent them in civil proceedings.
106 The disputed item of costs is costs 'in respect of' the fees paid or
payable to Byrons. In their submissions to us, the parties
were in agreement
that criteria importing the values of 'fairness' and 'reasonableness' should be
applied... It is well recognised
that in applying criteria of this nature to the
assessment of party/party costs under the LP Act 2004 and its predecessors, both
the amount that the successful party is required to pay to its lawyers for costs
and disbursements and an amount that can be fairly
regarded as reasonable to
obtain from the unsuccessful party are highly relevant factors. If the former
amount is exorbitant, the
unsuccessful party can legitimately claim that it be
scaled down to or towards the latter amount. When the latter amount is the
the 'indemnity principle' to which Davies A-J referred in
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Hattersley
(2001) 51 NSWLR 333
NSWSC 60...
may be applicable.
107 Assessment of party/party costs under the LP Act 2004 and its
predecessors is an expert process, developed over many years, for
issues such as these. By contrast, the uncontradicted evidence adduced by the
Respondent as to the assessment of accountants'
fees by relevant professional
bodies... provides no reason to believe that any such assessment would be
informed by the expertise
and experience required to take proper account of
these particular considerations, specific as they are to the particular exercise
of assessing party/party costs in legal proceedings.
108 As already emphasised, the disputed item of costs is not defined in the
Costs Order as simply the 'fees paid or payable by the
Appellants to Byrons'. It
is instead an amount 'in respect of' those fees. We are satisfied that for the
reasons that we have just
outlined, assessment of the costs thus defined under
Division 11 of the LP Act 2004, utilising the criterion of 'fair and reasonable'
stated in section 367A, is the most appropriate basis for determining such an
109 In view of this conclusion on the first of the two issues defined above,
discussion of the second issue - that of the procedure
to be adopted - can be
relatively brief.
110 In their submissions, the parties canvassed two alternative procedures
for assessment. Within each of these, some variants were
111 First, Mr Thawley [counsel for the Appellants] submitted that the
Tribunal should itself determine the disputed item of costs,
with the rider that
if the Tribunal thought fit, it could obtain evidence on one or more aspects of
the assessment from an independent
expert appointed by it. Mr Thawley indicated
that the Appellants had a 'slight preference' for this approach because it was
to be more economical than any other and the assessment would remain
within the control of the Tribunal...
112 Mr Latham [counsel for the Respondent] expressed opposition to this
proposal, describing it as 'clumsy'. He drew our attention
to a dictum of the
Legal Services Division of the Tribunal in
Legal Services Commissioner v
Galitsky (No 2)
[2008] NSWADT 153
, to the effect that the Tribunal
should not adopt the role of a costs assessor because it does not possess any
expertise or experience
in determining the quantum of fair and reasonable costs.
115 Our view on assessment by the Tribunal is as follows. We recognise that
the Tribunal may and in practice does determine the amounts
payable pursuant to
costs orders made under
. But it only takes this step
when the determination is comparatively simple. In proceedings that have been as
lengthy and as complex
as these proceedings, it does not purport to have the
necessary expertise.
118 In the light of our decision that the basis of assessment of the disputed
item of costs should be the basis set out in section
367A of the LP Act 2004,
and since this Act, in section 353(2), prescribes a mechanism for the Tribunal
to refer this item for assessment,
we see no advantage in departing from the
standard procedure applying to these circumstances. The assessment should be by
assessor appointed under Division 11 of Part 3.2 of this Act.
present proceedings, in our opinion, are akin to those described by the Appeal
Panel at paragraph [115]. As Mr Soltan submitted,
a costs order stipulating a
fixed amount is preferable to an order for the payment of costs 'as agreed or
assessed'. As he pointed
out, the Appeal Panel, hearing an appeal from the
Retail Leases Division, said this in
Trowbridge v Morris (RLD)
NSWADTAP 70
33 We would encourage Tribunal members to make fixed sum costs
orders in cases where neither party is legally represented as is the
We think that orders using the 'as agreed or assessed' formula are best confined
to cases with lawyers on both sides.
to Mr Soltan's primary submissions were copies of (a) a costs agreement, dated 4
September 2012, between his company, Wentworth
Warehousing Pty Ltd, and Mr
Fathullah, which Mr Fathullah had signed and (b) a tax invoice, dated 23
November 2012, relating to the
proceedings at first instance. The costs
agreement stated that the hourly rate for Mr Soltan's services was to be $200
The total amount quoted in the invoice, which incorporated a time
sheet, was $10,197, made up of $9,790 for 'total professional costs'
(44.5 hours
@ $200 plus GST) and $407 for disbursements. On this basis, Mr Soltan sought a
costs order in the amount of $10,197.
to Mr Soltan's supplementary submissions was a copy of Practice Note Civ 1 of
the Local Court. Under the heading 'Guideline
Amounts', clause 35.3 of this
Practice Note sets out amounts, determined by the Local Court and the Law
Society of New South Wales,
to be awarded as costs in 'relatively short and
straightforward matters'. Relevantly, these include an hourly rate of $280 for
attendances
at the Court. Clause 35.4 states that 'where a clerk or paralegal
carries out the attendances, costs for that person should be allowed
the amount for a legal practitioner'.
regard to the fact that the total amount of damages that we are awarding
($23,950.39) is relatively small, we agree with Mr
Soltan that these rates
determined for Local Court proceedings furnish useful guidance. We do not think
that the rate of $112 per
hour suggested for a 'clerk or paralegal' is
appropriate, given the level of responsibility assumed by Mr Soltan and the
matters with which he had to deal. We should not, however, simply adopt
the hourly rate stipulated in his costs agreement with Mr
Fathullah. Section
365(2) of the LP Act specifically enjoins costs assessors not to do this. Taking
these various considerations
into account, we consider that a 'fair and
reasonable' hourly rate is $160, to which GST should be added. We do not
question the
amount of time for which Mr Soltan claimed professional fees.
this footing, the amount that should be paid by the Respondents to Mr Fathullah
on account of his costs of the proceedings at first
instance is $8,239,
comprising $7,832 for Mr Soltan's professional fees and $407 for
disbursements.
THE COSTS OF THE APPEALS
his submissions, filed after the appeal hearing, in support of Mr Fathullah's
claim for the costs of the two appeals, Mr Soltan
relied principally on the
following arguments:-
(1) The Respondents acted so as to disadvantage Mr Fathullah by
failing to comply with directions given by the Appeal Panel and by
adjournment (this being conduct falling under paragraph (a) of
section 88(1A)
(2) They unreasonably prolonged the appeal proceedings (being conduct under
paragraph (b)).
(3) Paragraph (c) of
section 88(1A)
was engaged, because there was a
'substantial disparity' between Mr Fathullah's case in the appeal against the
principal decision
and the Respondent's attempt to revive, without any specific
grounds or supporting evidence, their 'astronomical' claim for damages
(4) On 7 February 2013, well before the hearing of the appeals, the
Respondents received Mr Fathullah's fresh evidence as to the residual
the fixtures and fittings, but failed to acknowledge that they should therefore
pay additional damages under this head.
(5) These were appeals in proceedings of a commercial nature.
(6) By virtue of the Court of Appeal's decision on costs in
& M Dawson Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 81
, the 'equitable fraud' committed by
the Respondents provided a sufficient basis for a costs order against them.
Respondents' submissions included an allegation in the following terms:-
Mr Soltan failed to serve the Appellant's submissions to the
Respondent to allow the Respondent to prepare for the hearing before
Panel on 22 May 2013. When he did serve the documents on 27 May 2013, many pages
were missing in the documents.
is convenient to examine this allegation before discussing the matters on which
Mr Soltan relied.
allegation was not supported by any evidence. The submissions on Mr Fathullah's
behalf to which it referred were filed by Mr Soltan
on 7 February 2013. At the
directions hearing on 18 February 2013 (described above at [10]), the filing of
them was mentioned and
it was directed (inter alia) that the Respondents'
submissions in reply to them were to be filed and served within 28 days. Mr
appearing in person and as agent for the Second and Third Respondents,
did not indicate that he had not received a copy of them.
Moreover, if that was
in fact the case, he still had ample opportunity to ask Mr Soltan to serve a
copy on him as soon as possible,
in order that he could meet the deadline set
for the filing of the Respondents' submissions in reply. Neither he nor anyone
on the Respondents' behalf provided any explanation for their failure to
take either of these steps.
may add that by virtue of the directions that we gave at the end of the hearing,
the Respondents had a period of four weeks (from
22 May until 19 June 2013)
within which to obtain from Mr Soltan a further copy of his submissions (and
indeed request the delivery
of any 'missing' pages) and to prepare, file and
serve their submissions on all matters raised in the appeal proceedings.
to material annexed to Mr Soltan's submissions filed after the
hearing, Mr Varma did in fact request a copy and Mr Soltan complied
request on 27 May 2013.
these reasons, it cannot be said that the Respondents were prejudiced by any
late service (if indeed this occurred) of the submissions
that Mr Soltan had
filed before the hearing.
turn now to the arguments by Mr Soltan that we summarised above at [153]. In our
opinion, they are sufficient to show that it would
be 'fair' under
to make a costs order against the Respondents relating to
the costs of both appeals.
so concluding, we have taken careful account of the following passage in a case,
Torchia v Swanton (RLD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 5
, to which we drew the parties'
attention at the hearing. The relevant passage in the Appeal Panel's reasons is
at [113 - 123]:-
113... [In this case] the Applicants [who were also the Appellants]
were not in fact wholly successful. The claims that they advanced
liability and on damages included significant components that the Tribunal did
not accept...
115 As indicated above at [10], the grounds on which they claimed relief were
unconscionable conduct, misleading or deceptive conduct,
breach of clause 8 of
the Mediation Agreement and estoppel. The remedies that they claimed (as
indicated above at [11]) included
a declaration that they had an interest in the
land to which the lease related and an order that a five-year lease of this land
granted to them at a current market rent.
116 In its first decision, however, the Tribunal stated (in the passage
quoted above at [20]):-
As to that part of the conversation [on 24 May 2007] concerning the grant of
a further lease at the expiration of the term then current,
it is clear that the
conversation stopped well short of one giving rise to a contractual obligation
to grant a fresh lease...
117 By virtue of this finding, the Applicants did not obtain any relief at
all based on their claim that the Respondents had promised
to grant them a new
lease. They did not obtain the declaration that they sought, nor the order for a
grant of a five-year lease...
In addition, their claim for damages for economic
loss sustained by virtue of reliance on Ms Swanton's alleged representation (in
May 2007) that a new lease would be forthcoming was not upheld...
118 The only relief that the Tribunal granted to the Applicants was an award
of compensation for the loss of the opportunity to obtain
a new lease that had
been afforded to them under clause 8 of the Mediation Agreement. The contractual
promise made to them under
this clause, and held by the Tribunal to have been
breached through conduct that it found to be unconscionable, was not that the
Applicants would actually obtain a new lease. It was instead a promise by the
Respondents to 'discuss in good faith and with fair
consideration any request
for a new lease'.
119 As Mr McCall pointed out in his submissions before me, the Applicants
appeared, both before and during the hearing on damages,
to believe that their
compensation should reflect either the value of the prospective new lease or the
amount lost by them through
reliance on Ms Swanton's alleged representation, not
merely the value of the opportunity to obtain a lease that clause 8 had
on them. The Applicants based their case relating to quantum on this
assumption...
120 As can be seen, however, from the passage in the Tribunal's second
decision quoted above at [27], the approach taken by the Tribunal
was to adopt
the amount given by Mr Hughes 'at the bottom of his range' as 'the value of the
business as it would have been at 30
April 2010 had there also been in place a
lease for a reasonable term', then to discount this amount ($137,500) by the
significant
proportion of 30% because of its finding that only an 'opportunity'
had been denied to the Applicants. At [42], the Tribunal said:-
As indicated earlier the applicants in my opinion in effect lost, as a result
of the respondents' breach of their contractual obligations,
a 70% chance to
acquire an asset worth $137,500. I would assess their damages at $92,650.
121 If the Applicants had been wholly successful, as Mr Spring maintained,
they would have obtained either a new lease or a sum substantially
122 Accordingly, since the Respondents successfully contested significant
components of the Applicants' case, both on liability and
on damages, it cannot
be said that there was a 'substantial disparity' between the relative strengths
of the parties' cases. As Mr
McCall argued, the Respondents did not act
unreasonably in choosing to defend the proceedings.
123 For these reasons, the Applicants' claim for the costs of the Tribunal
proceedings must fail in so far as it is based on paragraph
the appeal against the principal decision, the case argued by Mr Soltan included
a substantial claim for damages for loss of profits
that we held not to be
sustainable (see above at [106 - 114]). On the face of it, this provides grounds
for ruling that the Respondents
'did not act unreasonably' in defending the
appeal. But as we also pointed out (see [105]), the written submissions filed by
before the hearing concluded with a statement that the orders sought
by Mr Fathullah were that the Respondent pay him (i) damages
'on account of
fixtures and fittings' and for lost wages, (ii) interest and (iii) his costs at
first instance. No reference was made
here to any claim relating to loss of
profits. For reasons that we have explained (at [156 - 158]), the Respondents
either received
a copy of these submissions well before the hearing or, at the
least, were aware of their existence but unreasonably failed to advise
that he had not supplied them with a copy.
further matter of importance when comparing the strengths of the parties' cases
is that before and during the appeal hearing the
Respondents continued to claim,
without any supporting evidence, that Mr Fathullah was liable to pay substantial
damages to them
(see [52 - 54] above).
these reasons, we are satisfied that there was a 'substantial disparity' (to
repeat the phrase used in this context in
Jonamill Pty Ltd v Alramon Pty Ltd
(No 2) (RLD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 3
) between the relative strengths of
the parties' cases in the appeal against the principal decision and that this
provides good grounds
section 88(1A)(c)
for making an order
for costs against the Respondents. We have formed this view even though Mr
Soltan, in adding the claim for damages
for loss of profits to Mr Fathullah's
case, significantly overstated the scale of the Respondents' liability.
agree also with the first, second and fifth of the arguments by Mr Soltan as
summarised above at [153].
Respondents' conduct in relation to the appeal against the principal decision
fell within paragraphs (a) and (b) of
section 88(1A).
The fact that it was an
appeal in proceedings of a commercial nature is a relevant factor under
paragraph (d).
reasons for concluding that paragraphs (a) to (d) of
section 88(1A)
'enlivened' in the appeal against the principal decision apply equally, in our
opinion, to the appeal against the costs decision.
In particular, the case in
favour of making a costs order against the Respondents in the proceedings at
first instance must be viewed
as a very strong one, once the adjustments that we
have made to the damages awarded are brought into consideration.
with the costs at first instance, it is appropriate that we make an order fixing
the amount to be paid.
copy of a tax invoice addressed by Wentworth Warehousing Pty Ltd to Mr Fathullah
was annexed to Mr Soltan's submissions filed after
the appeal. It was dated 27
June 2013 and related to the appeal proceedings. Once again, the hourly rate
charged for Mr Soltan's
services was stated as $200 plus GST.
total amount quoted in this invoice, which incorporated a time sheet, was
$10,991, made up of $9,735 for 'total professional costs'
(44.25 hours @ $200
plus GST) and $1,256 for disbursements. The main reason why the figure for
disbursements significantly exceeded
the figure quoted in the invoice relating
to the proceedings at first instance was that it included a filing fee of $309
each of the two Notices of Appeal. On this basis, Mr Soltan sought a
costs order in the amount of $10,991.
do not question the amount of time for which Mr Soltan claimed professional
fees. But for reasons explained earlier, a lower hourly
rate of $160 plus GST is
appropriate for a costs order 'in respect of' such fees.
this footing, the amount that should be paid by the Respondents to Mr Fathullah
on account of his costs of the appeal proceedings
is $9,044, comprising $7,788
for Mr Soltan's professional fees and $1,256 for disbursements.
Soltan requested that, if we upheld Mr Fathullah's application for costs
relating to the appeals, we should grant to the Respondent
a certificate under
Suitors' Fund Act
. He pointed out that the Appeal Panel in
Coogee Bay Village Pty Ltd v Profilio (No 2) (RLD)
[2011] NSWADTAP 67
granted such a certificate (at [17]) in comparable circumstances.
Suitors' Fund Act
) do not, however, include
an appeal to an Appeal Panel under the
. We cannot, therefore, accede to
this request. We must respectfully differ on this matter from the view taken by
the Appeal Panel
Coogee Bay Village
the foregoing reasons, our orders in these appeal proceedings are as
1. (a) The appeal against the Tribunal's decision given on 15
November 2012 is allowed.
(b) The order made in that decision is set aside and the following order
made: 'The Respondents are to pay to the Appellant the sum
of $23,950.39,
comprising $20,550 as principal and $3,400.39 as interest.'
2. (a) The appeal against the Tribunal's decision given on 23 January 2013 is
(b) The order made in that decision is set aside and the following order
made: 'The Respondents are to pay to the Appellant the sum
of $8,239 in respect
of the costs of the proceedings.'
3. The Respondents are to pay to the Appellant the sum of $9,044 in respect
of the costs of these appeal proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (421 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter