URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Amaca Pty Ltd v Wallaby Grip Ltd & Anor [2025] NSWDDT 3 (11 July 2025)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Amaca Pty Ltd v Wallaby Grip Ltd & Anor
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDDT 3
Hearing Date(s):
2 June 2025
Date of Orders:
11 July 2025
Decision Date:
11 July 2025
Strathdee DCJ
(1) Pursuant to reg 20(1)(c) of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal
Regulation 2019
(NSW), the matter is removed from the
(2) The matter is struck out pursuant to UCPR r
(3) Amaca is to pay the costs of the defendants.
Catchwords:
WANT OF DUE DISPATCH – lack of steps appropriately taken in
accordance with the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
and UCPR 6.2
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Civil Proceedings Act 2011
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), rr 6.2, 12.7
Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(NSW), regs 20(1), 59
Procedural rulings
Amaca Pty Ltd (formerly James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd)
(Plaintiff)
Wallaby Grip Limited (First Defendant)
Wallaby Grip (BAE) Pty
Ltd (In Liquidation) (Second Defendant)
Representation:
I Griscti (Plaintiff)
S McKenzie (First Defendant)
McKenzie (Second Defendant)
Solicitors:
Holman Webb Lawyers Brisbane
(Plaintiff)
Zambra Legal (First Defendant)
Zambra Legal (Second
File Number(s):
DDT 2021/149136
Notice of Motion (NOM) filed 27 May 2025, Wallaby Grip Limited (WGL) and Wallaby
Grip (BAE) Limited (In Liquidation) (the defendants)
seek the following orders
against Amaca Pty Limited (formerly James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd)
(1) Pursuant to reg 20(1) of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
that this matter be removed from the Claims Resolution Process (CRP).
(2) That the matter be struck out pursuant to UCPR r 6.2.
(3) In the alternative, that the matter be dismissed pursuant to UCPR r 12.7.
(4) Such further or other orders as the Tribunal deems fit.
(5) Costs in favour of the Defendants.
opposed the orders sought.
defendants tendered an affidavit of Stuart James Newell affirmed on 27 May 2025
which became exhibit A on the NOM. Amaca tendered
an affidavit of Mark Vincent
Victorsen sworn 30 May 2025 which became exhibit 1, and a NSW Online Registry
entry dated 17 June 2022
which became exhibit
Statement of Claim filed 26 May 2021, Amaca seeks from the defendants the
following orders:
(1) Contribution and or indemnity pursuant to
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(2) Interest upon any sum which the defendants are ordered to pay to Amaca
pursuant to
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) or alternative
interest pursuant to
Civil Proceedings Act 2011
(3) The defendants pay Amaca’s Costs of the Statement of Claim (the Cross
(4) Any such orders as the Tribunal sees fit.
2 June 2025 the matter came before me in the Dust Diseases Tribunal (DDT)
General List. Whilst there had a been flurry of activity
in the week preceding
of the listing of the NOM, Mr Griscti sought an adjournment to put on evidence
as to the NOM, which was refused
given the delay of some four years in the
conduct of the proceedings.
original claim by the plaintiff (Mr Porter) against the defendants was settled
in July 2021. Amaca’s Division 6 claim which
arises out of a Queensland
dockyards exposure was served on the defendants in May 2021. As is evidenced in
Mr Newell’s affidavit,
shortly thereafter there was written correspondence
from the defendants to Amaca asking for compliance with reg 59 of the
Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(NSW), and most importantly the
Reply which lays out the basis of the case against the defendants.
I understand the
Reply was only recently served to comply with reg 59.
Legislation
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(NSW) provides as
20 Removal of certain claims from claims resolution
(1) A claim is removed from (and is therefore not subject to) the claims
resolution process if—
(a) the Tribunal determines, on application by the claimant and on the basis of
medical evidence presented for the claimant, that
the claim is urgent, or
(b) all the parties to the claim agree, following the required information
exchange, that the claim should not be the subject of
the claims resolution
process and notify the registrar accordingly, or
Note. For example, the parties may consider that the claim raises novel issues
(in the nature of a “test case”) that
are unlikely to be resolved by
the claims resolution process.
(c) the Tribunal determines on application by a party
) that the claim should be removed from the claims
resolution process because another party to the claim has failed to comply with
a requirement of the claims resolution process and that failure has resulted in
substantial prejudice to the applicant or substantial
(d) the Tribunal determines, of its own motion, that the claim should be removed
from the claims resolution process because no documents
have been filed, and the
claim has not otherwise progressed in the claims resolution process, within the
previous 12 months.”
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(NSW) states:
“59 Copies of original claim particulars and replies to accompany new
cross-claim statement of claim
(1) The initiating defendant must serve with the statement of claim for the new
cross-claim copies of each of the following—
(a) the statement of particulars of the plaintiff on the original claim, and
(b) the replies of each of the original claim defendants to the original claim,
(c) an appropriately revised version of
of Form 2 of the initiating
defendant’s reply to the original claim against the defendant, and
(d) any agreement among the original claim defendants as to the contribution
that each is liable to make to damages recovered on
the original claim, and
(e) any determination by a Contributions Assessor as to the contribution that
the original claim defendants are liable to make to
damages recovered on the
original claim.
(2) If the plaintiff on the original claim did not file and serve a statement of
particulars of the plaintiff’s claim, the
initiating defendant must
(instead of serving a copy of the plaintiff’s statement of particulars
with the statement of claim
for the new cross-claim) provide and serve with the
statement of claim for the new cross-claim a statement that provides sufficient
particulars of the original claim, based on information provided by the
plaintiff in the plaintiff’s statement of claim on
the original claim and
any other information provided by the plaintiff.
(3) If the Tribunal determines that the initiating defendant failed to provide
sufficient particulars of the original claim as required
by subclause (2) and
that as a result an issue was left in dispute between the initiating defendant
and a new defendant in proceedings
on the new cross-claim (being an issue
subsequently determined in favour of the new defendant), the initiating
defendant is liable
to pay the new defendant’s costs, assessed on an
indemnity basis, occasioned by the dispute.”
of the UCPR provides as follows:
6.2 How proceedings commenced
(1) Subject to these rules, the practice notes and any other rules of
court, a person may commence proceedings in the court by filing
a statement of
claim or a summons.
(2) Subject to these rules, the practice notes and any other Act or law,
the plaintiff may choose whether to commence proceedings
by statement of claim
or by summons.
(3) Originating process must be served on each defendant.
(3A) An originating process served in accordance with subrule (3) must
include the following—
(a) the seal of the court on the first page (whether an original
sealed copy or a photocopy of a sealed copy),
(b) the case number or unique identifier,
(c) the listing date (if allocated by the court registry).
(4) Subject to subrule (5), originating process is valid for
(a) in the case of proceedings in the Supreme Court, the Land and
Environment Court, the Dust Diseases Tribunal or the Local Court,
for 6 months
after the date on which it is filed, or
(b) in the case of proceedings in the District Court—
(i) for 6 months after the date on which it is filed—
(A) if it is a statement of claim seeking relief in relation only to a debt or
other liquidated claim, or
(B) if the defendant (or at least one of the defendants) is to be
served outside New South Wales, or
(ii) for one month after the date on which it is filed, in any other
(5) Failure to serve originating process within the time limited by these
rules does not prevent the plaintiff from commencing fresh
proceedings by filing
another originating process.”
17 June 2022, the Registrar of the DDT made the following order (exhibit
“Pursuant to r 6.2(4)(a) if the Uniform
Civil Procedure Act
, the Statement
of Claim filed on 26.5.21 (Amaca Pty Ltd v Wallaby Grip Ltd & Anor case no.
21/149136) has not been served within
6 months after the date which it was filed
and is now expired and not valid for service.”
appears to me that Amaca did nothing to prosecute its cross claim from 26 May
2021, until 13 March 2025 when an Amended Revised
Original Party 8 Reply was
filed. Since then, there has been correspondence between the parties, but to no
avail having regard to
the proposed the resolution of the cross-claim. Despite
correspondence between the defendants and Amaca, as at 5 May 2025, Amaca
provided any real response to the questions asked.
affidavit of Mr Victorsen does not really address the period between which the
Division 6 claim was made until 27 May 2025. More
importantly there is no
explanation for the four-year delay.
accept that it is appropriate to remove the matter from the CRP as Amaca has not
complied with Reg 20(c) of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
failing to serve the Reply within the time frames provided in the
Regulation.
in my view, Amaca needed to establish under UCPR r 6.2 that the service of the
cross-claim is void or invalid. The defendants
submit that Amaca asserts that
service did take place in 2021, but there was an irregularity, which they tried
to correct in March
2025. I note however that there has been no explanation for
the inordinate delay occasioned during that period of time.
as the defendants submit that the claim ought be dismissed for want of due
dispatch, I accept that submission. I accept that
the Statement of Claim had not
been served in accordance with reg 59 of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation
(NSW), and as such is an irregularity that cannot be cured.
accept that the claim ought to be dismissed for want of due dispatch.
propose to remove the cross-claim from the CRP and strike it out under UCPR
make the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to reg 20(1)(c) of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
(NSW), the matter is removed from the CRP.
(2) The matter is struck out pursuant to UCPR r 6.2.
(3) Amaca is to pay the costs of the defendants.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (234 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter