URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWLEC/2025/1792.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:00:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
IDC Property Management Pty Ltd v Inner West Council [2025] NSWLEC 1792 (11 November 2025)
Land and Environment Court
New South Wales
IDC Property Management Pty Ltd v Inner West Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWLEC 1792
Hearing Date(s):
2-3 June 2025. Further submissions received 20 June 2025.
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
The Court directs that:
(1) The parties are to confer and agree on a set
of conditions that are consistent with the findings of this judgment.
Agreed conditions of consent are to be filed to the Court by 10 December 2025.
Any conditions not agreed between the parties are
to be accompanied by a short
note detailing the reasons.
(3) Once the agreed conditions are filed and
reviewed, final orders will be made in these proceedings.
Catchwords:
DEVELOPMENT APPEAL — co-living housing — affordable housing
— upgrades to existing lodging rooms — loss of
low income housing
— FSR variation — contributions calculations
Legislation Cited:
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Local Government Act 1919
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
Inner West Local Environmental Plan 2022, cll 4.3, 4.4, 4.6
West Local Infrastructure Contributions Plan 2023,
Development Control Plan 2013
State Environmental Planning Policy (Affordable
Rental Housing) 2009
State Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021,
State Environmental Planning Policy
(Resilience and Hazards) 2021,
Cases Cited:
Australian Protein Recyclers v Goulburn Mulwaree Council
[2006] NSWLEC 641
Billyard Ave Developments Pty Limited v The Council of the City of Sydney
[2025] NSWLEC 22
Four2Five Pty Ltd v Ashfield Council
[2015] NSWCA
Initial Action Pty Ltd v Woollahra Municipal Council
[2018] NSWLEC 118
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
(2004) 218 CLR 216
Properties Australia Pty Ltd v City of Sydney Council
[2018] NSWLEC 66
v Pittwater Council
(2007) 156 LGERA 446
[2007] NSWLEC 827
Texts Cited:
Guidelines for the Retention of Existing Affordable Rental Housing, October
Principal judgment
IDC Property Management Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Inner West Council
(Respondent)
Representation:
J Reid (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Thomson Geer (Applicant)
Council (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/319898
Publication Restriction:
COMMISSIONER:
This appeal is primarily about the potential loss of affordable housing for low
income households in an existing house-let-in-lodgings
and if any loss has been
overcome by the provision of additional affordable housing.
Applicant, IDC Property Management Pty Ltd (IDC) has appealed pursuant to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) (EPA Act)
against Inner West Council’s (Council) refusal of Development Application
No. DA/2023/0900 (DA). The DA seeks
consent for the partial demolition of the
former Commonwealth Bank building and construction of a three storey co-living
house development
with a ground floor café at 119 Booth Street, Annandale
and alterations and additions to the existing house-let-in-lodgings
Booth Street, Annandale, as well as lot consolidation and remediation across
both sites.
consideration of the evidence and submissions, I find that the proposal does
result in a loss of some affordable housing for
low income households, however
this is offset by the overall increase in affordable housing proposed by the
development. The application
should therefore be granted development consent,
subject to conditions.
The proposed development
proposal has changed since its lodgement to Council. Most significantly, the
proposal retains the existing development on site.
At the hearing, further
information supporting the DA was tendered including an Aboricultural Impact
Assessment prepared by Blue
Tree & Consultancy dated April 2025 (Arborist
Assessment) and Remediation Action Plan and Detailed Site Investigation both
by EI Australia. The Court granted leave for IDC to amend their DA for
an amended Plan of Management prepared by The Planning Studio
dated 19 May 2025
(PoM) and amended written request prepared by The Planning Studio dated 19 May
2025 (written request). These documents
were considered during joint expert
reporting, and the amendments were unopposed by Council subject to costs as
agreed or assessed
under s 8.15(3) of the EPA Act.
amended DA seeks consent for the following works:
(1) Lot consolidation, site remediation and partial demolition of the former
Commonwealth Bank Building.
(2) Alterations and additions to the existing house-let-in-lodgings development
at 121-125 Booth Street (Lodgings Development) comprising
(a) Increase of three rooms;
(b) Upgrades to various rooms including new balconies and kitchenettes;
(c) New shared lift area;
(d) New communal open space areas and smaller spaces on some floors;
(e) Reduction in car parking;
(f) Increased landscaping; and
(g) Associated works.
(3) The new co-living development comprises 16 rooms, a café, building
manager’s office and communal outdoor space at
119 Booth Street (Co-Living
Development). The communal indoor and outdoor spaces will be shared between both
developments.
(4) IDC proposes to retain affordable housing for the Lodgings Development and
impose affordable housing restrictions on the Co-Living
Development to cap
rental rates of the rooms to the greater of:
(a) 30% of 120% of the median household income for Greater Sydney; or
(b) Rent chargeable under the National Rental Affordability Scheme.
Accordingly,
IDC submits that it proposes for all 82 rooms across both developments to be
affordable housing as defined under s 1.4
of the EPA Act and s 13 of the State
Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021 (Housing SEPP). This is in dispute
between the
conditions of consent, IDC also proposes to modify conditions to the existing
consents of the Lodgings Development to:
(1) Facilitate use of both developments together as set out in the PoM;
(2) Amend condition 1 of DA3650 to delete reference to married couples; and
(3) Delete condition 18 of BA/1979/10234 to permit cooking facilities in
bedrooms to rooms nominated on the architectural plans.
proposes conditions to stage the development and ensure residents are
temporarily relocated to another property operated by the
Applicant for the same
rent, where available, or to find comparable, subsidised temporary
accommodation.
The site and context
sites at 119, 121 and 125 Booth Street, Annandale are legally known
(1) Lot 1 in DP 404947
(2) Lot 1 in DP 131441
(3) Lot 1 in DP 912129
(4) Lot 17 in DP 654078 and
(5) Lot 1 in DP 916473.
site is irregular in shape and approximately 1,717m2 in size. The frontage along
Booth Street is 54.6m.
on site is the house-let-in-lodgings development, approved in 1970 and modified
in 1982. The existing former Commonwealth
Bank building on site, to be partially
demolished, is not a heritage item. However the adjoining Annandale Post Office
is a heritage
listed site. Directly surrounding the site is a set of shops, low
density residential development, a church and a petrol station.
visual catchment are the Annandale Local Shops.
site has a split zoning, being primarily zoned R1 General Residential and a
small part is zoned E1 Local Centre under the Inner
West Local Environmental
Plan 2022 (IWLEP).
hearing commenced on site. The site viewing included observations of the
streetscape, the existing development (including viewings
of several rooms),
walk over of the site and views of some of the objector’s properties from
the subject site.
the hearing, Council advised that most of the contentions had been resolved
through joint conferencing of the experts, amendments
to the DA and conditions.
The following contentions in the Amended Statement of Facts and Contentions were
(1) Contention 1 – Reduction of existing affordable housing.
(2) Contention 2 – Non-compliance with floor space ratio.
(3) Contention 10 – Public interest.
the hearing, a dispute arose relating to the calculation of contributions.
directed by the Court after the hearing, the parties provided contributions
calculations which now form part of Exhibit P. The
parties also submitted
revised conditions of consent with commentary on disputed conditions, which are
substituted for those at Exhibit
accept the parties’ agreement that all other contentions have been
resolved through joint expert conferencing, amendments
to the DA and conditions
of consent.
Expert Evidence
town planning evidence was submitted in a joint expert report (Planning JER) by
Ms Kate Bartlett for IDC and Mr Eltin Miletic
for Council. Oral evidence was
adduced at the hearing.
heritage evidence was submitted in a joint expert report prepared by Mr John
Oultram for IDC and Ms Lisa Trueman for Council.
waste management evidence was submitted in a joint expert report prepared by Mr
Paul Fuller for IDC and Ms Emma Parker for
loss of affordable housing?
presses contention 1 that the proposal results in an unacceptable reduction of
affordable housing pursuant to s 47 of the
Housing SEPP. Council’s central
issue is whether the proposed works result in a loss of affordable housing for
low income households,
on the basis of the works that are proposed to the
Lodgings Development. Council contends that having regard to s 47(2)(a), (b),
(c), (d), (e) and (g), the loss of affordable housing cannot be mitigated by a
monetary contribution. Council’s key concerns
relate to subsections
47(2)(a), (b), (d) and (e) not being satisfied (including some related ancillary
matters throughout s 47 of
the Housing SEPP). Finally, it is contended that no
information has been provided relating to the structural stability of the
fire safety requirements or viability of the development.
submits that the definition of ‘affordable housing’ is a spectrum
and provides for three separate categories of
affordable housing pursuant to s
1.4 of the EPA Act and s 13 of the Housing SEPP. These separate categories are
not mitigated by
the proposed condition from the Applicant that all rentals will
be broadly ‘affordable housing’. The EPA Act and Housing
relevantly state the following in relation to affordable housing.
1.4 Definitions of the EPA Act provides:
affordable housing
means housing for very low income households, low
income households or moderate income households, being such households as are
by the regulations or as are provided for in an environmental
planning instrument.
13 of the Housing SEPP provides:
13 Affordable housing—the Act, s 1.4(1)
(1) In this Policy, a household is taken to be a very low income
household, low income household or moderate income household if—
(a) the household—
(i) has a gross income within the following ranges of percentages of
the median household income for Greater Sydney or the Rest
(A) very low income household—less than 50%,
(B) low income household—50–less than 80%,
(C) moderate income household—80–120%, and
(ii) pays no more than 30% of the gross income in rent, or
(b) the household—
(i) is eligible to occupy rental accommodation under the National
Rental Affordability Scheme, and
(ii) pays no more rent than the rent that would be charged if the
household were to occupy rental accommodation under the Scheme.
45 of the Housing SEPP states:
low-rental dwelling
means a dwelling that was let at a rental
level no greater than the median rental level during the relevant period in
relation to
a dwelling—
(a) of the same type, and
(b) with the same number of bedrooms, and
(c) in the same local government area.
47 of the Housing SEPP states:
47 Reduction of availability of affordable housing
(1) Development for the following purposes, in relation to a building to which
this Part applies, is permitted with development consent—
(a) demolishing the building,
(b) altering or adding to the structure or fabric of the inside or outside of
the building,
(c) changing the use of the building to another use,
(d) if the building is a residential flat building—strata subdivision of
the building.
(2) In determining whether to grant development consent, the consent authority
must take into account the Guidelines for the Retention
of Existing Affordable
Rental Housing, published by the Department in October 2009 and the
(a) whether the development will reduce the amount of affordable housing in the
(b) whether there is available sufficient comparable accommodation to satisfy
the demand for the accommodation,
(c) whether the development is likely to result in adverse social and economic
effects on the general community,
(d) whether adequate arrangements have been made to assist the residents who are
likely to be displaced to find comparable accommodation,
(e) the extent to which the development will contribute to a cumulative loss of
affordable housing in the local government area,
(f) whether the building is structurally sound, including—
(i) the extent to which the building complies with relevant fire safety
requirements, and
(ii) the estimated cost of carrying out work necessary to ensure the building is
structurally sound and complies with relevant fire
safety requirements,
(g) whether the imposition of an affordable housing condition requiring the
payment of a monetary contribution would adequately mitigate
the reduction of
affordable housing resulting from the development,
(h) for a boarding house—the financial viability of the continued use of
the boarding house.
(3) Sufficient comparable accommodation is conclusively taken not to be
available if, for the 3 months occurring immediately before
the development
application is lodged, the average vacancy rate in private rental accommodation
for Sydney, as published monthly
by the Real Estate Institute of New South
Wales, is less than 3%.
submits that IDC’s proposal, whilst a form of affordable housing, would
lead to a loss of accommodation for ‘low
income households’
currently available by the Lodgings Development.
was agreed by the experts that the existing Lodgings Development is a low rental
residential building as defined by s 45 of the
Housing SEPP. It is agreed that
the proposed alterations to the Lodgings Development triggers s 47(2) and
consideration of the Guidelines
for the Retention of Existing Affordable Rental
Housing, October 2009 (Retention Guidelines).
planning experts also agree that the existing Lodgings Development is best
described as a ‘boarding house’ for the
purposes of considering the
Retention Guidelines.
planning experts agree that DA3650 and DA554/81 did not grant consent for
self-contained rooms and relied on communal kitchen
facilities on each floor,
except for the self-contained room for the on-site manager.
is also agreed that there is no condition on any of the existing consents to
limit the rent of the development.
Miletic, planning expert for Council, considers that there is a reduction of
existing affordable housing. The Retention Guidelines
state that there are less
obvious reductions in existing affordable housing where the amount of
accommodation is similar, but changes
in the quality, type or tenure would
result in accommodation no longer being available to the low rental market. That
is the case
in this DA. Further, the rule of thumb for low rental accommodation
in the Retention Guidelines is the tariff level to qualify for
exemptions. In 2023, that tariff level was $291 per week. Mr Miletic disagrees
with the approach that bedsits or studios
are comparable, noting that the
current approval does not permit self-contained dwellings.
Miletic’s evidence is that the proposal is absent any information on the
rental levels, occupancy and financial viability
of the existing development in
the relevant five year period. Therefore, it is not possible to consider the
reduction and change
of rental characteristics to determine the change in rental
characteristics, value and income generating capacity of the development
47(2) of the Housing SEPP and Retention Guidelines. The assessment of the loss
of existing low rental accommodation as a
result of the changes and the
viability of the development needs to be considered, including whether a
contribution to mitigate the
loss of affordable housing arises.
Miletic’s evidence is that the existing Lodgings Development is not
subject to any condition for rental caps or management
by a community housing
provider (CHP) as the existing building is low rental due to the condition of
the building and standard of
accommodation. The proposal should be managed by a
CHP to ensure the proposed conditions and PoM can be enforced. It is
unreasonable
for Council to enforce these conditions of consent to ensure rents
do not exceed the maximum allowed.
Miletic’s evidence is that the proposed affordable housing conditions seek
to address the reduction in existing affordable
housing that will arise from the
proposal to comprehensively refurbish the standard of accommodation and enable a
significant increase
from existing rental levels, which were as low as $100 a
week at March 2022. The proposed condition would allow the private operator
determine the market value and apply a 20% reduction, which would be a
significant increase from the current rent paid by existing
tenants and displace
current tenants.
Bartlett, planning expert for IDC, says that the proposal retains the existing
Lodgings Development, increases affordable housing
by 19 rooms and seeks to
impose affordable housing conditions on both developments that are not otherwise
subject to such conditions.
Bartlett’s evidence is that the Lodgings Development can currently charge
rent without any cap. The Applicant has owned the
site since 2022 and those
rental records have been provided which show the median rental amount as being
generally below a ‘bedsit’
or ‘studio’ in the Inner West
LGA. These rents range from approximately $150 to $400 a week. Whilst a maximum
cap is proposed, the characteristics of the Lodgings Development will
still impose its own cap and such a condition does not mean
that rents will be
raised to this level. Those rent changes could occur now. The proposed condition
imposes a maximum. In responding
to questions on if the rooms are rented in the
low income category, Ms Bartlett’s evidence is that the income levels for
were unknown and that the rental amounts charged in 2024 all exceeded
that year’s tariff rate.
Bartlett’s evidence is that the PoM and Social Impact Assessment prepared
by The Planning Studio dated 25 November 2024 (SIA)
provide details on the
careful management of the temporary relocation of residents during the
construction stage, including relocation
in a nearby development owned by the
Applicant or potential subsidies in nearby developments.
Bartlett’s evidence is that the proposal does not result in any loss of
affordable housing and instead increases affordable
housing by 19 rooms.
Accordingly, subsections 47(2)(c), (f) and (h) do not apply, as the proposal
overall increases affordable housing.
Further, the amended DA does not rely on
fire safety upgrades, structural stability issues or viability concerns as
reasons to support
the application. Ms Bartlett relies on the Retention
Guidelines that state that care is to be taken to ensure owners are not
for maintaining the value and income generating capacity of their
asset through necessary upgrades. It is acknowledged that the vacancy
that there is no sufficient comparable accommodation in the locality, however
maintains that there is no loss of affordable
housing from the proposal.
Bartlett’s evidence is that as the proposal increases, not decreases
affordable housing, no contribution should be
Submissions
Reid submits that the proposed works in the Lodgings Development are for the
purpose of maintenance, providing accessible rooms,
fire safety upgrades and
modest increases to the amenity through some balconies and communal spaces
shared with the co-living occupants.
The Lodgings Development will essentially
remain and increase by three rooms. 16 co-living rooms are proposed by the
Co-Living Development,
resulting in a total of 82 affordable housing rooms.
Reid submits that there is no loss of affordable housing. Instead, the proposal
increases affordable housing stock through the
proposed rental caps that are
consistent with the definition of affordable housing. The upgrades to the
existing rooms are a modest
refresh of the 1970’s building, involve four
new kitchenettes, a new shared communal space with the Co-Living Development and
fire safety measures. The communal spaces are not a significant upgrade, do not
include amenities such as sauna or spa facilities
and are located in an
undercroft area. The plans indicate that a number of the existing lodging rooms
already have self-contained
facilities. The proposal includes a reduction of car
parking spaces, in line with the general presumption of reducing car parking
affordable housing sites.
submits that as detailed in the SIA, rents paid by existing residents is
slightly more than bedsitter rooms in the Inner West
LGA and significantly less
than studio or 1 bedroom apartments in Annandale. As the size of the rooms and
access to private ensuite
facilities will generally not change, rents are
unlikely to materially increase. Temporary interruption of any existing tenants
to be managed through staged construction and relocation to similar
alternative accommodation.
Reid submits that the 1970 and 1982 consents applying to the Lodgings
Development are not subject to any condition imposing a maximum
rental. Despite
the lack of a condition, the Lodgings Development has provided accommodation for
‘low income earners’
since it was built. In accordance with Ord 70
Local Government Act 1919
(NSW), the premises were historically
licenced as a ‘boarding/lodging house’. There is no reduction in
rooms, no loss
of affordable housing and a contribution should not be imposed.
There is also no need or requirement for the rooms to be managed
Reid submits that a number of the matters for consideration under s 47(2) of the
Housing SEPP are not relevant as there is no loss
of affordable housing.
Therefore, there is no need to consider comparable accommodation, cumulative
loss of affordable housing, structural
integrity or development viability. To
the extent that any tenants might be disrupted during construction, IDC proposes
to find alternate
accommodation in the conditions of consent.
Reid submits that there is no evidence from Council that the proposal will
substantially increase the amount of rent that can be
charged. IDC is not
required to demonstrate that either, given the proposed affordable housing rent
condition across both developments.
Harker for Council submits that the affordable housing definition in the EPA Act
and Housing SEPP adopts a tripartite series of
categories. Affordable housing
can be for a very low income household or a low income household or a moderate
income household. Mr
Harker submits that in construing the provision, the
definition should be placed into the provision and then construed in its context
and purpose:
Kelly v The Queen
[2004] HCA 12
(2004) 218 CLR 216
Harker submits that the stated purposes of the affordable housing provisions (ss
14 and 15 of the Housing SEPP) include the need
for affordable housing across
the State, creation of mixed and balanced communities and a socially diverse
residential population
representative of all income groups. Construed in this
context, providing accommodation for one of the categories is a form of
housing. But movement from one of those categories to another is
still an impact and a loss of one of the defined categories of affordable
Harker submits that the Retention Guidelines recognise less obvious or modest
changes to rooms may result in some or all accommodation
no longer being
available to the low rental market. Improvements aren’t opposed, but
accommodation for people on low incomes
need to remain available. Here, as a
result of the proposed upgrades to the Lodgings Development and IDC’s
conditions, there
would be a loss of low income household affordable housing.
The proposed alterations, improvement of facilities and IDC’s proposed
conditions would allow rent to be charged to the level of a moderate income
Harker submits that IDC has not addressed the potential loss of accommodation
for low income households, as it adopts a global
approach to the definition of
affordable housing.
Harker submits that the Applicant bears the persuasive burden to demonstrate
that consent should be granted: see
Australian Protein Recyclers v Goulburn
Mulwaree Council
[2006] NSWLEC 641
. Further, IDC has not provided
evidence in relation to the potential increases in rent from the proposed
upgrade works. In circumstances
where IDC has the capacity to provide this
evidence, less weight should be given to their submissions that there will not
be a reduction
in affordable housing for those in the low income bracket. Mr
Miletic’s evidence is that there will likely be an increase in
however the extent of the increase is unknown. The assessment required by
47 of the Housing SEPP therefore cannot be undertaken.
therefore submits that given the high demand for affordable housing stated by
both experts, IDC should provide evidence that
there will be no reduction in low
income affordable housing. In the alternative, a condition should be imposed to
limit rent to the
low income / tariff level. The condition would allow
increases, but not beyond the low income category.
is no dispute between the parties that the Lodgings Development is a lawful use
subject to the 1970 and 1982 consents, pursuant
to s 4.70 of the EPA Act.
accept the agreement of the parties that the existing Lodgings Development is a
low rental residential building as defined under
ss 45 and 46 of the Housing
SEPP. I also accept that the Lodgings Development is best described as a
boarding house for the purposes
of the Retention Guidelines, as opposed to a
residential flat building as it better meets the definition of a boarding house.
existing development provided lodgers with accommodation for more than three
months with shared facilities. It did not provide rental
accommodation
consistent with the definition for a low rental residential flat building.
accept the parties’ agreement that s 47 applies as the proposal seeks to
alter or add to the structure or fabric of the inside
or outside of the
building. In this instance, alterations are proposed to the inside and outside
(s 47(1)(b)).
Retention Guidelines overarchingly seek to retain or mitigate the loss of
existing affordable rental housing. They also emphasise
that a balanced
consideration is required:
‘A balanced consideration of these criteria is required. A development
assessed as having poor outcomes under some of the criteria
may nonetheless
warrant approval if these are outweighed by positive outcomes under the other
criteria...’ (Retention Guidelines,
the criteria referred to is from the repealed State Environmental Planning
Policy (Affordable Rental Housing) 2009 (SEPP ARH),
these have been replicated
in relatively similar terms under the Housing SEPP in s 47, with some minor
amendments to the wording
of some criteria.
47(2) of the Housing SEPP requires that the Retention Guidelines and the
criteria of the subsection must be taken into
account prior to granting
development consent.
Are there categories of affordable
accept Mr Harker’s submissions that the loss of one of the subcategories,
even from shifting into another subcategory of affordable
housing, is a loss of
affordable housing. I make this finding on the basis of:
(1) The specific delineation of three categories of affordable housing in the
definition of s 1.3 of the EPA Act and s 13 of the
Housing SEPP.
(2) That the provision should be read with the definition and then construed in
that context (
). Whilst ss 14 and 15 of the Housing SEPP are
concerned with the imposition of conditions for an affordable housing
contribution
or land dedication under s 7.32 of the EPA Act, I accept that the
principles of the Housing SEPP at s 3 seek to mitigate the loss
of affordable
housing, as defined. Therefore, s 47(2)(a) is construed as requiring
consideration of whether the development will
reduce the amount of affordable
housing (as defined in s 1.3 of the EPA Act and
s 13 of the Housing SEPP). I
accept that a loss of rental accommodation for low income households to moderate
households would be
a loss of affordable housing.
this basis and for the reasons detailed under my consideration of s 47(2) of the
Housing SEPP and the Retention Guidelines, I accept
that the proposal would
result in a loss of some affordable housing for low income households.
I find that the potential loss of some affordable housing serving those
households is not fatal to the proposal. Ultimately,
the proposed development
will result in an increased amount of overall affordable housing, from 63 rooms
to 82 rooms. The Retention
Guidelines detail that an increase in new affordable
housing is a relevant consideration and one that may neutralise any loss of
rental accommodation. In addition, whilst some upgraded lodging rooms will
likely increase in cost, many lodging rooms remain
as existing. As I set out
below, I accept that the proposed loss of some affordable housing is
sufficiently offset by the increase
in affordable housing proposed. I also set
out my consideration of s 47(2) of the Housing SEPP and the Retention Guidelines
Whether the development will reduce the amount of
affordable housing in the area (s 47(2)(a) of the Housing SEPP)
criterion is described, unsurprisingly, as the more fundamental element of the
criteria and is also the key issue raised by Council.
accept Mr Miletic’s evidence, consistent with the Retention Guidelines,
that less obvious changes can result in some or all
rental accommodation no
longer being available to the low rental market. Some of the proposed works are
squarely considered in the
Retention Guideline examples, including room en-suite
facilities, that would increase rents/tariffs beyond the reach of low income
also accept that whilst there is no condition to limit the amount of rent that
can be charged, the modest conditions of the rooms
serves as a cap, as
demonstrated by the rental history within the relevant period (s 45 of the
Housing SEPP).
the evidence presented at the hearing, it is difficult to determine with
certainty whether the proposed alterations will increase
the amount of rent and
therefore, whether those rooms would be unavailable to low income households. I
accept Mr Harker’s submissions
that IDC had the capacity and ability to
provide such evidence but chose not to. This evidence would have better assisted
consideration
of this key issue. However I accept that there is sufficient
evidence to enable consideration of s 47(2)(a) of the Housing SEPP
(1) There is agreement between the planners that the rental information and
median household data is known, and that the rooms were
rented as a low rental
residential building in the relevant period (Exs M, O, 2, 3 and 7).
(2) Whilst the existing tenant’s income is not known, the rental data
shows that the rent paid is within the amount affordable
for a low income
household based on the median household income for Greater Sydney (Ex 7) and the
definition of affordable housing.
(3) The proposal is clear about which rooms are proposed to be upgraded.
(4) The proposed rent is to be capped to affordable housing for moderate
households.
(5) The Retention Guidelines provide adequate guidance on what will likely
increase the rent of rooms, which has been considered
by the experts.
the available evidence and consideration of s 47(2)(a) of the Housing SEPP and
the Retention Guidelines, I accept that the proposed
balconies along the front
façade to 21 rooms, upgrades to provide self-contained facilities
including some accessible rooms
(as shown in yellow on the architectural plans)
and a new communal area would have some impact and likely increase the rent that
could be charged.
accept Mr Miletic’s evidence that the Retention Guidelines detail that
alterations such as providing ensuite facilities may
increase rent beyond the
reach of low income residents. These changes increase the amenity and changes
the quality and type of accommodation
provided. I accept Mr Miletic’s
evidence and find that the amended DA proposes similar amenity increases, to the
the proposed kitchenettes/ensuites and balconies, that would likely
lead to an increase in rent as it changes the quality and type
of accommodation.
a lesser extent, I accept that the proposed communal areas may also have the
impact of a rental increase. I accept Ms Reid’s
submissions that the
communal areas are modest. At the site view, the existing rooms shown to the
Court and parties were also quite
modest. The communal areas would be shared
between a number of rooms, therefore any increase of rent to any individual room
result of this increased amenity is also likely to be modest. There are
existing communal/kitchen areas in the Lodgings Development,
and I accept that
the proposed modest communal areas would not meaningfully change the quality or
accept Ms Reid’s submissions that the reduction in car parking from 29 to
18 spaces is a relevant factor. I find that car
parking is a factor in the type
and quality of accommodation provided, and this is reflected in the rental data
provided in Ex O,
where car parking is rented at an additional cost to the
tenant/lodger. It follows that the proposed reduction in car parking would
to a reduction in rent for rooms that were coupled with or chose to take up a
car parking space.
the lift is an upgrade, I consider this to primarily serve the new Co-Living
Development and also provides a necessary upgrade
to facilitate accessible
access to both developments. I consider the lift to be a neutral factor and
necessary maintenance upgrade.
all of the existing rooms are proposed to be upgraded. The architectural plans
do not indicate ‘new structures’ to
37 rooms, where kitchenettes are
shown in blue. The architectural plans show in yellow what the proposed works
are, and therefore,
any self-contained structures shown in blue in those rooms
do not form part of the proposed development. I have not considered these
proposed upgrades. Whether those rooms have or need consent for the kitchenette
facilities shown on the plans is a separate matter
for the parties. Accordingly,
I find that 37 rooms will be maintained in their current condition and with
consideration of my findings
above, will generally be maintained as affordable
housing for low income households.
the evidence available, I accept that the rooms that will have alterations or
upgrades with kitchenettes/ensuites and/or balconies
will change the quality or
given the increased amenity
provided (some rooms will benefit from multiple
on the evidence of the planners and Retention Guidelines in lieu of valuation or
similar evidence, I have considered the worst
case scenario loss, being a loss
of 26 rooms from low income households to moderate income affordable housing
rooms. The test of
‘significantly higher rents’ does not apply, as
the Lodgings Development is not characterised as a ‘low rental
residential
flat building’ but is a low income boarding house by the Retention
Guidelines.
accept Ms Reid’s submissions that the loss of affordable housing does not
mean the DA should be refused. The Retention Guidelines
‘Finally, consideration must be given to any new affordable accommodation
being provided on the site which offsets the loss
of existing low rental
accommodation on the site. This may result in a nil net loss or possibly a gain
in low rental accommodation
available on the site.’
proposal squarely falls within this consideration. An additional three rooms are
proposed for the Lodgings Development and the
Co-Living Development will provide
an additional 16 rooms subject to a condition to cap rents to the affordable
housing definition.
balancing these matters for consideration, I accept that overall, the loss of
affordable housing for low income households has
been offset on the site by the
increase in overall affordable housing, as envisaged by the Retention
Guidelines.
I have found that the loss of some affordable housing rooms for low income rooms
has been offset by the proposed increase in global
affordable housing rooms, the
Retention Guidelines foreshadow that this fundamental criteria will affect how
the rest of the criteria
is considered. The rest of the Retention Guidelines are
focused on mitigating the loss of affordable housing and providing adequate
arrangements for residents to find comparable accommodation, which is limited in
these circumstances. Section 47(2) requires that
these matters be taken into
Whether there is available sufficient comparable
accommodation to satisfy the demand for the accommodation (s 47(2)(b) of the
Retention Guidelines stipulate that where a vacancy rate is less than 3% (as
published by the Real Estate Institute of NSW), than
no weight can be given to
evidence purporting to establish that there is sufficient comparable
accommodation.
was agreed in the evidence, and I accept, that given the Rental Vacancy Rate in
Sydney was 1.5% at the time of the hearing, that
there is not sufficient
comparable accommodation in the locality. In considering this aspect, I accept
that the overall increase
in affordable housing offsets the lack of available
comparable accommodation.
Whether the development is likely to
result in adverse social and economic effects on the general community (s
47(2)(c) of the Housing
SIA sets out that the development is likely to have a low to medium long term
positive social impact on Annandale and the Inner
West community. The SIA forms
this view on the basis of an overall increase in affordable housing, new and
improved communal areas
and retention of the Lodgings Development. The SIA also
proposes comparable accommodation for residents during the construction phase.
accept Ms Bartlett’s evidence and recommendations in the SIA that any
impacts on residents during the construction phase can
be managed through the
proposed relocation to another comparable development or through rental
subsidies to other rentals within
a 10km area. I accept Ms Bartlett’s
evidence that the benefits of the amended DA include an additional 19 rooms,
improved accessibility
within the development and an enforceable cap on the
maximum rent that can be charged within the affordable housing range.
will be some negative social and economic impacts. Some low income residents may
no longer be able to reside in the Lodgings
Development or the area, or may face
paying more for housing and have less to spend on other essentials and living
expenses. In the
current circumstances of the NSW housing market, these impacts
are not to be treated lightly. This needs to be balanced with the
benefits to the community through an increase of 19 affordable housing rooms. I
accept Ms Bartlett’s evidence that
the proposed cap will not automatically
mean a rent increase to that figure, which the Applicant could do now. I find
that the retention
of a significant number of the Lodgings Development rooms and
the provision of more affordable housing on site to house more people
affordable housing accommodation will overall have positive, not adverse, social
and economic effects on the general community.
Whether adequate
arrangements have been made to assist the residents who are likely to be
displaced to find comparable accommodation
(s 47(2)(d) of the Housing
the reasons detailed previously, I accept that during construction, comparable
accommodation during construction will be provided
for. Condition 54 enforces
those details, and I accept Council’s version of the condition that the
relevant staging and resident
relocation plans are to be provided to Council for
approval, not the certifying authority. Council is better placed with the
and vested community interest to ensure this occurs in the appropriate
manner, rather than a certifier, given the uniqueness of such
a condition.
did not propose any arrangements for permanent alternative accommodation as it
considered that there was no loss of affordable
housing. The SIA identifies the
demographics of many of the existing residents, some of whom may be at a
competitive disadvantage
as a result of their age (the Retention Guidelines
include those who are elderly, unemployed, living with a disability or on
benefits) (pp 16 and 19).
my findings that the upgrades to a number of rooms are likely to result in a
rental increase beyond the low income household
range, with consideration of
this provision and the Retention Guidelines, I will make a direction for the
parties to provide a condition
of consent that incorporates some or all of the
options recommended in the Retention Guidelines. This is appropriate in the
circumstances
(1) A majority of rooms will be retained without any change.
(2) The proposal will overall increase affordable housing.
(3) The Applicant operates other affordable housing developments.
(4) The SIA identifies other affordable housing developments in the area.
(5) The SIA identifies some residents who may be at a competitive disadvantage,
but overall details a tenant mix of working professionals
at various ages and
international students. The SIA details that residents would be given a first
right to return to the premises
after construction works, which may be
acceptable to some or all tenants in their circumstances on a permanent basis,
even if some
of the upgraded rooms have increased in rents.
(6) The Retention Guidelines recognise that conditions of consent may be
appropriate to create the displacement plan.
(7) I would note, but don’t rely on the below observations as they were
not put to the parties during the hearing, that there
were a range of rents
charged within the existing Lodgings Development. Rents ranged from $100 to $460
per week and increased over
2023 to 2024 (Ex O). It may be the case that some
residents may elect to return to their room (as per the proposed temporary
plan during construction) or may wish to reside in one of the
upgraded rooms or in a co-living room. If those residents choose an
room or co-living room, there would be less demand on those rooms not being
upgraded for existing tenants.
consideration of s 47(2)(d) of the Housing SEPP, the Retention Guidelines and
the above, I find that there is sufficient evidence
to direct a condition of
consent for a ‘Displaced Resident Plan’ that is consistent with the
Retention Guidelines and
at a minimum, incorporates the following:
(1) First right of return for existing residents to firstly, the Existing
Lodgings Development and as second option, the Co-Living
Development.
(2) Extension of the period of notice to vacate the premises beyond 60 days.
(3) First rights to the provision of accommodation in other premises in the same
ownership/management or by arrangement with other
owners/managers.
(4) Where accommodation cannot be provided for within the proposed development,
payment of relocation costs or equivalent one-off
The extent to which the development will contribute to a cumulative loss
of affordable housing in the local government area (s 47(2)(e)
of the Housing
accept Ms Bartlett’s evidence and Ms Reid’s submissions that, when
balancing the net increase of 19 affordable rooms,
the extent of some of the
upgrades and conditions of consent to restrain the development as affordable
housing up to the moderate
range, means that the cumulative loss is acceptable
in these circumstances.
Whether the building is structurally
sound (s 47(2)(f)); and
For a boarding house – the financial
viability of the continued use of the boarding house (s 47(2)(h) of the Housing
have dealt with these matters together, as their consideration is similar.
Whilst it was somewhat in contention that these matters
hadn’t been
addressed, I have considered these provisions and accept IDC’s submissions
that structural stability issues,
fire safety upgrades and the feasibility of
the development are not relied on to justify the proposed works. These criteria
have very limited application.
would note that the proposal is accompanied by a Building Code of Australia
Capability and Fire Safety Upgrade Report prepared by
Incode Solutions dated 20
November 2024 (BCA and Fire Report), that details recommendations for fire
safety upgrades. These upgrades
as well as upgrades to provide equitable access
through the lifts are positive aspects of the proposed development.
Whether the imposition of an affordable housing condition
requiring the payment of a monetary contribution would adequately mitigate
reduction of affordable housing resulting from the development (s 47(2)(g) of
the Housing SEPP).
Retention Guidelines state that a balanced assessment of the other criteria will
usually find that a development satisfies some,
but not all criteria, and with
varying degrees of impacts. Indeed, this proposal satisfies some, but not all
am satisfied that in the circumstances of this case, the imposition of a
condition pursuant to s 7.32 of the EPA Act and s 48 of
the Housing SEPP is not
warranted. I accept Ms Barlett’s evidence and Ms Reid’s submissions
that the proposed development
proposes an overall increase in affordable
housing. There is no requirement for Co-Living Development to be affordable
provide any rental cap. The proposal to cap rent to the Co-Living
Development provides a real increase of affordable housing. To
a lesser extent,
I accept the evidence that there are no conditions to cap rent on the existing
Lodgings Development, however I also
accept that the type and characteristics of
the Lodgings Development impose their own restrictions.
rental cap would be legally enforceable through conditions of consent. Whilst
new boarding houses under the Housing SEPP require
a CHP to manage the housing,
and CHP’s are recognised as best practice to manage affordable housing,
there are no restrictions
on the private market also providing affordable
housing. Conditions of consent are legally enforceable by Council and any owner
the site would be required to demonstrate compliance. To this end, I will
direct the parties to provide a proposed condition on record
keeping of rents
and salaries for tenants to ensure the condition can be enforced.
the basis that there is an overall increase in affordable housing and that the
site will provide a diversity of affordable housing,
I find that an affordable
housing contribution should not be imposed.
having considered all of the matters under Chapter 2, Part 3 of the Housing
SEPP, I find that there are no reasons to refuse
the application on this basis.
Council’s Contention 10 public interest was pressed on similar grounds, I
find that the proposal is in the public interest
as it provides increased
affordable housing and diversity of affordable housing on site. In terms of
setting an adverse precedent,
each development needs to be assessed on its own
merits. In this case, the retention and provision of a diverse range of
housing is in the public interest. In relation to the community
submissions, I have addressed these further below. I would also note
issue raised by a community objector does not make it an issue in contention
unless squarely raised by a Respondent in its
contentions: see
Billyard Ave
Developments Pty Limited v The Council of the City of Sydney
[2025] NSWLEC
Should the breach to floor space ratio be
pressed that Contention 2 in relation to the proposed breach to cl 4.4 of the
IWLEP floor space ratio (FSR) had not been satisfied.
At the hearing, the
contention was narrowed to a disagreement on whether there were sufficient
environmental planning grounds.
allowable maximum FSR for 121-125 Booth Street is 0.6:1. The maximum allowable
FSR for the part of 119 Booth Street zoned R1 is
0.66:1 including the bonus for
the co-living development. The allowable maximum FSR for the part of 119 Booth
Street zoned E1 is
1:1 including the 10% bonus for the gross floor area of the
co-living development.
existing development on121-125 Booth Street has a gross floor area (GFA) of
2,070m2, equating to an FSR of 1.81:1. The existing
development has a 202%
variation to the current maximum FSR. An additional 45m2 is proposed, which
would result in a total variation
E1 portion of 119 Booth Street proposes a variation of 17.86m2 or 22.09%.
R1 portion of 119 Booth Street proposes a variation of 269.62m2 or 81.29%.
4.4 of the IWLEP FSR states:
(1) The objectives of this clause are as follows—
(a) to establish a maximum floor space ratio to enable appropriate
development density,
(b) to ensure development density reflects its locality,
(c) to provide an appropriate transition between development of
different densities,
(d) to minimise adverse impacts on local amenity,
(e) to increase the tree canopy and to protect the use and enjoyment
of private properties and the public domain.
(2) The maximum floor space ratio for a building on any land is not to
exceed the floor space ratio shown for the land on the
Space Ratio Map
(2B) The maximum floor space ratio for development for the purposes of
residential accommodation is as follows—
Where the site area is greater or equal to 450m2 - 0.6:1
4.6 of the IWLEP exceptions to development standards states:
4.6 Exceptions to development standards
(1) The objectives of this clause are as follows—
(a) to provide an appropriate degree of flexibility in applying
certain development standards to particular development,
(b) to achieve better outcomes for and from development by allowing
flexibility in particular circumstances.
(2) Development consent may, subject to this clause, be granted for
development even though the development would contravene a development
imposed by this or any other environmental planning instrument. However, this
clause does not apply to a development standard
that is expressly excluded from
the operation of this clause.
(3) Development consent must not be granted to development that
contravenes a development standard unless the consent authority
is satisfied the
applicant has demonstrated that—
(a) compliance with the development standard is unreasonable or
unnecessary in the circumstances, and
(b) there are sufficient environmental planning grounds to justify
the contravention of the development standard.
Updated cl 4.6 Variation to FSR has been prepared by The Planning Studio dated
19 May 2025 (written request) (pursuant to
Environmental Planning
and Assessment Regulation 2021
(NSW)). The written request sets out the
Applicant’s justification to vary the development
Miletic for Council says that the existing development significantly exceeds the
FSR and the further breach to the FSR for both
sites is excessive. The
environmental planning grounds relied on by IDC is not agreed, as the proposal
is not for affordable housing.
Consistent with the evidence given for Contention
1, Mr Miletic says that the co-living rooms are not affordable housing and they
will not be managed by a CHP. If the new development was defined as a boarding
house under the Housing SEPP, which would be eligible
for a 25% FSR bonus, it
would be agreed that the development would be for affordable housing. Further,
the additional communal living
area is not required for the existing Lodgings
Development when assessed against the now repealed ARH SEPP.
Bartlett for IDC relies on the written request, which details the following
justification to vary the FSR development standard.
The written
requests – 121-125 Booth Street and 119 Booth Street
site is subject to two zonings and two FSR’s and the calculations are
complex. The written request is split into three variation
requests. I have
considered each one, but will deal with the requests together, as the grounds
for each precondition are generally
the same and the only contention is whether
there are sufficient environmental planning grounds.
with the development standard is unreasonable or unnecessary in the
circumstances (cl 4.6(3)(a) of the IWLEP)
written requests rely on the following justification:
(1) The existing 1970 and 1982 consents are subject to a condition that FSR is
not to exceed 2:1, which would equate to 2,282.52m2
or 233% variation.
(2) The proposed FSR is below the condition of 2:1. The current as-built GFA of
2,070m2, as calculated in accordance with the IWLEP,
results in an FSR variation
(3) The proposed additional GFA of 45m2 is still less than the 2:1 FSR condition
imposed under the existing consents.
(4) The increase in FSR allows for new indoor and outdoor facilities for
existing and future residents and the overall upgrades will
improve the existing
condition of the development.
(5) The written request utilises the often cited decision of Preston CJ in
Wehbe v Pittwater Council
[2007] NSWLEC
) at [42] to [43] to demonstrate that compliance
is unreasonable or unnecessary, as the objectives of the development standard
been met for the following reasons:
(a) The provision of additional affordable housing on site.
(b) The proposed upgrades and increased amenity to the existing building.
(c) The size and scale of the new two storey built form is consistent with low
density dwellings and the surrounding built form.
(d) The stepping of the new built form to allow the development to transition
between the different densities, zones and heritage
(e) The non-compliant FSR parts of the buildings do not increase overshadowing
or visual and acoustic impacts.
(f) The landscaping has been increased from 77m2 to a compliant 299m2.
Sufficient environmental planning grounds to justify the contravention of
the development standard (cl 4.6(3)(b) of the IWLEP)
written request relies on the following environmental planning
(1) Provision of an additional 19 affordable housing rooms across both
developments.
(2) Retention of the existing building that is already at 1.8:1 where 0.6:1 is
now the maximum. Any redevelopment will not be able
to achieve the current yield
(3) The current consents allow an FSR up to 2:1.
(4) Improvements to the amenity of the existing Lodgings Development.
(5) Fire and building upgrades to the existing Lodgings Development.
(6) Increased landscaping and removal of hard stand areas.
(7) Compatibility with existing surrounding development and as agreed by the
heritage experts.
(8) Lack of amenity impacts from the variations.
(9) Dual zoning of the site.
calculations of the FSR breaches are complicated, as a small part of the site is
a different zoning with a different FSR. The
method of the FSR calculations was
not in dispute between the parties. The only dispute is whether there are
sufficient environmental
planning grounds to justify the contravention of the
Environmental
planning grounds must be ‘sufficient’ in order to justify convening
the development standard: see
Initial Action Pty Ltd v Woollahra Municipal
[2018] NSWLEC 118
focus is on the contravention, not the development as a whole: see
Pty Ltd v Ashfield Council
[2015] NSWCA 248
am satisfied that the variations relate to the provision of affordable housing,
which is a sufficient environmental planning ground.
accept Ms Reid’s submissions that affordable housing can be provided by
private entities. The Housing SEPP facilitates, incentivises
and regulates some
forms of affordable housing (amongst other development types). However, it is
not the only source that can facilitate
affordable housing. IDC has proposed a
development, to be privately managed, that meets the definition of affordable
housing through
capped rents in accordance with s 1.4 of the EPA Act and
13 of the Housing SEPP.
Housing SEPP facilitates co-living housing as diverse housing, not affordable
housing. However, IDC’s proposed PoM and conditions
seek to cap rent for
the rooms to the maximum household amount defined as affordable housing under s
1.4 of the EPA Act and s 13
of the Housing SEPP. The Lodgings Development will
also be subject to the same rental cap and has a history as providing affordable
housing. I accept on this basis that both proposed developments are affordable
consent would be needed to remove the proposed affordable condition in the
future. If that were to occur and assuming the
Housing SEPP or an equivalent
exists at that time, a consent authority would need to consider a reduction in
affordable housing in
determining whether to grant consent.
is no dispute between the parties that IDC’s proposed condition to enforce
their rental cap proposal is unlawful. In terms
of enforcing the condition,
there is no requirement for the proposal, or all affordable housing, to be
managed by a CHP. I accept
to an extent that it should not be Council’s
role to proactively ensure that the conditions are being complied with. However,
it must be assumed that a proponent will comply with the conditions of consent.
this end and to make any enforcement a more straight forward task should Council
become aware of an issue, I will direct the parties
to draft a condition of
consent that records of rental payments and each tenant’s household income
are to be kept for at least
five years from every rental. This should be
straight forward, as most rental applications require proof of income. These
are to be made readily available to Council on request.
the proposed FSR variations all relate to affordable housing, whether in the
form of actual rooms or communal areas, these
are all for the purpose of
providing affordable housing. Accordingly, I accept that IDC has demonstrated
that the proposed variations
to cl 4.4 FSR have sufficient environmental
planning grounds (s 4.6(3)(b) of the IWLEP).
a precondition to granting consent, I must also be satisfied that compliance
with the development standard is unreasonable or unnecessary
circumstances (s 4.6(3)(a) of the IWLEP). I accept the agreement of the parties
that compliance is unreasonable or unnecessary
in these circumstances
(1) The circumstances are unique in that the existing development significantly
exceeds the FSR on site.
(2) The FSR variations meet the objectives of the development standard in that:
(a) Objective (a) is instructive about what the FSR control does.
(b) The density of the variations are consistent with the locality, with
consideration of its location, buildings directly across
the street, the
heritage listed post office and location in the visual catchment of the shopping
strip (objective (b)).
(c) The variations facilitate a built form transition and rear setback to the
low density residential properties to the north and
heritage buildings to the
east. The variations do not increase the height of the existing Lodgings
Development along the north, north-west
and west elevations (objective (c)).
(d) There are no adverse impacts on local amenity from the breaches. Privacy
screens have been added to shield privacy concerns and
the bulk of the
variations are further setback from the rear boundary. The indoor communal open
spaces that contribute to the variation
will not have any privacy impacts and
minimal acoustic impacts given their location, enclosed nature and modest
kitchen / dining
facilities (objective (d)).
(e) The existing site primarily comprises built form and concrete areas. The
development as a whole increases landscaping from 77m2
to 299m2, and critically,
the proposed variations do not impede the increased landscaping. The existing
tree canopy on site and adjoining
the site in either private or public land are
all proposed to be protected and will not be impacted by FSR variations
(e)). With consideration of objectives (e) and (d), the variations do
not impact the use or enjoyment of private properties or the
public domain.
justification given in relation to building upgrades and similar matters are not
accepted, as they do not relate to the variation
and are simply general benefits
of the development.
these reasons, I am satisfied that IDC has demonstrated that cl 4.6(3) has been
met and that the proposed variations to the FSR
should be allowed.
Applicable development contributions
during the hearing was a dispute on the applicable development contributions
payable under the Inner West Local Infrastructure
Contributions Plan 2023 dated
20 February 2023 (Ex P) (Contributions Plan).
applicable sections of the Contributions Plan are summarised below:
(1) Where a development results in a net population increase, a s 7.11
contribution is required.
(2) The net population increase is determined by the existing residents being
subtracted from the new residents, utilising Table
2 – Occupancy rate to
calculate net increase in population (p 23).
(3) Occupancy rates for co-living housing, rooms less than 16m2 are calculated
at one occupant per room. Rooms above 16m2, are calculated
at two occupants per
room. These figures are to include managers rooms (p 23).
(4) The s 7.11 contribution is then calculated as the net increase in residents
x per residents contribution rate, as indexed (p
(5) Table 4 Section 7.11 contribution rates at October 2021 calculates
‘other residential uses on a per resident, per occupancy
2.1’. The contribution rate per resident is $10,021 (p 28).
Submissions and evidence
contends that the contributions amount payable is $319,277 because:
(1) The ‘per room rate’ submitted by IDC should be a ‘per
occupant rate’. The applicable rate for co-living
accommodation is based
on the number of residents.
(2) Mr Miletic’s evidence is that the number of existing rooms less than
16m2 is 9. This is on the basis of the 1970 consent,
which stated there were 9
single person rooms. The 1970 consent and 1982 consent stipulate that there are
54 double person rooms.
Mr Miletic’s evidence was that these figures on
the consent were cross referenced and measured against the plans. Council
submitted on the basis of further plan measurements that the existing
rooms comprised 7 rooms less than 16m2 and 56 rooms greater
(contributions calculator received 20 June 2025).
(3) Mr Miletic’s evidence is that the new rooms include 18 rooms under
16m2 and 64 rooms greater than 16m2.
(4) Council submits that the difference is what the existing credit should be
and the application of the Environmental Planning and
Assessment (Local
Infrastructure Contributions) Direction 2012 dated 21 August 2012 (Ministerial
Direction).
(5) Council submits that if the Ministerial Direction were applied, the maximum
contribution for the 19 new rooms would be $380,000
(19 rooms x $20,000).
submits that the contributions payable is $221,905.42 because:
(1) The architect measured the existing rooms as 6 less than 16m2 and 60 rooms
greater than 16m2. The contributions calculations
provided on 20 June 2025
reflect the same figures. IDC’s calculations on that same date show an
increase of 16 rooms.
(2) The Ministerial Directions impose a $20,000 cap for dwellings, defined in cl
5(1)(a) as:
means a room or suite of rooms occupied or used or so
constructed or adapted as to be capable of being occupied or used as a separate
(3) The rooms can be defined as dwellings (see:
SHMH Properties Australia
Pty Ltd v City of Sydney Council
[2018] NSWLEC 66
contributions per room or dwelling, as indexed, therefore cannot exceed $20,000.
On this basis, the contributions figure is
the one put forward by IDC.
(4) A condition of consent should be imposed to adjust the contributions
payable should the gross floor area for the rooms do not
accord with the
calculations put forward by the Applicant.
calculations have been difficult to discern based on the inconsistent data
provided by IDC and some colour coding errors on the
proposed and existing works
shown on the architectural plans.
firstly accept Council’s evidence about the existing rooms. For reasons
unknown, IDC’s calculations of the existing
rooms in Ex O and their
contributions calculator received 20 June 2025 total 66. Despite IDC’s
solicitor clarifying that the
existing rooms should be a total of 63, the 66
rooms calculation has carried over into IDC’s calculations. IDC’s
number of rooms also deviate from the evidence during the hearing,
which was agreed as 19 new rooms, not 16 rooms as shown in the
Applicant’s
contributions calculations spreadsheet received 20 June 2025 (Ex P).
the evidence of the planners considered that there were 63 existing rooms, with
an increase of 19 new rooms across both developments,
to total 82 rooms. The
written request also relies on the provision of 19 new affordable housing
accept Mr Miletic’s evidence that the existing consents in 1970 and 1982
detail a total of 63 rooms and I accept his revised
measurements that 7 of those
rooms are below 16m2. Accordingly, the existing credits are for 7 single rooms
under 16m2 and 56 double
rooms (totalling 119 residents).
accept that the increase in the number of rooms is 19, consistent with the
evidence provided during the hearing. I accept Council’s
submissions that
these new rooms comprise 11 rooms under 16m2 and 8 rooms above, on the basis of
their submitted calculations and
as best as can be cross referenced against the
architectural plans.
also find that Council’s calculations of contributions are consistent with
the Contributions Plan. The calculations are based
on increases in residents.
The Contributions Plan details that this is determined through subtracting the
existing residents from
the new residents at a rate determined by Table 2. Table
4 determines the monetary rate per resident, which is agreed as $10,021
indexation.
calculations show this figure, indexed, to be $319,277. When that resident
calculation is divided by the number of
new dwellings (19), that equates to
approximately $16,803 per room.
both the Contributions Plan’s methodology of calculating contributions
through an increase in residents and Council’s
approach do not exceed or
conflict with the Ministerial Direction. Annexure A of the Contributions Plan
also reinforces this approach.
accept Council’s approach and associated conditions of
Disputed conditions of consent
conditions of consent are in dispute between the parties, which are considered
1 provision of affordable housing. Consistent with my findings in Contention 1,
IDC’s condition is to be adopted.
3 to provide a manager’s room is disputed as:
(1) IDC submits that the issue of a manager’s room was not in contention,
evidence was not led on this issue and that the development
will be managed in
accordance with the PoM. The PoM provides that a Manager will be on-site during
business hours and residents will
be provided a 24 hour phone number. A working
space for the manager has been provided (s 69(d) of the Housing SEPP). It is
that contributions would also need to be recalculated if a
manager’s room was provided.
(2) Council submits that the manager’s room is necessary to reflect the
terms of the approval of the house-let-in-lodgings,
which is consistent with the
previous requirements for a boarding house with 20 or more lodgers. A
manager’s room has no impact
on contributions.
(3) I mostly accept IDC’s submissions. The issue of providing a
manager’s room was not raised as a contention and if
a condition was going
to be proposed to this effect, IDC should have been given fair notice in the
amended Statement of Facts and
Contentions. Further, to the best as I could read
it, there are no requirements under the existing consents to provide a
room, though I accept a version of the plans at
Ex K shows a
room. The requirement under the Housing SEPP to provide a working space for a
manager has been shown on the plans and
in the PoM. I find that condition 3
should be deleted and that the proposed manager arrangements set out in the PoM
and architectural
plans are acceptable.
49 and 49A relating to s 7.11 of the Contributions Plan are disputed. For the
reasons I have previously given regarding
contributions, I accept
Council’s wording. I do accept condition 49A should be refined to clarify
that it only applies to room
G1.18 and the proposed rooms, in order to ensure
that compliance with the condition doesn’t result in works to rooms that
not proposed to be changed.
have previously considered the proposed Condition 54 regarding arrangements for
existing tenants. Council is best equipped with
being satisfied that the
Construction Management Plan, Staging and Resident Relocation Plan is reasonable
and fairly considered for
existing residents.
not in dispute, it was raised during the hearing about how the lift could be
accessed by the DDA rooms in the Lodgings Development
as the fire door might be
a barrier. In response to a question from the Court, the Applicant indicated it
would accept a condition
of consent to ensure the fire doors were automated and
could therefore be used by everyone.
Public Submissions
original development application made to Council was notified from
November 2023 to 22 December 2023. Five submissions were received. Two
submissions were received in support of the proposal. During
the hearing,
Council raised that an objector had requested that their submission be pressed
in their absence and submitted a further
objection against the proposal.
have carefully considered all the submissions in support and objections raised
in the submissions. For the following reasons, I
accept that the issues raised
have been mitigated by the proposal or do not warrant refusal of the
application.
Loss of cheap / affordable housing
issue is addressed from [
] in this judgment.
Excessive floor
issue is addressed from [
] in this judgment.
Adequate communal
proposal increases the small amount of communal areas currently available to the
existing Lodgings Development and for the new
works, provides increased communal
areas to meet the requirements of the planning controls in the Housing SEPP.
These areas are therefore
sufficiently sized to meet the needs of the residents.
The architectural plans demonstrate adequate cooking and laundry facilities,
it is open for any resident to utilise laundromat services should they wish to
Small size and location of rooms
size of the proposed or upgraded rooms are consistent with the minimums in the
Housing SEPP planning controls. The size of the
existing rooms cannot be
considered as they already have consent. The location of rooms opposite each
other along a hallway is typical
of the type of development.
protection and landscaping
DA is supported by an Arboricultural Impact Assessment prepared by Bluegum dated
April 2025 and a tree protection plan that detail
that no trees on the site or
surrounding sites will be affected subject to protection zones. These
recommendations and protection
zones are reinforced by conditions of consent.
proposed landscaping is a sizeable increase from the existing landscaping on
site and complies with Council’s planning controls
Waste management
waste issues raised about insufficient waste and recycling arrangements were
discussed by the waste experts for Council and IDC
during joint expert
reporting. The experts agreed on the number of bins required, how to manage
bulky waste, residential and commercial
waste disposal, which have been
incorporated into conditions of consent adopted by the parties. I accept the
experts and parties’
agreement that waste management will be adequate.
Ground floor café
ground floor café is a requirement under the Housing SEPP in commercial
zones. The part of the site where the café
is proposed is zoned E1, a
commercial/local centre zoning.
Need for a 24/7 building manager
to manage safety concerns
are no requirements for a 24/7 on site manager. The Applicant has proposed for a
building manager to be on site during business
hours and a phone number that is
available for 24/7 phone calls. These arrangements are consistent with the
current planning controls
that apply to the site.
Size of the
development and heritage impacts
heritage experts in the heritage joint expert report have considered the
proposed development and agree that the scale and design
will not impact the
heritage significance of the Annandale Post Office, subject to minor design
changes which have been adopted in
the conditions of consent. I accept their
agreement that the development will not cause unreasonable impacts to the
heritage significance
of the post office.
the reasons I detail in response to the proposed variations to floor space ratio
judgment, I find that the size of the development is consistent with the
character of the area. In short, the visual catchment
is mixed in character and
the new works are consistent with the scale of the existing building, opposite
shops and post office. The
height of the proposed development does not overly
contrast with the adjoining low density residential dwellings and are further
setback from the boundary than the existing Lodgings Development.
terms of privacy impacts from the existing Lodgings Development, these site
conditions remain largely unchanged from the existing
development. The proposed
communal area within the carpark area is screened by existing fencing.
Notwithstanding, the Applicant has
accepted conditions of consent to screen
rooms on levels 1-3 of the existing development along the northern and western
boundaries,
and to screen the western facing rooms on levels 1-3 of the new
co-living development to a height of 1.6m. The screening more than
manages overlooking and improves the existing situation.
Existing design and building separation
proposal seeks some internal changes to the existing building and changes to the
front façade, but no changes are sought
to the external parts of the
building facing the side and rear boundaries. I am therefore unable to consider
objections in relation
to building separation from existing parts of the
building that are unchanged by the proposal.
Previous fire
am unable to consider previous fire incidents in relation to new works, but I
note that fire safety upgrades are included in the
Safety and noise concerns from the existing parking
only changes proposed to the parking area is a reduction in car parking. I am
unable to consider concerns in relation to parking
arrangements already
approved. In terms of fumes from the car park, the car park will reduce in size
and there is no evidence of
excessive or unreasonable fumes from the existing
open car park situation.
Crime prevention
proposal is for an ordinary residential development and there is no evidence of
additional crime prevention measures needed. The
usual measures of fencing and
passive surveillance between properties and the public domain are sufficient.
proposal includes modifications to conditions in DA3650, BA/1970/10234 and
DA554/81. These conditions are:
(1) The first paragraph in the notice of determination of Development Consent
3650 issued by Council on 23 July 1970 is amended to
Reference is
made to your letter of 9th July 1970, reference, FA/pb, attached to which were
amended drawings in connection with Development
Application of 2nd October 1969,
lodged by you pursuant to the Town Planning Provisions of the
Government Act, 1919
, as amended, and as further amended by Development
Consent DA2023/0900.
(2) A new condition is inserted in DA3650 to read:
The use of the
house-let-in-lodgings is to be operated in conjunction with the co-living
development on the Co-living Site and in
accordance with the plan of management
approved by Development Consent DA2023/0900
(3) The reference to 'married couples' in Condition 1 of DA3650 is deleted.
BA/1970/10234
(1) Condition 18 of BA/1970/10234 in relation to cooking facilities is
(1) A new condition is inserted in DA554/81 to read:
The use of the
house-let-in-lodgings is to be operated in conjunction with the co-living
development on the Co-living Site and in
accordance with the plan of management
approved by Development Consent DA2023/0900
accept that these conditions should be deleted to ensure the consents do not
conflict with each other and I accept that they are
within power, pursuant to
s 4.17(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the EPA Act.
Statement of Environmental Effects and amended Statement of Environmental
Effects prepared by The Planning Studio (SEE’s)
comprehensively address
the jurisdictional and merit matters for the following relevant planning
controls. I have considered all
the relevant controls:
(1) Housing SEPP.
(a) In addition to satisfactorily addressing the relevant provisions, I accept
that co-living is permissible through the Housing
(2) State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021.
(a) In relation to satisfaction of s 4.6, the submitted Remediation Action Plan
prepared by EI Australia dated 12 May 2025 covers
all properties, has been
included in the conditions of consent and satisfies the provisions.
(a) In addition to being satisfied that all the relevant matters in the IWLEP
have been met, I am also satisfied that the proposed
breach to cl 4.3C
landscaped areas for residential accommodation in Zone R1 has been adequately
justified. The written request prepared
by The Planning Studio dated 21 November
2024 (landscape written request) details that
subcl 4.3C(3)(a) in relation
to minimum landscaping is met, but that subcl 4.3C(3)(b) site coverage is
breached by 4%. The landscape
written request sets out that compliance with the
development standard is unreasonable as the breach is caused by the existing
development
and the proposal has removed some hard paved areas to increase
landscaping from 77m2 to a compliant 21.9% landscaped area. There
is no further
site coverage proposed by the Lodgings Development. The landscape written
request details that there are sufficient
environmental planning grounds for
similar reasons as well as the reduced embodied emissions from retaining the
existing building.
(b) As previously acknowledged, it is only the justification relevant to the
proposed breach that can be considered, not benefits
of the development as a
whole. I am satisfied on the basis of the above summarised reasons that the
Applicant has demonstrated that
compliance with the development standard is
unreasonable and that there are sufficient environmental planning grounds.
(4) Leichhardt Development Control Plan 2013
(5) Contributions Plan.
have considered the SEE’s and when read with the other documentation
accompanying the DA, I am satisfied that all the jurisdictional
provisions,
preconditions to consent and merit controls have been met or adequately
consideration of the information accompanying the class 1 appeal, evidence,
parties’ submissions and community submissions,
I have considered all the
relevant matters as required under s 4.15(1) of the EPA Act and accept that they
have been met.
Conclusion and directions
considered the evidence and submissions of the parties, I accept that the
proposal does result in a loss of some affordable
housing for low income
households (benchmarked from the Greater Sydney median household income).
However the loss of some rooms is
offset by the overall retention and increase
in affordable housing proposed, which I find can be managed as affordable
housing without
a CHP. Having found that the proposal is for affordable housing,
I also accept that the proposed breach to the FSR is warranted in
circumstances and that the proposal is in the public interest.
are several findings that warrant revised conditions of consent from the
parties, in relation to:
(1) Adoption of Council’s condition 54 for the temporary relocation plan
during construction be provided to Council for approval.
(2) Condition/s to prepare a potential displacement of resident’s plan, to
be approved by Council prior to the issue of a construction
certificate, at [
(3) Operational condition/s on record keeping of rents and salaries for tenants
to ensure the affordable housing condition can be
enforced, at [
(4) The findings regarding the conditions in dispute, at [
(5) The findings that the contributions payable is the amount submitted by
line with my findings, I therefore direct that:
(1) The parties are to confer and agree on a set of conditions that are
consistent with the findings of this judgment.
(2) Agreed conditions of consent are to be filed to the Court by 10 December
2025. Any conditions not agreed between the parties
are to be accompanied by a
short note detailing the reasons.
(3) Once the agreed conditions are filed and reviewed, final orders will be made
in these proceedings.
Commissioner of the Court
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (438 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter