URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/191.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Button v R [2025] NSWCCA 191 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 191
Hearing Date(s):
3 October 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Ward P; Harrison CJ at CL; N Adams J
1. Grant leave to appeal.
the appeal.
Catchwords:
CRIME – Appeal – Appeal against sentence – Aggregate
sentence – 35 counts including dangerous driving occasioning
dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm, actual bodily harm caused by
wanton driving – Whether material error
in factual findings –Whether
sentence manifestly excessive – Whether notional accumulation excessive
appeal granted but appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Cases Cited:
[2015] NSWCCA 120
[2023] NSWCCA 24
(2023) 305 A Crim
Chow v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593
(1992) 63 A
[2015] NSWCCA 232
(2015) 254 A Crim R 150
[2022] NSWCCA 153
(2022) 300 A Crim R 214
DPP v De La Rosa (2010) 79
[2010] NSWCCA 194
[2006] NSWCCA 237
Hili v The Queen
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2010] HCA 45
Hordern v R
[2019] NSWCCA 138
(2019) 278 A
[2018] NSWCCA 2
Kleindienst v R
[2020] NSWCCA
[2020] NSWCCA 244
Moananu v R
[2022] NSWCCA 85
; (2022) 297 A
Nguyen v The Queen
(2016) 256 CLR 656
[2016] HCA 17
(2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
[2023] NSWCCA 308
(1998) 194 CLR 610
[1998] HCA 57
[2012] NSWCCA 199
[2014] NSWSC 1705
R v Janceski
[2005] NSWCCA 288
R v Musumeci
(unreported, NSWCCA 30/10/97, per Hunt CJ at CL)
R v Speechley
[2012] NSWCCA
(2012) 221 A Crim R 175
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
[2002] NSWCCA
[2011] NSWCCA 207
[2025] NSWCCA 121
(2015) 123 SASR 422
; (2015) 254 A Crim R 115
Principal judgment
Brett Andrew Button (Applicant)
The King (Respondent)
Representation:
PD Rosser KC with R Court (Applicant)
S Dowling SC with K
Jeffreys and V Garrity (Respondent)
Solicitors:
O’Brien Winter
Partners Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2023/00187236
Publication Restriction:
See Annexure A
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
11 September 2024
File Number(s):
2023/00187236
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant, Brett Button, pleaded guilty in the Local Court on 8 May 2024
to 35 separate offences arising out of a single incident
– an horrendous
crash on 11 June 2023 when he was driving a bus that overturned on a roundabout
at Greta in the Hunter Valley.
The bus was carrying guests to Singleton after a
wedding in the Hunter Valley. No other vehicle was involved. There is no doubt
that the crash was caused by excessive speed through the roundabout. Ten
passengers were killed and the remaining 25 passengers were
injured, nine
grievously.
The offences to which Mr Button pleaded guilty, following a plea agreement
under which charges of manslaughter were withdrawn, were:
10 counts under
Crimes Act 1900
) of occasioning
death through dangerous driving; 9 counts under
of occasioning grievous bodily harm through dangerous driving; and 16
counts under
(which were before the Court pursuant
to a certificate under
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
in respect of actual bodily harm caused by his wanton driving.
The sentencing judge, Ellis DCJ, was provided with a Statement of Agreed
Facts and Mr Button gave evidence at the sentencing hearing.
Mr Button was
prescribed the opioid Tramadol as a pain medication and was aware at the date of
the offending that he had taken significantly
in excess of the maximum
recommended dosage of Tramadol in the 24 hours preceding the crash. The tipping
threshold (the speed at
which rollover of the bus was likely) was 31km/h at the
entry to the roundabout and was 47km/h as the bus approached its final position.
The speed of the bus on approach to the roundabout was recorded at 52km/h. An
onboard monitoring system recorded the bus’s
speed at 56.48km/h at a point
between the entry to the roundabout and the point where the bus overturned. At
the sentence hearing,
the Crown tendered 46 victim impact statements made by
survivors, next of kin of the deceased and family members of both survivors
the deceased. Updated medical records were tendered which documented the
subsequent progress of the injuries to the nine victims
who sustained grievous
bodily harm.
On 11 September 2024, the sentencing judge imposed an aggregate sentence of
32 years with a non-parole period of 24 years. Mr Button
received a discount of
25% for his pleas of guilty. He will be eligible for release to parole on 8 May
Mr Button sought leave to appeal against the aggregate sentence imposed on
him upon three grounds. First, that the sentencing judge
erred in finding as a
fact that he “drove knowing that he was under the influence of an opioid
painkiller, Tramadol”.
Second, that the sentencing judge erred in finding
that the relevant tipping threshold for the bus was 31km/h (when comparing his
recorded speed of 56.48km/hr. Third, that the aggregate sentence was manifestly
The Court held
(Ward P, Harrison CJ at CL and N Adams J), granting
leave to appeal but dismissing the appeal:
(1) The reasons on sentence did not, as Mr Button suggested,
encompass a finding that he knew at the time he drove the bus that
night that he
was adversely affected by the opioid drug he had taken. Rather, the sentencing
judge found (amply supported by the
Agreed Facts and Mr Button’s own
evidence) that he knew that he had taken significantly in excess of the
recommended maximum
limit of Tramadol when he drove the bus that evening, knew
that the drug had the capacity to affect his ability to drive, and knew
reason for the limitation on his use of opioid medication while driving a bus
was that that he was a danger (or potential
danger) on the roads. That sustained
the finding that Mr Button drove “knowing he was under the influence
of” Tramadol,
when understood in the context of the following words
“having consumed a quantity of the drug which was well over the prescribed
24-hour dosage limit”. Ground 1 was not established: [148]-[150].
(2) While there was some force in the complaint as to the
statement made in the remarks on sentence that the bus was travelling
“within the roundabout ... at 56.48 kilometres or nearly twice the
estimated rollover tipping point speed of 31 kilometres”,
any error by
reason of the incompleteness of the reference to the 31km/h tipping point being
at the entry to the roundabout was not
material. Insofar as that reference
informed his Honour’s assessment that Mr Button’s moral culpability
was very high,
that assessment was not only open to his Honour but was well
founded. To the extent that there was an erroneous factual finding that
highest recorded bus speed was nearly twice the estimated rollover tipping point
speed of 31km/h, it was not a material error.
Ground 2 was not established:
[167]-[170].
(3) Having assessed the objective seriousness of the
offending and Mr Button’s very high moral culpability, as well as his
subjective case (which established remorse, prior good character and likely more
onerous conditions of custody), the sentencing judge
properly took into account
the harrowing victim impact statements and the purposes of sentencing (including
general and specific
deterrence, denunciation and, importantly in the present
case, recognition of the harm done to the victims and the community). Further,
his Honour correctly recognised that the offending, though arising from a single
act of criminality, required a reasonable degree
of notional accumulation. The
offending did not occur by mere happenstance or chance. Mr Button engaged in
undoubtedly risk-taking
behaviour with the knowledge referred to above and
breached his duty to ensure the safety of the very passengers he was engaged to
convey. Mr Button did not establish that the sentence was unreasonably or
plainly unjust. The aggregate sentence was not manifestly
excessive. Ground 3
was not established: [197]-[204].
(2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
[2018] NSWCCA 2
[2025] NSWCCA 121
[2020] NSWCCA 244
Moananu v R
[2022] NSWCCA 85
297 A Crim R 513 applied;
[2022] NSWCCA 153
300 A Crim R 214
considered.
: The applicant, Brett Button, pleaded guilty in the Local Court on 8
May 2024 to 35 separate offences arising out of a single incident
horrendous crash on 11 June 2023 when he was driving a bus that overturned on a
roundabout at Greta in the Hunter Valley.
The bus was carrying guests to
Singleton after a wedding in the Hunter Valley. No other vehicle was involved.
There is no doubt
that the crash was caused by excessive speed through the
roundabout.
passengers were killed and the remaining 25 passengers were injured, nine
grievously. Mr Button suffered a minor laceration to
a finger. Given that all
the passengers had attended a wedding that day, a number of them were related
to, or knew, each other. The
consequences for their families and the communities
of which the deceased and severely injured formed part were devastating.
a plea agreement under which charges of manslaughter were withdrawn, Mr Button
pleaded guilty to the following offences:
10 counts under
Crimes Act 1900
) of occasioning death through
dangerous driving; 9 counts under
occasioning grievous bodily harm through dangerous driving; and 16 counts under
(which were before the Court pursuant to a
certificate under
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
respect of actual bodily harm caused by his wanton driving. He received a
discount of 25% for his pleas of guilty.
11 September 2024, the sentencing judge, Ellis DCJ, imposed an aggregate
sentence of 32 years with a non-parole period of 24 years.
Mr Button will
be eligible for release to parole on 8 May 2048.
applicable maximum sentences in respect of the offences to which Mr Button
pleaded guilty are: in respect of the s 52A(1) offences
– 10 years; in
respect of the s 52A(3) offences – 7 years; and in respect of the
offences – 2 years. There are no applicable standard non-parole periods.
The indicative sentences were stated by his Honour
as follows: in respect of the
s 52A(1) offences – 4 years 6 months; in respect of the s 52A(3)
offences – indicative
sentences varying from 2 years 7 months (4 counts)
to 2 years 3 months (3 counts) to 1 year 10 months (2 counts); and in
offences – indicative sentences varying between 12
months (7 offences) and 10 months (9 offences). A rough calculation of the
period of the indicative sentences if wholly accumulated would be over 78
Button seeks leave, pursuant to
(NSW), to appeal against the aggregate sentence imposed
on him upon the following grounds:
The sentencing Judge erred in finding
as a fact that the Applicant “drove knowing that he was under the
influence of an opioid
painkiller, Tramadol”.
The sentencing Judge erred in finding
that the relevant tipping threshold for the bus was 31 kilometres per hour.
In all of the circumstances, the
aggregate sentence of 32 years with a non-parole period of 24 years was
manifestly excessive.
the following reasons, leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should
be dismissed.
sentencing judge was provided with a Statement of Agreed Facts, which had been
signed by Mr Button at the time he pleaded guilty
(Ex A4). The following
summary of the factual background is drawn from that Statement of Agreed Facts
(numbers in square brackets
indicate the relevant paragraph from the Agreed
Facts). Updated medical records were tendered which documented the subsequent
of the injuries to the nine victims who sustained grievous bodily harm
(Ex A12-20). Victim impact statements were read from survivors,
next of kin of
the deceased and family members of both survivors and the deceased. There are
suppression and non-disclosure orders
in force in respect of those victim impact
statements.
Particularly
given ground 3, which contends that the aggregate sentence was manifestly
excessive, it is necessary to set out in some
detail what occurred on and
leading up to the night of the crash.
Agreed facts as to the
events on 11 June 2023
groom had made arrangements through Linq Buslines for a coach to transport
guests to and from the wedding at Wandin Estate ([1]).
Mr Button was the driver
of the bus to and from the wedding. He collected passengers from the Royal Hotel
in Singleton at around
2.10pm ([2]). There were fewer than 57 passengers aboard
the bus ([2]). The bus arrived at the venue at around 3pm ([2]). On the
the wedding, Mr Button joined in conversation with passengers Mr El Moussalli
and Mr Dinakis at the front of the bus. He also
engaged in banter with and was
generally making jokes with the passengers at the front of the bus ([11]). At
times during the journey,
Mr Button braked harder than necessary or went
too fast around corners where the road was winding and narrow ([12]).
arrival at Wandin Estate, Mr Button stopped at the reception venue to allow some
passengers to use the bathroom before driving
them to where the wedding ceremony
was to be held ([13]). On the way, Mr Button fiddled with the bus doors and left
them open, was
jovial and made jokes about doing “donuts”. At one
point, he commented that “This is nothing to what I can drive,
lot bigger buses than this” ([14]).
Button remained at the venue during the evening. Around 11pm, he had a
conversation with an employee at the wedding venue, who
observed that
Mr Button appeared tired, with his speech being quiet and slow ([17]).
around 11:17pm, Mr Button left Wandin Estate for Singleton, driving the bus with
35 passengers on board ([5]-[6]). There were different
accounts from surviving
passengers as to the weather at the time of the crash, some reporting heavy fog
and others reporting no fog
and clear visibility ([23]). Ms Sury, a wedding
guest who followed the bus onto Lovedale Road (before she turned left onto Camp
recalled that the visibility was good on the drive ([20]). CCTV footage
obtained from nearby premises, including an Ampol service
station at Greta
(three minutes’ drive from the roundabout), showed some light fog. The
heavy fog is increasingly apparent
following the crash ([23]).
the journey, Mr El Moussalli and Ms Sandoval, who were sitting immediately
behind Mr Button (and who had not been wearing seatbelts
at the start of the
journey) put their seatbelts on after Mr Button had been driving for a few
minutes because they felt uncomfortable.
Mr El Moussalli felt that
Mr Button was going too fast, particularly for backroads. Ms Cox, another
passenger, sitting on the right
hand side of the bus, also put on her seatbelt
because she felt the bus travelling quickly and did not feel safe ([24]).
the trip, Mr Button turned on music and fostered a party atmosphere in the bus,
engaging in banter with the wedding guests
([26]). At one stage he said,
“if you liked that corner, you’re going to like this one”. At
another point, one
passenger, Mr Dinakis, said “this guy’s going a
bit fast, he’s gone crazy” and Mr Button responded, saying
it’s nothing” and described times when he had driven fast and had
driven a four-wheel drive on the sand dunes.
Mr Button did not change his
driving after Mr Dinakis’ comment. ([26]).
the bus passed the Ampol service station at Greta, a couple of minutes before
the roundabout, a car overtook it at speed. Mr Button
appeared annoyed and said
something like “fuck, fuck this”. A police officer who was at the
service station observed
the bus and the car go past but did not consider the
speed of the bus or the car to be excessive at that point ([27]).
after 11:30pm, having travelled approximately 12km from Wandin Estate, Mr
Button’s bus entered a roundabout at Greta
from the north on Wine Country
Drive, in order to take the western off-ramp onto the Hunter Expressway
the bus approached the roundabout, a couple of minutes after passing the Ampol
service station at Greta ([27]), Mr Button said
“This next part’s
going to be fun” and he then accelerated ([28]). As the bus entered the
roundabout it began
to tilt towards the left ([7]). One passenger, Mr Junkeer,
who was sitting in the front row on the left side of the bus with his
“he’s coming in hot” and his wife replied “he’s
going too fast”. Ms Hooper, another
passenger, said to her partner, Mr
Burns, that she was scared and he held her down on his lap. As the bus travelled
too quickly through
the roundabout, Mr Junkeer said “mate” to Mr
Button and Mr Burns said “slow down” (see
[28]-[29]).
Speed of the bus
to the speed of the bus at relevant points of the journey, speed data was
captured by an on-board Consat Telematics Solutions Connected
Bus Program system
([32]). Gavin Lennon, a collision reconstruction expert, identified the speed of
the bus as being largely compliant
with the speed zoning along the journey to
the collision site, the maximum speed recorded for the journey being 96km/h on
England Highway, within a 90km/h speed zone ([32]). Immediately before
reaching the entry to the roundabout, the speed was recorded
as 52km/h. At a
later point on the roundabout, it was recorded as 56.48km/h ([32]).
Lennon calculated the “tipping threshold” (the speed at which
rollover of the bus was likely) to be 31km/h at the entry
to the roundabout.
His opinion was that, to reduce the speed from 52km/h so as to enter the
roundabout below that threshold, would
have required a “moderate to high
level braking rate for a bus”, falling within the “aggressive”
driver category,
and that, for the bus to have then reached 56.48km/h on the
roundabout, Mr Button must have then accelerated at a level falling at
higher end of “normal driving” towards the “aggressive”
level of driving ([33]).
Lennon’s opinion, taking into account the location (a roundabout as
opposed to a straight section of road), was that the
braking and acceleration
rates applied by Mr Button were excessive, unnecessary and aggressive. He
considered that it should have
been apparent to the driver that a loss of
control was imminent ([33]).
Statement of Agreed Facts includes a diagram indicating the safe speeds
calculated by Mr Lennon for different points on the roundabout
bus’ probable speed where relevant ([33]; Ex A5a). That diagram (Annexure
B to these reasons) identifies the following
four points:
(i) first, where Mr Button entered the roundabout making a left-hand turn, at
which the estimated tipping threshold was 31km/h and
a safe speed was 24km/h;
(ii) second, where he had commenced a right-hand turn on the roundabout, at
which the tipping threshold was 51km/h and a safe speed
was 39km/h; (Mr Lennon
assessed the probable speed range of the bus at 40-45km/h at this point);
(iii) third, further along the roundabout, still on the right-hand turn, where
the tipping threshold was 60km/h and a safe speed
was 46km/h (Mr Lennon assessed
the probable speed range of the bus at this point as 50-60km/h);
(iv) fourth, as the bus approached its final position, where the tipping
threshold was 47km/h and Mr Lennon assessed that a safe
speed was 37km/h.
Button’s speed was recorded as 56.48km/h between the second and third of
those four points. As already noted, it was an agreed
fact that as the bus
entered the roundabout it began to tilt to the left ([7]). The bus tipped and
skidded across the roadway on
its left side, coming to a rest against an Armco
railing ([6]-[7]).
Lennon calculated the sideways force coefficient of the road and said that the
skid resistance of the roadway was not a contributing
factor to the collision
([34]). (A crime scene officer with the engineering investigations unit
conducted a mechanical investigation
of the bus on 13 June 2023 and identified
no mechanical failures or defects with the vehicle that may have been
contributing factors
towards the collision ([84]).)
Aftermath of
first people to arrive at the scene were the four wedding guests who had been
travelling separately by the car driven by Ms Sury.
As noted above,
Ms Sury’s car had followed the bus onto Lovedale Road but when she
turned onto Camp Road the bus continued
on Lovedale Road ([19]-[20]). After a
short stop in Nelson Street, Greta (where Ms Sury saw the bus in the distance go
past at the
New England Highway intersection), she next saw it when she turned
left onto the New England Highway. Ms Sury could see the bus around
but by the time she entered the 80km/h zone where the road became a two lane
highway she could no longer see it ([21]).
first notification to emergency services after the crash was made from
Mr Burns’ phone at 23:32:26. At 11:33pm, Ms Dickson,
passengers in Ms Sury’s car, made contact with NSW Ambulance ([30]). The
four wedding guests travelling in Ms Sury’s
car rendered assistance while
waiting for emergency services to arrive. Two of the men providing assistance
(Mr Ellis-Cluff and Mr
Atie) helped people out of the front roof manhole as the
bus was on its side and ripped aside the front windscreen to enter the bus
([36]). Some of the injured asked them to find their loved ones. It was clear
that a number of people inside the bus were dead.
Mr Button was seen standing
and staring, apparently in shock ([36]).
scene was one of chaos, as a number of passengers attempted to locate their
loved ones and to assist others with injuries to get
free of the bus. Surviving
passengers described seeing “dead bodies and body parts all around”
and “horrific images
of what was on the ground” ([35]-[38]). One of
the first police officers to attend the scene described the western side of
bus as a “warzone”, with a number of passengers moaning in pain and
others clearly trapped under the bus and the
deceased ([41]).
11:42pm, Mr Button contacted his manager and said “I have had an accident,
I fucked up. I have rolled a bus on Wine Country
Drive”. Asked if everyone
was okay, he said “no, there are fatalities and emergency services are on
their way”.
Mr Button’s manager recalls that he remained calm and
level during this conversation and said that his tone and response seemed
have no emotion ([39]).
Attendance of emergency services
Constable Dennis arrived at the scene soon afterwards
and was followed by other
police officers who assisted some of the surviving passengers out of the bus. Mr
Button identified himself
as the driver and was assisted out of the front of the
bus ([40]). The first ambulance arrived at 11:40pm and was followed by others.
Intensive care paramedics provided assistance to Ms Bulman, who was in a
critical condition ([42]).
some time after 11:56pm, while at the crash scene, Mr Button told Senior
Constable Benjamin Goodridge, unprompted, that he did
not know how the accident
had happened and said that he had “driven around here hundreds of
times”, that “I just
can’t figure it out. ... You can’t
tip those buses, it doesn’t make sense. They weren’t all on one side
anything. I guess I was just going too fast” ([44]).
Button was taken to Singleton District Hospital shortly after midnight. While at
hospital waiting for forensic samples to be taken,
he told other police officers
that he was driving with his cruise control on as he was coming down the hill,
that he turned it off
and sped up going down the hill, and he did not accelerate
going back up the hill so he would slow down. He said that he did not
going into the roundabout “because I was already at a slow enough speed, I
have driven this road plenty of times”
4:10am, Mr Button told Senior Constable Brien that on approaching the roundabout
he “clicked the cruise control off”,
slowed down and checked the
area and then, as he has done previously, turned into the corner; that it was a
sharp corner and that
he was turning right, aiming the bus at the corner. He
said that “I don’t think I’d even started to accelerate,
think I was still coasting, and I felt it understeer it was [sic] and then it
just fell over. It literally just tipped on its side
and skidded across the
road”. Mr Button said that he thought he slowed to “like 30 or
something” and that he did
not feel he was going fast but that it was a
tight corner. He said he had taken the roundabout “heaps of times”
and had never had an issue previously ([48]).
Driving in a
manner dangerous
was an agreed fact that, at the time of the crash, Mr Button was driving in a
manner dangerous to other persons in that he ([9]):
(a) was under the influence of Tramadol to the degree that
there would have been some impairment of his driving ability, having
Tramadol in a quantity exceeding the maximum recommended by medical
professionals, and knowing that consuming substantial
amounts of Tramadol had
the capacity to affect his ability to drive;
(b) engaged in risk-taking behaviour; and
(c) drove too quickly to safely negotiate the roundabout.
Dead passengers
noted above, ten passengers died as a result of the crash (nine at the scene and
one in hospital).
passengers were identified as dead by paramedics at the scene at 12:18am. Those
passengers were:
Rebecca Mullen
, aged 26, who had been
sitting at the back of the bus with her fiancé, Samuel Howard (who
suffered injuries in the crash);
Zachary Bray
, aged 29, who had been sitting at the rear of the bus
next to his AFL teammate Alexander Tigani (who suffered injuries in the crash);
Andrew Scott
, aged 35, and his wife
Lynan Scott
, aged 33, who
had been sitting towards the rear of the bus (the couple leaving two infant sons
orphaned as a result of the crash);
Tori Cowburn
, aged 29, who had been sitting at the rear of the bus
with her partner, Tyrone Gersh-Mizen (who suffered grievous bodily harm);
Angus Craig
, aged 28, who had been sitting at the right-hand side of
the bus with his partner, Isabella Liddy (who suffered injuries in the crash
who had moved to sit between the Scott and McBride families);
Nadene McBride
, aged 52, who had been sitting next to her husband,
Graham McBride, who suffered grievous bodily harm;
Kyah McBride
, aged 22, who had been sitting in front of her parents
and who was the McBrides’ only child; and
Kane Symons
, aged 21, who was sitting next to his girlfriend, Kyah
tenth passenger who died was
Darcy Bulman
, aged 30, who had been sitting
near the front of the bus with her partner, Nikiforos Dinakis (who suffered
grievous bodily harm in
the crash). Ms Bulman suffered severe traumatic injuries
to the left side of her chest. She was transported by ambulance, intubated,
John Hunter Hospital, where her condition deteriorated and she later died after
her bleeding could not be controlled ([52]).
Agreed Facts included a diagram (a copy of which is attached to these reasons as
Annexure C), indicating where each victim was
seated. Colour-coding has been
added to the diagram to indicate the extent of the injuries suffered by each
victim: red indicates
that the victim died; orange indicates that the victim
suffered grievous bodily harm; yellow indicates that the victim sustained
Passengers suffering grievous bodily harm
passengers suffered grievous bodily harm ([53]-[67]); Ex A12-A20. In
circumstances where there is a challenge to the term of
the aggregate sentence,
it is important to note in some detail the extent of the injuries suffered by
these victims and the ongoing
consequences of the crash. In summary, those
injuries involved significant orthopaedic issues that required surgery and, more
12 months after the bus crash, many survivors required ongoing treatment
and were left with a restricted ability to work and a need
for ongoing
psychological support.
, aged 44, lost consciousness at the scene. She was transported to
John Hunter Hospital, where her injuries were recorded as left
thigh degloving,
right knee penetrating injury, L5 transverse process fracture, bilateral pubic
rami fractures, right sacral ala
fracture and
fracture ([53]). Ms
Junkeer’s left thigh wound required split thickness skin grafts, and she
required bilateral lower leg wound
dressings. She also required an open
reduction, internal fixation of her pelvic fractures. Ms Junkeer’s
injuries required repair
to her index and middle fingers. She also required
repair of multiple forehead and scalp lacerations ([54]). Ms Junkeer remained
in hospital until 1 August 2023. After that time, she underwent significant
treatment from a team of specialists including specialists
in hand therapy,
physiotherapy, osteopathy, scar management, plastic surgery, orthopaedic
surgery, rehabilitation physician, and
ophthalmology.
Junkeer suffered acute stress symptoms and post traumatic amnesia, which was
improving by 14 June 2023 ([54]). At the time of sentence,
Ms Junkeer was
receiving ongoing trauma counselling from specialist psychologists. While able
to return to work on a greatly reduced
basis (approximately 7½ hours a week
on a two-day cycle), Ms Junkeer had ongoing issues such as chronic pain from her
injury and was seeing a plastic surgeon for expected scar revision
surgery in the near future.
was found on arrival at John Hunter Hospital to
have: a subarachnoid haemorrhage, a nasal bone fracture, a lip laceration, a
segmental humerus fracture and a left 5th metacarpal facture. A large scalp
laceration and left arm and hand lacerations were also
noted. ([55]).
Ms Healey’s subarachnoid haemorrhage was managed conservatively. She
required open reduction, internal fixations
for both the left ulna and 5th
metacarpal fractures and an internal fixation of the fracture of her humerus.
her initial surgery, which required internal fixations of the left ulna, 5th
metacarpal and humerus, Ms Healey underwent a number
of other facial and
orthopaedic surgeries. In respect of the extensive injuries to her left upper
body, Ms Healey underwent a revision
surgery in late June 2023 to fix the
original plating of the left humerus which had failed. In February 2024, she
underwent further
surgery to her left shoulder and hand. In May 2024, she had
more surgery to her left arm to remove the humeral plates. At the time
sentence, she continued to require extensive physiotherapy, particularly in
respect of her left arm and hand.
had the following injuries on arrival at John Hunter
Hospital: multiple pelvic fractures, multiple fractures of his cervical spine
(left C7-11 transverse process fractures), multiple fractures of his thoracic
spine, spleen injury (Grade 3 splenic laceration),
multiple rib fractures (left
3-11 ribs), a traumatic pneumothorax, a traumatic haemopneumothorax, a fracture
of shaft of his clavicle
and an anterior dislocation of his humerus. ([57]).
Mr Burns briefly lost consciousness. He also sustained lacerations to his
forehead. Mr Burns required an open reduction internal fixation for his
fractured clavicle, and surgical repair of the wounds to
his scalp. He remained
in intensive care for two days. ([58]).
the time of sentence, Mr Burns was still receiving extensive rehabilitation
treatment, including ongoing therapy with a physiotherapist,
physiologist and psychologist. He continued to experience high levels of
fatigue, reduced exercise tolerance, as well as
chronic pain in his back and
left shoulder. He had not yet been able to return to work full- time. His
functional capacity was
much reduced compared to his pre-injury function,
particularly with respect to his ongoing left shoulder injury, traumatic
caused by the multiple spinal fractures, and lumbo-pelvic instability.
It was likely that he would require intensive ongoing rehabilitation
next 12 to 18 months to assist him in his recovery.
had: a vertebral fracture, multiple rib fractures,
a radial shaft fracture and scalp laceration ([59]). Mr McBride lost
consciousness
at the scene, his left arm had been pinned under the bus and his
left elbow was degloved. Mr McBride’s C2 vertebral fracture
was surgically
fixed. His left 5th and 6th rib fractures were managed conservatively. His left
radial shaft fracture was operated
on, requiring proximal radius operative
fixation and split thickness skin graft. Mr McBride’s scalp laceration was
in the emergency department ([60]).
the time of sentence, Mr McBride had ongoing issues with a left middle finger
palsy and left shoulder pain for which he continued
to see orthopaedic
specialists and attend ongoing physiotherapy sessions. As already noted, he lost
his wife and only child in the
(aged 29) had the following injuries: a C7 right pars
interarticularis, articular facets and right pedicle fractures, a C4 spinous
process fracture and facial lacerations. He also had broken teeth ([61]).
Mr Dinakis was found on the side of the road at the scene.
His Glasgow Coma
Scale score was 7. Mr Dinakis was intubated from 12 to 13 June 2023 and remained
in hospital until 19 June 2023,
before being discharged to return to Victoria
([62]). Mr Dinakis had post traumatic amnesia for several days. He
subsequently underwent
further facial surgery.
the time of sentence, Mr Dinakis required ongoing psychological support and
occupational therapy. He continued to exhibit anxiety
and other symptoms
associated with PTSD. He had memory problems and ongoing issues with cognitive
function. He had only recently
returned to work on a limited basis of three days
a week and reported high levels of exhaustion in coping with that limited
As noted, his fiancée, Darcy Bulman, died in the crash.
(aged 58), the wife of Gregory Warren and mother of Luke Warren,
presented to Maitland Hospital with neck pain and right shoulder
pain. She had
an acute unstable C2 fracture, extending into both lateral atlantoxial joints,
and a comminuted fracture of the right
C2 lateral mass involving right C2
foramen as well as further spinal fractures such as an undisplaced fracture of
right C4 superior
facet; an acute fracture of left T1-L1 transverse processes, a
minimal compression of the T3 vertebral body, of uncertain age, left
rib fractures and an acute fracture of posterior left 9th-11th ribs, with up to
mild displacement at the 10th and 11th
rib fracture sites; ([63]). Ms
Warren’s unstable cervical spine fracture required operative fixation
her back surgery to have the odontoid process fixed with a screw, Ms Warren
had ongoing neck pain and intermittent pain in her
right upper arm, with
associated paraesthesia and numbness. At the time of sentence, she required
ongoing pain management and osteopathy
treatment, primarily for her cervical
spine injuries and worsening headaches. More recently, she has suffered
significant traumatic
and mental health injuries that have manifested since the
time of the bus crash and which have developed in severity over time.
(aged 29), the son of Jennifer and Gregory Warren, sustained a
comminuted and displaced left clavicle fracture, and underwent an
open reduction
and internal fixation for repair. He will have permanent scarring over his
collarbone and he may have permanent numbness
to his upper left chest area
([65]). Mr Warren’s clavicle fracture caused temporary disability, pain,
and loss of function
for several months.
the time of sentence, Mr Warren had required long-term physiotherapy as well as
treatment with a psychologist to deal with the
impact of the crash and the
injury. He reported ongoing left side neck pain as late as July 2024. He had
required long-term physiotherapy
to improve his range of mobility and general
function of his left arm and shoulder as well as continuing treatment with a
psychologist
to deal with the trauma of the bus crash and its aftermath.
(aged 27) was taken by helicopter to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.
He sustained a broken jaw that required surgical intervention.
It was wired shut
which required him to be on a liquid diet for six weeks ([66]). He required a
prolonged period on a liquid diet
and underwent review from a speech
pathologist. For many months, Mr Stafford struggled with eating, jaw pain and
decreased range
of movement of the jaw. By the time of the sentence, while he
had made significant improvements, he was likely to have ongoing jaw
difficulty eating. He suffered back and neck soreness after the crash and
needed to see an osteopath for regular physical
therapy. He had been working
with a psychologist for his trauma.
Gersh-Mizen
(aged 31) was also taken by helicopter to Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital. He sustained a left forearm compartment syndrome, which required
fasciotomy, following fractures to both the radius and ulna and a left midshaft
humerus fracture. All of the fractures required
surgical intervention, and
internal fixations ([67]). His injuries required skin grafting and surgical
repair including fasciotomy
and debridement of the left forearm. He remained an
inpatient for an initial 10-day period. He required regular wound dressings,
monitoring for infection, pain management and psychological support for PTSD and
grief counselling after the loss of his partner,
Tori Cowburn. By the time of
sentence, he had regained full function of his left upper limb. He still
required ongoing treatment
with a mental health specialist for trauma and other
psychological effects.
Passengers suffering less than grievous
bodily harm
remaining 16 passengers suffered injuries of varying severity, ranging from
multiple fractures of the ribs, clavicle and lumbar
spine, serious facial
lacerations, acute kidney injury, mild traumatic brain injury and other deep
lacerations and haematomas, soft
tissue injuries of the neck and spine, deep
abrasions, haematomas and lacerations to the face and body (see [68]-[83]).
, Sharyn Junkeer’s husband, complained of C-spine tenderness,
had to wear a collar, and had sutures that remained in place for
(aged 30), Hannah Cox’ husband, attended John Hunter Hospital. He
sustained multiple deep abrasions to his right hip, and a
small, less than 1cm
laceration to his right dorsal hand fourth metacarpophalangeal joint. His wounds
were cleaned and dressed, and
there was no need to close the laceration
, Nicholas Cox’ wife, attended John Hunter Hospital. She sustained
a laceration to her left upper eyelid, which was sutured
on arrival. She
complained of pain in her left shoulder and C-spine tenderness. She had a
headache, amnesia, and no recollection
of what had occurred. A CT scan showed
large scalp haematomas ([70]).
extricated himself from the bus and assisted his wife, Emma Healey,
who sustained grievous bodily harm in the crash (see above).
attended John Hunter Hospital some time after the incident with neck discomfort.
A CT scan showed no evidence of a C-spine
injury, although soft tissue injuries
to his neck were noted. Mr Healey sustained a small graze to his right ankle and
a 2cm laceration
to his left axilla, which required suturing ([71]).
, the husband of Jenny Warren and father of Luke Warren, presented to
Maitland Hospital and was transferred to John Hunter Hospital,
complaining of
C-spine tenderness and right shoulder pain, with obvious abrasions to his arms
and hands. He suffered displaced rib
fractures on the left side, of the lst-4th
ribs, a left clavicle fracture and an acute kidney injury ([72]).
presented to Maitland Hospital. She indicated she had hit her head
and complained of sore ribs on the left side. She had a gash to
fingers on her right hand ([73]).
presented to Maitland Hospital complaining of generalised back
pain. A small haematoma was evident to her right scalp, and some grazing
right shoulder and back ([74]).
presented to Maitland Hospital with a haematoma behind his right ear;
a small bruise under his right eye; a graze to his shoulder
and back; and two
small grazes to his left hand ([75]).
presented to Maitland Hospital with a laceration to the left side of
her lip and cheek. Glass was removed from her cheek during the
examination. The
lip injury involved a full thickness penetration externally into the oral
cavity, and a steri-strip was applied
in advance of suturing. The facial
lacerations were assessed as complex, requiring specialist referral and
management to minimise
risk of significant scarring and any functional or
cosmetic deficit. Ms Mousley also had some minor abrasions to her left lower
She does not recall the crash ([76]).
presented to Maitland Hospital complaining of back pain. He had three
left lower rib fractures and a minor apex scalp abrasion ([77]).
, whose partner, Angus Craig, died in the crash, presented to Calvary
Mater Hospital. On arrival she was complaining of pain to her
right ankle and
right shoulder. She had self-extricated from the bus and had not lost
consciousness. There was a small area of erythema
and a small laceration to her
right ankle, which was sutured. Multiple superficial abrasions and tiny
lacerations were noted, said
to be a result of glass fragments. There was a
superficial burn over Ms Liddy’s right lateral heel ([78]).
presented to Calvary Mater Hospital with undisplaced left L2-L4
transverse process fractures, and lower lip and left mastoid lacerations.
laceration to Mr Ellis’ lip was repaired with sutures, and the left
mastoid laceration with tissue glue and steri-strips
El Moussalli
presented to Calvary Mater Hospital with soft issue injuries to
his right ribs and hip, bilateral knees, left shoulder, neck and
lower back; and
a mild traumatic brain injury/concussion ([80]).
Arielle Sandoval
presented to Calvary Mater Hospital with tenderness and
bruising to her anterior superior iliac spine and proximal femur bilaterally.
CT scan showed some minor subcutaneous stranding (fluid accumulation) over the
anterolateral aspects of the hips ([81]).
(aged 28) presented to Calvary Mater Hospital with left
shoulder/scapular pain ([82]).
, whose fiancée Rebecca Mullen died in the crash, ended up
half out of the back left window of the bus, with the roof of the
bus across his
torso. He was on his back and vomiting when assistance was provided, allowing
him to slide out. Mr Howard presented
to Maitland Hospital complaining of pain
to the left side of his back. Swelling to the left parietal region of the scalp
was noted, along with multiple abrasions to the scalp, a left sided
subconjunctival haemorrhage and a small superficial laceration
to the left upper
back. Multiple glass fragments had to be removed from the dorsum of both hands
Mr Button’s employment and medical history
2016 until October 2022, Mr Button worked as a bus driver for CDC (operator of
Hunter Valley Buses). He had earlier suffered
a workplace injury in 1994
([85]). In his employment application, Mr Button indicated that he was taking
prescription medication
that may affect his ability to work. He did not tick
boxes to indicate that he suffered from back, neck or shoulder injuries ([86]).
On a pre-employment medical assessment conducted on 29 August 2016, Mr Button
was found to be fit for the role. It was noted that
he had a pre-existing back
injury and was taking Tramadol daily for back pain. A drug and alcohol screen on
29 August 2016 noted
a positive result for opiates/morphine in the urine sample
30 August 2016, Mr Button’s regular GP wrote a letter stating that his
longstanding back pain was well controlled and that
there was no reason why he
could not perform the normal duties of a bus driver ([88]). Mr Button commenced
employment with Hunter
Valley Buses on 6 September 2016 ([88]).
26 September 2018 (three months after starting work for CDC), Mr Button attended
a consultation with his GP, whose notes record
that he reported increased back
pain after 33 hours working in the bus the previous week. He was prescribed
Panadeine Forte in addition
to Tramadol ([91]).
Button’s GP referred him to two pain specialists, on 18 January 2022 and
15 February 2022, for an opinion and management
regarding worsening back pain
with neck pain triggered more recently by work as a bus driver. The referral
stated that he was “using
more oral analgesia that we are concerned
release tablets,
Tramadol 200mg modified release ablets and Tramadol 50 mg
capsules ([92]).
8 March 2022, Mr Button submitted a WorkCover claim, stating that his 1994
injury had been aggravated while driving buses and had
been getting worse over
the previous 12 months ([93]).
3 June 2022, Dr John Prickett, a pain specialist, described Mr Button as
“increasingly dependent on opiate-based medications
with diminishing
clinical benefit”. The report said that he had “an opiate
dependence disorder with features of vulnerability
to addiction” and that
he “recognises that his current style of medication use is
inappropriate”. The report recorded
Mr Button’s daily use of
mediation as “Tramadol 50mg immediate release ... approximately once per
day. Tramadol 100mg
slow release, ... anywhere between 2 and 5 times per
day” and that “he will use approximately 20 x Tramadol 200’s
and 20 x Tramadol 100’s per week in a pain contingent fashion although
tries not to take them when he is driving. He also uses
up to 10 x Panadeine
Forte tablets per day as well as some Mobic” ([94]).
14 June 2022, Mr Button was stood down from his duties following receipt of Dr
Prickett’s report ([95]). A CDC employee contacted
him on 15 June 2022 and
noted that he was emotional and angry with Dr Prickett. He disagreed that he was
addicted to opioids, stating
that he felt he just had a high dependency. He said
that he not taken any opioids since the appointment and that he could not afford
not to work ([96]).
13 July 2022, Mr Button told a WorkCover impairment assessor that he felt he
could not work as a bus driver without being able
to take adequate pain relief
9 September 2022, Dr Tame, a different pain specialist, provided a second
opinion, reporting that Mr Button had been using “quite
high doses of
Tramadol to try and improve function and remain at work” and that this was
“quite a long standing arrangement”.
Dr Tame commented that he would
be surprised if workplace regulations allowed employees to drive in a public
transport capacity while
using opioid analgesics but said that he was not an
expert on that area. Mr Button reported to Dr Tame that he was using 50mg doses
of Tramadol on most days and an additional 100 to 200mg per day depending on
symptoms. He had ceased using Panadeine Forte. Dr Tame
noted that Mr
Button’s reports indicated that he used no more than 250mg of Tramadol per
day in total. Dr Tame also noted that
he was “desperate to get back to
work” and “happy to comply” with whatever strategies and
assessments would
specialist opinion to determine Mr Button’s risk of addiction and abuse;
and indicated that, subject to obtaining a favourable opinion on that issue,
Dr Tame would be happy with Mr Button using up to a
maximum of 150mg
slow-release Tramadol per day ([99]).
16 September 2022, Mr Button’s worker’s compensation claim was
declined ([100]). On 20 September 2022, he re-commenced
Tramadol, with
prescriptions for 50mg modified release tablets, 150mg modified release tablets
and 50mg capsules ([101]).
26 September 2022, Dr Tame reported that Mr Button had concluded that he would
not be able to get back to work unless he was permitted
to use low dose opioid
analgesics at work. On 29 September 2022, Dr Tame discussed limiting Mr
Button’s Tramadol to 100mg daily
with Mr Button’s GP,
Dr Scheman, ([102]).
30 September 2022, CDC arranged a meeting with Mr Button to discuss his medical
prognosis and ability to continue to perform his
role as a bus driver. An
independent medical assessment was arranged for 19 October 2022. On 4 October
2022, Dr Scheman noted that
Mr Button was “very upset and depressed with
how work has treated him” ([103]).
15 October 2022, Mr Button applied for employment with Sid Foggs Coaches
a 17 October 2022, in a consultation with Dr Scheman, Mr Button reported that he
felt he could get back to work driving and was
keen to do so. Dr Scheman
recorded that Mr Button “has to stick to max. medication recommended by
specialist though –
separate issue from his back pain” ([105]). From
then until the bus crash, Mr Button continued to be prescribed 150mg Tramadol
modified release, 50mg modified release and 50mg tablets ([106]).
19 October 2022, Mr Button resigned from CDC, effective immediately. He
commenced driving with Sid Fogg’s Coaches on a casual
basis two days
later. On 11 November 2022, Mr Button resigned from that position following an
unrelated dispute ([107]).
November 2022, Mr Button commenced casual employment with Linq Buslines, after
answering an advertisement. There was no record
that he disclosed his use of
Tramadol to his new employer (despite self-report required by its Drug and
Alcohol Policy) ([108]).
Driving history
Button had no traffic matters in NSW but a number of offences on his Victorian
licence: a demerit point in 2019, for exceeding
the speed limit by less than
10km, and 3 demerit points in 2018, for exceeding the speed limit by 15km/h or
more but less than 25km/h
Mr Button’s police
Button participated in an ERISP at 11:35am on the morning after the crash. He
described it as follows:
... and then we went around the corner, um, past the turn off to Branxton and
down the dip where I disengaged the cruise and sort
of coasted up to the
roundabout looking out to see what was coming and so forth and um, it looked
pretty clear so I started turning.
Um, it’s sort of a funny sort of turn
but I’ve been around there before. I, um, I didn’t feel like I was
and I’ve got to be honest I wasn’t looking at the speedo, I
was looking at the road and feeling the vehicle. And um,
I started turning into
the corner and what I would think about three quarters of the way around it felt
funny in the steering like
it was um, understeering and then suddenly it felt
like someone lifted it up and threw it on its side and I don’t think I
the inside, um, um, median or the roundabout part, the bricks but um,
and then it just went over like yeah, it was as if everything
just jumped to one
side and it just went over and the rest is unfortunately a blur [[113]; A 22,
Button said that on the day of the crash, he had taken 50mg of Tramadol in the
morning, then 50mg slow release Tramadol around
“lunch time”, and a
150mg Tramadol slow release tablet around 2pm ([115]). (This was contradicted by
the pharmacological
evidence – see below.) He said that the Tramadol
dulled his neck pain from disc lesions with
Pharmacological evidence
is an opioid analgesic considered equipotent to codeine and has a depressant
effect on the central nervous system. Its typical
effects include respiratory
depression, euphoria, somnolence, mental clouding and ataxia (unsteadiness) and
impairments to visual
memory and functions, comprehension, attention, problem
solving and decision-making ([119]).
of Mr Button’s blood and urine were taken at 1:10am on 12 June 2023 at
Singleton District Hospital. Analysis of those
samples revealed 0.62mg/L of
Tramadol and >5mg/L of Panadol in Mr Button’s blood ([118]). Mr
Button’s blood concentration
of Tramadol indicated he had consumed a
higher dose of Tramadol than he had reported to the police. Dr Perl, a clinical
pharmacologist, Dr Perl, considered that the blood concentration
strongly suggested a dose of around 400mg in the 24 hours before
the sample was
taken ([121]). Dr Perl noted that, while some of Mr Button’s behaviours
immediately after the crash may have
been partly due to shock, others were
consistent with the critical nervous system depressant effects of high Tramadol
concentration
the high concentration of Tramadol in Mr Button’s system, his driving
ability would have been impaired, even taking into
account the fact that he
would have developed a tolerance to his prescribed dose
Statement of Agreed Facts included in the opening Summary (at [9]) that at the
time of the crash the applicant was driving in
a manner dangerous to other
persons, in that he:
(a) Was under the influence of Tramadol to the degree that
there would have been some impairment of his driving ability, having
Tramadol in a quantity exceeding the maximum recommended by medical
professionals, and knowing that consuming substantial
amounts of Tramadol had
the capacity to affect his ability to drive;
(b) Engaged in risk-taking behaviour;
(c) Drove too quickly to safely negotiate the roundabout.
Sentence hearing
sentence hearing took place in the District Court at Newcastle on 9 to
11 September 2024.
Crown tendered 46 victim impact statements (A21-A47), 31 from family members of
the ten deceased (three of whom were also passengers
on the bus), and 15 from
other surviving passengers.
psychiatric report of Dr Christopher Bench was tendered (Ex 2), as to
Mr Button’s background and mental health. Dr Bench noted
Button left school in year 10 before attaining his school certificate, having
been a poor and easily distracted student.
Mr Button spoke positively of his
parents and his upbringing generally, with the exception of sexual abuse by an
adult friend of
the family that occurred at age 15. After leaving school, he
worked in car yards and car sales before turning to driving buses. Mr
two adult sons from his first marriage, and two further sons (one aged 13) with
his second wife of 27 years. He had sustained
a back injury in 1994 and had
bursitis in both shoulders and osteoarthritis in both knees. Before his arrest,
he was drinking infrequently,
had smoked cannabis and used amphetamines in the
past, and acknowledged having over-used prescribed opioids for pain
management.
Bench noted that Mr Button was diagnosed with depression and anxiety in 1992,
which had resolved. He had reported suicidal ideation
after the offending and
significant anxiety, flashbacks and intrusive thoughts, and had engaged in
sessions with a Lifeline counsellor.
Dr Bench noted that, in custody, Mr Button
was a sweeper in his pod and that he had been the subject of threats and
intimidation
but no prolonged periods of isolation.
Bench considered that, with a reasonable degree of medical certainty,
Mr Button met the diagnostic criteria for Major Depressive
Disorder with
anxious distress recurrent, Opioid Use Disorder in enforced remission, and
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder but that only
the Opioid Use Disorder materially
contributed to the offending. Dr Bench opined that there would be a foreseeable
risk of a custodial
sentence exacerbating his Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and
depression and that in this context a custodial sentence would weigh
heavily on him than the average individual.
references were tendered from Mr Button’s wife and four friends, two of
whom had also been his work managers when
he was a car salesman (Exs
Applicant’s evidence
Button gave evidence on the morning of the third day of the sentence
said that he had been taking Tramadol since 1994, and that, in 2022, when made
aware of Dr Prickett’s opinion, it was his
perception that he was
addicted, or “certainly dependent” (11/09/24; T 4.25). He said that
when he had told Dr Bench
he did not feel he had ever “abused”
opioids, he meant he “didn’t take them for any other reason than
(11/09/24; T 4.36). His experience was that the effect of Tramadol
on him was that it “relieves pain” and it was not
accompanied by
anything in the nature of a high or any consciousness of intoxication. He said
it was not his perception on the night
that his driving ability was impaired by
his ingestion of Tramadol (11/09/24; T 5-6). He agreed that he took
significantly in excess
of his prescription that day (11/09/24; T 6).
Button said that he did not have a recollection of previously having approached
the roundabout from the direction that he did that
night (11/09/24; T 6) (cf his
earlier statements to police that he had travelled the roundabout many times).
He accepted that, to
overturn the bus, he had to be driving at a speed
significantly higher than the safe speed for the roundabout (11/09/24; T 7)
that the bus tipped over because at the crucial point it was travelling in
excess of 50km/h (11/09/24; T 7).
Button expressed remorse for his offending, saying “I can’t forgive
myself”, “I’ve committed the
ultimate sin”, and “I
hate myself, and I want to disappear” (11/09/24; T 10).
cross-examination, Mr Button accepted that he had told various police officers
after the crash that he was familiar with the corner
he took (11/09/24;
T 11). He gave evidence that, when he said “this next part’s
going to be fun” on approach to
the roundabout, he was referring to the
ramp onto the freeway being like a rollercoaster (11/09/24; T 5-14). Mr Button
agreed that
he was stood down (from CDC) as a result of Dr Prickett’s
report because someone dependent on opioids and vulnerable to addiction
be driving a bus due to very clear safety concerns (11/09/24; T 16). He also
agreed that Dr Scheman had emphasised to him
in October 2022 that he had to
stick to the specialist’s recommended maximum, and that the limit existed
because of the danger
he posed while being a bus driver from taking high
quantities of Tramadol (11/09/24; T 17).
response to questions from the sentencing judge, Mr Button acknowledged that,
with hindsight, the doctors limited his Tramadol
prescription because its use
would affect his driving. However, he said, “I’ve been taking it
for so long, I guess I
didn’t think about it. I never felt affected by
tramadol” (11/09/24; T 19).
Button agreed that he knew from June of 2022 that using large amounts of
Tramadol made him a danger on the roads, that he thought
he knew better than the
doctors about the risk he posed, and that, on the night of the crash, he was
joking about rollercoasters
at a time when he knew he had taken far more
Tramadol than his doctors had recommended (11/09/24; T
Reasons on sentence
Mr Button’s evidence, counsel made oral submissions (written submissions
having been previously filed). The sentencing
judgment was given that afternoon;
as his Honour noted.
Honour referred to the number of victim impact statements that were read or
otherwise tendered that painted a graphic picture
of devastation caused by the
offending; the significant emotions the sentence hearing had generated; and the
extraordinary devastation
suffered by so many individuals and families. His
Honour considered that no assistance could be gained as to an appropriate range
of sentence, from statistics or comparable cases, given the nature of the
Honour expressly noted that Mr Button was entitled to a 25% discount to reflect
his early pleas.
Factual findings
sentencing judge referred to the Agreed Facts without reciting them in
Honour noted that the speed of the bus was recorded at 52km/h before reaching
entry to the roundabout, and 56.48km/h on the roundabout.
His Honour noted that
“Mr Lennon, the traffic expert, calculated that the tipping threshold,
that is the speed at which a rollover
of the bus was likely, was
31 kilometres per hour”, and said that Mr Button must have
accelerated at the “higher end”
of normal driving and towards the
“aggressive” end, given that he was recorded at 52km/h before
reaching the entry point.
Honour found that Mr Button was driving the bus at an excessive speed, not only
as it entered the roundabout but as it was travelling
through it before it
reached the sharper curve he needed to negotiate.
Honour noted the history of Mr Button’s use of Tramadol from 2016, and his
examination by two pain specialists, both of
whom considered that he had become
opiate dependent, leading to his being stood down from his position as a bus
driver in 2022. His
Honour said that Mr Button “did not accept that his
use of tramadol opiate painkiller was a problem in terms of his driving
notwithstanding the fact that the prescribing authorities indicated a lower
24-hour maximum quantity ... than would otherwise
operate had he not been the
driver of a bus”. His Honour also noted that Mr Button was aware of this
lower level maximum quantity,
but that it was clear that on the day of the
offence the far exceeded it. His Honour considered the pharmacological evidence
the impacts of Tramadol on the central nervous system and its typical
effects and noted that a number of the typical effects of the
opioid analgesic
are significant factors for a person driving any vehicle, let alone a bus. Later
in his reasons, his Honour referred
to Mr Button’s “insistence
essentially that he knew more than the doctors”.
sentencing judge referred to the relevant passages of the Agreed Facts and the
summaries in the Crown’s written submissions
as to the passengers’
injuries (without reciting them), which his Honour found to be clear and
Good character
Honour noted that Mr Button’s traffic and criminal history was limited and
found that he was otherwise a person of good
character, with the potential
exception being in relation to his use of Tramadol. His Honour nevertheless
commented that Mr Button’s
ignoring of doctors’ advice, and his
insistence that he knew more than them and that his use of Tramadol would not
affect his driving, was an approach one might not expect of a person
of good character, given the significance of a bus driver’s
role to ensure
passenger safety.
Honour further noted that good character may be less relevant for driving cases,
and that Mr Button’s good character was
probably one of the reasons he was
able to obtain his role as a bus driver.
Purposes of
sentencing judge referred to the purposes of sentence in
(Sentencing
Sentencing Procedure Act
), noting the significance of general and
personal deterrence, the need to make an offender accountable and to denounce
his conduct,
the need to protect the community from an offender, and the need to
recognise the harm done to victims and the community and to ensure
offender is adequately punished.
Honour recorded that he took into account the victim impact statements,
including those of family members of the deceased in accordance
s 30E(3) of the
observations of McCallum J in
[2014] NSWSC 1705
sentencing judge referred to community attitudes to offences of this type, as
evidenced over the years by increases in maximum
penalties and the issuing of
two guideline judgments. His Honour noted that human life is precious, and the
taking of a human life
by dangerous driving is a crime of considerable
seriousness.
Objective seriousness and moral culpability
Honour considered the issue of abandonment of responsibility as referred to in
the guideline judgment of
(2002) 55 NSWLR 252
[2002] NSWCCA 343
, placing significance on Mr Button’s responsibility, as
a driver of a bus containing 35 people, to ensure the safety of his
passengers,
which necessitated that his manner of driving should have been exemplary. His
Honour said that the guideline judgment
provided no assistance in terms of the
appropriate sentence to be imposed, given the number of victims who lost their
lives and the
number who were seriously injured.
stated that the question of moral culpability was significant, his Honour said
that “[t]hat he drove
knowing he was under the influence of an opioid
painkiller, tramadol
, having consumed a quantity of the drug which was well
over the prescribed 24-hour dosage limit, was a significant breach of the
of care he owed his passengers” (emphasis added). Ground 1 challenges the
italicised portion of this statement.
sentencing judge found that Mr Button drove the bus into the roundabout at a
speed which greatly exceeded the calculated tipping
point or rollover speed for
a bus negotiating that particular roundabout, despite telling numerous police
and others that he was
familiar with the roundabout, and at one point was
travelling at 56.48km/h, “nearly twice the estimated rollover tipping
speed of 31km/h”. Ground 2 challenges the last of those statements.
His Honour found that risk-taking behaviour was the only
explanation for the
things he said and for his speed and was satisfied that the driving demonstrated
an abandonment of his responsibility
to ensure his passengers’ safety and
evidenced “very high” moral culpability.
sentencing judge referred to the catastrophic consequences of this abandonment
of responsibility, namely the deaths, and the physical
injuries and mental
health issues suffered by the surviving passengers and acknowledged the
inexpressible “pain, anger, frustration
and sadness” which permeated
the two days over which victim impact statements were
to totality, his Honour reflected that Mr Button’s single act of driving
the bus in a manner dangerous made him guilty of
35 offences, and noted that the
real substance of the offence “is not just the dangerous driving; it is
the dangerous driving
in association with the taking of a human life”
(unreported, NSWCCA 30/10/97), per Hunt CJ at
CL). His Honour referred to authorities that establish a need for notional
accumulation
between indicative sentences to reflect the criminality of each
offence in accordance with
194 CLR 610
[1998] HCA 57.
Honour stated that the sentences indicated for each of the ten counts resulting
in death would be identical, but that there would
be some variation within the
categories of offences resulting in grievous bodily harm and the s 53
offences, to reflect his assessment
of the seriousness of the injuries to each
Honour stated that he would then comply with the principle of totality and the
requirement of accumulation by imposing an aggregate
sentence to reflect the
Court’s assessment of the total criminality of all 35 offences and said
that a “reasonable degree”
of (notional) accumulation was
appropriate.
Subjective case
sentencing judge found that Mr Button had expressed genuine remorse and
contrition in his evidence on sentence and accepted responsibility
devastating consequences of his driving.
Honour noted the medical history reflected in Dr Bench’s report, and the
sexual assault experienced by Mr Button as an adolescent.
In terms of
Mr Button’s mental health, the sentencing judge found that Mr Button
had suffered suicidal ideation from time to
time since the collision and been
hospitalised on one occasion, and that he had received some threats and
intimidation in custody
but had not experienced prolonged periods of isolation.
His Honour noted that Mr Button was experiencing nightmares daily and his
relationship with his wife was “rocky”. His Honour also noted Dr
Bench’s proposed diagnoses and found Mr Button’s
time in custody is
likely to be served in harsher circumstances, having regard to his PTSD, age and
physical condition.
sentencing judge noted the character references and found that there was no
question of extra-curial punishment or hardship to
third parties.
Honour declined to make a finding of special circumstances, as the length of the
sentence would allow for a sufficiently lengthy
parole period without varying
the statutory ratio, while ensuring that the non-parole period adequately covers
the criminality of
the offending.
Honour specified the indicative sentences for each offence before imposing the
aggregate sentence the subject of this appeal.
the length of the aggregate sentence and the evident public interest in this
matter, it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal.
– The sentencing judge erred in finding as a fact that the applicant
“drove knowing that he was under the influence
of an opioid painkiller,
Mr Button’s submissions
ground of appeal impugns the finding in the sentencing judgment identified above
that Mr Button “drove knowing that he
was under the influence of an opioid
painkiller, Tramadol”. In essence, as emerged in oral submissions, Mr
Button reads that
statement as amounting to a finding that he drove knowing that
he was “adversely affected” by Tramadol.
Button says that it was no part of the Crown case, nor was it part of the Agreed
Facts, that he knew that he was under the influence
of Tramadol. As to the
Agreed Facts, he says that these are expressed in terms of his knowledge of the
of the drug to affect his driving. As to his evidence at the
trial, Mr Button points to his evidence that he did not believe he was
affected by the amount of the drug that he had taken and says that this was
unchallenged.
particular, Mr Button points to the following evidence given during his
examination in chief (11/09/24; T 4-5):
Q ... [referring to Dr Bench having said that] “The
defendant does not feel that he has ever abused opioids”. You
doctor that?
Q. By opioids, you were referring to tramadol?
Q. What did you mean by the term “abused”?
A. I didn’t take them for any other reason than pain.
Q. From your experience of the effect tramadol has on you, what
is the effect?
A. Relieves pain.
Q. Is it accompanied by anything in the nature of a high? Do
you understand what I am saying?
A. Yes, I understand, and no.
Q. Is it accompanied by any consciousness of an
intoxication?
Q. You understand, and you agree with the proposition that your
driving ability was impaired to a degree by the ingestion of tramadol?
Q. Was that your perception on the night?
giving evidence that on 11 June 2023 he had taken Tramadol 50mg immediate
release at about 7am, 150mg slow release mid-afternoon,
and 150mg slow release
at about 8 to 10pm, Mr Button said this (11/09/24; T 6; 18-20):
Q. What you took on the 11th was, you agree, significantly in
excess of your prescription?
Q. You understand that the experts are plainly of the view that
there was some impairment of your driving ability?
Q. Did you have that perception that night?
Q. Why did you think that the doctor was limiting the amount of
tramadol you were allowed to take while driving a bus? That’s
necessarily being related whether it was working from a pain relief point of
view. Why do you think the doctor said ‘Don’t
use more than’
whatever it was ‘while you’re driving a bus’?
A. Because they thought I was addicted. I --
Q. Did you not give some consideration to what the doctors
might perceive to be the problem? . . . Why do you think that the doctors
saying ‘Don’t use more than this quantity when you’re
driving’? Not just because you’ll get addicted,
but why did you
think they were limiting that?
A. In hindsight because they thought I was a risk.
Q. That’s what I’m getting [at]. That the use of
such a substance would impact on your driving seems to be why the
doctors would
limit that prescription while you were a bus driver?
Q. You say you weren’t cognisant of that at the time, or
you didn’t think about it at the time?
A. I’ve been taking it so long, I guess I didn’t
think about it. I never felt affected by tramadol. Other medications
me, which I didn’t take any more.
Q. What about in terms of your character in terms of what you
agree was the risk taking persona? Don’t you perceive that
something that’s a change; that is that, normally speaking, without that
substance, you would not, as a bus driver,
be a risk taker, but seemingly with
the substance, it made you more likely to take risks? What do you want to say
A. Its certainly not consciously. As I said all along, I
didn’t realise I was taking the risk, and I never felt impaired
although people have said that I was.
Q. Essentially then, you seemed to be in a position where you
didn’t believe that taking this particular substance was likely
problem for you when you were driving a bus. Is that the conclusion you’d
A. I wouldn’t have taken it if I thought it was a risk to
my driving ability.
Q. Why do you think the doctors were saying, “Don’t
take any more than this when you drive a bus”? They didn’t
as a general proposition. It was qualified by, “When you’re driving
a bus, don’t use more than this”.
Why do you think that was
something that they would insist on?
A. Once again, in hindsight, obviously so as I wouldn’t
be impaired, they thought I would be.
Q. Did you ever think to ask any of them what the problem might
be if you did take more than that prescribed amount as a driver?
CROWN PROSECUTOR
Q. Mr Button, you had a wakeup call about your use of tramadol
in the middle of 2022, surely.
Q. Your employer then took the drastic step of immediately
taking you off the road when they received Dr Prickett’s report.
Q. You can’t have thought that that was simply because
they were concerned that you might be developing addiction for your
own personal
welfare. You must surely have understood that the reason for that and I think
you agreed with me earlier that it was
because of the danger that you posed to
the people that you were responsible for as a bus driver.
Q. You knew from June of 2022 that using large amounts of
tramadol made you a danger on the roads.
Q. Isn’t that right?
Q. You didn’t tell your new employer about your use of
tramadol; that’s right, isn’t it?
A. According to the paperwork, yes.
Q. You were keen to get back to work.
Q. You thought that you knew better than the doctors about the
risk that you posed.
Button says that at no point was it put to him that his evidence as to his
asserted state of belief (that his driving ability was
not impaired by having
taken Tramadol) was untrue. Mr Button submits that his Honour’s finding
that he drove “knowing”
that he was under the influence of Tramadol
is inconsistent, and impossible to reconcile, with other findings made by his
referring to the following passage:
It is clear from the agreed facts and from the evidence that he gave that the
offender did not accept that his use of the tramadol
opiate painkiller was a
problem in terms of his driving. . . the offender has a limited traffic and
criminal history and in that
sense he is otherwise, [it] might be fair to say, a
man of good character. The potential exception to that is the offender’s
conduct in relation to the use of tramadol and his ignoring the advice provided
by medical practitioners and his insistence essentially
that he knew more than
the doctors and that his use of tramadol would not adversely impact upon his
Button points out that his Honour did not reject his assertion as to his state
of mind (i.e., that he did not believe he was adversely
affected by the drug).
Rather, his Honour found that Mr Button’s claim to know better than
medical practitioners compromised
“such claim to good character as he
had”. (There is no challenge to his Honour’s finding on the issue of
Mr Button’s
prior character.)
Button accepts that it may well be said that his belief that he was not
adversely affected by the drug was unreasonable but says
that this cannot be
converted to a positive finding of knowledge.
Button thus contends that the finding impugned by Ground 1 went beyond the
Agreed Facts and was unsupported by the evidence before
the sentencing
Respondent’s submissions
respondent emphasises that it was one of the particulars of Mr Button’s
dangerous manner of driving, and part of the agreed
facts he signed, that he
“was under the influence of Tramadol to the degree that there would have
been some impairment of his
driving ability, having consumed Tramadol in a
quantity exceeding the maximum recommended by medical professionals, and knowing
consuming substantial amounts of Tramadol had the capacity to affect his
ability to drive” (referring to Ex A4 [9]).
respondent points out that, shortly before delivering his sentence judgment, his
Honour had heard Mr Button’s evidence about
his use of Tramadol and his
beliefs about its effects on him, and the sentencing judge had himself
questioned Mr Button on that topic
(11/09/24; T 4-6; 15-21). The respondent
refers to Mr Button’s evidence as to his opioid use (already summarised
above), including
that he was aware that the maximum medication limit
recommended by his specialist was because of the danger that he posed while
a bus driver and taking high quantities of Tramadol (and see also the
acceptance in cross-examination that he knew from June 2022
that using large
amounts of Tramadol made him a danger on the roads (11/09/24; T 20)).
respondent says that it was not the Crown case that Mr Button felt high,
intoxicated or otherwise subjectively affected by the
Tramadol he took. Rather,
the Crown case was that he knew he had taken more Tramadol than he was
prescribed (described in his evidence
in chief as “significantly in excess
of his prescription”) (11/09/24; T 6.3) and he knew that taking
substantial amounts
had the capacity to affect his ability to drive. The
respondent submits that the practical effect of Mr Button’s acceptance
those two propositions is that he knew he was “under the influence”
of Tramadol.
respondent contends that the finding impugned by Ground 1 (“[t]hat he
drove knowing he was under the influence of an opioid
painkiller, tramadol,
having consumed a quantity of the drug which was well over the prescribed
24-hour dosage limit, was a significant
breach of the duty of care he owed his
passengers”) was consistent with the Agreed Facts and Mr Button’s
evidence, namely
that he determined to drive a bus containing 35 passengers,
knowing that he had taken a quantity of Tramadol that made him a danger
roads; and that this was a serious aspect of his offending.
respondent notes in this regard that where a party chooses to supplement an
agreed statement of facts with oral evidence it is
open to the sentencing judge
to make factual findings in accordance with the further evidence adduced
Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593
(1992) 63 A Crim R 316
[2006] NSWCCA 237
Determination
the outset, we note that there has been some doubt expressed as to the test to
be applied by an appellate court where there is
a challenge to factual findings
made by a sentencing judge (namely, whether the findings were reasonably open on
the evidence before
the sentencing judge, i.e., there was some basis for the
finding – see
[2023] NSWCCA 308
N Adams J at [116] (Ward P and Stern JA agreeing)) or whether the appellate
court may substitute its own factual finding if
persuaded that the finding of
the sentencing judge was in error (see
(2015) 254 A Crim R 150
(2019) 278 A Crim R 353).
That issue was recently the subject of
submissions in this Court before a bench of five, on which judgment is presently
(Hancock v R). It was not raised as an issue in the present appeal and
does not need (nor is it appropriate for it) to be addressed
here in light of
the conclusions we have reached. Even if the latter test is the applicable test,
we do not accept that his Honour
erred in the respects contended by Mr Button
(or, if he did, that the error was material).
read (and noting that they were delivered orally on the third day of the
sentence hearing and hence should be read without
an eye finely tuned to error),
the reasons on sentence did not encompass a finding that Mr Button knew at the
time he drove the bus
that night that he was adversely affected by the opioid
drug he had taken. What the sentencing judge found (amply supported by the
Agreed Facts and Mr Button’s own evidence) was that he knew that he had
taken significantly in excess of the recommended maximum
limit of Tramadol when
he drove the bus that evening; knew that the drug had the capacity to affect his
ability to drive; and knew
that the reason for the limitation on his use of
opioid medication while driving a bus was that that he was a danger (or
danger) on the roads. That sustains the finding that Mr Button drove
“knowing he was under the influence of” Tramadol,
when understood in
the context of the following words “having consumed a quantity of the drug
which was well over the prescribed
24-hour dosage limit”.
as Mr Button complains that his state of mind on this issue was unchallenged, it
may be noted that the cross-examination by
the Crown prosecutor did in effect
challenge his evidence as to his state of mind in that the Crown prosecutor
confronted him with
the proposition (which Mr Button accepted) that he knew his
doctor had said that the level of the drug he had taken made him a danger
roads. In any event, whatever he thought or believed about the effect of the
drug on him, it was not in dispute that Mr Button
knew that he had taken
significantly in excess of the daily limit imposed on his use of Tramadol by his
medical specialist and knew
the reason for that limitation. It is that knowledge
to which the impugned finding relates (not his subjective belief as to whether
the drug had adversely affected him).
do not accept that the finding that Mr Button drove knowing he was “under
the influence” of Tramadol can fairly be
read as a finding that he drove
knowing that he was adversely affected by the drug. Indeed, in oral submissions
on the appeal, Senior
Counsel for Mr Button appeared to accept that his argument
on this point amounts to no more than someone under the influence of alcohol
saying that he or she did not believe he or she was affected by it (AT 3.20).
While Senior Counsel maintained that that the argument
here put for Mr Button is
different, in essence what he now relies on (as explained above) is that a
reading of the impugned finding
amounts to a finding of actual knowledge that he
was adversely affected by the drug. We do not accept that this is what his
found. Rather, his Honour found in effect that Mr Button knew when he
drove the bus that he had taken significant amounts of the
drug and in that
sense knew that he was “under the influence” of the drug (whatever
his subjective belief as to the actual
effect of the drug).
error is established. Ground 1 is dismissed.
Ground 2 – The
sentencing judge erred in finding that the relevant tipping threshold for the
bus was 31km/h
Mr Button’s submissions
2 impugns the statement by his Honour that the estimated rollover tipping point
speed for the bus was 31km/h. Mr Button submits
that this finding necessarily
aggravated the view that his Honour took of the degree to which he exceeded both
safe and likely rollover
speeds of the bus.
Button says that, at the point in the roundabout at which the bus overturned,
the opinion of Mr Lennon was that the likely rollover
speed of the bus was
47km/h; and that the estimated rollover speed of 31km/h related to the entry of
the roundabout which Mr Button
says had been successfully negotiated. (Some
might cavil with the proposition that the entry to the roundabout had been
successfully
negotiated in circumstances where it was an Agreed Fact that, as
the bus entered the roundabout it began to tilt towards the left
([7]) but it is
not here necessary to explore the precise point at which the bus commenced to
roll.) In oral submissions, Mr Button
argues that the sentencing judge was
“fixated” on the speed of 31km/h (AT 7.47).
Button notes that the highest recorded speed of the bus through the roundabout
was 56.48km/h at a point earlier than the ultimate
rollover point. He says that
his Honour’s juxtaposition of 56.48km/h with 31km/h was erroneous (by
saying that this speed was
nearly twice the estimated rollover tipping point
speed of 31km/h); and that the appropriate comparison for a consideration of the
degree to which Mr Button’s speed was dangerous is 47km/h (that, we note,
being the estimated tipping point closest to the
point on the roundabout at
which the bus reached its final position).
Button accepts that it was open for his Honour to consider the whole course of
driving through the roundabout and acknowledges
that the speed at which he drove
was clearly excessive in the circumstances. However, he complains that his
Honour’s “apparent”
finding substantially exaggerated the
variance between the relevant calculated rollover speed and the actual speed of
the vehicle
at the point where it overturned.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent points out that his Honour correctly observed that: Mr Lennon
calculated that the tipping threshold was 31km/h (although
we note that his
Honour did not there add that this was the tipping threshold at the entry to the
roundabout); that, for the bus
to have reached a speed of 56.48km/h on the
roundabout, Mr Button must have accelerated at a level which was the higher end
driving and towards the aggressive end; and that the bus was recorded
as travelling at 52km/h before it reached the actual entry
to the roundabout.
The respondent refers to the Agreed Facts which establish ([32]-[33]) that the
bus was travelling at 52km/h immediately
before reaching the entry to the
roundabout, the tipping threshold at the entry to the roundabout was 31km/h, and
the bus was travelling
at 56.48km/h at a point on the roundabout.
respondent notes that Mr Button passed through the entry to the roundabout
(where the tipping threshold was 31km/h) before he
reached a speed of 56.48km/h
a short distance later. The respondent says that the precise speed at which he
did so is unknown and
that excessive speed on both entering and traversing the
roundabout accords with the passengers’ observations, which do not
describe heavy braking before entry (Agreed Facts [28]-[29]).
respondent says that it was also correct for the sentencing judge to state that
“it is clear that [Mr Button] was driving
the bus at an excessive speed,
not only as it entered the roundabout, but as it was travelling through the
roundabout before it reached
what might be said to be the sharper curve that he
needed to negotiate”.
is noted that the impugned statement (italicised below) was made in the context
of his Honour’s consideration of Mr Button’s
moral culpability,
where the sentencing judge observed that:
The offender stated to numerous police and others that he was familiar with the
roundabout, yet he drove his bus into the roundabout
at a speed which greatly
exceeded what the expert evidence noted was the tipping point or rollover speed
for a bus negotiating that
particular roundabout.
kilometres.
clear that the offender engaged in risk-taking behaviour, as that is the only
explanation for the things he said and the
speed at which he attempted to
negotiate the roundabout. [emphasis added]
respondent notes that the tipping threshold was not uniform throughout the path
to the final position of the bus because of the
roundabout’s irregular
(elliptical) shape and that the precise point where the rollover occurred is not
known and nor is the
tipping threshold at that point. The respondent accepts
that the initial tipping threshold of 31km/h at the entry to the roundabout
not the most appropriate comparator by which to assess the significance of the
measured speed of 56.48km/h a little further into
the roundabout but says that,
given that the exact location of where the bus rolled is not known, and in light
of the uncontroverted
fact that it did so, the earlier tipping point was not an
irrelevant reference when considering Mr Button’s speed. The respondent
says (which is hardly controversial since Mr Button accepts that he plainly
drove too fast) that he drove sufficiently quickly to
roll the bus while
navigating a roundabout, where both the road rules and the shape of the roadway
required him to drive at a lower
the extent that the sentencing judge’s description of the traffic
expert’s conclusions does not reflect the totality
of that evidence, the
respondent points out that his Honour’s reasons were delivered
at the conclusion of the evidence and submissions, noting that
reasons for sentence delivered
may “lack the
order and precision of language that can be incorporated into a judgment after
the luxury of time for consideration,
refinement of expression, and
polishing” (see
[2011] NSWCCA 207
(per Simpson J, McClellan CJ at CL and Fullerton J agreeing);
[2012] NSWCCA 130
(2012) 221 A Crim R 175
contrary to the respondent’s submissions, error is found, then the
respondent argues that it had no capacity to affect the
exercise of the
sentencing discretion. It is noted that there was no dispute that Mr Button
drove too quickly to be able safely to
negotiate the roundabout; that Mr Button
agreed that the bus “travelled too quickly through the roundabout”
([29]); that
the braking and acceleration rates he applied in the roundabout
were “excessive, unnecessary and aggressive” ([33]);
immediately after the crash, he admitted to police “I guess I was just
going too fast” ([44]). The respondent
says that the rolling of the bus
indicates that Mr Button drove faster than the tipping threshold at some point
very shortly after
the location where he was recorded travelling at 56.48 km/h
and points out that Mr Button accepted in evidence that to overturn the
had to be driving at a speed significantly higher than the safe speed for the
roundabout.
respondent says that the sentencing judge’s finding that it is very clear
that Mr Button engaged in risk taking behaviour,
and that is the only
explanation for the speed at which he attempted to negotiate the roundabout, was
well open to his Honour. His
Honour’s ultimate conclusion (that
Mr Button abandoned his responsibility to ensure his passengers’
safety and his moral
culpability was high) was also well supported on the
Determination
do not accept the criticism that the sentencing judge was “fixated”
on the speed of 31km/h (see AT 7). Mr Lennon calculated
the tipping threshold at
the entry to the roundabout as 31km/h. True it is, that his Honour did not
record in his reasons that Mr
Lennon had calculated higher tipping thresholds at
other points on the roundabout. However, the fact that his Honour did not refer
to all of the estimated tipping points on the roundabout does not bespeak
the respondent notes, the precise speed at which the bus entered the roundabout
is not clear. It is known that the bus was recorded
as travelling at 52km/h a
few minutes before entering the roundabout. Mr Button said that he had
disengaged cruise control and coasted
up to the roundabout but does not suggest
that he had braked before entry to the roundabout. As the bus did not roll on
the roundabout, it may be inferred that the speed of the bus had slowed
(from the 52km/h last recorded before the roundabout) on
the approach, or at the
entry, to the roundabout but by how much is not known. If so, this is consistent
with the expert’s
conclusion that Mr Button must have accelerated at a
level towards the aggressive end of driving in order to reach the recorded
speed on the roundabout that he did of 56.48km/h.
accept that comparison of the highest recorded speed (56.48km/h) with the 31km/h
tipping point at the entry to the roundabout was,
as the respondent accepts, not
the relevant comparison. Rather, the appropriate comparison with the highest
recorded speed would
have been with the estimated tipping point at or close to
that location. Mr Button accepts that he was travelling too fast for the
conditions but submits that it was not twice as fast as what was likely to
result in the bus overturning (after entry into the roundabout)
(see AT 8.29).
However, what is abundantly clear is that the speed at which Mr Button
negotiated the right hand curve of the roundabout,
after entering from the left
hand turn, was excessive.
parties accept that there is some doubt as to whether the statement that Mr
Button impugns was a “finding” as such.
However, at the least it was
a statement in the context of considering his moral culpability. The statement
that at one point Mr
Button was travelling within the roundabout at nearly twice
the estimated rollover tipping point speed would be accurate if qualified
recognition that the tipping point speed there referred to was that at the entry
to the roundabout, not later when driving within
it. The statement impugned by
Mr Button was incomplete unless it is qualified. We again point to the
nature of the reasons and observe that some infelicity or inaccuracy
of expression in such a judgment will not of itself necessarily
is, therefore, some force in the complaint as to the statement at page 11 of the
remarks on sentence. However, we do not accept
that any error by reason of the
incompleteness of the reference to the 31km/h tipping point was material.
Insofar as it informed
his Honour’s assessment that Mr Button’s
moral culpability was very high, that assessment was not only open to his Honour
but well founded. Mr Button clearly drove at excessive speed on the roundabout.
He did so having taken significantly in excess of
his prescribed opioid
medication and knew that this had the capacity to affect his driving ability and
that this posed a danger on
the roads; and he did so when he had responsibility
for his 35 passengers. There is no doubt that he abandoned his responsibility
ensure the safety of his passengers and that he engaged in risk-taking
behaviour. Those conclusions are amply supported by the
evidence (even leaving
aside the comments made to the passengers by Mr Button during the drive and
on the roundabout to which reference
has already). Further, the Agreed Facts
establish that Mr Button ignored warnings from passengers while on the
roundabout. Senior
Counsel for Mr Button submits that, by then, it was too late
but it is by no means clear that the evidence establishes this (see
9.49-10.14). The conclusion that Mr Button’s moral culpability was
very high was correct even if one substitutes for the
reference to 31km/h in the
impugned statement a reference to the higher tipping points later in the
roundabout (i.e., even though
at the point at which the bus was travelling at
56.48km/h this was not twice the speed of the estimated tipping point at that
as Mr Button complains that this “apparent” finding informed his
Honour’s assessment of the objective seriousness
of the offending, we
again do not consider that any error as to the relevant tipping point was
material. On any view of the facts
(as set out in some detail above) the
offending was objectively very serious.
have thus concluded that, to the extent that there was an erroneous factual
finding that the highest recorded bus speed was nearly
twice the estimated
rollover tipping point speed of 31km/h, it was not a material error. Ground 2
should be dismissed.
Ground 3 – In all the circumstances
the aggregate sentence of 32 years with a non- parole period of 24 years was
Mr Button’s submissions
Button does not contend that the individual indicative sentences were
inappropriate, although he submits that they may be regarded
“relatively heavy” sentences for the offences.
points out that the offences charged under s 52A (i.e., the dangerous driving
occasioning death) are not the aggravated offences
under that section. The
essence of the dangerous driving was his affectation (to an indeterminate
degree) by the Tramadol he had
ingested, the manner in which he immediately
approached the roundabout, and the speed at which he attempted to negotiate the
roundabout.
Button points out that, while his earlier driving was criticised by some
passengers, it was generally compliant with the speed
limit. He says that the
prevailing speed limit at the relevant portion of the roadway was 80km/h and
notes that, over the 12km
trip from the wedding reception to the roundabout, the
speed of the bus had not materially exceeded applicable speed limits. Thus,
Button says that this is not a case in which the whole course of driving from
the wedding reception to the roundabout is capable
of increasing his moral
culpability. (We interpose to note that there is no challenge to his
Honour’s finding that Mr Button’s
moral culpability was very high,
nor as to the objective seriousness of the offending.)
Button emphasises that his criminality involves a single act on his part, albeit
that the consequences of that act were catastrophic
(in that regard no doubt
referring to what was said in
[2022] NSWCCA 153
(2022) 300 A Crim R 214
), to which we refer in due
the matters raised in Grounds 1 and 2 (which have been considered above), Mr
Button accepts that he cannot point to specific
errors in his Honour’s
reasoning toward the aggregate sentence imposed (though suggesting that those
errors may provide some
part of the explanation for the sentence). Rather, he
argues that his Honour must have erred in the degree of notional accumulation
applied in reaching the result that he did. Mr Button accepts that his Honour
was not required to specify any particular degree of
accumulation (referring to
[2023] NSWCCA 24
(2023) 305 A Crim R 550
that the scheme of the aggregate sentence legislation means that it will not be
possible arithmetically to align the ultimate
aggregate sentence with the
individual indicative sentences (referring to
Kleindienst v R
NSWCCA 98).
Button accepts that the ultimate question is whether the aggregate sentence is
excessive in the sense that it is unreasonable or
plainly unjust (citing
at [116] per Gleeson JA (N Adams and Ierace JJ agreeing)). That said, Mr
Button notes that the indicative sentences form part of the
reasoning process
that culminates in the aggregate sentence (referring to
that the “potentials for accumulation” are open to examination to
determine whether the aggregate sentence represents
a sound exercise of the
sentencing discretion (citing
[2012] NSWCCA 199
[2015] NSWCCA 120).
Button notes that, as a matter of principle, a sentencing judge is required to
apply a degree of notional accumulation to each
of the offences (
R v Janceski
[2005] NSWCCA 288)
(and we note that his Honour here expressly acknowledged
that a reasonable degree of notional accumulation was appropriate in this
– see remarks on sentence at p 14).
Nguyen v The Queen
(2016) 256 CLR 656
[2016] HCA 17
) at [64]. There, the majority in the High Court noted that
“the object of the sentencing exercise is to impose individual sentences
that, so far as possible, accurately reflect the gravity of each offence while
at the same time rendering a total effective sentence
which, so far as possible,
accurately reflects the totality of criminality comprised in the totality of
offences” and that
this is an exercise which involves a significant
measure of discretionary moderation and accumulation of individual sentences
to the particular circumstances of each case (about which sentencing
judges might take different views). The Court said that:
Generally speaking, however, the imposition of less severe individual sentences
may call for a greater degree of accumulation in
order to reflect total
criminality whereas more severe individual sentences may necessitate a greater
degree of concurrency.
Button says that in this case the individual indicative sentences were
relatively severe and hence it was appropriate that a lesser
degree of notional
accumulation be applied. He relies, as he did before the sentencing judge, on a
survey of sentences involving
multiple victims of offences under
(a copy of which was appended to Mr Button’s written
submissions on appeal), as a record of what has happened in the past where
accumulations were imposed in respect of additional victims of
offences. In this regard, Mr Button is conscious of the statements of principle
by Simpson J, as her Honour then was, in
DPP v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR
[2010] NSWCCA 194
(approved by the High Court in
Hili v The Queen
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2010] HCA 45
) as to the
proper use that can be made of sentencing patterns. (It is not necessary here to
repeat that caution. Ultimately, their
use may provide guidance but they do not
fix the boundaries within which future sentences are to be set.)
Button emphasises that the purpose of an aggregate sentence is to meet the total
criminality of the offender. He argues that, in
a case where his moral
culpability remains the same (in respect of each of the offences) and has been
assessed in determining the
indicative sentences, it would be contrary to
principle to revisit that moral culpability in determining the degree of
notional accumulation.
Pausing here, there is no indication that the sentencing
judge did engage in any double counting.
is made that, in the present case, the sentencing judgment is entirely opaque as
to the degree of notional accumulation
(though there is no separate complaint as
to adequacy of reasons). Mr Button nevertheless contends that it must be greater
urged on his behalf. In particular, he argues that cases such as
(where the aggregate sentence after appeal involved an
accumulation of 9 years 6 months encompassing three additional manslaughter
offences, one additional aggravated
offence and the
counts) and
Moananu v R
[2022] NSWCCA 85
; (2022) 297 A Crim R 513 (
(where the aggregate sentence involved accumulation of 4 years 3 months
encompassing an additional manslaughter offence and an additional
offence) demonstrate that his Honour has applied an excessive degree of
notional accumulation to the present offences (which Mr Button
emphasises were
not aggravated offences).
Button disavows any suggestion that there is a mathematical formula to be
applied. Rather, he advocates the approach set out by
N Adams J in
at [330]; [333]. There, her Honour gave the example of
application of the totality principle to the scenario where a driver acting
criminally negligent manner collided with a school bus and killed 20 children,
saying that the application of the totality principle
may lead to a result in
which there is a relatively short portion of the total sentence attributable to
each additional death. Her
Honour noted that the one act of criminally negligent
driving had catastrophic consequences but contrasted this with an offender
embarking on a deliberate series of discrete offences.
Button argues that, as catastrophic as the consequences were of his dangerous
driving, the aggregate sentence imposed was manifestly
Respondent’s submissions
respondent notes that the sentencing judge took into account both the
catastrophic consequences of the crash (the number of lives
lost, the extent and
number of the injuries caused, and the devastation, pain and suffering expressed
in the victim impact statements
of the surviving passengers and the families of
the deceased) and that Mr Button’s liability for 35 offences derived from
act of driving. The respondent argues that, given the need to impose a
sentence that acknowledges the harm caused to so many victims,
the degree of
notional accumulation that his Honour applied cannot be said to be manifestly
respondent submits that the aggregate sentence was not manifestly excessive,
pointing to: the number of offences (and the maximum
penalties for those
offences), the loss of life and serious physical injury (of varying degrees)
suffered by the passengers, including
the ongoing debilitating effects suffered
by the grievously injured passengers, and Mr Button’s duty, as a bus
driver with
responsibility for the safety of his passengers, to drive in an
exemplary manner.
respondent says that, because the victims were the very passengers who Mr Button
was engaged to convey, this was not a matter
of “happenstance or
chance” that so many lives were lost and adversely affected, in the way
that it might potentially
have been viewed had he been driving a car that
collided with a bus (cf
(2015) 123 SASR 422
; (2015) 254 A Crim
R 115 and the example given in
respondent also emphasises that, by reason of his recent employment history and
the concerns voiced by his doctors, Mr Button
well knew how serious the heavy
use of Tramadol was in relation to the performance of his duties as a bus
driver, and had been reminded
by his doctor of the importance of keeping to the
daily maximum recommended by the pain specialist; yet he knowingly consumed a
significantly
greater quantity of Tramadol than his daily maximum (knowing that
using large amounts of Tramadol made him a danger on the roads).
The respondent
also points to the risk-taking behaviour in which Mr Button engaged, including
telling his passengers “this
next part’s going to be fun” (a
statement that likened the experience of the bus driving onto the freeway to a
rollercoaster).
respondent accepts that Mr Button only drove at a dangerous speed at the point
of the roundabout but says that his driving ability
was impaired by Tramadol for
the entire journey, during which his manner of driving was observed to be
erratic (noting that this
frightened his passengers and prompted some to put on
their seatbelts and comment on his speed).
respondent notes that the sentence imposed on Mr Button was required to reflect
the purposes of sentencing in s 3A of the
, including ensuring Mr Button was adequately punished for the
offences, general and specific deterrence, making Mr Button accountable
actions, denouncing his conduct, and recognising the harm done to the victims
and the community.
respondent points to the victim impact statements of the family members of the
deceased passengers, which his Honour properly
took into account on the basis
that the harm to the families is an aspect of the harm done to the community
(referring to s 30E(3)
noting that because the passengers were connected through the bride and groom
and not strangers to each other, particular communities
in Singleton and
Victoria have suffered devastating effects from the loss of these lives. The
respondent also refers to the victim
impact statements of the surviving
passengers which articulate the serious ongoing effects of the trauma of the
crash and its aftermath,
noting that those who were less severely injured
nevertheless provided assistance to the dying and grievously injured, many of
were their loved ones and friends.
respondent submits that it was necessary for the aggregate sentence to reflect a
substantial degree of notional accumulation with
respect to each offence, in
order to recognise the dignity of each of the deceased victims and to
acknowledge the suffering of each
of the injured victims, with partial notional
concurrence to reflect the fact that the offences were all the consequence of
at [38], [333]). The
respondent rejects the proposition that
demonstrate that the degree of notional accumulation was excessive, arguing that
the number of offences for sentence in this matter
means that mathematical
comparisons to the quantum or degree of accumulation in other decided cases are
of no practical assistance.
In that regard, the respondent submits that, while
Mr Button’s survey of previous cases supports the uncontroversial
proposition
that some degree of partial accumulation is appropriate, it is
incapable of providing more specific guidance.
respondent further submits that Mr Button’s argument that longer
indicative sentences should result in less notional accumulation
carries little
weight in the context of 35 offences, where the lengths of the individual
indicative sentences play a more limited
role in the determination of the
aggregate sentence (referring to
respondent submits that his Honour identified and applied the correct principles
in imposing the aggregate sentence and that,
in a case involving so many
indicative sentences, the range of permissible sentences open in the exercise of
the sentencing discretion
must necessarily be
Determination
principles to be applied when considering whether a sentence is manifestly
excessive were not in dispute. They were summarised
by R A Hulme J in
(2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
Appellate intervention is not justified simply because the result arrived at in
the court below is markedly different from sentences
imposed in other cases.
Intervention is only warranted where the difference is such that it may be
concluded that there must have been some misapplication
of principle, even
though where and how is not apparent from the reasons of the sentencing judge,
or where the sentence imposed is
so far outside the range of sentences available
that there must have been error.
It is not to the point that this court might have exercised the sentencing
discretion differently.
There is no single correct sentence and judges at first instance are allowed as
much flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with
consistency of approach and
application of principle.
It is for the applicant to establish that the sentence was unreasonable or
plainly unjust.
and were similarly articulated in
[2018] NSWCCA 2
More recently, Bell CJ said in
[2025] NSWCCA 121
) (Garling J agreeing) that:
4. Mere disagreement by appellate judges with the sentence
imposed is not enough to warrant a conclusion that a sentence is manifestly
excessive (or manifestly inadequate). The significant degree of latitude
afforded to sentencing judges when reviewing sentences for
manifest excess or
manifest inadequacy reflects the fact that sentencing is a discretionary
exercise in which there is no one correct
sentence and that, within a range of
acceptability, the judgment of a sentencing judge as to an appropriate sentence
should be respected:
[2025] NSWCCA 111
5. As noted in
(2021) 104 NSWLR
[2021] NSWCA 95
, an applicant seeking to challenge a sentence
on the ground of manifest excess has a “very heavy practical
burden”, and
must show a kind of disproportion which is so “manifest
on its face as to be indicative of, not a mere difference of idiosyncratic
opinions, but, rather, of substantive error of law”, citing
[2000] NSWCCA 235
relation to aggregate sentences, in
[2020] NSWCCA
, Beech-Jones CJ at CL, as his Honour then was, said (at [32], Payne JA and
Fagan J agreeing):
...with an aggregate sentence, although the indicative sentences specified in
accordance with s 53A(2) of the Sentencing Act are
not themselves amenable to
appeal, they can be a guide to whether error is established in relation to the
aggregate sentence (
[2014] NSWCCA 297
Hulme J with whom Hoeben CJ at CJ and Adamson J agreed and cases cited thereat;
”). Even if the indicative sentences are considered
excessive, that does not necessarily mean that the aggregate sentence is
excessive (
[2012] NSWCCA 242
[2013] NSWCCA 123
). The corollary of
that proposition is that, even if the indicative sentences are not excessive in
their own right, then that does
not preclude a conclusion that the aggregate
sentence is excessive. In that regard, the principles concerning cumulation,
concurrency
and totality are still applicable to the sentencing exercise when an
aggregate sentence is imposed (
[2015] NSWCCA 120
”). The “potentials for
accumulation” of the various notional sentences can be examined to
determine whether the
“aggregate sentence represents a sound exercise of
sentencing discretion” (
[2012] NSWCCA 199
per Grove AJ;
at [73]), although the absence of any
requirement to specify beginning and end dates for each notional sentence may
make it more
difficult to demonstrate a relevant error in applying those
principles (
[2014] NSWCCA 124
). The ‘principle’, or even ultimate, “focus of
determination of a ground alleging manifest inadequacy or excess
will be whether
the aggregate sentence reflects the totality of the criminality involved”
our opinion, Mr Button has not discharged the heavy burden of establishing that
the aggregate sentence imposed was beyond the range
of sentences properly
available to the sentencing judge in the exercise of his discretion, nor that it
was disproportionate to the
totality of his criminality, so as to warrant
appellate intervention.
assessed the objective seriousness of the offending and the very high moral
culpability of Mr Button, as well as Mr Button’s
subjective case (which
established remorse, prior good character and likely more onerous conditions of
custody), his Honour properly
took into account the harrowing victim impact
statements.
Honour correctly recognised that there should be some reasonable notional
accumulation (see
at [172] where Hamill J allowed a
“reasonable” amount of notional accumulation “to recognise the
suffering and individual
dignity of the ... separate victims”)
Honour properly took into account the purposes of sentencing, including general
and specific deterrence, denunciation and, importantly
in the present case,
recognition of the harm done to the victims and the community. As the respondent
points out, the direct impact
of Mr Button’s offending extends to those
involved in the wedding and those who attended the crash scene but also has had
impact (through the loss of so many young lives) on the community more
the consequences to the victims are considered (and it is for this reason that
we have included the details of the survivors’
injuries in these reasons,
which understandably were not recited in the
reasons), it can
readily be understood that the offending, though arising from a single act of
criminality, required a reasonable
degree of accumulation, as his Honour
recognised in his reasons for sentence. The precise quantum of that notional
accumulation was
not required to be specified by his Honour, as Mr Button
disagreement with his Honour’s aggregate sentence would not be sufficient
to warrant appellate intervention (as Bell CJ
made clear in
is required is that the sentence be shown to be unreasonable or plainly unjust.
Mr Button has not established that it is.
Insofar as the indicative sentences
are relied on as an integer in the aggregate sentencing process, they totalled
some 78 years.
It can therefore be seen that a significant degree of concurrence
is allowed by the aggregate sentence that was imposed.
do not accept the contention by Mr Button that the “relative”
severity of the indicative sentences warranted a lesser
degree of accumulation
than that which is reflected in the aggregate sentence. The indicative sentences
are conceded to have been
appropriate. The complaint was as to the aggregate
sentence. This was a case where there were 35 offences and where the
consequences
of that offending have been devastating for numerous families and
for the communities in which the victims live (or lived) and work
(or worked).
His Honour was unable to gain much assistance from the survey of cases which had
been provided to him. Given the unique
circumstances of this case that is
understandable.
it is that this was a single act of offending; but it was not mere happenstance
or chance. Mr Button had the responsibility (and
duty) to ensure the safety of
passengers, yet he engaged in undoubtedly risk-taking behaviour, having consumed
significantly higher
amounts of Tramadol than he knew was the daily maximum,
knowing that this had the capacity to affect his ability to drive and made
potential danger on the roads. The impact of this offending is incalculable and
ongoing. Numerous families have been devastated.
Ten families have lost a
member, two young children have been orphaned, five adults have lost their
intimate partners, one survivor
has lost not only his wife but their only child.
The survivors all suffered physical, and some mental, injuries as a result of
crash (as outlined earlier). Some of those impacts are ongoing. The grief
expressed in the victim impact statements is palpable.
Their lives were forever
altered by Mr Button’s decision to engage in risk-taking behaviour.
aggregate sentence was not manifestly excessive. Ground 3 is not
established.
the above reasons, leave to appeal will be granted and the appeal dismissed.
Court makes the following orders:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Dismiss the appeal.
A - Non-Publication Orders (Button) (16.3 KB, docx)
B (288 KB, jpg)
C (102 KB, jpg)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (489 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter