URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Molyneux and Vermeesch v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (RD) (No 2) [2013] NSWADTAP 41 (26 August 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Molyneux and Vermeesch v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (RD) (No
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 41
Hearing Date(s):
23 and 24 July 2013
Decision Date:
26 August 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
RL Seiden, Deputy President
S Frost, Judicial Member
Non-Judicial Member
1) Leave granted to extend the appeal to the merits
2) Matter listed for
directions on 30 August 2013 at 12 noon
Catchwords:
Duties - reassessment - power to reassess - legal interpretations and
assessment practices of Chief Commissioner - delay by Chief
Commissioner -
market rate component of interest - whether decision was a final decision -
leave to extend appeal to merits
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Duties Act 1997
Judiciary Act 1903
Management Act 1956
Payroll Tax Act 1971
Stamp Duties Act 1920
Taxation Administration Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Australian Boot Trade Employees' Federation v The Commonwealth of Australia
[1954] HCA 9
(1954) 90 CLR 24
Building Professionals Board v Hans
[2008] NSWADTAP 13
Butler Land Company Pty Ltd and Commissioner of State Revenue
[2012] WASAT
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Incise Technologies Pty Ltd
NSWADTAP 19
Commissioner of Police v Fortuna
[2010] NSWADTAP 51
Commissioner of Taxes v Tangentyere Council, Inc
(1992) 107 FLR 470
Commonwealth of Australia v Beale
[1993] FCA 294
(1993) 30 ALD 68
DeMarco v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWCA 86
Director General of Social
Services v Chaney
[1980] FCA 87
(1980) 47 FLR 80
ISPT Nominees Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2003] NSWSC 697
Leichhardt Municipal Counsel
v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs v Perth City Mission
[2000] FCA 397
Molyneux and
Vermeesch v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] NSWADT 117
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2012] NSWADTAP 53
Project Blue Sky Inc
v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Roads and Traffic
Authority, New South Wales v Hutchinson (GD)
[2007] NSWADTAP 28
Trust Co. of
Australia v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2002] NSWADT 21
Water Board
v Moustakas
[1988] HCA 12
(1988) 180 CLR 491
Texts Cited:
Revenue Ruling DUT 1, DUT 12
Interlocutory applications
Eve Maria Heaton Molyneux and Skye Vermeesch (Appellants)
Commissioner of State Revenue (Respondent)
Representation
M Richmond SC (Appellants)
I Mescher (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
CLS Legal (Appellants)
Crown Solicitor's Office (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Revenue Division
- Date of Decision:
26 May 2011
- Citation:
[2011] NSWADT 117
- Court File Number(s):
is an appeal from the decision of the Tribunal in
Molyneux and Vermeesch v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] NSWADT 117
(the Decision). The
underlying proceedings concern an application to review a decision of the
Respondent to reassess duty on the
transfer of a property at 26 The Strand Whale
Beach (the Property).
factual background is not in dispute. The Appellants acquired the Property from
their family trust, by contract for sale dated
10 December 2005 (the Contract).
As the parties were not at arms' length, the consideration under the Contract
was determined in
accordance with a valuation from a registered valuer, Bruce
Clisdell of B&C Clisdell Consulting. He valued the property in the
$2.5m - $2.75m. This valuation was provided to the Respondent and on 15 December
2005 the Contract was assessed to duty
on a dutiable value of $2.5m.
Subsequently
(some 3½ years later) the Respondent notified the Appellants of his
intention to investigate the transfer valuation.
On 25 May 2009, the Respondent
reassessed the Contract on the basis of a valuation provided by Andor Kabok of
the Department of Lands.
The value ascribed was $5.8m. The Respondent applied
additional duty and imposed penalty tax pursuant to
Division 2 of the
Taxation Administration Act 1996
(NSW) (TAA) at the rate of 25% and
interest pursuant to
of the TAA, which included both a market rate
component and a premium rate component.
Appellants objected to the reassessment on 23 July 2009 and on 26 February 2010
the objection was disallowed. The Appellants subsequently
filed an application
for review in the Tribunal.
the hearing, evidence was led from several different valuers. There were written
valuation reports and the valuers were cross examined
as a panel. The Judicial
Member was ultimately not satisfied with the valuation evidence. At [67] to [70]
of the Decision, the Tribunal
outlined various deficiencies in each valuer's
summary, the Tribunal considered that both Mr Clisdell and Mr Wotton (another
valuer called on behalf of the then applicants) relied
for their conclusions on
sales that were not comparable sales. On the other hand, Mr Kabok whilst using
comparable sales failed to
fully assess the negative impact of two factors: (1)
the existence of a restaurant adjacent to the Property which affected the value
of the Property because of noise and smell pollution; and (2) the existence of a
large pine tree which, at least partially, blocked
the view from the Property.
The Tribunal said at [71]:
In these circumstances, I think it is only appropriate and fair
that I should remit the valuation issue to the respondent to make
adjustments in respect of the impact of the kiosk/restaurant next door and the
pine tree. In carrying out further assessment
of any impact, the valuer may need
the assistance of appropriate expertise and relevant local government
authorities to determine
their real impact. Further, the assessment has to be
made retrospectively as at 10 December 2005.
relation to interest and penalty tax, the Tribunal held that there were
circumstances to warrant the remission of penalty tax and
the premium component
of interest. The Judicial Member said at [79]:
When all facts and circumstances, including the long delay that
occurred before the respondent's investigation leading to the reassessment,
taken into account I think this is a proper case where the premium component of
the interest should be remitted in full under
s 25 of the Administration Act and
the penalty tax remitted in full under s 33 of the Act.
orders of 26 May 2011 (the Orders) the Tribunal remitted the reassessment back
to the Respondent to: (1) make adjustments to the
valuation as directed; and (2)
make a further reassessment on the basis of the adjusted valuation.
is apparent that the Tribunal anticipated that there would be a reduction to the
dutiable value, in the further reassessment.
Nevertheless,
on 10 November 2011 the Respondent informed the solicitor for the Appellants
that a new valuation had been obtained
from Mr Kabok and that he had affirmed
his earlier valuation. Rather than issuing a further reassessment, the
Respondent notified
the Appellants' solicitor of his decision to affirm the
original reassessment.
Appellants appeal from the Decision on questions of law and seek leave to extend
the appeal to the merits.
Grounds of Appeal
Grounds of Appeal are as follows:
(1) The learned
Judicial Member erred in law in failing to consider whether the reassessment of
the transfer of the property at 26
The Strand, Whale Beach was authorised by
section 9(2) of the TAA. The reassessment was not authorised by that provision
(in particular,
it was contrary to the legal interpretation and assessment
practices generally applied by the Commissioner at the time of the transfer
set out in Revenue Ruling DUT 12 (DUT 12)) and consequently both the
reassessment and the Tribunal's decision were a nullity [or
beyond power].
(2) Alternatively,
the learned Judicial Member erred in law when he decided (at [71]) that the
valuation issue
" should be remitted to the Respondent "
to make proper
adjustments
" to it, pursuant to
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) rather than making a new decision on the
reassessment in substitution for the Respondent's decision under s 63(3)(c) of
ADT Act. The power to remit under s 63(3)(d) of the ADT Act may only be
exercised where the Tribunal is not in a position to formulate
a decision in
substitution for the decision under review: see
Commonwealth of Australia v
[1993] FCA 294
(1993) 30 ALD 68
Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs v Perth City Mission
[2000] FCA 397.
That was not so
in the present case.
further alternative, and subject to a grant of leave to extend the appeal to the
merits, the learned Judicial Member erred
(at [77]) in failing to remit the
interest in full (rather than merely in part) under s 25 of the TAA because, on
the facts as found
by the Tribunal, the delay in payment was due to no fault of
the appellant but rather a difference of opinion as between the parties'
(at [76]-[77]).
the Orders made at first instance did not specify under what provision they had
been made, there was discussion as to whether
the Appeal Panel was properly
seized of the matter. The reason this is important is that the Appeal Panel
cannot simply assume it
has jurisdiction to deal with a matter simply because
the parties contend that to be the case:
Commissioner of Taxes v Tangentyere
Council, Inc
(1992) 107 FLR 470.
This issue also took up some time at the
hearing of the interlocutory application which was brought to extend the time
for the Appellants
to bring their appeal:
Molyneux v Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue
[2012] NSWADTAP 53
the Decision is a final decision, the Appeal Panel is properly seized of the
appeal. The question is whether the Decision was a
final decision and if not
what flows from this.
Tribunal was hearing a review of a reviewable decision, being a decision of the
Respondent that had been the subject of an objection:
s 8 and s 96(1) TAA.
Section 65(1)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(ADT Act) provides that the Tribunal may remit a reviewable decision to the
administrator who made it.
Section 101(1)(d)
of the TAA also provides the
Tribunal with power to remit the matter to the administrator. Neither s 65 of
the ADT Act, nor s 101
of the TAA require the reviewable decision to be revoked
or set aside before it is remitted. This is unlike s 63(3)(d) of the ADT
which also empowers the Tribunal to remit a matter, but expressly requires the
reviewable decision to be set aside before the
matter is remitted.
parties contended that the Decision was not a decision under s 63 of the ADT Act
(despite the reference to s 63 in the grounds
of appeal). They relied on s
101(1)(d) of the TAA or s 65(1) of the ADT Act. The parties contended that the
Decision was a final
decision and therefore the Appellants could, by right,
appeal on questions of law and with leave extend the appeal to a review of
merits: s 113(2) ADT Act.
to the parties' submissions, a decision under s 65 of the ADT Act is an
interlocutory decision:
Roads and Traffic Authority, New South Wales v
[2007] NSWADTAP 28
to s 65(2) of the ADT Act, if a decision is remitted to an administrator, the
administrator may affirm, vary or set aside
the decision and make a new
decision. If the administrator varies or sets aside the decision, the
application "is taken" to continue
and the applicant may proceed or withdraw the
application: s 65(3) and (4) of the ADT Act. The legislation does not expressly
the consequences if the decision is neither varied nor set aside by the
administrator, but it is implicit that if the decision is
affirmed the
proceedings continue. There is no need for the proceedings to "be taken" to
continue: the same decision remains the
subject of the review. We note that the
position under the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(AAT Act) is different. Section 42D of the AAT Act expressly provides that
the Application may continue whether the decision is varied,
set aside or
remains the same (our emphasis): s 42D(3), (4) and (8) AAT Act.
the present case, the administrator (the Respondent) neither varied nor set
aside the reviewable decision. By letter dated 10 November
2011, the Respondent
notified the then applicants that the original reassessment was affirmed. The
Respondent also took the view
that the Tribunal's remittal decision was a
decision under s 65 of the ADT Act. If that view was correct, then the
notification by
the Respondent to the Appellants that he had affirmed his
reassessment did not bring the first instance proceedings to a close.
a fair reading of the decision, it was not interlocutory. The Tribunal set no
forward date for the application to continue and
it is implicit that the
Decision the subject of the review was set aside: the Respondent was ordered to
make a further reassessment.
The Decision was not therefore a decision under s
65 of the ADT Act and it was not an interlocutory decision under s 101(1)(d) of
the TAA (assuming that is authorised).
we are wrong and the Orders were interlocutory, leave to appeal the
interlocutory decision is necessary and we would grant such
leave: s 113(2A) ADT
Act. The issues are substantive, the appeal will effectively deal with the whole
subject matter of the proceedings
and there is no prejudice to the Respondent
who, in any event, dealt with the matter on a final basis.
note the different regime under the AAT Act where interlocutory decisions are
not "decisions" amenable to appeal in the same way
as final decisions (i.e.,
under s 44 of the AAT Act), but are amenable to judicial review under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Judiciary Act 1903
Director General of Social Services v Chaney
[1980] FCA 87
(1980) 47 FLR 80
). Here the context is quite different.
First, appeals to the Appeal Panel on interlocutory issues do not disrupt
proceedings in the
same way as described in
(at 102), where it was
noted that appeals under s 44 of the AAT Act are as of right and to an external
forum. Here interlocutory
appeals are by leave and internal. Secondly, appeals
to the Appeal Panel are not limited to questions of law as they are under s
of the AAT Act. Finally, s 113(2A) of the ADT Act expressly contemplates appeals
to the Appeal Panel on interlocutory matters.
Accordingly,
whether the Decision was final or not, we are nevertheless satisfied that we
have jurisdiction to deal with it. The Decision
is an appealable decision, being
a decision on review of a reviewable decision: s 112 ADT Act.
Leave to extend appeal to the merits
first ground of appeal concerns the lawfulness of the Respondent's reassessment.
The issue was not ventilated before the Tribunal
at first instance and the
Appellants therefore seek leave to extend the appeal to the merits in order to
raise this point. The general
principles governing the raising of a new issue on
appeal were stated in
Water Board v Moustakas
[1988] HCA 12
(1988) 180 CLR 491
where the point is one of construction or of law, then a court of
appeal may find it expedient and in the interests of justice to
entertain the
the point is that s 9(2) of the TAA precludes the Respondent from issuing a
reassessment in circumstances where Revenue Ruling
DUT 12 (DUT 12) was complied
with at the time of assessment. It is submitted that it is not a point that
could have been met by the
Respondent calling evidence below. The Respondent
does not object to the Appellants raising the new ground, but takes issue with
the Appellants' construction of s 9(2) and contends that there was no breach of
that section by the Commissioner in issuing the reassessment.
Commissioner of Police v Fortuna
[2010] NSWADTAP 51
the Appeal Panel said
It is not necessary for the Appeal Panel to first identify an error
of law before granting leave for an appeal to be extended to the
merits of the
Tribunal's decision:
Lloyd v Veterinary Surgeons Investigating Committee
[2005] NSWCA 456.
The onus of proof lies on the party applying for leave and the
standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities:
World Best Holdings Ltd
v Sarker & Anor
[2004] NSWSC 935
per Sully J. The discretion is
open and unfettered but must be exercised in a fair and just manner having
regard to the purpose of
the relevant legislation:
Jones v Ekermawi
[2009] NSWSC 143
. Certain inferences can be drawn from the fact that
leave is required. They include the fact that the need for leave is a "control
filter" designed, among other things, to protect respondents from the cost of a
full hearing of appeals which should not properly
be entertained:
Holdings Ltd v Sarker & Anor
, per Sully J at [25]. Circumstances which
may justify leave being granted include where the Tribunal has gone about its
fact finding
process in an unfair or unorthodox manner:
are satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to grant leave to extend
the appeal to the merits and to determine the new
ground. First, if the
Appellants are correct, it is a knock out point and disposes of the appeal.
Secondly, it is a matter of construction
and therefore itself raises a question
of law. Thirdly, it is an important provision within the Taxation Administration
regime. Finally,
there is no objection from the Respondent.
Was the Reassessment Lawful?
question for the Appeal Panel is whether the Commissioner was precluded from
issuing the reassessment because of the operation
of s 9(2) of the TAA.
9(2) of the TAA provides as follows:
A reassessment of a tax liability is to be made in accordance with
the legal interpretations and assessment practices generally applied
Chief Commissioner in relation to matters of that kind at the time the tax
liability arose except to the extent that any departure
interpretations and practices is required by a change in the law (whether
legislative or non-legislative) made after that
precursor to s 9(2) can be found in s 35B(1) of the
Stamp Duties Act
(NSW) but there is no authority relevant to the issue that we are
concerned with. No similar provisions existed in relation to other
statutes such as the
Land Tax Management Act 1956
(NSW) or the
Tax Act 1971
Section 9(2)
has been in the TAA since its enactment. We
were informed by counsel for the Respondent that neither the second reading
the explanatory notes are helpful.
contended by both parties, it is necessary for the Appeal Panel to approach the
question on the following basis. First, identify
the "matters" or types of
matters to which the legal interpretations and assessment practices referred to
apply; second, identify the legal interpretations and assessment
practices that apply; and third, determine whether or not the reassessment
in accordance with the legal interpretations and assessment practices. The
Respondent contended that there is a fourth step in
the process and that is to
determine whether a breach of
leads to the invalidity of the decision:
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR
Appellant contended that the relevant matters are agreements for the transfer of
land or transfers of land between associated
Butler Land Company Pty
Ltd and Commissioner of State Revenue
[2012] WASAT 33.
The Respondent
contended that the relevant matters are assessments of duty based on the
dutiable value of dutiable property. Nothing
turns, in this case, on the
difference.
to the second point, the parties differed on a potentially significant issue.
The Appellants contended that the legal interpretations
and assessment practices
are limited, in this case, to DUT 12. On the other hand, the Respondent, whilst
accepting that DUT 12 is
relevant, contends that
of the TAA are also relevant. The
Appellants, in oral argument, contended that this cannot be the case because
statutory provisions
themselves do not constitute legal interpretations or
assessment practices. Further, the Appellants contended
of the TAA reads
12 relevantly provides:
2. In general, the dutiable value of dutiable property is the
greater of consideration for the dutiable transaction, and the unencumbered
value of the dutiable property
(section 21).
Section 305
authorises the Chief
Commissioner to require a person who is liable to duty "to provide a declaration
by a competent valuer as to
the unencumbered value of the property or to provide
such other evidence of that value as the Chief Commissioner thinks fit". The
does not prescribe the circumstances in which evidence of value may be required.
3. A decision to require a person liable to duty to provide evidence of
value, and the type of evidence required, are at the discretion
of the Chief
Commissioner. This ruling provides some general guidelines as to when evidence
of value will be required, and sets out
value acceptable to the Chief Commissioner...
4. In general, evidence of value will be required in 2 circumstances:
if there is no consideration or nominal consideration and
if the Chief Commissioner is not satisfied that the consideration is an
adequate indication of the unencumbered value of the property...
6. The important matter for determination is whether or not the parties
with each other at arm's length. Therefore, any relationship
between the parties is relevant, as related parties may not act severally
independently in forming their bargain in the same manner that arm's length
parties would normally do...
12. Where evidence of value of land is required to determine the adequacy of
the consideration as outlined in paragraph 8 above, the
following are
acceptable:
(a) a "declaration by a competent valuer" as outlined in paragraph 13 or
(b) a private opinion or expression of value by a registered valuer,
identifying the specific property or
(c) an agreement which is evidence of a recent arm's length sale of the
property or
(d) a valuation required by a financial institution for finance purposes,
with the proviso that such valuations are often conservative
and may indicate
that the property has a higher unencumbered value.
If this evidence of value indicates that the consideration is adequate, no
further evidence of value will be required.
13. If the above evidence of value indicates that the unencumbered value of
the land exceeds the consideration by a significant amount,
a "declaration by a
competent valuer" will be required, being either:
(a) a valuation by the Valuer General of the improved land value; or
(b) a valuation by a registered real estate valuer within the meaning of the
Valuers Registration Act 1975
of the full market value, being a
comprehensive valuation of the property in its present condition indicating that
an inspection of
the property has been undertaken. (Brief market appraisals,
estimates of value or other statements that do not indicate a full inspection
the subject property has been undertaken will not be acceptable.)
now provides as follows [our underlining]:
(1) The Chief Commissioner may, for the purpose of determining
whether a person is liable for duty or determining a person's liability
(a) require the person, by notice in writing given to the person, to provide
a valuation of property prepared by a registered valuer
or to provide such other
evidence of the value of property as the Chief Commissioner considers
appropriate, or
(b) obtain a valuation of property, or
(c) rely on a valuation of property prepared for any purpose (whether or not
for the purpose of determining liability for duty) by
a registered valuer or
other person the Chief Commissioner is satisfied is properly qualified to
provide evidence of the value of
(2) The Chief Commissioner may assess duty on the basis of a valuation or
evidence referred to in subsection (1).
(3) If a person is liable to pay duty under this Act that is chargeable by
reference to the value of property, the Chief Commissioner
may recover from the
person the cost of obtaining a valuation of the property under this section.
(4) In this section:
"registered valuer"
has the meaning given by the
Valuers Act
the time DUT 12 was issued, 18 March 1999, s 305 provided as follows [our
underlining]:
305 Valuation of property
(1)The Chief Commissioner may require a person who is liable to duty
determined with reference to the value of property to provide
a declaration by a
competent valuer as to the unencumbered value of the property or to provide such
other evidence of that value
as the Chief Commissioner thinks fit.
(2)The Chief Commissioner may assess duty in accordance with the value so
(3)The Chief Commissioner may have property valued if not satisfied with the
value so declared and may assess duty on the basis of
the valuation.
(4) The Chief Commissioner may recover the cost of obtaining a value under
this section from the dutiable person.
are satisfied that DUT 12 contains a legal interpretation or assessment practice
of the Respondent that is relevant to the matters
between the parties. This is
confirmed by Revenue Ruling DUT 1 which provides at [17] that Revenue Rulings
provide the Commissioner's
"interpretations, guidelines, precedents and practice
." This is to be contrasted with
which is not itself a legal interpretation or assessment practice. Neither is
of the TAA.
third issue is where the real dispute lies: whether the reassessment has been in
accordance with the legislative interpretations
and assessment practices. The
Appellants contended that the expression "in accordance with" is to be
interpreted consistently with
Australian Boot Trade Employees' Federation
v The Commonwealth of Australia
[1954] HCA 9
(1954) 90 CLR 24
at 37 to mean "in harmony
with, in conformity with, in agreement with." The Respondent emphasised that
of the TAA does not require identity or an exactitude and referred to the
ISPT Nominees Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2003] NSWSC 697
where Barrett J described the provision as being of a
relatively undemanding nature.
the heart of this issue is the interplay between
of the TAA and DUT 12.
Appellants contended that
is only directed to the
initial assessment stage. This followed, so it was submitted, from the fact that
contains no definition of the expression "assess", and
importantly it does not have an expanded definition of the expression
"assessment"
which includes a reassessment. Further, the Appellants contended
that DUT 12 operated to read down
where there had been an assessment and
DUT 12 had been followed by the taxpayers, there was no warrant for the
Commissioner to make
a reassessment and any such reassessment would be beyond
power. In certain exceptional cases, it was accepted, this would not be
case. For instance, when the valuations provided to the Commissioner in
purported compliance of DUT 12 were fraudulent. In such
a case DUT 12 was not
satisfied because there was no
valuation and also, the
principle that one may not profit from one's wrong would be engaged: see, for
instance, McColl JA in
DeMarco v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWCA 86
(her Honour was in dissent, but the principle is not
contentious although its application might be; see at [76] and [77] per Basten
Respondent contended that the
incorporates the TAA and therefore the
two Acts must be read together. Relevantly
provides that
does not contain all the provisions concerning duties and that it
must be read together with the TAA which contains,
, provisions
dealing with how assessments of duty are made and the investigative powers of
tax administrators. For the reason that
"assessment" is defined in
TAA to include a reassessment,
has application to
reassessments. This submission is reinforced by
of the TAA which is the
corollary to
. It provides that the purpose of the TAA is
to make general provision with respect to the administration and enforcement of
taxation laws with respect to,
inter alia,
the imposition of tax.
is a taxation law:
TAA. Consequently, the TAA contains
provisions with respect to "assessment and reassessment of tax liability"
including duty. The
reference to "assess" in
therefore include a reference to a reassessment.
Conclusion on ground 1
in context, which includes the interplay between the
and the TAA,
is not limited in its reach to the making of initial
assessments, but extends to the making of reassessments. The expression assess,
, includes reassess:
any event, DUT 12 is only concerned with circumstances in which it is necessary
or desirable for the Chief Commissioner to require,
by force of statute, a
taxpayer to provide a valuation and therefore does not read down
12 was issued on 18 March 1999. The then-existing
a different (but not relevantly so) form. In both the historical version and the
current version, the Commissioner was empowered
to obtain his own valuation. DUT
12 is neither expressly nor impliedly directed to the Commissioner's power to
obtain his own valuation
or "have property valued". This is apparent from
paragraphs 2 and 3 of DUT 12, which are extracted above.
final words of paragraph 12 in DUT 12 are as follows:
If this evidence of value indicates that the consideration is
adequate, no further evidence of value will be required. [our underlining]
final words of paragraph 12 pick up the language of the historical version of
, now found in
s 305(1)(a).
This conclusion is
reinforced by paragraph 13 which details circumstances where the Respondent
would require further evidence of
value and prescribes what will be
"acceptable". DUT 12 is not a fetter on the Respondent's power to seek his own
valuation and reassess,
but explains the circumstances under which the
Commissioner will exercise the power in
to require, by force of
statute, the taxpayer to incur the expense of providing valuation evidence.
the reasons expressed above we have granted leave to extend the appeal to the
merits to enable the Appellants to rely on this
ground. However, there has been
no breach of
of the TAA vis-à-vis DUT 12. In light of our
conclusion, it is not necessary for us to consider whether a breach of
leads to invalidity.
The Valuation Issue
to Chapter 2 of the
, the Contract was liable to duty as if it was a
transfer of land:
. Duty is charged on the dutiable value
of the dutiable property:
. The dutiable value is the greater of
the consideration and the unencumbered value of the dutiable value:
. Here, the consideration was derived from a valuation because the
parties were not at arms' length; the real question is therefore
what is the
unencumbered value of the property. It is for this reason that the valuation
evidence was central to the proceedings
at first instance.
Appellants contend that the Tribunal erred in law in failing to determine the
dutiable value of the dutiable property: the valuation
was a finding of fact
that the Tribunal was required to make. Further, it was contended that the
Tribunal could not, in the circumstances,
abrogate its duty and pass back to the
administrator the very subject of the proceedings. Only in the event that the
Tribunal was
unable to come to a view on valuation was it permissible to remit
the matter to the Respondent.
the Appellants relied on the decision of Neaves J in
Commonwealth of
Australia v Beale
[1993] FCA 294
(1993) 30 ALD 68.
His Honour was there dealing with s
43(1) of the AAT Act which gave express power to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal to set aside
a decision and to remit the matter for reconsideration.
His Honour said at 70:
However, it may only do so where, in order to give effect to the
conclusions to which the Tribunal has come, it is appropriate to
set aside the
decision under review but the Tribunal is 'not in a position to formulate a
decision in substitution for the decision
to set aside.'
that case, the Tribunal had reached a firm conclusion that the documents were
exempt documents, therefore it was appropriate for
the Tribunal to have made an
order to affirm the decision under review: at 70.5. That is a different case to
the case we are faced
Appellants also relied on
Minister of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
Perth City Mission
[2000] FCA 397
per Lee J at [23]. In that case, the
Tribunal had, in effect, exercised the power of the administrator, to not refuse
a visa on the
grounds of bad character. There was, in the circumstances, nothing
left to remit: at [24].
the Appellants submitted, questions of valuation are not questions of precision:
valuation is a judgment call. Valuation is not
science. There may be genuine
differences of opinion. Accordingly, the Appellants contended that the Tribunal
was capable of ascribing
value after hearing from each of the valuers. The
Tribunal was in a position, so it was submitted, to form a judgment as to the
value of the dutiable property.
Appellant relied upon
Leichhardt Municipal Counsel v Seatainer Terminals Pty
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
). At 434.8 per Hope JA said:
The need to make adjustments to values deduced from sales in order
to arrive at the true valuation of the land to be valued does not
preclude the
court which has the task of valuing the land from relying upon the sales as
comparable in the relevant sense, nor from
the making by the court or by valuers
of adjustments which may be nothing more than the best guess that can be
case was concerned with whether there had been an error of law by the trial
judge in arriving at a valuation where adjustments
to comparable sales were
necessary. No error of law was disclosed because the finding of fact (the
valuation) was held to be reasonably
open on the evidence: there was evidence to
support the sales being comparable and there was no error of principle in making
adjustments. That it was not an error of law, in that case, to determine a
valuation, does not mandate the conclusion that it will
be an error of law to
abstain from making a valuation. In
the valuer had quantified
the adjustments and the court accepted the evidence at 436. Here the necessary
adjustments were not quantified
for the Tribunal and neither was the method or
principle to do so.
have already detailed above the reasons why the Tribunal was not satisfied with
the evidence of any one particular valuer and in
the absence of some
quantification of the adjustments, the Tribunal was not in a position to make
the valuation. There was accordingly
no error of law in relation to ground
Nevertheless,
as the appeal has been extended to the merits, by the grant of leave occasioned
by ground 1, the Appeal Panel must decide
what is the correct and preferable
Building Professionals Board v Hans
[2008] NSWADTAP 13
Pursuant to s 115 of the ADT Act we are now charged with deciding what the
correct and preferable decision is having regard to the
material before us. In
order to do so we may exercise all the functions that are conferred or imposed
on the Tribunal at first instance
under any relevant enactment or the ADT Act.
This is not limited to only those parts of the Tribunal's decision that were the
of an application for leave to extend to the merits. Issues of
procedural fairness may of course arise. At the hearing of the appeal,
parties accepted it would be necessary for the Appeal Panel to have regard to
the transcript of evidence and the valuations
if we were disposed to grant leave
to extend the appeal to the merits. We indicated that if we granted leave we
would list the matter
for further directions.
final ground of appeal concerns the decision of the Tribunal not to remit the
market interest rate.
25 of the TAA confers a discretion on the Commissioner to remit the market rate
component of interest. In declining to remit
the market rate, the Tribunal said
In relation to the market rate imposed, no special circumstances
were before the Tribunal to remit the interest payable.
Appellants sought leave to extend the appeal to the merits in relation to this
ground. We have already granted such leave. The
Appellants contended that the
very factors that the Tribunal took into account to remit the premium component
ought to have been
taken into account to remit the market rate.
Tribunal found no special circumstances to justify the remission of the market
rate component of the interest, yet accepted that
there was relevantly no
non-disclosure of the facts by the Appellants, there was no evidence that there
was any arrangement or scheme
in relation to the Clisdell valuation and there
was no evidence the Appellants failed to take reasonable care or intentionally
disregarded
the law: at [77] and [78] of the Decision. Two other factors are
relevant: first, more than three years passed before the reassessment
and, secondly, the Appellants had complied with DUT 12.
is authority for the proposition that when the tax default is due to the fault
of the Chief Commissioner, that may be a circumstance
that warrants remission of
the market rate of interest:
Trust Co. of Australia v Chief Commission of
State Revenue
[2002] NSWADT 21
to [28]. Taking this factor into
account pays due regard to the policy that the market rate component of interest
reflects the use
by the party of the money and the lack of use of the funds by
the State during that period.
Appeal Panel in
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Incise Technologies Pty
[2004] NSWADTAP 19
stated at [60]:
In our view the primary interest rate (the market rate component)
is intended to compensate the Commissioner (on behalf of the Government
South Wales) for not having the benefit of the tax payment from the time it was
due. So a rate is set which fluctuates, and
is connected to an external rate,
the Reserve Bank's Accepted Bill rate. This, as we see it, is a component that
could rarely, if
ever, be waived as otherwise tax would be paid at a de-valued
amount thereby discriminating against taxpayers who meet their obligations
time. The tribunal made the observation at [50] that to justify any remission of
the market rate component of interest, it would
be necessary to show that in
some way the Commissioner contributed to the default. We agree with this
observation.
Tribunal failed to take into account the 3½ year interval between the
assessment and the reassessment, in circumstances where
this delay was not
contributed to by the Appellants and furthermore the Appellants had, during the
intervening period, the comfort
of knowing they had complied with DUT 12 and
nothing further could be expected of them. In those circumstances it can be said
the Respondent contributed to the tax default.
is not necessary to decide if the Respondent's contribution to default is a
mandatory consideration, in the sense identified in
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
(1986) 162 CLR 24
at 39-40 because leave to extend
the appeal to the merits has already been granted. If not a mandatory
consideration, then in any
event, this was a material factor that was not
considered by the Tribunal.
are satisfied that there are special circumstances in this case to warrant the
remission of the market interest rate for the period
up to the re-assessment.
These are as follows:
(a) there is no
suggestion of lack of good faith on the part of the Appellants;
(b) matters of
valuation are matters of judgment and on which reasonable minds could
Appellants complied with DUT 12 and were entitled to expect that if the
Respondent was not satisfied with the valuations he
would have taken steps in a
timely fashion;
(d) three and
one-half years went by between the time of the stamping of the Contract and the
Commissioner's notification of further
investigations into the transaction.
need not be any blame for the Commissioner's delay. It is the mere passage of
time in circumstances where the Appellants justifiably
considered the matter
closed that sets this case apart from the ordinary case.
market rate interest component should be remitted for the period between the
initial assessment and notification of the
reassessment.
Respondent's reassessment, the subject of the review, was not beyond power.
There was no breach of s 9(2) of the TAA for the reasons
that DUT 12 does not
speak to the circumstances in which the Respondent may obtain his own valuation
and DUT 12 does not fetter the
Respondent's power to reassess under
. Further, there was no error of law in relation to the Tribunal's
decision to remit the valuation issue to the Respondent in circumstances
the Tribunal was unsatisfied with the valuation evidence. Finally, there was
warrant to reduce the interest by expunging the
market rate of interest under
of the TAA.
only orders we propose to make are to grant leave to extend the appeal to the
merits and to list the matter for further directions.
In order to avoid
fragmentation and to preserve the parties' rights to appeal, we will defer
making final orders until the substantive
valuation issue has been ventilated
orders are as follows:
(1) Grant leave
to extend the appeal to the merits.
listed for directions on 30 August 2013 at 12 noon.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter