URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2022/133.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd v Saad [2022] NSWCATAP 133 (19 May 2022)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd v Saad
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2022] NSWCATAP 133
Hearing Date(s):
28 February 2022
Date of Orders:
19 May 2022
Decision Date:
19 May 2022
Appeal Panel
G Sarginson, Senior Member
D Ziegler, Senior Member
1. The appeal is allowed.
decision under appeal is quashed.
3. The matter is remitted
to the Tribunal, differently constituted, with leave for the parties to adduce
such further evidence and
join further parties as the Tribunal thinks fit.
Catchwords:
APPEALS – Procedural fairness – adequacy of
CONSUMER LAW – Consumer guarantees – action
against manufacturer – guarantee as to due care and skill –
as to fitness for a particular purpose – guarantee as to
compliance with express warranty.
CONSUMER LAW – Enforcement
and remedies – remedies against manufacturer - whether a work order can be
made against a manufacturer.
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law 2010 (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Consumer Claims Act 1998
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
Barbour v Autosports Five Dock Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCATAP
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 715
Steve Jarvin Motors Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP 186
New South Wales Land and
Housing Corporation v Orr
[2019] NSWCA 231
Pate v Neich Holdings Pty Ltd t/as
Sydney vehicle Sales
[2018] NSWCATCD 16
Prendergast v Western Murray
Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
Sacks v Hammoud
[2016] NSWCATAP
Wilson v Winnicott
[2021] NSWCATAP 211
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Mohammad Saad
(Respondent)
Representation:
S Jayasuriya (Appellant)
Solicitors:
Herman Legal
(Appellant)
Respondent (Self-represented)
File Number(s):
2021/00336716
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Not applicable
Date of Decision:
02 November 2021
M Jayasinghe, Tribunal Member
File Number(s):
MV 21/29348
REASONS FOR DECISION
1 This is an internal appeal under
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act
(the NCAT Act) against a decision of the Consumer and
Commercial Division of the Tribunal.
2 The issues raised in this appeal demonstrate the pitfalls of a consumer
bringing proceedings in the Tribunal for breach of a consumer
guarantee under s
Australian Consumer Law 2010
(NSW) (‘the ACL’) only
against the manufacturer of the goods; and the supplier of the goods (or related
services) not
being a party to the proceedings.
3 The appeal also identifies the importance of applicable causes of action
and remedies being identified. This is undoubtedly challenging
in circumstances
where an unrepresented litigant with a limited understanding of complex legal
issues is arguing their case, and
there is scarce hearing time.
4 The dispute relates to a Volkswagen Tiguan which was acquired by Mr Saad in
May 2018 (‘the vehicle’). Mr Saad was the
applicant in the Tribunal
proceedings and is the respondent to the appeal.
5 Mr Saad alleged that there were issues with the seals on the sunroof of the
vehicle resulting in water ingress into the vehicle.
The appellant, Volkswagen
Group Australia Ltd, is the Australian agent for the manufacturer of the
6 The Tribunal found in favour of Mr Saad and made an order that the
appellant carry out various repairs to the vehicle.
7 For the reasons that follow, we have decided to allow the appeal and to
remit the matter to a differently constituted Tribunal for
redetermination.
8 The background to the appeal, which is based on information contained in
documents filed in the appeal proceedings and told to us
during oral
submissions, is as follows:
(1) The respondent purchased the vehicle brand new from a Volkswagen dealership
(Liverpool Volkswagen) in May 2018. Liverpool Volkswagen
was not a party to the
Tribunal proceedings.
(2) The purchase price of the vehicle was $55389.62.
(3) In around May 2020 the respondent presented the vehicle to another
dealership (Sutherland Volkswagen) after having received notification
(4) It was common ground that the recall involved the sunroof but did not relate
to the sunroof seals. The recall necessitated replacement
of components of the
LED background lighting on the vehicle’s sunroof.
(5) The evidence before the Tribunal as to what occurred when Sutherland
Volkswagen carried out this repair, or the circumstances
which led up to the
repair, was scant. Neither party presented any documentation in this regard.
(6) In the application to the Tribunal the respondent stated that prior to the
recall he had “never experienced any issues
with the sunroof. There have
since been various issues with the sunroof which has [sic] resulted in extensive
damage to the interior
of the car”.
(7) The respondent first observed water leaking into the vehicle through the
sunroof at some point between 18 May 2020 and 4 September
2020. On 4 September
2020 he presented the vehicle to Sutherland Volkswagen with complaints of water
(8) The vehicle has continued to experience water ingress through the sunroof
since that time despite repairs being conducted to
the vehicle. Although there
was some dispute about the dates of each repair, it was common ground that
Sutherland Volkswagen has
replaced the vehicle’s sunroof seals on at least
two occasions since the respondent first complained of water ingress - on
September 2020 and on 5 March 2021.
(9) Sutherland Volkswagen’s invoice relating to the 4 September 2020
repair states: “
Inspected and confirmed customer concerns. Inspected
and found sunroof seal to be the cause of water entry and requiring renewal.
Removed and replaced sunroof seal and all damaged components as per DISS.
Replaced all components and retested finding all OK
.” On the same
invoice, under the heading
”, appears the word
” and next to the heading
“Total amount
including GST
” the invoice states
“Total invoice
(10) Sutherland Volkswagen is a third party dealership and was not a party to
the Tribunal proceedings.
(11) Another dealership (Sydney City Volkswagen) has also attempted to repair
the vehicle. On 16 April 2021 Sydney City Volkswagen
carried out repairs,
including to the sunroof. Sydney City Volkswagen was not a party to the Tribunal
proceedings.
(12) The appellant is the Australian agent for the manufacturer of the vehicle
which itself does not have a place of business in
Australia. The appellant
imports and distributes Volkswagen vehicles into Australia.
Submissions and evidence
9 In deciding the appeal we have had regard to the following:
(1) The Notice of Appeal lodged on 26 November 2021;
(2) The Reply to Appeal lodged on 15 December 2021;
(3) A folder lodged by the appellant on 13 January 2022 containing documents,
further written submissions and a copy of the transcript
of the hearing;
(4) Further written submissions lodged by the respondent on 7 February 2022
together with attached documents;
(5) The appellant’s submissions in reply lodged on 16 February 2022;
(6) The procedural directions made at call over;
(7) The Tribunal’s Notice of Order and reasons for decision dated 2
November 2021;
(8) The application to the Tribunal dated 7 July 2021; and
(9) The oral submissions made by the parties during the hearing.
Tribunal proceedings and decision
10 The application to the Tribunal was lodged on 7 July 2021 and was listed
for a 90 minute final hearing on 2 November 2021. The
Tribunal’s orders
and reasons for decision were published on the day of the hearing.
11 In his application Mr Saad sought an order that the appellant “fix
or replace faulty vehicle or parts to the approximate
value of $65000 replace my
vehicle or pay out”.
12 In other words, Mr Saad sought in the alternative either (a) repair of the
vehicle; (b) replacement of the vehicle; or (c) that
the vehicle be returned and
he receive a full refund.
13 The Tribunal considered the claim within the framework of the consumer
guarantees contained in the ACL. No other potential causes
of action were
identified or considered by the Tribunal.
14 The Tribunal said at [14]:
There are four Issues. Firstly, is the Applicant a Consumer for the purposes
of the legislation? Secondly, does the Tribunal have
matter. Thirdly, is there a breach of the consumer guarantees of Acceptable
Quality (ss 54 of the ACL)
and the Fitness for any disclosed pourpose [sic] (ss
55 of the ACL). Finally what is the remedy available for the Applicant?
15 The Tribunal concluded that Mr Saad was a consumer, that the Tribunal had
Fair Trading Act
(NSW) (‘the FT Act’); that there had been a failure to
comply with the consumer guarantees in ss 54 and 55 of the ACL;
and that the
manufacturer was responsible for the failure to comply.
16 The Tribunal made orders that the appellant, as manufacturer, carry out
the following repairs to the vehicle:
1 Replace airbags, seat belts and the internal wiring looms and any other
water affected electronic safety advice;
2 Replace all carpets, underfelts and seat trims;
3 Replace water seals in the sunroof.
17 It is common ground that the repairs ordered by the Tribunal to the
vehicle are extensive and likely to be of considerable expense.
18 It is not apparent why the Tribunal, when making its decision, focused
only on the consumer guarantees contained in ss 54 and 55
of the ACL and not on
other causes of action which may have been available to Mr Saad (some of which
are canvassed below). There
is nothing in the application or documents lodged in
the Tribunal by Mr Saad which refers to the ACL or to the consumer guarantees
ss 54 and 55, and the transcript of the Tribunal hearing reveals that neither
the Tribunal member nor the parties made any mention
of those consumer
guarantees during the hearing.
19 As will be explained in further detail below, the consumer guarantees in
ss 54 and 55 of the ACL relate to the condition of goods
at the time they
were supplied to the consumer.
20 It appears to us, having reviewed the transcript, that whether or not Mr
Saad was alleging a breach of those guarantees, he was
also alleging that:
(1) The repairs done by Sutherland Volkswagen in May 2020 resulted in damage to
the waterproofing of the sunroof;
(2) The repairs done by Sutherland Volkswagen in September 2020 were inadequate
to repair the vehicle; and
(3) Volkswagen Australia Group was responsible for those repairs (or the
inadequacy of the repairs).
21 We refer in particular to the following extract from the transcript of the
hearing during which Mr Saad cross-examined the appellant’s
O’Connor (who represented the appellant at the hearing and gave evidence)
(at T 10.16-36):
Mr Saad: Okay. You said it: the sunroof seal was not
installed properly by Volkswagen; correct or incorrect?
Ms O’Connor: That’s Sutherland Volkswagen, yes.
But I’m not from Sutherland Volkswagen.
Mr Saad: Yes. Ok. So there we go.
22 Later Mr Saad said (at T 11.41-46):
The faulty roof seal, even the one that was apparently not installed
properly, what does that have to do with me? What does that have
to do with me,
if one of your guys didn’t install the roof seal properly?
23 Shortly thereafter the parties had the following exchange (at T
Mr Saad: No matter how you look at it, the faulty roof seal
is from Volkswagen. The faulty maintenance is from Volkswagen. Okay.
Ms O’Connor: It does seem like Sutherland Volkswagen
Mr Saad: Yes, Volkswagen –
Ms O’Connor: Only Volkswagen Group Australia
(indistinct). I can’t comment on work that is carried out -
Mr Saad: It’s not –
that’s not my problem ... that’s not my problem.
24 Mr Saad was not legally represented and did not clearly articulate the
legal causes of action on which his claim was founded.
That is not unusual in
the Consumer and Commercial Division of the Tribunal.
25 However, whilst he did not explicitly say so, Mr Saad appears to have been
suggesting that the repairs were done by Sutherland
Volkswagen on the
appellant’s behalf as agent; and that the appellant was therefore
responsible for any damage caused to the
vehicle during the course of those
repairs or due to the inadequacy of those repairs.
26 The fact that Sutherland Volkswagen’s invoice for repairs carried
out in September 2020 indicates that the respondent was
not charged for those
repairs and that the repairs were carried out under warranty suggests that the
appellant may have had some
involvement with, or responsibility for, those
repairs pursuant to its obligations under the manufacturer’s warranty.
27 The Tribunal made a finding that the vehicle had a manufacturer’s
warranty of three years but otherwise did not address these
alternative
submissions, or indeed any other potential causes of action which might have
been available to the respondent. The Tribunal
focussed solely on the consumer
guarantees in ss 54 and 55 and, for the reasons explained later in these
reasons, misapplied those
provisions and the applicable remedial regime.
Notice of Appeal
28 The Notice of Appeal was lodged on 26 November 2021, which is within the
28 day time period specified in cl 25(4) of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (the NCAT Rules). The appeal has therefore been
lodged within time.
Grounds of Appeal
29 Internal appeals from decisions of the Tribunal may be made as of right on
a question of law, and otherwise with leave (that is,
the permission) of
the Appeal Panel: s 80 (2) of the NCAT Act.
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
NSWCATAP 69
the Appeal Panel set out at [13] a non-exclusive list of questions
(1) Whether there has been a failure to provide proper reasons;
(2) Whether the Tribunal identified the wrong issue or asked the wrong
(3) Whether a wrong principle of law had been applied;
(4) Whether there was a failure to afford procedural fairness;
(5) Whether the Tribunal failed to take into account relevant (i.e., mandatory)
considerations;
(6) Whether the Tribunal took into account an irrelevant consideration;
(7) Whether there was no evidence to support a finding of fact; and
(8) Whether the decision is so unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker
would make it.
31 The grounds of appeal raised by the appellant are as follows:
(1) The Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasons for determining that the
alleged failure to the vehicle’s sunroof was attributable
(2) The Tribunal denied the appellant procedural fairness by failing to address
the respondent’s argument that the alleged
failure to the vehicle’s
sunroof seals was caused by a third party not named in the proceedings.
(3) The Tribunal incorrectly identified the issue of the appellant’s
liability as being whether there was evidence of water
ingress at the time of
the vehicle’s examination by the respondent’s expert.
(4) The Tribunal erred in its application of sections 54 and 55 of the ACL.
(5) The Tribunal denied the Appellant procedural fairness in determining that
the appellant opted not to cross-examine the respondent’s
circumstances where the respondent had not made that expert available for
cross-examination.
(6) The Tribunal denied the appellant procedural fairness in determining that
the appellant had had “many opportunities”
to provide its own expert
report in circumstances where the respondent had refused to make the vehicle
available to the appellant
for inspection.
32 All of these grounds involve questions of law. Leave to appeal under Cl.
12 of Sch. 4 of the NCAT Act, which deals with appealable
errors other than
errors of law, is not a matter for consideration.
33 Grounds 1 and 4 raise the most salient issues in this appeal and
accordingly we have limited our consideration to those grounds.
34 We have not addressed the other grounds of appeal because it is
unnecessary do so.
Legislative framework
35 As the Tribunal’s conclusions focussed on the consumer guarantees
contained in ss 54 and 55 of the ACL, and the remedies
available for a failure
to comply with the consumer guarantees, it is helpful to set out excerpts of the
relevant provisions.
36 By reason of
Fair Trading Act
ACL is a law of New South Wales.
Consumer guarantees
relevantly provides:
54 Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of acceptable quality if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would
regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer
of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the goods.
38 Section 55 relevantly provides:
55 Guarantee as to fitness for any disclosed purpose etc.
(a) a person (the supplier) supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a
consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are reasonably fit for any disclosed
purpose, and for any purpose for which the supplier represents
that they are
reasonably fit.
39 “Supply” is defined in
of the ACL as follows:
, when used as a verb, includes:
(a) in relation to goods-supply (including re-supply) by way of sale,
exchange, lease, hire or hire-purchase; and
(b) in relation to services-provide, grant or confer;
and, when used as a noun, has a corresponding meaning and
have corresponding meanings.
Note: Section 5 deals with when a donation is a supply.
40 “Manufacturer” is defined in s 7 of the ACL as follows:
7 Meaning of manufacturer
[Definition: manufacture
manufacturer
the following:
(b) a person who holds himself or herself out to the public as the
manufacturer of the goods;
(e) a person who imports goods into Australia if:
(i) the person is not the manufacturer of the goods;
(ii) at the time of the importation, the manufacturer of the goods does not
have a place of business in Australia.
[Deemed importation of goods]
If goods are imported into Australia
on behalf of the person, the person is taken for the purposes of paragraph (1)
(e), to have
imported the goods into Australia.
41 The remedies in the ACL available for a breach of the consumer guarantees
in Chapter 3
Division 1 are set out in Chapter 5
(ss 259-277 of the ACL).
42 Importantly, the majority of the remedies are against
“suppliers” of goods and services; rather than against
“manufacturers”
43 Division 1 of
is headed “Actions against suppliers”
and is divided into Subdivision A and Subdivision B. Subdivision A is headed
against suppliers of goods” and Subdivision B is headed
“Actions against suppliers of services”. Division 2 of
headed “Action for damages against manufacturers of goods”. Division
3 is headed “Miscellaneous”.
44 For present purposes Subdivision A of Division 1, and Division 2 of
are most relevant. Subdivision A of Division 1 contains ss 259 – 266.
Section 259 is in the following terms:
259 Action against suppliers of goods
(1) A consumer may take action under this section if:
(a) a person (the supplier) supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to the
consumer; and
(b) a guarantee that applies to the supply under Subdivision A of Division 1
(other than
sections 58
and 59(1)) is not complied with.
(2) If the failure to comply with the guarantee can be remedied and is not a
major failure:
(a) the consumer may require the supplier to remedy the failure within
a reasonable time; or
(b) if such a requirement is made of the supplier but the supplier
refuses or fails to comply with the requirement, or fails to comply
requirement within a reasonable time—the consumer may:
(i) otherwise have the failure remedied and, by action against the
supplier, recover all reasonable costs incurred by the consumer
in having the
failure so remedied; or
(ii) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the consumer
rejects the goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection.
(3) If the failure to comply with the guarantee cannot be remedied or is a
major failure, the consumer may:
(a) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the consumer rejects the
goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection;
(b) by action against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction in
the value of the goods below the price paid or payable
by the consumer for the
(4) The consumer may, by action against the supplier, recover damages for any
loss or damage suffered by the consumer because of the
failure to comply with
the guarantee if it was reasonably foreseeable that the consumer would suffer
such loss or damage as a result
of such a failure.
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply if the failure to comply with the guarantee
occurred only because of a cause independent of human
control that occurred
after the goods left the control of the supplier.
(6) To avoid doubt, subsection (4) applies in addition to subsections (2) and
(7) The consumer may take action under this section whether or not the goods
are in their original packaging.
45 Section 260 deals with when a failure to comply with a consumer guarantee
is a “major failure”; s 261 addresses how
a supplier may comply with
a requirement to remedy a failure to comply; s 262 sets out time limits for
rejection of goods under s
259; and ss 263 – 266 contain various other
miscellaneous provisions regarding the remedies available against suppliers.
46 Division 2 of
contains ss 271-273. Section 271 provides as
271 Action for damages against manufacturers of goods
(a) the guarantee under
applies to a supply of goods to a
consumer; and
(b) the guarantee is not complied with;
an affected person in relation to the goods may, by action against the
manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the manufacturer.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the guarantee under
complied with only because of:
(a) an act, default or omission of, or any representation made by, any person
other than the manufacturer or an employee or agent
of the manufacturer; or
(b) a cause independent of human control that occurred after the goods left
the control of the manufacturer; or
(c) the fact that the price charged by the supplier was higher than the
manufacturer’s recommended retail price, or the average
retail price, for
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods by description to a
consumer; and
(b) the description was applied to the goods by or on behalf of the
manufacturer of the goods, or with express or implied consent
manufacturer; and
(c) the guarantee under section 56 applies to the supply and it is not
complied with;
an affected person in relation to the goods may, by action against the
manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the manufacturer.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply if the guarantee under section 56 is not
complied with only because of:
(a) an act, default or omission of any person other than the manufacturer or
an employee or agent of the manufacturer; or
(b) a cause independent of human control that occurred after the goods left
the control of the manufacturer.
(a) the guarantee under
or 59(1) applies to a supply of goods to a
consumer; and
(b) the guarantee is not complied with;
an affected person in relation to the goods may, by action against the
manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the manufacturer.
(6) If an affected person in relation to goods has, in accordance with an
express warranty given or made by the manufacturer of the
goods, required the
manufacturer to remedy a failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in
subsection (1), (3) or (5):
(a) by repairing the goods; or
(b) by replacing the goods with goods of an identical type;
then, despite that subsection, the affected person is not entitled to
commence an action under that subsection to recover damages
of a kind referred
to in section 272(1)(a) unless the manufacturer has refused or failed to remedy
the failure, or has failed to
remedy the failure within a reasonable time.
(7) The affected person in relation to the goods may commence an action under
this section whether or not the goods are in their original
47 Section 272 sets out the nature of the damages that an “affected
person” is entitled to recover against manufacturers,
and s 273 sets out
time limits for bringing actions against manufacturers. Section 274 states that
a manufacturer is liable to indemnify
a supplier who liable to pay damages to a
consumer under s 259 (4) in certain circumstances.
CONSIDERATION OF GROUNDS OF APPEAL
48 As explained earlier in these reasons, it is necessary for us to consider
only the first and fourth grounds of appeal raised by
the appellant.
Ground 1 – Adequacy of reasons
49 The first ground of appeal is that the Tribunal failed to provide adequate
reasons for determining that the alleged failure to
the vehicle’s sunroof
was attributable to the appellant.
Submissions
50 The appellant referred to the points of defence which it lodged in the
proceedings and to submissions made by its representative
at the hearing, both
of which made the point that the repairs complained of by the respondent were
carried out by a third party (i.e.
a Volkswagen dealer) and not by the
51 The appellant submitted that the Tribunal member failed to explain why the
leaks in the vehicle’s sunroof constituted a breach
of the consumer
guarantees under
and 55 of the ACL attributable to the appellant, who was
the Australian agent for the manufacturer of the vehicle, despite the fact
the respondent’s complaints related to repairs done by a third party.
52 The appellant also said that its submissions in relation to ground 2 are
relevant to ground 1. In this regard it says that the
Tribunal denied the
appellant procedural fairness by failing to address its argument that the
alleged failure to the vehicle’s
sunroof seals was caused by a third party
not named in the proceedings.
53 The respondent did not give detailed arguments but submitted that the
reasons of the Tribunal were adequate.
The Tribunal’s Decision
54 In its reasons for decision the Tribunal outlined some of the evidence of
the respondent (at [9]), of the respondent’s expert
(at [11]-[12]) and of
the appellant (at [13]). The Tribunal went on to describe its understanding of
the relevant issues, of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction and of the relevant
legal principles (at [14]-[32]).
55 In the penultimate section of the decision, under the heading
“Consideration”, the Tribunal set out some further observations.
stated at [33]-[38]:
33. The Tribunal is satisfied with the Expert Evidence and accepts the same.
The Respondent opted not to cross examine the evidence
[sic]. There is no other
expert evidence presented to counter the findings and recommendations of the
34. The Tribunal is satisfied that a Brand New Motor vehicle should be able
to withstand water ingress. At paragraph [28] of the expert
evidence it is
stated that a small amount of water is sufficient to cause water ingress at the
time of examination.
35. The manufacturer is responsible for the Consumer Guarantee that the
vehicle is of acceptable quality and fit for purpose.
36. It is reasonable to expect a vehicle to be water proof. A failure is an
indication of a breach of the warranty.
37. However, the Applicant gave evidence that he was willing to provide an
opportunity initially to fix the minor water leak. Moreover,
from the evidence
of the expert it appears that even though the solution is not economical, the
vehicle can be fixed.
38. Moreover, there is no evidence that the vehicle was rejected.
56 In the final section of the decision under the heading
“Conclusion” the Tribunal said:
39. The Tribunal is satisfied on the balance of probabilities the vehicle is
not of acceptable quality or fit for purpose under the
consumer guarantee
provisions of the ACL.
40. However, the Tribunal is also not satisfied on the balance of
probabilities the vehicle has a "major failure" within the meaning
of s 260 (a)
of the ACL.
41. Accordingly, there is no right to a refund or replacement under ss
259-263 of the ACL.
42. I hold that the failure of the vehicle is a minor failure that requires
to be fixed by the manufacturer.
Ground 1 - Consideration
57 Although the decision runs over several pages its analysis of the key
issues is unfortunately lacking in several respects.
58 The NSW Court of Appeal in
New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation
[2019] NSWCA 231
(per Bell P) helpfully set out the principles
relevant to adequacy of reasons at [66] – [77]. They are summarised as
(1) The function of the appeal court is to determine not the optimal level of
detail required in reasons for a decision but rather
the minimum acceptable
quantity (or detail) of reasons
, necessary for
those reasons to be adequate may vary both with the
nature of the
decision maker
, i.e. whether or not it is a court or tribunal, and, if the
latter, possibly the type of tribunal, and the
nature of the question
being decided
(3) As to the
quality of reasons
, it is generally accepted that the sheer
volume of work undertaken by tribunals is such that a perhaps more relaxed
standard of review
of reasons is appropriate than may be the case when an
appellate court is hearing an appeal from another court.
(4) Even in the less formal setting of a tribunal there are certain minimum
characteristics that a Tribunal’s reasons must
possess. These are
supplied, in relation to the Tribunal, by s 62(3) of the NCAT Act which,
requires there to be set out in reasons
(when requested by a party):
(a) the findings on material questions of fact, referring to the evidence or
other material on which those findings were based,
(b) the Tribunal's understanding of the applicable law, and
(c) the reasoning processes that lead the Tribunal to the conclusions it made.
(5) At least a basic explanation of the fundamental reasons which led the
Tribunal to its conclusion is necessary.
(6) It is not necessary for a judge to detail each factor which he or she has
found to be relevant or irrelevant. Nor is a judge
required to make an explicit
finding on each disputed piece of evidence. It will be sufficient if the
inference as to what is found
is appropriately clear.
(7) Reasons need not be elaborate.
(8) Expression of conclusions in a certain sequence does not indicate a failure
to consider the evidence as a whole.
(9) The court should not read passages from the reasons for decision in
isolation from others to which they may be related.
(10) The reasons must be read fairly and as a whole.
(11) The reasons recorded ought not to be inspected with a fine tooth-comb
attuned to identifying error.
(12) There should be a degree of tolerance for looseness in the language of the
Tribunal, unhappy phrasing of the tribunal's thoughts
or verbal slips.
59 Applying these principles, we are satisfied that the Tribunal has failed
to give adequate reasons. While the reasons contain an
overview of the evidence
and an explanation of the Tribunal’s understanding of the law, they
contain few material findings
of fact, and no meaningful explanation of the
reasoning process as to how the Tribunal applied the law to the factual context.
60 Significantly, the Tribunal made no findings as to the genesis of the
defective sunroof seals and did not explain how the evidence
showed that the
goods were not of acceptable quality or fit for purpose at the time of supply.
In its conclusion the Tribunal said
It is reasonable to expect a
vehicle to be water proof. A failure is an indication of a breach of the
” and then proceeded directly to consider available remedies
under ss 259-262 of the ACL for failure to comply with the consumer
under ss 54 and 55 of the ACL, without a clear conclusion that there had been a
breach of the consumer guarantees, and
without making any findings as to how the
evidence showed that the vehicle had not been sufficiently waterproof at the
time of supply.
61 This is a critical omission because whether there was a breach of ss 54 or
55 depends on the condition of the vehicle
at the time it was supplied
the respondent, which occurred in May 2018.
62 As Perram J said in
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Au
[2021] FCA 715
’) at [606]:
The language of s 54(1) suggests that the guarantee applies at the
time of supply of vehicles. The issue is therefore whether the
vehicles were of
acceptable quality at the time of supply.
63 The same analysis applies to the interpretation of the language of s 55.
64 Claims against a manufacturer made under s 54 in relation to motor
vehicles will usually involve an allegation that there was something
inherent in
the condition of the vehicle at the time of supply that made the vehicle not of
acceptable quality, including the risk
of future mechanical failure. As Perram J
I accept that not every inherent risk of failure will have the consequence
that goods are not of acceptable quality. The conclusion
in any particular case
will be a function of the nature of the feared failure and the extent of the
risk of its occurrence, measured
against the consumer’s reasonable
expectations of how the product ought to behave. Sometimes the failure will be
the risk insubstantial and in such cases the claim may fail. Further
than this, at least in principle, seems dangerous to go.
65 Here the evidence that the waterproofing issue may have existed at the
time of supply in May 2018, or that there was an inherent
risk of future
failure, was equivocal at best. Moreover, there was evidence that the damage to
the seals may have occurred at a later
date due to the actions of Sutherland
Volkswagen (i.e. after the recall repair in May 2020).
66 The evidence to this effect included the respondent’s assertion that
the water ingress had not occurred until after the May
2020 repair, the
expert’s evidence that “the repairs were completed at a sub-standard
level”, and evidence given
by the respondent’s witness Ms
O’Connor (which was not disputed by the respondent), to the effect that
the water ingress
occurred because Sutherland Volkswagen did not install the
sunroof seals properly. During evidence in chief at T 9.32-37 Ms O’Connor
One of the seals seems to have been fitted by Sutherland Volkswagen –
who I note are not joined on the claim – and they
have been fitted
incorrectly. This is obviously a workmanship concern and it’s not
something I can comment on because I’m
not from Sutherland Volkswagen,
I’m from the manufacturer.
67 The appellant submitted that as the water ingress issue had not occurred
until after the vehicle had been repaired in May 2020
by Sutherland Volkswagen
(a third party repairer), the logical conclusion was that the issue was
therefore the fault of that third
party, rather than an inherent manufacturing
68 Whilst this evidence and submissions were very briefly alluded to by the
Tribunal (at [13]), the Tribunal did not engage with them.
It did not explain
why, despite this evidence, it was satisfied that the vehicle was nonetheless
not of acceptable quality or fit
for purpose in breach of ss 54 and/or 55 of the
ACL against the manufacturer.
69 Further, while the Tribunal said that it accepted the evidence of the
respondent’s expert Mr Alessi, that “there are
deficiencies
regarding the seals fitted to the vehicle” Mr Alessi’s report did
not directly address the cause or timing
of those deficiencies.
70 The cause and timing of the waterproofing issue were critical matters in
these proceedings and yet the Tribunal has not set out
in its reasons its
findings in relation to these material questions of fact.
71 We are therefore satisfied that the Tribunal has failed to give adequate
reasons for decision. A failure to provide adequate reasons
is an error of law.
Ground 4 – application of ss 54 and 55 and the remedial
72 The fourth ground of appeal is that the Tribunal erred in its application
of sections 54 and 55 of the ACL and of the corresponding
remedial regime in
Submissions
73 The submissions made by the appellant in relation to this ground are as
(1) The appellant is not a supplier of goods under the ACL but rather is a
“manufacturer” as defined in s 7 of the ACL
and the remedies to
which the Tribunal refers under s 259 are not available against the appellant.
(2) The Tribunal’s application of s 259 of the ACL, which relates to
‘suppliers’ of goods, reflects the Tribunal’s
conflation of
the appellant with third party dealerships.
(3) Section 271 of the ACL (NSW) provides for “affected persons” to
claim for damages against manufacturers of goods.
The consumer guarantee of
reasonable fitness for a disclosed purpose in s 55 is not a guarantee which
allows an affected person
to make a claim against the manufacturer.
(4) A work order is not a remedy available against a manufacturer.
(5) A work order in this instance was outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
74 The respondent’s submissions essentially supported the decision at
first instance for the reasons given by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal’s Decision
75 In paragraphs [19]-[25] of the decision, the Tribunal set out an overview
of ss 54 and 55 of the ACL and of the remedies available
under ss 259. It
19. The relevant consumer guarantee provisions in this matter are:
20. Section 54-Guarantee that goods are of acceptable quality.
21. Section 55-Guarantee for fitness for any disclosed purpose.
22. There are three potential causes of action under Section 259 of the
23. First, if the failure to comply with a guarantee can be remedied and is
not a major failure, and the supplier fails or refuses
to remedy the matter
within a reasonable time the consumer may "by action against the supplier,
recover all reasonable costs incurred
by the consumer in having the failure so
remedied": ACL s 259(2)(b)(i). [59] of Barbour v Autosports Five Dock Pty
24. Second, if the failure to comply with the guarantee cannot be remedied or
is a major failure, the consumer may "by action against
the supplier, recover
compensation for any reduction in the value of the goods below the price paid or
payable by the consumer for
the goods": ACL s 259(3)(b). [60] of Barbour v
Autosports Five Dock Pty Ltd.
25. Sections 259-263 of the ACL-If goods are not of acceptable quality; have
a "major failure"; the consumer rejects the goods within
a reasonable period of
time; and the goods are returned or made available for collection by the
supplier or goods or manufacturer,
the consumer is entitled to a refund or
replacement of the goods.
76 The Tribunal went on to discuss in general terms some of the authorities
which deal with ss 259 – 263 before reaching its
conclusions which have
been extracted above.
77 In summary, the Tribunal concluded that there had been a breach of the
consumer guarantees in ss 54 and 55, that failure to comply
with the consumer
guarantees was not a “major failure” within the meaning of s 260 of
the ACL, that there was no evidence
that the respondent had
“rejected” the vehicle, that the respondent was not entitled to a
refund or replacement under
ss 259-263 of the ACL, and that a work order was
appropriate.
78 Such a remedial outcome may have been available against the supplier of
the vehicle. However, the supplier of the vehicle was not
a party to the
proceedings. The salient issue is whether the remedial outcome was available
against the manufacturer of the vehicle.
Application of ss 54 and 55 and the remedial regime
79 For the following reasons we are of the view that the Tribunal has erred
in its application of the remedial regime which applies
when there has been a
breach of the consumer guarantees in ss 54 and 55 of the ACL.
80 In short, the Tribunal has erroneously applied the remedies in ss 259-264
which are contained in Division 1 of Part 5-4 of the
ACL. These remedies are
available against suppliers, but not against manufacturers, of goods.
81 Wheelahan J helpfully summarised the operation of Division 1 in
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty
[2020] FCA 1672
) as follows at [35]:
A supplier is liable to a consumer to remedy a failure to comply with a
guarantee of acceptable quality or fitness for purpose within
a reasonable time,
or for compensation where the supplier refuses or fails to comply with the
requirement to remedy the failure.
If the failure to comply with the guarantee
cannot be remedied, or is a major failure, the consumer may reject the goods. If
consumer rejects the goods, the supplier must, in accordance with an
election made by the consumer, refund any money paid by the
consumer for the
goods, or replace the rejected goods with goods of the same type and of similar
value, if such goods are reasonably
available to the supplier.
82 Notably, where there has been a failure to comply with a consumer
guarantee, the ability of the consumer under Division 1 to demand
remedy of the
failure or, in certain circumstances, to reject the goods and demand a refund or
replacement, is only available against
“suppliers”.
83 In this case it was common ground that the appellant is the Australian
agent for the manufacturer of the vehicle, which does not
itself have a place of
business in Australia, and therefore the appellant is the
“manufacturer” for the purposes of the
ACL: s 7(1)(e).
84 As manufacturer, the appellant supplies vehicles to Volkswagen
dealerships. The respondent’s vehicle was acquired by the
respondent from
such a dealership (Volkswagen Liverpool) and not from the appellant, and
therefore it is Volkswagen Liverpool, rather
than the appellant, which is the
supplier of the vehicle for the purposes of s 259.
85 Whilst a manufacturer will usually be a “supplier” in the
sense that it supplies goods to retailers and other third
parties, the remedial
provisions in s 259 will only be available to consumers against the person who
supplied the relevant goods
to the consumer. This is because s 259(1)(a) states
that a consumer may take action under the section if a person (ie “the
supplier”) “supplies, in trade or commerce, goods
consumer” (emphasis added).
86 The remedies available against manufacturers in Division 2 of Part 5-4 are
quite different to those available against suppliers
in Division 1.
Perram J explained in some detail the differences between
the available remedies. At [701] he said:
Where the manufacturer has not given any express warranties then it would
appear to follow that the consumer could not require the
manufacturer to remedy
any failure to comply with the acceptable quality guarantee pursuant to such an
express warranty ... the statute
imposes no obligation by itself on a
manufacturer to repair or replace goods which do not comply with the guarantee
of acceptable
quality. The only direct statutory right is the consumer’s
right to claim damages under s 271(1) for breach of the guarantee
at [48] Wheelahan J said:
The practical and useful remedy of the right of rejection of the goods given
by the ACL will in most cases be exercisable only against
the supplier, and not
against a manufacturer if the manufacturer did not supply the goods to the
89 It follows therefore that the regime in Division 1 whereby a consumer may
demand a supplier to remedy a failure to comply with
a breach of a consumer
guarantee, or in certain circumstances to provide a refund or replacement, does
not apply to the appellant
as the appellant was not the supplier of the vehicle
to the respondent.
90 By proceeding on the basis that the respondent’s available remedies
fell within the regime contained in Division 1, rather
than Division 2, and by
considering the respondent’s remedies in that context, the Tribunal has
therefore misapplied the relevant
provisions of the ACL.
91 Moreover, the Tribunal erred when it said at [35] “The manufacturer
is responsible for the Consumer Guarantee that the vehicle
is of acceptable
quality and fit for purpose.” Section 271 of the ACL sets out remedies
available against manufacturers when
there has been a failure to comply with
specified consumer guarantees. The guarantee as to fitness for purpose in
s 55 is not one
of the guarantees specified. There is nothing in the ACL
which imposes on a manufacturer obligations regarding a breach of the guarantee
of fitness for purpose in s 55 of the ACL.
Power of Tribunal to make work orders against manufacturers
92 Whilst the errors identified above in applying the ACL are in themselves a
sufficient basis on which to uphold the appeal, we will
also make observations
in relation to the appellant’s assertion that the Tribunal had no power to
make a work order against
the appellant.
93 The appellant is correct that the remedies available against manufacturers
in Division 2 of Part 5-4 as a result of a breach of
a consumer guarantee are
different to those available against suppliers and are limited to claims for
damages. Division 2 does not
contain a direct mechanism for a consumer to
require a manufacturer to repair or replace goods. In
Perram J summarised the position as follows:
The point for present purposes is that it is the supplier who stands in the
firing line first and must under Division 1 repair or
replace the goods unless
the failure to comply with the s 54 guarantee cannot be remedied or is
a major failure. No such
statutory obligation rests on
the manufacturer unless it has given an express warranty that it will repair or
replace the goods.
This it may do but is not required to do. But if it decides
to do so the express warranty so proffered is given statutory force by
59(1) and by s 271(5) the consumer may sue the manufacturer for failing to
comply with its own express warranty. Although the remedial
provisions with
respect to suppliers are complex, by contrast there is no corresponding
machinery in the case of manufacturers and
the repair/replacement process
happens under the auspices of whatever the express warranty provides for (backed
up by s 59(1) and
94 We will deal further with the guarantee in s 59 below.
95 Although the ACL contains no direct mechanism to compel a manufacturer to
repair or replace goods, it is also relevant to consider
Part 6A of the FT Act
and its interplay with the ACL.
96 It is Part 6A of the FT Act which gives the Tribunal jurisdiction to hear
and determine “consumer claims”, as defined
in s 79E of the Act. It
also empowers the Tribunal to make various kinds of remedial orders.
97 Section 79N of the FT Act states as follows:
79N Orders in favour of claimant
(cf CC Act 1998, s 8 (1))
In determining a consumer claim wholly or partly in favour of a claimant, the
Tribunal may, subject to this Division, make any one
or more of the following
orders that it considers appropriate—
(a) an order that requires a respondent to pay to the claimant a
specified amount of money,
(b) an order that requires a respondent to perform specified work
in order to rectify a defect in goods or services to which the
(c) an order that requires a respondent to supply to the claimant
specified services other than work,
(d) in the case of a claim for relief from payment of
money—an order declaring that a specified amount of money is not due
owing by the claimant to a respondent,
(e) an order that requires a respondent to deliver to the claimant
goods of a specified description,
(f) an order that requires a respondent to return to the claimant
specified goods which are in the possession or under the control
respondent, whether the property in the goods has passed or not,
(g) an order that requires a respondent to replace goods to which
the claim relates,
(h) an order that requires a respondent to refund all or part of
the purchase price of specified goods that are in the possession
(or under the
control) of the claimant and the claimant to return all or part of those goods
to the respondent (whether the property
in the goods has passed or not).
98 As the Appeal Panel said in
Lam v Steve Jarvin Motors Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP 186
) at [164] when discussing Part 6A of the FT
Act and its predecessor, the
Consumer Claims Act
The CC Act, and now Pt 6A of the FT Act, do not, of themselves, create
any causes of action. They are predicated upon the existence
of causes of action
that arise independently from them. The cause of action may be founded upon
contract, tort, debt, statute or
any other sufficient basis in law. All that is
required is that the cause of action is available under New South Wales law to
consumer at the relevant time and provides a legitimate legal basis for the
consumer to make a claim of a type listed in s 3A(1)(a)
to (e) of the CC
Act, or the corresponding definition in Pt 6A, against the supplier. If
there is such a claim and the other requirements
in relation to jurisdiction are
met, the Tribunal then has power to make orders of the types listed in s 8
(now ss 79N, 79O and 79P
of the FT Act), having regard to the legal
entitlements of the parties under the causes of action upon which the claims are
99 It is clear therefore from s 79N(b) of the FT Act that the Tribunal has
power to make a work order in order to “rectify
a defect in goods or
services to which the claim relates”. The question is whether the Tribunal
has power to make a work order
against a manufacturer where there has been a
failure to comply with the consumer guarantee in s 54, even though the ACL does
itself provide a direct mechanism for a consumer to require a manufacturer
to repair goods.
100 This issue was touched on in
the Appeal Panel
expressed the view that the Tribunal may
(our emphasis) the
forms of relief available under the ACL by making additional types of orders as
set out in s 79N. It said at [165]:
Given the width of the types of orders available under s 8 of the CC
Act, it appears that the legislature intended and, since the
enactment of
ss 79N, 79O and 79P of the FT Act, intends that the orders that can be made
by the Tribunal in respect of a consumer
claim should be flexible so as to be
fair and equitable as between the parties at the same time as being in
accordance with law.
For example, a consumer who was entitled to damages for
breach of contract might, in an appropriate case, obtain an order that the
supplier provide a replacement for the defective services or perform work, even
where the usual remedy available at common law would
be damages. Especially
since the re-enactment of these provisions in October 2015, in our view the
proper construction of the ACL
NSW and the CC Act, and now Pt 6A of the FT
Act, is that a similar approach can be taken where the consumer claim is based
on a failure
to comply with a consumer guarantee. In other words, whilst the ACL
NSW establishes the foundational causes of action to claim certain
relief, the
CC Act, and Pt 6A, provide not only a means of obtaining such relief by the
making of corresponding orders under s 8(1)
or s 79N, they also allow
the Tribunal to supplement those forms of relief in appropriate cases by making
additional types of orders,
as set out in s 8(1) or s 79N. This
approach is consistent with, and gives proper recognition and effect to, the
remedial and beneficial
nature and purpose of both statutes. It also promotes
the objects of Pt 6A of the FT Act set out in s 79B namely: “to
for remedies for, and the straightforward resolution of, disputes
concerning the supply of goods and services to consumers”
as it would the
similar objects of the CC Act set out in s 2A (quoted above).
101 However,
did not directly discuss the provisions of Division 2
of Part 5-4 of the ACL (which apply to manufacturers), and the comments
the ambit of the Tribunal’s remedial powers under Part 6A of the
FT Act are obiter dicta.
102 We accept that the Tribunal has remedial powers under Part 6A of the FT
Act, and it is the provisions of the FT Act that give
the Tribunal jurisdiction
to hear and determine a consumer claim.
103 In our view, the comments in
should be construed on the basis
that the Tribunal has remedial powers under Part 6A of the FT Act that engage
with causes of action
outside the ACL (e.g. contract and tort); and has remedial
powers that “supplement” the ACL remedial powers.
104 However, we do not think that the Tribunal’s remedial powers under
the FT Act extend to permitting a work order against
a manufacturer where the
sole cause of action is breach of the consumer guarantee of acceptable quality
in s 54 of the ACL. Our reasons
for this are as follows:
(1) The consumer guarantees under the ACL, and the remedies for breach of those
guarantees, arise by force of the statute.
(2) A cause of action for breach of s 54 is only available against manufacturers
because Division 2 of Part 5-4 of the ACL says so.
It permits actions to be
brought against manufacturers for breaches of certain guarantees relating to the
supply of goods, including
the guarantee in s 54. Absent Division 2,
manufacturers would have no liability for a breach of s 54.
(3) Under Division 2 the remedies available against manufacturers for breach of
s 54 are limited to damages.
(4) There is nothing in Division 2 (or elsewhere) which entitles a consumer to
require a manufacturer to carry out repairs as a result
of a breach of s 54.
(5) A work order against a manufacturer where there has been a breach of s 54
would therefore be inconsistent with the consumer’s
legal entitlements
under the ACL.
(6) Whilst the obiter dicta in
suggests that the Tribunal may
supplement the forms of relief available under the ACL by making additional
out in s 79N, we do not think this reasoning extends to
relief that goes beyond, or is inconsistent with, what the manufacturer can
obliged to do under the ACL when the applicable cause of action is breach of the
consumer guarantee under s 54 of the ACL . As
the Appeal Panel said in
at [164] when exercising its powers under s 79N the Tribunal is to
“have regard to the legal entitlements of the parties under
the causes of
action upon which the claims are based”.
105 For these reasons, we are of the view that where the sole cause of action
against a manufacturer is the guarantee of acceptable
quality in s 54, the
Tribunal does not have power to make a work order against the manufacturer
either under Division 2 of Part 5-4
of the ACL, or under Part 6A of the FT Act,
because such an order would be inconsistent with the consumer’s legal
entitlements
under the cause of action on which the claim is based.
106 There is no difficulty with the Tribunal making a repair order against a
supplier of goods under s 79N (b) of the FT Act when
breach of s 54 of the ACL
is established. For example, a consumer may establish against a supplier that
goods are not of acceptable
quality, but fail to establish that the failure is a
“major failure” or that if there is a “major failure”
the goods have been rejected within a reasonable period of time after supply in
respect of the remedial provisions under ss 259-262
of the ACL.
107 In such circumstances, an order for repairs can be made against the
supplier of the goods under s 79N (b) of the FT Act, even
if that was not the
primary remedy sought by the consumer (see, for example,
Pate v Neich
Holdings Pty Ltd t/as Sydney vehicle Sales
[2018] NSWCATCD 16
at [76]-[90]).
, the Tribunal referred to the power under s 232 of the ACL
to grant an injunction. That power includes dealing with breaches of Chapter
of the ACL, which includes the consumer guarantee provisions under Part 3-2.
However, on the basis of the same principles identified
by Perram J in
at [702]-[704], s 232 of the ACL cannot extend to overriding the
remedial provisions under ss 271-272 of the ACL if the claim is
brought only
against a manufacturer and the cause of action is breach of s 54 of the ACL,
(irrespective of whether the Tribunal is
a “court” for the purpose
of s 232 (1) of the ACL).
109 It is important to point out here that given that the causes of action,
and remedies, which are available under the ACL against
suppliers are different
to, and generally broader than, those available against manufacturers, it is
critically important when instituting
proceedings for breach of consumer
guarantees, for consumers to be sure to identify the correct respondent or
respondents and to
consider whether, in addition to, or instead of, instituting
proceedings against the manufacturer, it may also be appropriate for
supplier and/or the repairer (as appropriate) to be joined as respondents.
Other causes of action
110 We pause here to note that there are several further potential causes of
action against the appellant, including under the ACL,
which were not considered
or determined by the Tribunal.
111 One of these is the consumer guarantees relating to provision of
services. It appears that Sutherland Volkswagen conducted repairs
to the sunroof
by reason of the appellant’s manufacturer’s warranty. In that
regard, it is arguable that Sutherland Volkswagen
was acting as the agent of the
manufacturer to give effect to the provisions of the manufacturer’s
warranty. Provision of the
repairs involved the provision of services. It
appears, on the evidence of the manufacturer, that the services were not
with due care and skill, because the manufacturer blames the work
performed by Sutherland Volkswagen as the cause of the water ingress.
112 If services are not performed with due care and skill, that is a breach
of the consumer guarantee under s 60 of the ACL which
If a person supplies, in trade or commerce, services to a consumer, there is
a guarantee that the services will be rendered with due
care and skill.
113 If Sutherland Volkswagen was the agent of the manufacturer, then arguably
the appellant, as manufacturer, is vicariously liable
for the failure by
Sutherland Volkswagen to provide services with due care and skill and is the
“supplier” of services
pursuant to the ACL. If so, Mr Saad would
then have potential remedies against the appellant under s 267 and/or s 268
of the ACL;
or in the alternative under s 79N of the FT Act (including, if
appropriate, an order for repair under s 79N (b) of the FT Act).
114 Section 61 may also be relevant. It provides a guarantee that services
will be reasonably fit for any purpose for which the services
are being acquired
and which are made known by the consumer, either expressly or by
implication.
115 Another cause of action which was not considered by the Tribunal is s 59
of the ACL. Section 59 contains a consumer guarantee
that manufacturers and
suppliers will comply with any ‘express warranty’ given by them.
Presumably this would include
Volkswagen’s three year manufacturer’s
warranty which was referenced in the Tribunal’s decision.
116 If a manufacturer has given an express warranty that it will repair or
replace defective goods, and the manufacturer refuses or
fails to comply with
the terms of that warranty, it will be in breach of the consumer guarantee in s
59 and the consumer may sue
the manufacturer for damages under s 271(5) of the
ACL. Arguably where there has been a failure by a manufacturer to comply with
express warranty, the Tribunal may also, in appropriate circumstances, make an
order for repairs under s 79N (b) of the FT Act.
In our view, applying the
reasoning in
, such an order, which would be supplementary to the
remedial regime in the ACL, would be appropriate provided it is consistent with
the consumer’s entitlements under the terms of the manufacturer’s
express warranty.
117 Depending on the legal mechanism by which the respondent acquired the
benefit of the appellant’s three year warranty, including
whether there
was privity of contract, the respondent may also have a claim against the
appellant for breach of contract for which
remedies are available under s 79N of
the FT Act.
118 Further, if the respondent succeeds in a claim against the manufacturer
for breach of s 54 of the ACL, by reason of s 271(1) and
s 272 of the ACL he may
be entitled to claim damages, including for the cost of repairing the vehicle if
“...it was reasonably foreseeable that the affected person would suffer
loss or damage as a result of such a failure”
. However, this would be
dependent on matters including: (a) the respondent proving breach of s 54 of the
ACL against the manufacturer;
and (b) providing sufficient evidence of the
repairs required and the cost of such repairs.
119 No issue regarding breach of s 59, s 60 or s 61 of the ACL, or breach of
contract, were raised at the Tribunal hearing or on appeal,
and the terms of the
three year warranty were not made available to the Appeal Panel. Accordingly,
these are not matters in relation
to which it is appropriate for the Appeal
Panel to make its own findings under s 81 (1) (d) of the NCAT Act.
120 The respondent may also have causes of action, including under the ACL,
against the "supplier" of the vehicle, or against the
dealer who inadequately
repaired the vehicle (if the dealer was not acting in the capacity of agent of
the manufacturer). However,
those third parties were not named as
respondents in the Tribunal proceedings and therefore it would be inappropriate
for us to comment
any further in this regard.
Additional issue – time limit in section 79L
121 The appeal raises another issue and that is whether the application to
the Tribunal was brought within time. This was not raised
as a ground of appeal
but as the matter is being remitted to the Tribunal for redetermination it is
appropriate to make some brief
observations in this connection.
122 The Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear a consumer claim is governed
by s 79L of the FT Act. Section 79L relevantly provides
(1) The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine a
consumer claim if any of the following apply—
(a) the cause of action giving rise to the claim first accrued
more than 3 years before the date on which the claim is lodged
123 A cause of action “first accrues” when facts which constitute
the elements of the relevant cause of action crystallise
or combine so that all
the elements necessary to entitle a person to make a consumer claim are present:
Sacks v Hammoud
[2016] NSWCATAP 225
. Put another way, a cause of
action accrues when damage is suffered, whether or not the applicant/plaintiff
is aware of it:
Wilson v Winnicott
[2021] NSWCATAP 211
Barbour v Autosports Five Dock Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCATAP 141
) at [64]-[68].
124 The limitation period in s 79L of the FT Act is not to be confused with
the more limited “rejection period” under
s 262(2) of the ACL which
applies where a consumer wishes to reject goods and receive a refund or
replacement, due to a failure to
comply with a consumer guarantee. The rejection
period is defined as being the period from the time of the supply of the goods
the consumer within which it would be reasonable to expect the
failure to comply with the consumer guarantee to become apparent having
(a) the type of goods; and
(b) the use to which a consumer is likely to put them; and
(c) the length of time for which it is reasonable for them to be used;
(d) the amount of use to which it is reasonable for them to be put
before such a failure becomes apparent.
125 A consumer may not notify a supplier that it rejects goods under s 259 if
the rejection period has ended: s 262(1)(a).
126 In its reasons for decision the Tribunal stated at [17]:
The Tribunal proceedings are also within the 3 year period from the cause of
action to file proceedings in the Tribunal under s 79L
of the FTA as the
applicant only became reasonably aware that the faults in the vehicle were of
sufficient duration and severity
to reject the goods after the issue in
September 2020.
127 The Tribunal appears to be conflating the “rejection period”
under s 262 of the ACL with the three year limitation
period in s 79L of the FT
Act. The rejection period is however only relevant to determining whether a
consumer is precluded from
giving notice to a supplier that it rejects goods as
a result of a failure to comply with a consumer guarantee. It has no relevance
to other types of remedies against suppliers and does not apply at all to claims
against manufacturers.
128 For example, where a consumer has served a notice on a supplier rejecting
goods, a cause of action for compensation under s 259(4)
will accrue upon
service of the rejection notice because it is at that point that property in the
goods reverts to the supplier under
s 263(6) and the relevant loss is suffered:
at [74]. If the rejection period has ended, no such cause of
action will have accrued because the consumer had no right to reject
129 Conversely, an action to recover compensation for any reduction in value
of goods under s 259(3)(b) does not require notice of
rejection of the goods to
be given to the supplier. Such an action arises upon a breach of the guarantee
which constitutes a major
failure and the suffering of relevant
at [75]. The rejection period is not relevant in such
circumstances. Similarly, the rejection period is not relevant to any of the
remedies available against manufacturers in Division 2 of Part 5-4.
130 In this instance the Tribunal appears to have been under the
misapprehension that the three year limitation period commenced when
rejection period - which was irrelevant in this instance – ended, rather
than when the cause of action first accrued.
131 The important point is that it is necessary, when determining whether a
claim has been brought within time for the purposes of
s 79L of the FT Act, for
the Tribunal first to identify clearly the cause or causes of action on which
the consumer relies. If the
claim relates to a breach of a consumer guarantee
under the ACL, this will involve identifying which guarantee, and which
remedy, the consumer is relying upon. Once the cause or causes of
action have been identified, the Tribunal must make then make relevant
of fact to determine when the relevant loss or damage was sustained.
132 These matters will need to be considered when the matter is remitted to
the Tribunal for redetermination.
133 The conclusions we have reached can be summarised as follows:
(1) The guarantee as to acceptable quality in s 54 of the ACL and the guarantee
as to fitness for purpose in s 55 of the ACL apply
at the time of supply of the
(2) The Tribunal concluded that there had been a failure to comply with these
guarantees but its reasons for decision did not include
any factual findings as
to the cause or timing of the waterproofing issue, including whether it
subsisted, or there was an inherent
risk of future failure,
at the time of
of the vehicle in May 2018. The Tribunal’s reasons for decision
were inadequate.
(3) The remedies set out in Division 1 of Part 5-4 of the ACL apply to suppliers
of goods but not manufacturers. By considering the
available remedies against
the manufacturer within the context of Division 1 the Tribunal misapplied the
remedial regime.
(4) Division 2 of Part 5-4 of the ACL sets out the remedial regime available
against manufacturers where there has been a breach
of the consumer guarantees
relating to goods.
(5) There is no remedy available against manufacturers for a breach of the
consumer guarantee in s 55 of the ACL as to fitness for
(6) The remedies available against manufacturers under Division 2 of Part 5-4
for breach of consumer guarantees relating to goods
are limited to damages.
Whilst the Tribunal may, in certain circumstances, supplement the remedies
available under the ACL with the
6A of the FT Act (per
at [165]), including, relevantly, orders for
repairs, the remedial powers of the Tribunal do not extend to allow a work order
made against a manufacturer where the only cause of action against the
manufacturer is breach of the consumer guarantee in s 54.
(7) There may have been other remedies available against the manufacturer under
the ACL which were not considered by the Tribunal.
These potentially include a
claim for damages under ss 271 and 272 of the ACL (if a breach of s 54 is
established), remedies for
breach of the guarantees in s 60 and 61 which relate
to the supply of services (if the repairs were carried out under warranty and
the manufacturer was vicariously liable for them) and, depending on the terms of
the manufacturer’s warranty, for breach of
the guarantee in s 59 that
a manufacturer will comply with the terms of any express warranty. There may
also have been a claim in
contract depending on the terms of the
manufacturer’s warranty and the mechanism by which the manufacturer became
(8) The respondent may also have claims, including under the ACL, against the
supplier of the vehicle, or against the dealer which
inadequately repaired the
vehicle (if the dealer was not acting as agent of the manufacturer when it
carried out the repairs).
(9) When making a claim regarding defective goods a consumer should consider
whether the appropriate respondent is the manufacturer,
the supplier of the
goods and/or the repairer of the goods. This will depend on the cause of action
on which the consumer relies,
and the remedy which he or she seeks.
(10) There are limitation issues which will need to be considered when the
matter is remitted to the Tribunal. When determining whether
a claim has been
brought within time for the purposes of s 79L of the FT Act, the Tribunal must
first clearly identify the cause
or causes of action on which the consumer
relies. If the claim relates to a breach of a consumer guarantee under the ACL,
involve identifying which guarantee, and which applicable remedy, the
consumer is relying upon. Once the cause or causes of action
identified, the Tribunal must then make relevant findings of fact to determine
when the relevant loss or damage was sustained.
134 Given the confusion surrounding the applicable causes of action and
limitation periods, the absence of crucial findings of fact
and the possibility
that other parties may need to be joined to the proceedings, we are of the view
that justice is best served by
remitting the whole matter to the Tribunal for
reconsideration.
135 Appropriate directions will need to be made at the first directions
hearing to ensure Mr Saad correctly identifies the cause or
causes of action,
the facts relied upon and the order or orders sought. If Mr Saad seeks leave to
join the supplier or the repairer
he will need to identify the relevant cause or
causes of action against such parties.
136 We make the following orders:
(1) The appeal is allowed.
(2) The decision under appeal is quashed.
(3) The matter is remitted to the Tribunal, differently constituted, with leave
for the parties to adduce such further evidence and
join further parties as the
Tribunal thinks fit.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (418 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter