URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2021/715.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd t/as Volkswagen Australia [2021] NSWSC 715 (18 June 2021)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd t/as Volkswagen Australia
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2021] NSWSC 715
Hearing Date(s):
18-20, 24-25, 31 May and 1 June 2021
Decision Date:
18 June 2021
Equity - Commercial List
Stevenson J
The plaintiff’s case fails
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Representative proceedings – Sale of goods
– claim that Volkswagen vehicles were not of acceptable
quality for the
purposes of s 54 of the Australian Consumer Law by reason of being fitted with
driver side Takata airbags –
where airbags contained a propellant
(“PSAN”) that had propensity to degrade when exposed to moisture and
temperature
fluctuations – whether plaintiff established any functionally
significant propensity of the PSAN to degrade in the airbag in
his vehicle such
as to cause it to explode or malfunction – whether the airbag in the
defendant’s vehicle did not malfunction
– where defendant replaced
the airbag in the plaintiff’s vehicle without cost – whether the
plaintiff established
any loss by reason of any want of acceptable quality in
his vehicle
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Sch 2 – Australian Consumer Law
Consumer Goods (Motor Vehicles With
Affected Takata Airbag Inflators and Specified Spare Parts) Recall Notice 2018
Trade Practices Act 1974
Cases Cited:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corp Pty Ltd
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Top Snack Foods Pty
[1999] FCA 752
Courtney v Medtel Pty Ltd
(2003) 126 FCR 219
Farley v Skinner
[2001] UKHL 49
[2002] 2 AC 732
Gill v Ethicon Sarl (No 5)
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan (2000) 102 FCR 307;
HTW Valuers (Central Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
(2004) 217 CLR
[2004] HCA 54
Kizbeau Pty Ltd v WG & B Pty Ltd
(1995) 184 CLR 281
[1995] HCA 4
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
(2003) 130 FCR 182
[2003] FCAFC
New South Wales Lotteries Corporation Pty Ltd v Kuzmanovski
[2011] FCAFC 106
Potts v Miller
[1940] HCA 43
(1940) 64 CLR 282
Prestige Auto
Traders Australia Pty Ltd v Bonnefin
[2017] NSWSC 149
Steiner v Magic Carpet
Tours Pty Ltd
(1984) ASC 55-366
(1984) ATPR 40-490
Wyzenbeek v Australasian
Marine Imports Pty Ltd (In Liq)
(2019) 272 FCR 373
[2019] FCAFC 167
Elcom Credit Union Ltd
(1990) 94 ALR 445
Texts Cited:
Concise Oxford English Dictionary, online ed, accessed 15 June
Explanatory Memorandum,
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Sch 2
– Australian Consumer Law
P Herzfeld and T Prince, Interpretation, (2nd
ed, 2020, Thomson Reuters)
Principal judgment
Philip Dwyer as representative plaintiff (Plaintiff)
Volkswagen Group
Australia Pty Ltd trading as Volkswagen Australia (Defendant)
Representation:
C R C Newlinds SC with D Barnett (Plaintiff)
S J Free SC
with I Ahmed and C Winnett (Defendant)
Solicitors:
Quinn Emanuel
Urquhart & Sullivan (Plaintiff)
Clayton Utz (Defendant)
File Number(s):
SC 2018/322648
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
The provisions in the ACL
The plaintiff’s pleaded case
Takata airbags in Volkswagen vehicles
The real-world experience in Volkswagen
The recall notices
VW AG’s Empirical Testing Program
Physical examinations and CT scans
Closed Vessel Analysis
Mis-deployment short of rupture
Conclusion as to the Empirical Analysis Program
What is the “consequence” of the use of
PSAN as an inflator?
PSAN’s propensity to degrade
Propensity or risk of explosion
Propensity or risk of aggressive malfunction
Was the plaintiff’s vehicle not of acceptable
Section 271(2) of the ACL
Section 272(1) of the ACL
How the plaintiff put his claim for damages
The plaintiff has suffered no damage
Reduction in value
Discrete Choice Experiments
Professor Baddeley
Not a real-world premise
Only measured willingness to pay
False factual premise
Methodological problems
A “no transaction case”?
The “left in hand” approach
“Do my best”
Loss of use – out of pocket expenses
Distress – disappointment and anxiety
Introduction
plaintiff, Professor Phillip Dwyer, brings these proceedings under
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) as representative of some 83,000 persons
(the “Group Members”) who between 2007 and 2018 purchased Volkswagen
in which a Takata driver side airbag was installed.
plaintiff purchased his vehicle, a Volkswagen Passat, in 2013 for some $40,000.
of the Australian Consumer
(the “ACL”) the
defendant, Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd (“VW”), is taken to
have guaranteed to the
plaintiff and those Group Members who purchased their
Volkswagens prior to 1 January
, that their vehicles were of
“acceptable quality”; that is, relevantly, free from defects and
plaintiff contends that his vehicle was not of acceptable quality because, by
reason of the installation of the Takata airbag,
the vehicle was not free from
defects and was not safe.
is because, the plaintiff contends:
(a) the airbag contained a
propellant known as Phase Stabilised Ammonium Nitrate (“PSAN”) that
had a propensity to degrade
over time when exposed to moisture and temperature
fluctuations; and
(b) if the PSAN degraded sufficiently, the PSAN could burn so aggressively
that the inflator housing could rupture in a life-threatening
put more widely in his pleadings, the plaintiff’s case advanced in final
submissions was in essence that it was this
risk of mis-deployment that meant
that the vehicle was of unacceptable quality and that the defect in the vehicle
for the purposes
of the ACL was the use of a propellant in the airbag
that was vulnerable to temperature fluctuations or presence of moisture.
plaintiff accepts that the risk of mis-deployment of these airbags is
unquantifiable in that it cannot be predicted when and in
what circumstances the
PSAN in the airbags might degrade to a functionally significant degree.
it is the plaintiff’s case that this is what makes the vehicles of
unacceptable quality for the purpose of
of the ACL.
plaintiff has had no problem with the airbag in his vehicle. The vehicle has not
been involved in an incident that would have
caused the airbag to deploy. There
is thus no evidence that, in fact, the airbag in his car would not have deployed
as intended.
replaced the Takata airbag in the plaintiff’s car in 2019 at no cost to
the plaintiff. This occurred during the vehicle’
,000 km service. It is
common ground that the new airbag is sound and will deploy as intended. The
plaintiff incurred no out of pocket
expenses while the airbag in his car was
being replaced.
of the Group Members is in the same position as the plaintiff in that there was
no mis-deployment of the Takata airbag in their
vehicles, and that VW have now
replaced the airbags at no cost with a non-Takata airbag.
is agreed that I should decide this case, at least at the outset, by reference
to the plaintiff’s position and leave the
position of the Group Members
for later consideration, if appropriate.
have been greatly assisted by the submissions of Mr Newlinds SC, who appeared
with Mr Barnett for the plaintiff, and Mr Free SC,
who appeared with Mr Ahmed
and Ms Winnett for VW. Much of what follows, especially as to uncontroversial
background matters, is drawn
with gratitude from those submissions. The case was
conducted with great skill by both sides and with great economy, bearing mind
its complexities. The case occupied only 9 of the 15 days allocated for hearing.
That is a tribute to those conducting the case.
Much of the time saved was a
result of Mr Newlinds and Mr Barnett electing not to press aspects of the
plaintiff’s case that
would otherwise have lengthened the hearing. The
quality of the parties’ closing written submissions was particularly
plaintiff has not established any link between the propensity of PSAN to degrade
and any relevant, functionally significant, propensity
of the PSAN to degrade in
the particular airbag installed in his vehicle so as to cause it to explode or
malfunction. He has therefore
not established that the vehicle was not of
acceptable quality when he purchased it.
any event, the plaintiff has not established that he has suffered any damage by
reason of the installation of a Takata airbag in
his vehicle, not least because
VW has, without charge, replaced the Takata airbag with an airbag that is
undoubtedly sound.
The provisions in the ACL
of the ACL provides that if a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to
a consumer and the supply is not by auction, then there
is a guarantee that the
goods are of “acceptable quality”.
the guarantee is not complied with, an affected person may recover damages from
the manufacturer of the goods under s 271(1) of
the ACL subject to the exception
in, relevantly, s 271(2)(a), to which I will return.
reason of s 272 of the ACL, such an affected person is entitled to recover:
(a) any reduction in the value of the goods below, relevantly, the
price paid for the goods resulting from the failure to comply with
guarantee; and
(b) any reasonably foreseeable loss or damage suffered by the affected person
because of the failure to comply with the guarantee.
are of “acceptable quality” if they are, relevantly:
(a) free from defects; and
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would
having regard to,
relevantly:
(c) the nature of the goods; and
(d) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
concept of “acceptable” quality is similar to that of
“merchantable” quantity contained in s 74D of the
Trade Practices
(Cth), the test relevant to Group Members who purchased Volkswagens
with Takata airbags prior to 1 January 2011. It is common ground
distinction as there may be between goods being of “acceptable” as
opposed to “merchantable”
is not a determinative
distinction for the purpose of these proceedings.
question as to whether goods are of acceptable quality is an objective one, to
be determined on the basis of relevant information
known at the time of the
test posed by
is not absolute, nor is it a standard of perfection. Rather,
it is a test of what a reasonable consumer would regard as acceptable
regard to, relevantly here, any relevant circumstances relating to supply of the
relevant expectation is that of a reasonable consumer in the position of the
actual consumer.
The question is to
be answered on the basis of what was objectively reasonable to expect at the
time of supply.
answer will always depend on the circumstances.
plaintiff’s pleaded case
his Amended Statement of Claim, the plaintiff pleads that:
“Takata Airbags:
a. use ammonium nitrate in the
propellant with the consequence that the inflators within the Takata Airbags:
i. have a propensity to
explode and/or a risk of exploding, thereby propelling metal shrapnel towards
the occupants of the Defective
ii. have a propensity to malfunction and/or a risk of
malfunctioning on deployment of the Takata Airbag, by deploying too rapidly
and/or with excessive
plaintiff alleges that as his vehicle was fitted with a Takata Airbag it was not
safe to drive and if driven would “expose
the driver and any passengers to
unnecessary danger and
that, by reason of these
“...a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of
the Defective Vehicles would not regard the Defective
Vehicles as:
a. acceptably fit for all the purposes
for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied;
b. free from defects;
plaintiff contends he is entitled to recover damages, being the difference
between the price he paid for his Volkswagen Passat
and the “true
value” of the
airbags in Volkswagen vehicles
Takata airbags in question were fitted to the front driver side of the vehicles,
within the steering wheel boss.
are comprised of several different components. Those components include the
inflator which, in this case, was a particular
driver airbag inflator known as a “Smokeless Driver Inflator”
purpose of an airbag inflator is to cause gas to be generated rapidly when there
is a collision.
the event of a collision, an ignitor within the airbag produces hot gasses.
These gasses ignite propellant tablets that cause the
propellant, here the PSAN,
to ignite and produce gas for inflating the airbag cushion.
steps need to occur within milliseconds of the initiation of the process by the
airbag control unit.
plaintiff’s vehicle, and each of the vehicles of the Group Members, was
manufactured by VW’s German parent Volkswagen
Aktiengesellschaft
AG did not manufacture the airbags. Airbag systems are complex and require
specialist expertise to design, develop, manufacture
and test. Indeed, VW AG
does not hold the German legal approvals necessary to produce airbag systems.
AG gave Takata specifications in respect of the airbags in a “Book of
Requirements”. The Book of Requirements contained
specification drawings,
under cover of a “nomination letter”, setting out certain
requirements that Takata was required
to meet when designing the airbag system.
specifications that VW AG gave Takata included performance specifications for
the inflators, including that, at room temperature,
inflation should occur
within the range of 24 to 33 milliseconds.
and critically, VW AG did not specify what propellant should be used in the
airbags. Takata chose to use PSAN as the propellant.
AG became aware from publicly available sources that from in or around 2007
Takata was conducting internal investigations in relation
to airbags supplied to
manufacturers other than VW AG.
2013 and 2014, Takata told VW AG on a number of occasions that these
investigations did not relate to airbags installed in Volkswagen
it was known, at around this time, that certain types of Takata airbag
inflators, not of the kind used in Volkswagen vehicles,
had manufacturing
25 January 2016, the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (the
“US Regulator”) published a “Takata
Defect Information
Report” which was said to “address concerns with non-desiccated SDI
airbag inflators installed in
frontal driver airbag modules in the United
Andreas Schade, a Technical Expert employed within VW AG’s Technical
Development Department, gave evidence in cross-examination
that, prior to this
point, VW AG “didn’t know that there is a rupture risk in our cars,
we didn’t see anything,
we didn’t hear anything up to that stage
[of] rupture or mis-deployment”.
Schade said that, based on discussions he had with the US Regulator, it became
clear to him that the US Regulator required certain
Volkswagen vehicles in the
United States to be recalled.
9 February 2016, Volkswagen Group of America provided a formal response to the
US Regulator in which it stated that:
(a) Volkswagen was not aware
of any incidents, accidents or injuries worldwide relating to ruptured inflators
or of any ruptured inflators
from Takata’s production plant in Freiberg,
(b) the ruptures that had been reported to have occurred were in vehicles
other than Volkswagens; and
(c) the root causes of those ruptures had not been determined.
led to VW AG deciding, in 2016, to conduct its own analysis (“the
Empirical Analysis Program”) for the purpose of
investigating whether PSAN
gas generators used in Volkswagen vehicles constituted a safety risk. I return
to the Empirical Analysis
Program below.
The real-world
experience in Volkswagen vehicles
AG installed frontal Takata airbag inflators using PSAN in some 20 million
Volkswagen vehicles worldwide. The plaintiff has not
adduced evidence that any
Takata airbag in any of these vehicles has mis-deployed.
Schade estimated that some 440,000 of those 20 million Volkswagen vehicles have
been involved in a collision that resulted in deployment
of the vehicle’s
Schade said that:
“This estimate was calculated by applying the rate of incidents that
involved a collision that resulted in the deployment of
a vehicle’s airbag
(obtained from publicly available government sources, such as the accident rates
published by [the US Regulator])
to the number of vehicles manufactured each
year, the period for which the vehicle may be expected to remain in the national
(published by [the US Regulator]) over the period of manufacture from 2005
to 2015 of the affected vehicles containing Takata frontal
airbags equipped with
PSAN propellant (obtained from VWAG’s production
Schade said:
“I am not aware, nor to my knowledge is any of my colleagues at VWAG
aware, of any confirmed field incident globally that has
resulted in the
mis-deployment of a PSAN based driver side airbag in any Volkswagen vehicle,
whether or not such a rupture caused
harm to a vehicle
Schade’s analysis made clear that some of the 440,000 vehicles were
relatively new. It is common ground that PSAN will only
degrade after many
years’ exposure to temperature fluctuations and moisture. For that reason,
a lack of airbag mis-deployment
in new vehicles is not presently significant.
However, 50,000 of the 440,000 Volkswagen vehicles involved in accidents were
years old or older, and thus of an age where any problem with the airbags
would likely materialise.
there is no evidence of any mis-deployment of a Takata airbag in any Volkswagen.
fact is, of course, not determinative of the issues in these proceedings. But it
raises a serious question as to whether there
is any link between PSAN’s
propensity to degrade when considered as a matter of generality, and the
likelihood of any functionally
significant propensity of PSAN degradation in the
airbags fitted to Volkswagen vehicles, including that purchased by the
The recall notices
February 2018, the Assistant Minister to the Treasurer issued the
Goods (Motor Vehicles With Affected Takata Airbag Inflators and Specified Spare
Parts) Recall Notice 2018
(Cth) (the “Recall Notice”), which
came into effect in March 2018.
Recall Notice applied to a wide class of motor vehicles and required the recall
of “Affected Takata Airbag Inflators”
including driver side airbags
that used PSAN as a propellant.
Recall Notice stated that it had been issued after a detailed investigation by
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC) into possible risks
involved in using vehicles containing Takata airbags.
Recall Notice differentiated between “Alpha” airbags which were
manufactured between 2000 and 2002 and were affected
by known manufacturing
problems, and other inflators. Alpha inflators were stated in the Recall Notice
to pose an “extreme
safety risk”. The Recall Notice required
suppliers to initiate recall action of Alpha inflators immediately. No
vehicle was fitted with an Alpha inflator.
Recall Notice stated:
“Degradation of the propellant can reach an unsafe point between six and
twenty-five years post manufacture of the vehicle
depending on the climate that
the vehicle is exposed to over time. In the most severe hot and humid climatic
conditions, the defect
can manifest as early as between six and nine years
post-manufacture.”
2 of the Recall Notice contained a “Communication and Engagement
Plan” and set out “examples of best practice
communications to
Consumers to adequately convey the serious safety risk posed by Affected Takata
Airbag Inflators and the need for
replacement”.
March 2018, when the Recall Notice came into effect, the plaintiff’s
vehicle was less than five years’ old.
vehicles up to six years from manufacture, the suggested communication to
consumers was:
“Your vehicle’s airbag is faulty and it could
kill or seriously
you and other people in your vehicle from when it reaches six years
after its year of manufacture.
There is no immediate known risk with the
airbag, but there will
be in the future
...it is important that
you...arrange to have the airbag replaced before it reaches 6 years old”.
(Emphasis in original.)
the regulatory regime underpinned by the Recall Notice did not contemplate an
immediate safety risk for cars less than six years
relation to cars older than six years, the suggested communication was different
“Your vehicle’s airbag is faulty and it could
kill or seriously
you and other people in your vehicle. You should
immediately...arrange for the airbag to be replaced”. (Emphasis in
required by the Recall Notice, VW initiated a recall program under which
Volkswagen vehicles were recalled and the airbag inflators
in them progressively
airbag in the plaintiff’s vehicle was replaced on 2 May 2019 in the course
of its 60,000 km service.
has now replaced the airbag inflators in each of the affected Volkswagen
vehicles, or applied to the ACCC for an allowable exemption
(for example where
the vehicle has been stolen, scrapped or where the owner has not been able to be
VW AG’s Empirical Testing Program
February 2016, VW AG commenced its Empirical Analysis Program of the Takata
airbag inflators.
program involved the collection of approximately 20,000 SDI airbag inflators
from the field. The airbags were retrieved from vehicles
manufactured from 2005
onwards and from various geographical areas around the world with a range of
climactic conditions.
geographical and age spread of the inflators used in the Empirical Analysis
Program was important because PSAN degradation observed
in other brands of
vehicles and in other airbags (such as passenger side frontal airbags) was
thought to be more likely to occur
in hot and humid conditions and in aging
plaintiff’s liability expert, Mr Robert
agreed that the Empirical
Analysis Program had involved ample testing across different climate zones and
of inflators of different
Renz gave this evidence in cross-examination:
“Q. Now, the Volkswagen empirical analysis program that is described in Mr
Schade’s affidavit, you’ve agreed with
is a suitable
program to understand the ballistic performance of these Takata airbags in
Volkswagen vehicles.
Q. And you've agreed that the scientific methodology that was applied by
Volkswagen was sound and consistent with accepted scientific
A. Correct.
Q. And it's produced meaningful conclusions about the performance of the parts
and substances which were tested.
A. I believe it did create meaningful conclusions, though I would say that my
conclusions and [VW’s]
conclusions aren't necessarily in agreement.
Q. But they are both operating off the same data, aren't they?
A. Yes, they are.”
AG concluded from the Empirical Analysis Program that SDI inflators installed in
Volkswagen vehicles “did not show any functionally
relevant anomalies and
no material manufacturing faults...that would lead to rupture”.
AG considered that the result of the Empirical Analysis Program was that the
airbag inflators fitted to Volkswagen vehicles exhibited
performance in
accordance with the specifications for them, and did not exhibit any deviation
from those specifications that would
indicate that they were at systemic risk of
rupture or mis-deployment.
Empirical Analysis Program revealed that airbag inflators for Volkswagens were
different from the inflators in other vehicles
in ways that might meaningfully
affect their performance. I return to this below.
a result of this testing program, VW AG’s Product Safety Committee
determined that there was no systemic risk associated
with airbag inflators
installed in Volkswagen vehicles that would warrant their recall. Indeed, I
was informed that no European
regulator has required a recall of Volkswagens
fitted with Takata airbags.
the Empirical Analysis Program, VW AG sought to test the very airbags that are
said by the plaintiff to be at risk of failure.
This is the only empirical
evidence before me concerning how these airbags are or were likely to perform.
is not, of course, for VW to show that the airbags are safe. It is for the
plaintiff to show that they are unsafe. The results
of the Empirical Analysis
Program suggest that the airbags are safe.
do not accept the submission made on behalf of the plaintiff that “the
tests that Volkswagen carried out where undertaken
to support, not truly to
test” whether the airbag inflators were unsafe. There is nothing in the
evidence to suggest that the
Empirical Analysis Program was not a genuine
attempt by VW AG to ascertain whether there was any problem with Takata airbags
in Volkswagens.
Physical examinations and CT scans
AG subjected the retrieved airbags to physical examinations and CT scans.
showed differences between airbag inflators fitted to Volkswagen vehicles and
those fitted to other vehicles.
differences included:
(a) the number of outflow openings;
(b) the size of the propellant tablets;
(c) the use of a ceramic, rather than a wired, propellant cushion;
(d) the use of a thicker base plate;
(e) a design to deploy with larger output pressure;
(f) absence of what Mr Schade described as “anomalies” in the
base of the generators that in other brands indicated excessive
moisture over
(g) use of 60 gm filter compared to a 70 gm filter in SDI inflators installed
in other vehicles.
Schade gave unchallenged evidence that the results of the CT scans showed that
the SDI inflators installed in Volkswagen branded
vehicles did not show any
functionally relevant anomalies and no material manufacturing faults that would
lead to rupture.
provides support for the submission made on behalf of VW before me that airbag
inflators for Volkswagen vehicles are different
from the inflators in other
vehicles in ways that meaningfully affect their
performance.
Closed Vessel Analysis
AG subjected PSAN, drawn from the airbag inflators recovered from the field, to
pressure in a reinforced closed vessel in order
to determine whether its
“Integrated Burn Rate”, measured in megapascals per millimetre per
second (MPa*mm/s), exceeded
the “normal” or “expected”
rate of between 1,700 and 1,850 MPa*mm/s.
derived the “normal” or “expected” Integrated Burn Rates
from new PSAN, that is PSAN that had not previously
been deployed in an airbag
inflator. There was no challenge before me about these normal or expected
Integrated Burn rates, notwithstanding
that they were derived from information
from Takata. Indeed, the plaintiff’s purported challenge to the results of
Vessel Analysis assumed their correctness.
Schade explained that:
“Closed vessel tests are performed to determine the pressure generated by
the burning of the propellant and subsequently calculate
the burn rate of the
propellant and the pressure generated by the burning of the propellant (which
produces the gas which inflates
the airbag cushion). This is done by igniting a
sample...of propellant extracted from the Field Inflators within a specially
and reinforced closed vessel which ensures that the volume during the
ignition remains constant”.
Schade gave this evidence in cross-examination:
“Q. And because you had read in the literature about these alleged
incidents that were happening around the world with airbags
rupturing and the
like that there was a suggestion that the PSAN was degrading over time, you
wanted to check if the PSAN that Takata
had used in the airbags might have been
degraded. Correct?
A. WITNESS: In our vehicles, in our set ups, yes.
Q. That was the point in part of the experiment you were carrying out.
A. WITNESS: Exactly.”
Renz agreed that the closed vessel analysis was a good test for correlating the
burn performance of the propellant, PSAN. Mr Renz
added that it was not
possible to draw a direct correlation between this and the performance of the
PSAN inside an inflator. However,
the plaintiff points to no other testing than
that carried out during the Empirical Analysis Program.
results of the Closed Vessel Tests were recorded in Mr Schade’s attached
Figure 21. (
21 (149698, PDF)
Figure 21 shows, in the Closed Vessel Tests the PSAN was subjected to pressures
up to 90 MPa. This was much higher than would normally
be experienced in the
field as the airbags are designed so that when pressure reaches 40 to 50 MPa
ventholes open and the airbag
normal or expected Integrated Burn Rate for PSAN of between 1,700 to 1,850
MPa*mm/s are depicted by the vertical green bars within
the blackened shading in
21 shows that some PSAN exhibited an Integrated Burn Rate at times exceeding
these normal or expected rates.
Professor Klapötke gave this evidence in cross-examination:
“Q. Professor, you agree that the experiments conducted by Volkswagen do
show a progressive deterioration in the PSAN, that
exceeds the normal or
expected parameters set by Volkswagen by about 8%, don't you?
A. Yes, I do agree. For the older inflators, not for the new ones.
Q. Of course. And it's a progressive phenomenon, and therefore the older the
inflator, the more marked the result will be?
A. In general, yes, but it depends on environmental conditions and other
Q. You accept that an 8% deviation from normal or expected is statistically
significant?
A. 8% is statistically relevant, though it's not
dangerous.”
highest Integrated Burn Rate recorded in the experiment was 2,051 MPa*mm/s.
his Figure 23 (
23 (123435, PDF)
Mr Schade plotted the Integrated Burn Rates detected in the Closed Vessel
Analysis against the age of the vehicles from which the
airbags had been
retrieved in relation to three climates zones: Zone 1 being warm; Zone 2 being
temperate; and Zone 3 being cold.
horizontal green lines on Figure 23 represent the normal or expected Integrated
Burn Rates of 1,700 to 1,850 MPa*mm/s.
red line at 3,000 MPa*mm/s represents what Takata had determined to be the
“critical rupture point” beyond which rupture
might occur. As can be
seen from Figure 23, the Integrated Burn Rates revealed by the Closed Vessel
Analysis from PSAN retrieved
from vehicles in all three climate zones was well
below that critical rupture point.
admitted the evidence of Takata’s critical rupture point as evidence only
that this was the rate adopted by Takata as being
critical and not as evidence
that this was in fact so.
the plaintiff pointed out, neither Professor Klapötke nor Mr Schade have
sought to prove or check that 3,000 MPa*mm/s was
a critical rate beyond which
rupture was likely, nor short of which rupture was unlikely.
as I have said, the plaintiff’s criticism of the conclusions VW AG drew
from the Closed Vessel Analysis were based
on the extent that the tests showed a
deviation from Takata’s normal or expected Integrated Burn Rate and thus
assumed the
correctness of those rates. In the context of testing the likely
veracity of conclusions VW AG drew from the Closed Vessel Analysis,
and in order
to compare like with like, that criticism can only be measured against
Takata’s other metric, its critical rupture
the implications of the Integrated Burn Rates being shown to be above
Takata’s normal or expected range must be considered
in the context of
Takata’s critical rupture point.
I have said, while the Closed Vessel Analysis did show that the PSAN from some
retrieved airbags exceeded Takata’s normal
or expected range, none came
anywhere near Takata’s critical rupture point.
the evidence before me established that airbags are designed with a 150% safety
factor as far as concerns the Integrated
Burn Rate. If that factor is applied to
the highest Integrated Burn Rate detected in the Closed Vessel Analysis, 2,150
the result is still well below the Takata critical rupture point.
AG also subjected some of the inflators retrieved from the field to “Tank
Tests” in which the inflator, as a unit,
was placed in a tank and internal
and external measurements taken.
attention was paid to these tests in final submissions, save that it was
emphasised on behalf of the plaintiff that during
one of these tests, one
inflator ruptured.
was the only rupture that occurred in the entire Empirical Analysis Program in
which some 20,000 airbags were tested.
that regard Mr Renz gave this evidence:
“Q. Given the comprehensive data you've seen from the Volkswagen testing
of inflators from around the world, including inflators
of equivalent age, you
would actually conclude that the incident with the [one airbag that ruptured] is
anomalous, wouldn't you?
A. I'm not sure that I would characterise that as anomalous. The parts reaching
that rupture point, there's a spectrum even at a
specific age and a specific
environment, so I would - again, not knowing the specifics here - I've seen this
happen where - in other
expert reports, where they had a number of deployments
with a number of them performing without rupturing and having one or two
out of a large number of samples.
Q. But in this particular setting, you've got the benefit of a large body of
data, including a large number of airbags from 2007
that have been tested and
have shown burn rates nowhere near the rupture level. Do you accept that?
A. I do accept that.
Q. Viewed in that light, this single incident you would view as an anomaly as
compared with the rest of the data.
Mis-deployment short of rupture
behalf of the plaintiff it was suggested that the Empirical Analysis Program as
a whole was directed to ascertaining whether airbags
might rupture and not as to
whether there might be some kind of mis-deployment short of rupture.
do not think this is a fair criticism. This is revealed by the evidence that Mr
Schade gave in cross-examination:
“Q. Your report, almost exclusively, and the experiments you conducted
were aimed to determine whether there was a rupture
risk. Correct?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. They were not aimed or directed to determining whether there was a
misdeployment risk below the level of rupture, were they?
A. WITNESS: But that's what you see if you do a tank test, or you do a closed
vessel test. You - you don't get only on and off. You
get on and off --
Q. Are you even trying --
A. WITNESS: I’m sorry.
Q. -- to answer my question?
A. WITNESS: I understand that your question is if we looked at misdeployments
below a rupture, so to speak, and my answer to this
is that a tank test and
closed vessel test but not a deployment test, a simple deployment test. A tank
test and a closed vessel test
will show if you have a - a directed or an
inflator that might lead to a misdeployment as you just depicted
Conclusion as to the Empirical Analysis Program
am not persuaded that the results of the Empirical Analysis Program could lead
to a conclusion that the tested airbags were unsafe.
the contrary, the results of the Empirical testing program suggest, as VW AG
concluded, that the airbag inflators installed in
Volkswagens were safe and that
increased Integrated Burn Rates revealed by the tests were unlikely to translate
to aggressive or
unsafe deployment of the airbags.
any event, had I been persuaded that there was some defect or flaw in the manner
in which VW AG conducted the Empirical Analysis
Program such as would warrant
its results being set to one side, it would not follow that a conclusion
opposite to that drawn by
VW AG should be adopted. It would mean no more than
that the results of the Empirical Analysis Program cast no light on the
I have mentioned, it was not for VW to show that the airbags were safe, but for
the plaintiff to show that they were not.
What is the
“consequence” of the use of PSAN as an inflator?
plaintiff’s closing submissions made repeated reference to PSAN having a
“propensity” to degrade.
I have said, as articulated in closing submissions, the plaintiff’s case
is that the defect in the vehicles for the purpose
of the ACL was the
use in the airbag inflators of a propellant, PSAN, that was vulnerable to
degradation when subjected to temperature
fluctuations or the presence of
that is not the plaintiff’s pleaded case.
plaintiff’s pleaded case is that the use of PSAN in the airbag inflators
had the consequence that the inflators within the
airbags would themselves have
the propensity to explode or malfunction by deploying too rapidly or with
excessive force.
make out this case, the plaintiff must do more than show that PSAN had a
propensity to degrade.
plaintiff must show a link, that the pleadings recognise, that the airbags
themselves, and in particular those installed in Volkswagens,
had a propensity
to explode or aggressively deploy.
PSAN’s propensity to
is hydroscopic, that is, it absorbs moisture from the air.
Renz and Professor Klapötke agreed that generally speaking:
(a) the root cause of the degradation of PSAN in the Takata airbag
inflators was thermal fluctuation with moisture being present;
(b) the rate of such degradation increases as the moisture level increases;
(c) the degradation of the PSAN will lead to an increase in surface area of
the PSAN which leads to faster burning of the propellant
tablets. This then
causes increased pressure inside the inflator, which in turn causes the airbag
inflation to occur faster and at
a higher peak pressure than would otherwise be
Renz opined that such degradation was progressive, irreversible and inevitable.
Klapötke expressed a more nuanced view:
“Q. Professor, you agree that the experiments conducted by Volkswagen do
show a progressive deterioration in the PSAN, that
exceeds the normal or
expected parameters set by Volkswagen by about 8%, don't you?
A. Yes, I do agree. For the older inflators, not for the new ones.
Q. Of course. And it's a progressive phenomenon, and therefore the older the
inflator, the more marked the result will be?
A. In general, yes, but it depends on environmental conditions and other
Q. Of course. And you accept the scientific theory that that degradation will be
an inevitable thing that happens to PSAN if it is
exposed to temperature
fluctuations and some form of humidity or moisture?
A. Yes, I do. If humidity and moisture, you mean ingress by external humidity
and moisture, not by the amount of moisture that was
in the propellant from the
time of manufacture on.
Q. Yes, so some external moisture that comes into the system either at the time
of manufacture or after?
A. I would say, at the time of manufacture, if everything goes according to the
standards, would be no problem. It has to be additional
Q. But if everything at the factory doesn't go to standards, well, the moisture
might get in there, but otherwise, it's going to
have got in by some process
after the car is manufactured?
Q. And that could be a myriad of things. It could be leaking seals, it could be
valves not working, it could be adhesive tape not
sticking properly. But,
whatever, if moisture gets in, and you combine it with temperature fluctuations,
the science is that this
process will commence, and it will then inevitably
A. Yes, that's correct.”
this establishes is that PSAN
exposed to moisture
and temperature fluctuation.
this occurs, the consequences described by Mr Renz and Professor Klapötke
there is a further complication. The rate at which the PSAN within an airbag
inflator will degrade varies significantly according
to a variety of factors
which differ from manufacturer to manufacturer. It is not possible to make
generalisations between airbags
fitted to different manufacturers’
vehicles or even between different models of vehicles made by the same
manufacturer.
Renz agreed that the factors which will affect the rate of PSAN degradation
(a) the dashboard components and interior upholstery of
the vehicles;
(b) the physical integrity of the propellant;
(c) the integrity of the seals on the inflator;
(d) the type of aluminium used as a sealant in the inflator;
(e) the number of physical openings within each inflator and their
circumference;
(f) the amount of moisture present at the time of manufacture;
(g) the size and shape of the propellant that is used;
(h) the arrangement of the tablets of propellant within the inflator; and
(i) the position of the airbag within the vehicle.
I have set out above, the physical examinations and CT scans conducted as a part
of the Empirical Analysis Program showed that
the airbag inflators installed in
Volkswagen vehicles differed from the airbag inflators in other vehicles in many
of these respects.
Renz and Professor Klapötke agreed that the differences between inflator
design and vehicles, as well as other variables,
impacted upon the level of
moisture ingress into an inflator, being the critical factor associated with
degradation of PSAN.
Mr Renz gave this evidence in cross-examination:
“Q. Putting those various factors together, you've agreed with Professor
Klapötke in the joint report that the level of
moisture ingress into an
inflator is dependent on several factors, including environmental, design, and
vehicle details. That's correct?
A. That is correct.
Q. So you accept now, then, Mr Renz, that it's not scientifically valid to
assess PSAN degradation independently of the particular
particular vehicle model into which it's installed?
A. I would accept that.”
Mr Renz agreed that the enquiry as to the safety of the airbag inflators in
question must be vehicle and airbag inflator type
was put on behalf of the plaintiff in final submissions that:
“No time frame can be given for when the risk of mis-deployment and/or
rupture arises for any given car and the risk for any
given car at any given
point in time cannot be quantified, other than to say that the risk increases
over time.”
may be correct at a very high level of generality. But it overstates matters
for present purposes, where the question is whether
there was a risk of rupture
and mis-deployment of the airbags in Volkswagen vehicles.
that regard, Professor Klapötke gave this evidence in cross-examination:
“Q. You also agree with Mr Renz, I think, that because there are so many
variables as to what could impact on this process,
that the timing and speed
over which it will occur is unknowable?
A. It is unknowable on the basis of theoretic model of prediction. If you do
testing, fierce testing on many, many examples returned
from the field, you can
create a model to be able in a position to predict the time when it becomes
critical or dangerous.”
I have set out above, by engaging in the Empirical Analysis Program, VW AG has
engaged in “fierce testing” of “many
examples returned from
the field” so as to be “in a position to predict the time when the
airbags become critically dangerous”.
testing suggests, very strongly in my opinion, that there is no reason to
predict that the airbag inflators actually installed
in Volkswagen will become
critical or dangerous.
Propensity or risk of explosion
I have said, the normal or expected operating pressure in the Takata airbag
inflators was between 1,700 and 1,850 MPa*mm/s. Mr
Renz agreed that the
inflator housing for an airbag is designed to have a rupture pressure which is
“very significantly higher
than the designed internal operating
pressure” and that there is a margin between the normal burn rate for the
propellant in
the inflator and the “critical burn rate at which rupture
could occur”. Mr Renz agreed that “the industry standard”
this safety margin was “around 150% of normal operating
the industry standard safety margin of at least 150% to the highest of the
normal or expected operating pressure of 1,850
MPa*mm/s yields a rupture
pressure of 2,775 MPa*mm/s. As was pointed out on behalf of VW, this figure is
broadly consistent with
Takata’s calculation of the peak pressure at which
inflator housing might rupture, being 3,000
I have set out, the Empirical Analysis Program conducted by VW AG showed that
airbag inflators in Volkswagen vehicles did not reach
anything like this level
of pressure.
was submitted for VW:
“The unchallenged evidence was that the [Empirical Analysis Program]
showed that in closed vessel testing, there were no critical
identified in the burn rate of inflators in Volkswagen vehicles. Moreover, out
of the thousands of inflators of various
ages and from various climates around
the world that were tested, the analysis showed the
that was observed was 2051 MPa*mm/s. This is nowhere near the level of increased
pressure that could involve a risk of
rupture, whether that is the figure of
approximately 2775 MPa*mm/s suggested by Mr Renz’s industry standard or
the rupture
pressure of 3000 MPa*mm/s calculated by Takata”. (Emphasis in
plaintiff’s case is that there is a risk of an explosion occurring because
PSAN by its nature may or will degrade in the
presence of moisture and
temperature fluctuation, and that the bare fact that PSAN has this propensity is
sufficient to create the
VW submitted, a critical integer is missing here. That critical integer is of
there being any connection between possible degradation
in the PSAN and airbag
performance in Volkswagens.
plaintiff has not established that, on the balance of probabilities, the alleged
propensity or risk has been present in any Volkswagen
vehicle. Nor that, on the
balance of probabilities, the alleged propensity or risk would have materialised
in any Volkswagen material
at any identifiable point in time.
VW submitted, the most that the plaintiff can say, relying on the evidence of Mr
Renz, is that there is a
theoretical possibility
that at some
identified point
in the future,
a vehicle were to be left in
the right environment for long enough, the alleged propensity or risk
materialise.
plaintiff has not sought to demonstrate that this risk could eventuate within
any meaningful timeframe.
think that VW is correct to submit that the risk that the plaintiff asserts
remains no more than a speculative possibility.
Propensity or
risk of aggressive malfunction
plaintiff’s second alleged propensity or risk relates to a malfunction of
an airbag by reason of aggressive deployment short
of rupture.
is no evidence before me that this has actually occurred in any airbag in any
car, let alone in a Volkswagen.
Renz accepted that whether some deviation from the designed burn rates in an
airbag inflatable material would affect the ability
of the airbag to inflate
within a specified time would depend upon the extent of the deviation. Mr Renz
agreed that he had not carried
out any analysis to ascertain what the burn rate
of the propellant in airbags fitted to Volkswagen vehicles would need to be in
to meet Volkswagen’s specification. He also agreed that he did not
know what deviation would be required from either the internal
pressure or internal burn rates of the propellant, before the airbag failed to
meet those specifications.
Renz opined that there was a “continuum of risk” in relation to the
performance of an airbag inflator and that the
higher the burn rate within an
airbag inflator the more quickly the airbag would inflate. Mr Renz agreed that
he could not say
where, along that “continuum”, a particular burn
rate equated to a particular kind of deployment. Nor could Mr Renz
extent to which an increased burn rate increased the risk of mis-deployment or
risk to an occupant of a vehicle, let alone
in a Volkswagen vehicle.
these circumstances, I think VW was correct to submit:
“The effect of this evidence is that there is nothing that could support a
finding that there was any real propensity or risk
that the airbag inflators
installed in Volkswagen vehicles would malfunction in a manner that involved
deploying too rapidly or with
excessive force, let alone in a manner that would
cause harm to a vehicle occupant or otherwise impede their efficacy. The
boldly suggests in his closing submissions...that the Court can simply
infer without evidence that if an airbag deploys ‘too
quickly and
therefore is deflating when it is meant to be creating a cushion, there is a
greater risk of some injury to the driver
than if the airbag deployed at its
deigned and intended speed’. These are highly technical propositions
depending on things
which occur over the course of a handful of milliseconds.
The expert witness called for the plaintiff was unable to assist in proving
these interacting factors would in fact play out in different circumstances. The
Court has no sound basis to draw the inferences
invited by the plaintiff”.
substance, the plaintiff’s case is that there is a theoretical possibility
that at some unidentified time in the future there
may be a risk of
mis-deployment in an airbag inflator fitted to a Volkswagen vehicle.
am not satisfied that there is any evidence that any such possibility was real
or would develop in a way that was meaningful to
a consumer.
the plaintiff’s vehicle not of acceptable quality?
question under
of the ACL is whether a reasonable consumer, fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the plaintiff’s vehicle,
any hidden defects, would have regarded the vehicle as being
acceptable.
plaintiff’s case is that the state and condition of the goods for this
purpose must be assessed in light of the facts that:
“a. The PSAN propellent used in the affected airbags has
a propensity to degrade over time given the presence of moisture
and changes in
temperature;
b. Volkswagen’s own testing shows that propensity is
manifesting in the field. That indicates, that by whatever means, sufficient
moisture is entering the system in the real word to cause measurable degradation
of the PSAN;
c. As PSAN degrades, the risk of the airbag mis-deploying (ie
deploying too quickly) or rupturing increases. This process is inevitable
progressive;
d. If the airbag deploys too quickly, the risk is that it will
not protect the occupant in an accident either at all or to the
extent designed,
leading to an increased risk of injury. If the airbag ruptures, the risk is that
metal fragments are sprayed inside
the cabin and cause injury or death;
e. That process of degradation, culminating in the risk of
mis-deployment and rupture, is inevitable in the sense that given temperature
fluctuations and moisture,
those outcomes will happen at some stage
f. No time frame can be given for when the risk of
mis-deployment and/or rupture arises for any given car and the risk for any
given car at any given point in time cannot be quantified, other than to say
that the risk increases over time.” (Emphasis
for the reasons I have set out, a reasonable consumer in this hypothetical
circumstance would also be acquainted with the fact
that there was no reason to
think that, probably, “those outcomes will happen at some
in any Volkswagen
and thus in the plaintiff’s vehicle.
reflects the link or integer that is missing from the plaintiff’s case,
namely between the propensity of PSAN to degrade
and any relevant, functionally
significant propensity of PSAN to degrade in Volkswagens.
the reasonable consumer in the hypothetical circumstance posed by
also be acquainted with the fact that motor vehicles are complicated pieces of
machinery that may develop problems, even problems
going to the safety of the
vehicle, that may require rectification by the manufacturer during the
vehicle’s lifetime.
these circumstances, I am not persuaded that the plaintiff’s vehicle was
not of acceptable quality and thus not persuaded
that VW has failed to comply
with the guarantee in
of the ACL.
Section 271(2) of the
that this conclusion is not correct, and that the plaintiff’s vehicle was
not of acceptable quality, and that VW thereby
did not comply with the guarantee
of the ACL, the question that arises under s 271(2) of the ACL is
whether VW did not so comply “only because of” the
act, default or
omission of Takata.
271(2) provides, relevantly:
“(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the guarantee under
not complied with only because of:
(a) an act, default or omission of, or any
representation made by, any person other than the manufacturer or an employee or
of the manufacturer; or
(b) a cause independent of human control that occurred after the goods left the
control of the manufacturer...”.
this hypothetical circumstance, the reason that VW did not comply with the
guarantee is because the airbag in the plaintiff’s vehicle used PSAN as
the propellant and because PSAN has a propensity to
AG did not design the airbag and did not specify what propellant should be used,
let alone specify that PSAN should be used. Only
Takata was responsible for the
design and manufacture of the airbag and for the decision to use PSAN as the
propellant.
for Takata’s decision to use PSAN as the propellant, there would have been
no breach by VW of the
guarantee of the kind contended for by the
plaintiff. There is no other circumstance that, in this hypothetical scenario,
to VW being in breach of the guarantee.
is true that VW AG installed the airbag, but there is no suggestion here that
the manner of airbag installations was causative
of the plaintiff’s
vehicle not being of acceptable quality.
is also true that VW “supplied” the vehicle to the plaintiff for the
the guarantee under
only arises when there has been such a supply. The
exemption in s 271(2) can only arise if there has been such a supply. Otherwise,
there could be no guarantee “not complied with”. The exemption in s
271(2) presupposes that the manufacturer in question
has “supplied”
the goods and then posits a circumstance where the breach of the guarantee
thereby arising occurs “only
because” of the conduct of
fact that, on this hypothesis, the plaintiff’s vehicle was not
“acceptable” from the time of its manufacture
takes matters no
further. Subsection 271(2)(b) deals expressly, and alternatively, with causes
“after the goods left the control
of the manufacturer”. This makes
clear that the legislature did not intend that the exception in s 271(2) be so
plaintiff also submitted that VW’s non-compliance with
hypothetical circumstance was not “only” because of Takata’s
acts, defaults or omissions but also because
of VW’s own selection of
Takata as its subcontractor and VW’s “selection and policing of
specifications and quality
standards” even if it “exercised
reasonable care and skill”.
effect, the submission was that the mere fact that VW chose Takata as its airbag
supplier was itself a reason for its failure to
comply with the
But that reading of s 271(2)(a) would leave it having no work to do. That
subsection is clearly directed to acts, faults
and omissions of parties other
than the manufacturer itself. If the mere engagement by the manufacturer of
such a third party was
sufficient to exclude the subsection’s operation, I
find it hard to see what operation the subsection could have.
plaintiff also drew attention to the Explanatory Memorandum leading to the
introduction of s 271(2)(a) into the ACL. The Explanatory
“A manufacturer is not required to pay damages to a consumer if an act,
default or omission or representation made by some
other person, not being an
employee or agent of the manufacturer, resulted in caused goods to be of less
than acceptable quality.
This ensures that manufacturers are not held liable for
issues with goods that are beyond their control.”
do not see that this takes matters any further. In this case, the circumstances
that, on this hypothesis, led to VW being in breach
guarantee were
beyond its, and VW AG’s control.
these reasons, even if the plaintiff could establish his vehicle was not of
acceptable quality for the purpose of
of the ACL when he purchased it, the
guarantee that would have arisen under
does not apply by reason of s
I have determined that the plaintiff has failed to establish that his vehicle
was not of acceptable quality when he purchased it,
it is not necessary to
consider the question of whether or not the plaintiff has suffered damage.
in deference to the detailed submissions advanced by the parties, I will
consider that question upon the assumption, contrary
to my conclusions, that the
plaintiff has established that his vehicle was not of acceptable
Section 272(1) of the ACL
plaintiff’s damages are to be assessed in accordance with s 272(1) of the
ACL which is in the following terms:
272 Damages that may be recovered by action against
manufacturers of goods
(1) In an action for damages under this
Division, an affected person in relation to goods is entitled to recover damages
(a) any reduction in the
value of the goods, resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee to
which the action relates,
below whichever of the following prices is
(i) the price paid or payable by the consumer for the
(ii) the average retail price of the goods at the time of
supply; and
(b) any loss or damage
suffered by the affected person because of the failure to comply with the
guarantee to which the action relates
if it was reasonably foreseeable that the
affected person would suffer such loss or damage as a result of such a
(2) Without limiting subsection (1)(b),
the cost of inspecting and returning the goods to the manufacturer is taken to
be a reasonably
foreseeable loss suffered by the affected person as a result of
the failure to comply with the guarantee.
(3) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply to loss or damage suffered
through a reduction in the value of the goods.”
behalf of the plaintiff it was submitted that the plaintiff’s claim for
damages is not confined by s 272(1)(a) to “any
reduction in the value of
the goods” as set out in that subsection.
was said to be so because of the use in the chapeau to s 272(1) of the word
“for” rather than words such as “measured
solely by” or
“assessed only as”.
as a matter of language, “for” is used here to specify and confine
what damages are recoverable for breach of the
“for” is used here in the sense of “having as a reason or
“representing”.
attention was drawn to the Explanatory Memorandum relevant to s 272(1)(a) which
“The damages that are recoverable from a manufacturer of goods
the reduction in value of goods below the lower of the price paid
or the average retail price of the goods at the time of the supply.
approach ensures that manufacturers are not required to provide excessive
compensation to consumers if suppliers charge high
prices for goods”.
(Emphasis added.)
passage does state that damages recoverable “include” the reduction
in value of the goods but the word “include”
is here used merely to
describe the content of s 272(1)(a), not to suggest that some other species of
damage is also available.
my opinion, the plaintiff’s damages can only be assessed by reference to
the test in s 272. The question is what damage the
plaintiff has suffered by
reason of the value of his vehicle being reduced below its purchase price as a
result of it being of unacceptable
How the plaintiff
put his claim for damages
developed in final submissions, the plaintiff put his claim for damages in three
he contended that there had been a reduction in value of his vehicle, at the
time of purchase, of $15,000 from the purchase
price. This reduction was
calculated by reference to two “Discrete Choice Experiments”
conducted by an econometrician,
Professor Michelle Baddeley. The result of those
Discrete Choice Experiments was said to reveal that the “true value”
of the plaintiff’s vehicle when he purchased it was $25,000: $40,000 less
and alternatively, the plaintiff contended that his loss should be calculated on
a “left in hand” basis by comparing
what he paid for the vehicle and
what he has now “left in hand”.
and assuming that damages could not be calculated on either of the first two
bases, the plaintiff contended that as he “undoubtedly
suffered a loss on
the day he bought” the vehicle and had “undoubtedly paid too much
given the then unknown defect”
in the vehicle that I should “do the
best I can” to arrive at a damages figure.
The plaintiff
has suffered no damage
the reasons that follow, I am not able to accept any of the bases on which the
plaintiff put his damages claim.
is a fundamental problem with the plaintiff’s case that can be resolved
without resort to the numerous authorities to
which I was taken.
plaintiff is only entitled to damages for the loss that he has actually
suffered. This is an obvious proposition for which there
must involve consideration of the events that have happened since the plaintiff
purchased his vehicle and thus at how “risks
evolved into
certainties”.
plaintiff’s case concerning “reduction in the value” directs
attention only to events at the time that the plaintiff
purchased the vehicle.
the question for the purpose of s 272 of the ACL is what damage the plaintiff
has now suffered “for”, that is, as
a result of or by reason of, any
reduction in the value of the vehicle below the purchase price “resulting
failure by VW to comply with the
question is, what effect has any such failure had on the plaintiff’s
financial position?
answer is obvious. It has had no effect on the plaintiff’s financial
plaintiff has had the full use of his vehicle since he acquired it.
has never been any issue with the performance of the vehicle associated with the
alleged defect, being the use of PSAN as the
propellant in the airbag
plaintiff was not involved in an accident which resulted in the deployment of
the airbag in his vehicle. But had he been involved
in such an accident, whether
before or after his original airbag was replaced, I see no basis to conclude
that the airbag would have
operated in anything other than in the way it was
designed to operate.
revelation to the plaintiff that the airbag in his car would need to be replaced
did not affect the performance or utility of
the vehicle, nor the way that the
plaintiff continued to use it.
airbag inflator has now been replaced with a new airbag inflator as part of the
regular servicing of the car, and at no cost to
the plaintiff.
plaintiff continues to own a car that is as valuable as any ordinary
eight-year-old Volkswagen Passat would be.
closing submissions, this was accepted on behalf of the plaintiff when it was
“It is accepted that common sense would suggest that once the defective
airbags are replaced with safe airbags, the plaintiff’s
car has the same
value as a now eight-year old second hand car as it would have had had the
plaintiff bought the same vehicle but
with non-defective airbags at the
plaintiff’s argument is that, nonetheless, he “overpaid for his new
vehicle”. But that argument ignores what
has happened since then.
plaintiff, now, has precisely what he thought he was acquiring.
is not to the point only to enquire what the “true value” of the
plaintiff’s vehicle was at the date of purchase
and thus whether that
“true value” was less than the purchase price. What matters is the
plaintiff’s position
now that the airbag has been replaced. The effect of
such replacement is that such defect, as may hitherto have affected the
value, has been removed.
my opinion, this is a sufficient basis on which to dismiss the plaintiff’s
Nonetheless,
I will consider how the plaintiff did put his claim.
plaintiff’s case was that s 272(1)(a), in effect, provides for a
“approach” and entitles the plaintiff to recover the difference
between what he paid for his vehicle and its “true
s 272 makes no reference to “true value”. Rather, it speaks of a
reduction in value resulting from, relevantly, a
failure to comply with the
airbag in the plaintiff’s car has now been replaced by VW at no charge and
the plaintiff has accepted that as a matter of
“common sense” his
car is now of the same value as if it had never been fitted with a Takata
plaintiff nonetheless contends that he “overpaid for his new
vehicle” because its value was reduced below its purchase
price by reason
of the potential for the airbags to mis-deploy. That proposition depends upon
the results of the Discrete Choice
Experiments.
Discrete Choice
Experiments
Baddeley conducted two Discrete Choice Experiments which the parties referred to
as “DCE-1” and “DCE-2”.
DCE-1 was conducted in May 2020
and DCE-2 in April 2021.
main differences between DCE-1 and DCE-2 were that DCE-1 was directed to airbags
in seven makes of vehicles
whereas DCE-2 was directed only to Volkswagen vehicles, and that DCE-2 included
information concerning risk that was absent from
each DCE, Professor Baddeley engaged a professional survey company to conduct an
online survey for which respondents were rewarded,
premised on the assumption
that the respondent was buying a new vehicle and had then been offered two
options for the purchase.
The first option was a car with a “defective
driver’s side airbag”. The second option was a car with
“non-defective
DCE asked the respondents to review a detailed and lengthy “opening
statement”.
respondents were then asked to answer ten “choice questions”. Each
of these set out five types of information for
two different options. The five
participant.
illustrate the point, an example of “Task 1 of 10” for DCE-1 was:
The car is fitted with one or more defective airbag(s)
The car will be recalled for replacement of the defective airbag(s)
Recall status
No recall necessary
Your airbag is replaced with an airbag, but the replacement airbag may be
Malfunction
No malfunction
If the airbag inflates too aggressively in the event of a crash, it may not
protect the driver and passengers from injury in an accident
and/or may itself
injure the driver and passengers
I would purchase:
respondent was given different combinations of replacement, recall, malfunction
and price scenarios, randomly selected.
Respondents
were then asked to complete a further set of concluding questions. In the case
of DCE-1, this included 30 questions on
the respondents’ appreciation of
Baddeley estimated that it would take respondents 10 minutes to complete the
opening submissions, the plaintiff argued that Professor Baddeley’s
Discrete Choice Experiments were an “appropriate
quantification” of his alleged loss and that her model “applie[d]
accepted economic methodology and produce[d]
plausible results”.
following Professor Baddeley’s evidence, the plaintiff accepted in closing
submissions that there were “undoubted
limitations and problems”
with the Discrete Choice Experiments. Nonetheless, it was submitted for the
plaintiff that I could
use the results of the exercise to form an estimate of
the “true value” of the plaintiff’s vehicle at the time
purchased it.
do not agree. In my opinion, for the reasons that follow, no weight can be
given to the experiments. They certainly do not show
that, as the plaintiff
contends, his vehicle was worth $15,000 less than he paid for it.
Professor Baddeley
Baddeley is a highly qualified and, academically, deeply experienced economist
and econometrician.
she did not present well as a witness.
closing submissions, the plaintiff accepted that Professor Baddeley
“presented as a somewhat naïve and inexperienced
court expert”.
is true, but I would go further. Professor Baddeley, consciously or
unconsciously, has become too closely aligned with the interests
plaintiff and the Group Members that she represents and has allowed herself to
become something of an advocate for them.
answer and critique Professor Baddeley’s work, VW called Dr Christopher
Pleatsikas. Dr Pleatsikas is also an economist and
a specialist in statistical
and econometric analysis, including analysis of survey data.
is true, as the plaintiff submitted, that Dr Pleatsikas expressed his criticisms
of Professor Baddeley’s work in robust and
perhaps unnecessarily combative
Dr Pleatsikas identified a number of fundamental flaws in Professor
Baddeley’s work and impressed me as a well informed
and reliable expert.
am not prepared to accept Professor Baddeley’s opinions to the extent that
they were contested by Dr Pleatsikas.
example of a fundamental error that Professor Baddeley made was in relation to
her “Structural Break Analysis”.
this analysis, Professor Baddeley sought to analysis vehicle auction data in an
attempt to identify and quantify any diminution
in the resale price of vehicles
that correlated with the announcement of the recalls in respect of the affected
vehicle. Prior to
closing submissions the plaintiff abandoned reliance on
Professor Baddeley’s Structural Break Analysis and in closing submissions
accepted that it suffered from “fundamental flaws” and was “of
no utility to the Court”. One obvious problem
with the Structural Break
Analysis is that it was untethered to the plaintiff’s pleaded case, which
relied only on diminution
in the value of the plaintiff’s vehicle at the
time he acquired it, and not at the time of any resale. But the Structural
Break Analysis remains relevant insofar as it sheds light on the reliability of
Professor Baddeley’s opinions.
the purpose of her Structural Break Analysis, Professor Baddeley erroneously
assigned recall dates for Volkswagen vehicles approximately
four years prior to
the time that they were recalled. Professor Baddeley assumed that the recall
dates were in 2014, when they were
in fact in 2018. When this was pointed out by
Dr Pleatsikas in his reply report, Professor Baddeley’s response was not
the implications this had for her methodology but to attempt to
justify that methodology through the supposed effect of what the
referred to as
“Dieselgate”
price of Volkswagen vehicles from May 2014. Professor Baddeley relied on an
academic article to justify this position but
in cross-examination accepted that
the article did not mention Volkswagen specifically. More troublingly, Professor
Baddeley accepted
that another article she cited was inconsistent with the
opinion she expressed in her report, and that she was aware of that at the
that she cited it.
in July 2019, Professor Baddeley presented a draft document for discussion with
the plaintiff’s solicitors entitled
“Discrete Choice
Methodology”. That document contained a note from Professor Baddeley to
the plaintiff’s solicitors:
“We will need some guidance from the legal team on how narrow or broad
this range ought to be, based on their expectations
around how much the average
consumer needs to be compensated”.
Baddeley was speaking of the “range” of discounts that survey
respondents should be offered in the event that
they elected for a car with
defective airbags. In closing submissions, the plaintiff pointed out there was
no criticism made of the
discounts ultimately adopted by Professor Baddeley.
But that is not the point. As VW submitted, Professor Baddeley’s note
represented a request from her for information so as to design an experiment
that best fitted the answers the plaintiff’s solicitors
hoped to derive. I
can envisage no good explanation for an exchange of this kind between a
supposedly independent expert and the
solicitors for the plaintiff. None was
given. Indeed, as Professor Baddeley said, when this was pointed out to her:
“I agree that that was not an appropriate thing for me to say”.
Baddeley was also provided with a “Literature Review” prepared by
the plaintiff’s solicitors. Professor
Baddeley said she used the
Literature Review as a resource in preparing her reply report. The Literature
Review contained material
inappropriate to be provided to an independent expert,
including purported views as to the effect of various articles on the prospects
of the case as a whole and whether they assisted or detracted from the
real-world premise
any event, a fundamental difficulty with the Discrete Choice Experiments is that
they were based upon a highly unrealistic premise,
namely, that a rational
person would buy, at a discount, a car known to have a defective airbag. I
think VW was correct to submit
that the scenario the participants were thus
asked to assume was so artificial, and so implausible and removed from reality,
any views thereby expressed about Volkswagen vehicles could not be treated
as an insight into value.
were three further problems with the Discrete Choice Experiments.
Only measured willingness to pay
first is that, as Professor Baddeley accepted, the Discrete Choice Experiments
were not directed to ascertaining the market value
of the vehicles in question.
Rather they were directed to ascertaining a purchaser’s willingness to pay
for the vehicle; or
the “value to the consumer” of the vehicle.
Thus, the Discrete Choice Experiments were directed only to the demand side
transaction that, in the real world, would have a supply side as well.
is no doubt true that in the real world there would not be a market for vehicles
known to have a defective airbag, not least because
no rational and responsible
vehicle manufacturer would offer such vehicles for sale.
it does not follow that, assuming it can be ascertained, a purchaser’s
willingness to pay for a vehicle can be a proxy for
the vehicle’s market
test posited by s 272 of the ACL is expressed in terms of “price
payable” or “average retail price” and
thus in terms of value
in a market of buyers and sellers.
Discrete Choice Experiments were not directed towards this question and say
nothing about market value.
False factual premise
second difficulty with the Discrete Choice Experiments is that they contained an
Opening Statement which asked participants to assume
a false level of risk.
Opening Statement clearly conveyed that the risk of airbag malfunction existed
from the date of manufacture. It is common ground
that such risk as existed
concerning PSAN degradation did not arise at the date of manufacture, but only
after many years and exposure
to temperature fluctuations and moisture.
Discrete Choice Experiment also posed as one of the three “recall
scenarios”, the replacement of existing airbags
with another airbag which
might also be unsafe. There is no suggestion that VW did this.
Methodological problems
the surveys were confusing.
“Opening Statement” was dense. Professor Baddeley agreed that she
was “concerned that it might be confusing”.
DCE-1 did not include quantifiable information about the probability that the
airbag’s safety risk might eventuate.
a real question arose as to what level of consideration participants gave to the
survey. Participants had an incentive, through
a points or rewards system, to
complete the survey as quickly as possible. Metadata from the survey showed that
five out of six participants
read the complex Opening Statement at a rate that
exceeded that average adult reading speed. The metadata also showed that half
respondents to DCE-1 answered the questions at a median speed of 10 seconds
or less and that a high proportion of respondents gave
inconsistent answers.
Discrete Choice Experiments were deeply flawed. In my opinion, they were of no
value to the task at hand. They cast no light
on what the “true
value” was for the plaintiff’s vehicle at the time he purchased it,
assuming that to be a relevant
A “no transaction
closing submissions, the plaintiff characterised his case as a “no
transaction case” and submitted that relief should
be granted on the basis
of “being restored to the position that would have existed if there had
not been any
transaction”.
the plaintiff’s damages must be assessed in accordance with s 272 of the
ACL which provides for recovery of damages “for...any
reduction in value
of the goods, resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee” in,
relevantly,
question posited by s 272 assumes goods have been acquired and then seeks to ask
what damage has been suffered by reason of any
difference between the price paid
and the value of the goods. The section is not directed to what might have
happened had the goods
not be acquired.
any event, the plaintiff’s evidence does not establish a “no
transaction case”. His case is that if he had not
purchased the Volkswagen
Passat, he would have chosen to purchase another vehicle.
“left in hand” approach
to the plaintiff’s “no transaction case” submission was the
proposition that appropriate compensation in
a “no transaction case”
might be to award a sum that:
“...together with the value of what the innocent party still holds (or is
‘left in hand’), will ‘do what
is practically just between the
parties’ so as to, in effect, restore him, her or it to the position that
he, she or it would
now obtain had the transaction not
plaintiff contended that what he had “left in the hand” was a second
hand Volkswagen Passat worth between $12,200
the plaintiff submitted the he should be awarded the difference between what he
paid for the car (some $40,000) and the value
of what he has “left in
hand”, namely a vehicle worth
= $15,000. To state the
argument is to reveal why it cannot be accepted. It would involve the plaintiff
being placed in a position
where he had an eight year old car with over 60,000
kms on the odometer, that had been driven without incident throughout that
and had recently had its airbags replaced at no charge, and yet receive
compensation that would put him in the same financial position
as he was when
his vehicle was a brand new car.
are further difficulties with this argument. It was first raised in closing
submissions, was not pleaded, was not opened on
and was not the subject of any
submitted that had the matter been raised timeously, it would have been the
subject of evidence in the proceedings.
any event, for the same reasons as I have mentioned when referring to the
plaintiff’s “no transaction case”,
the framework of s 272 of
the ACL is not apt to accommodate damages calculated this way.
“Do my best”
a fallback position, it was submitted for the plaintiff that, in effect, I
should “do my best” to arrive at a figure
which would provide
adequate compensation to the plaintiff.
it was put on behalf of the plaintiff:
“The task for the Court is to determine an appropriate measure which
compensates the plaintiff for his loss. That is a difficult
task, and any single
approach will necessarily have its problems. However, the Court cannot let that
inherent difficulty stand in
the way of assessing an appropriate
in the “potential approaches” to such a task, the plaintiff
submitted that I could:
(a) award a proportion of the difference
between the price paid by the plaintiff for his vehicle and its “true
with the proportion being equal to the number of years that the
vehicle as “defective” over the total number of years
from purchase
to judgment; or
(b) award the plaintiff interest at an appropriate rate on the difference
between the price paid and the “true value”
over the period during
which the vehicle was “defective”.
difficulty with each of these approaches is that they do not take account of the
fact that such “defect” as may have
been in the plaintiff’s
vehicle has been remedied.
the approaches assume that, somehow, the plaintiff is now in a position where in
the events that have happened, he has suffered
some financial loss. For the
reasons I have explained, in my opinion, he has not.
Loss of use
– out of pocket expenses
is common ground that the plaintiff has suffered no relevant out of pocket
airbag in his vehicle was replaced during the vehicle’
,000 km service.
The plaintiff’s wife drove the plaintiff to and from the relevant service
Distress – disappointment and anxiety
has been held that, in cases alleging misleading or deceptive conduct, damages
may be awarded for distress, disappointment, inconvenience,
vexation or
attention was not brought to any authority in which damages for such matters has
been awarded under section 272 of the ACL.
s 272(1)(b) makes provision for damages for loss or damage suffered by an
affected person because of “the failure to
comply with [relevantly, a
guarantee]...if it was reasonably foreseeable”.
in final written submissions, VW put that matters such as distress and
disappointment would be too remote from a breach of
guarantee to be
recoverable, in closing oral submissions, its senior counsel accepted that such
damages might be recoverable, if
reasonably foreseeable.
behalf of the plaintiff, it was accepted in final submissions that any damages
awarded to him under this head would be “undoubtedly
towards the lower end
of the spectrum”.
May 2018, the plaintiff became aware, because of reports in the media, that his
vehicle might be affected by the Recall Notice.
The airbag in the
plaintiff’s vehicle was replaced a year later, in May 2019.
plaintiff described his reaction to knowing that his vehicle was the subject of
the Recall Notice in three affidavits, in which
an evolving picture emerged.
his first affidavit made on 26 July 2019, the plaintiff did not depose to any
anxiety or distress of the kind that he now alleges.
that affidavit he said that:
(a) since the recall of his vehicle he
holds little weight on his previously resolute trust in the Volkswagen brand;
(b) he was “frustrated” by VW’s handling of the recall,
particularly in respect of the lack of information regarding
the recall process;
(c) “[I]t is my personal belief that [his vehicle’s] potential
resale value, as well as its potential trade-in value,
has been tarnished by the
safety recall”.
an affidavit served on 18 December 2020, the plaintiff said, for the first time,
that he was “angry” when he heard
of the Recall Notice. He said:
“This was not the first recall my VW had been subject to by the defendant,
Volkswagen. My car was also recalled as part of
the diesel emissions
this affidavit the plaintiff expressed frustration that “no-one from
Volkswagen has bothered to contact me specifically about
the recall” and
that “[a]t no time did Volkswagen take any proactive steps to engage with
me about the recall”.
plaintiff said he found “Volkswagen’s conduct and attitude towards
the recall to be incredibly concerning”.
“To me, the point of a car is to get you from point A to point B, as
safely as possible. Volkswagen denied this to me and my
wife. Every time either
of us drove the car after the recall, I was apprehensive and had the airbag
fault in the back of my mind.
Volkswagen has now replaced the airbag in my VW. According to them it is
‘safe’ to drive, but I don’t have any
confidence in what VW
say, because they are a company that has, in my view,
artfully deceived its
customers for a long period of time both in relation to the diesel emissions and
in relation to the airbags
”. (Emphasis added.)
cross-examination, the plaintiff was asked why he believed VW had
“artfully deceived its customers”. The plaintiff
“My understanding was that they knew, in advance, that the airbags were
faulty and yet continued to install them in their cars”.
the plaintiff professing this belief, it forms no part of the case put on his
behalf in these proceedings. There is no suggestion
in this case that VW AG
installed airbags in Volkswagen vehicles that they knew to be unsafe. No such
suggestion was made in submissions
to me on the plaintiff’s behalf. The
whole point of the Empirical Analysis Program was to ascertain if there was any
risk involved. For the reasons I have set out, I am satisfied that based
on the results of the Empirical Analysis Program, VW AG
was entitled to conclude
that there was no safety risk involved.
plaintiff continued:
“I will certainly not be buying a VW again. The time and energy I have
wasted dealing with Volkswagen’s mistakes and
the stress it has put on me
and my wife, well it’s not something I would subject myself to
cross-examination, the plaintiff agreed that the “time and energy”
that he had “wasted” was because of
his involvement in these
proceedings.
plaintiff made a third affidavit on 14 May 2021, a short time before the trial.
this affidavit, the plaintiff said that having read the Recall Notice and looked
at VW’s website he understood from these
sources that “if the faulty
Takata airbag in my VW deployed in an accident, shards of metal could shoot out
of the airbag and
kill me or other passengers in the car”.
cross-examination, the plaintiff accepted that neither Volkswagen’s
website nor the Recall Notice suggested that there was
any immediate danger with
the plaintiff’s vehicle as it was less than six years old. The plaintiff
went on to say that although
he was “apprehensive and had the airbag fault
in the back of my mind”, each time he drove his car:
“The VW was my only means of transport. So to some extent, I often had to
push my concerns about it to the back of my mind.
As such, this may not have
necessarily played on my mind every time I drove the car, but I often felt
apprehensive and I was always
worried when my wife was driving the car without
plaintiff again expressed “upset” by the lack of communication from
VW and said:
“I felt that Volkswagen had not been honest with me and probably other
customers about the danger of the airbags in some vehicles,
and only took steps
when compelled to by law. As I have stated above, VW never contacted me at all
it from the media and then my own research to
see if my car was impacted”.
plaintiff also stated that:
“I also used the VW for domestic travel. For example, my wife and I
particularly enjoy trips to Scotts Head, which is about
four hours by car from
Newcastle”.
cross-examination, the plaintiff accepted that he had continued to drive his
vehicle in the normal way from the time he learnt
of the Recall Notice to the
time the airbag in the car was replaced. He said that he did not feel the need
to adjust his driving
habits at all and continued to drive with his wife on
multiple trips to Scotts Head, and that his wife also drove the vehicle during
this period even though she had a car of her own she could have used.
the plaintiff stated that he preferred using the vehicle as compared to his
wife’s car, describing her car as “somewhat
older and less
comfortable and possibly
than the Passat”.
is thus clear that the plaintiff’s alleged frustrations were not merely
because of some apprehension about the safety of
his vehicle, but also because
of his vehicle’s earlier recall in relation to the diesel emissions issue,
which has no relationship
to this case, and because of his frustrations as to
what he saw as lack of communication from VW.
I did not find the plaintiff to be a reliable informant.
was due to the evolving nature of his descriptions of his reaction to the state
of his vehicle.
also found particularly concerning the different accounts the plaintiff gave of
what he was told by VW when the airbag in his vehicle
was replaced in May 2019.
his first affidavit, the plaintiff said:
“When I collected my vehicle, I asked the Dealership about what brand of
airbag had been used to replace the defective airbag.
I was told by a member of
the Dealership’s customer service team that a non-Takata brand of airbag
had been used, however I
did not receive a separate service invoice for the
replacement”.
his third affidavit, served just before the hearing commenced, he added:
“Given the lack of transparency by Volkswagen about the recall and the
replacement, my recollection is that I still left the
Dealership believing there
was a real possibility that another Takata airbag had been used in my VW. I was
left in the dark about
in cross-examination, the plaintiff gave this evidence:
“Q. you say in your first affidavit that you asked at the dealership about
whether - and I take it this was at the end of the
day - whether the replacement
airbag was a Takata airbag or a non-Takata airbag. Is that right?
A. That’s my - that’s my - my recollection was, I asked what the -
what kind of airbag had been used as the replacement.
Q. And is the reason you asked that because you knew from reading about the
issue that some manufacturers were, in fact, using Takata
airbags as replacement
A. That’s right.
Q. But you were told by the staff at the dealership that that wasn’t the
case with your car, that the airbag which had been
put in was a non-Takata
A. It’s not my recollection. I believe that the person I was talking to
didn’t really know what kind of airbag
had been used to replace
, and I - my impression was that it was a Takata airbag, because I believe
my response was, “What good is that? I’ll only
have to come back in
18 months’ time.”
Q. Can I ask you to look at your first affidavit, please, Mr Dwyer.
Q. If you could turn, please, to paragraph 25 of your first affidavit.
Q. Do you see there that you've said: "I asked the dealership about what brand
of airbag had been used to replace the defective airbag.
I was told by a member
of the dealership's customer service team that a non-Takata brand of airbag had
been used"?
A. That's right.
Q. That's the true position, isn't it?
A. I - I think I've modified that statement in a - in the - in the subsequent
Q. What's the true position, Professor Dwyer, about what conversation occurred
on the day in May 2019 when you had the car serviced?
A. My recollection is that the person I was talking to
didn't really know
what kind of airbag had been used to replace the Takata airbag
vaguely recall then commenting, "what was the point of that? It'll only have to
be replaced again in 18 months' time."
Q. Professor, can you look at your third affidavit, please?
Q. Turn to the end, to the last paragraph, paragraph 20?
Q. Have you got paragraph 20, where you refer back to what you said in paragraph
25 of your first affidavit?
Q. You say: "where I refer to being told that a non-Takata brand of airbag had
been used in my VW, but I was provided with no" -
I assume that should be "not"
- "I was not provided with any other information and or documentation saying as
much, except for a
sticker being placed in my VW." So it remains the case,
doesn't it, Professor, that you do remember being told by the staff at the
dealership that, when you asked that question, they said a non-Takata brand of
airbag had been used?
A. My - my recollection is somewhat different, and that's all I can say at this
Q. You accept that you wrote--
A. I - I accept that I've written that in the affidavit, yes.
Q. So you accept that the most likely position is you were, in fact, told
A. It's quite possible.
Q. So you didn't have cause to say to anyone, "what's the point of that? I'm
just going to have to come and get it replaced again"?
A. I remember it somewhat differently.
Q. Professor, the true position is, you asked the question because of the
information you knew about what some manufacturers were
doing, and you were
given a satisfactory answer that the type of airbag that had been installed
wasn't a Takata one?
A. I'm not quite sure how I'm supposed to answer that question. I - I just have
a slightly different recollection of the short conversation
transpired.” (Emphasis added.)
found this evidence to be highly unsatisfactory. Having first deposed that VW
told him that the airbag in his vehicle had been replaced
with a non-Takata
airbag, the plaintiff in his third affidavit then expressed an apprehension
that, despite being told that a non-Takata
airbag had been used, there was a
“real possibility” that this was false and that “another
Takata airbag had been
used”. In cross-examination the plaintiff then
resorted to saying that “the person I was talking to didn’t really
know what kind of airbag had been used to replace” the Takata airbag.
impression I gained was that, here, the plaintiff was saying whatever he thought
would assist his case.
Courtney v Medtel Pty
Sackville J
In my view, not every consumer who has experienced anxiety or worry as a
consequence of acquiring goods that are not fit for their
purpose or not of
merchantable quality should receive compensation on that account. In the absence
of special or unusual circumstances,
I think something more substantial than the
worry and anxiety experienced by the applicant in the present case is required
compensation should be awarded under this head. Some restraint is
appropriate in cases where compensation is sought for worry and
anxiety as such
to avoid “the creation of a society bend on litigation”:
[2001] UKHL 49
[2002] 2 AC 732
, at 751, per Lord Steyn. Accordingly, no
compensation should be awarded to the applicant in respect of anxiety, worry and
my opinion, this is a case where “restraint is appropriate”. I am
not satisfied that the account the plaintiff gave
in his affidavits truly
represents any apprehension that he experienced by reason of the alleged defect
in his vehicle.
the extent that the plaintiff had been “angry” or
“frustrated” by the events following the Recall Notice,
this appears
to be by reason of his belief that VW has behaved dishonourably, his frustration
as what he sees as being poor communication
or service from VW and his
involvement in these proceedings.
these circumstances, and had I otherwise been satisfied that the
plaintiff’s case was made out, I would not have awarded
the plaintiff any
damages under this head.
is common ground that no limitation issue arises in relation to the
plaintiff’s claim.
issues may arise in relation to claims of other Group Members as the time for
commencing action for lack of merchantable
or acceptable quality is three years
from the day when the plaintiff became or ought reasonably to have become aware
plaintiff’s claim fails.
will hear submissions as to costs and as to the future conduct of the
proceedings.
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth), Sch 2 – Australian Consumer
Group Members who
purchased their vehicles prior to 1 January 2011 were instead entitled to the
warranty under s 74D of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cwth): see [20]
Section 54(2)(c)
See Gill v Ethicon Sarl
[2019] FCA 1905
at [3529] in which Katzmann J opined that the words were
“not materially
different”.
Prestige Auto
Traders Australia Pty Ltd v Bonnefin
[2017] NSWSC 149
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Jayco Corp Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty
Ltd v Ryan (2000) 102 FCR 307;
[2000] FCA 1099
(Lindgren J, Lee J
agreeing; Kiefel J at [611]); Courtney v Medtel Pty Ltd
(2003) 126 FCR 219
[2003] FCA 36
Medtel Pty Ltd v
(2003) 130 FCR 182
[2003] FCAFC 151
(Branson J, Jacobson J
Where the airbags
installed in Volkswagens were
manufactured.
A chemist with
Mechanical Engineering Technology expertise and many years’ experience
working on automatic airbag ignitors,
inflators and micro gas
generators.
liability expert, a Professor of Chemistry at Ludwig Maximilian University in
The transcript
records Mr Renz referring to “Takata’s conclusions” but this
was clearly an accidental
See [79] to [83]
See [97] to [101]
See the passage I
have emphasised at [155e].
Concise Oxford English Dictionary, online ed, accessed 15 June 2021; and
accepting the well-known caveats about using dictionary
definitions to construe
statutes and contracts: P Herzfeld and T Prince, Interpretation, (2nd ed, 2020,
Thomson Reuters) at [20.40].
For example, see Kizbeau Pty Ltd v WG & B Pty Ltd
[1995] HCA 4
(1995) 184 CLR 281
[1995] HCA 4
(Brennan, Deane, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh
HTW Valuers (Central
Qld) Pty Ltd v Astonland Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 54
(2004) 217 CLR 640
[2004] HCA 54
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Heydon
[1940] HCA 43
(1940) 64 CLR
Toyota, Honda, Nissan,
BMW, Mazda and Subaru, in addition to
An issue, unrelated to
that in this case, that arose in relation to diesel
VW referred to
numerous examples in fn 157 of its closing
submissions.
For example,
Wyzenbeek v Australasian Marine Imports Pty Ltd (In Liq)
(2019) 272 FCR 373
[2019] FCAFC 167
, [107] (Rares, Burley and Anastassiou
Wyzenbeek v
Australasian Marine Imports at
Being sale prices for
Volkswagen Passats with the same build date as the plaintiff’s vehicle
between 2015 and 2018.
Adopting, as a “conservative course”, the highest of those
For example, Steiner
v Magic Carpet Tours Pty Ltd
(1984) ASC 55-366
(1984) ATPR 40-490
(Wilcox J); Zoneff v Elcom Credit Union Ltd
(1990) 94 ALR 445 (Hill
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Top Snack Foods Pty Ltd
(Tamberlin J); and New South Wales Lotteries Corporation
Pty Ltd v Kuzmanovski
(2011) 195 FCR 234
[2011] FCAFC 106
A matter which,
as I have said, is not the subject of these
proceedings.
(2003) 126 FCR
[2013] FCA 36.
Section 74J of the
Trade Practices Act
and s 273 of the ACL.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (538 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter