URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2017/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jones [2017] NSWMHRT 8; (4 October 2017)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO JONES AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
19 JANUARY 2017
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2017] NSWMHRT 8
s 58(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Ms Anina Johnson
Deputy President
Mr Todd Davis
Mental Health Advocacy Service
Mr Michael Sterry
Forensic Legal Advisor, JHFMHN
DATE OF HEARING:
29 September 2017
MH Inquiries Room 1
APPLICATION:
Pursuant to
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
, Ms Jones is to be transferred to Mental Health Facility B on or before
30 October 2017
1. Ms Jones is a woman who has been remanded in custody since March 2016. She
is facing serious criminal charges of importing a commercial
quantity of
cocaine. Ms Jones’ next court appearance will consider her fitness to
stand trial.
2. Concerns have been raised about Ms Jones’ mental state and its
impact on her fitness for trial. The appropriate paperwork
had been completed
which allowed for Ms Jones to be transferred to a mental health facility under
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(MHFPA). The
Psychiatrist and The Psychiatry Registrar consider that the best available
mental health care for Ms Jones in the circumstances,
would be at Mental Health
Facility B.
3. The question at this review was whether the Tribunal had the power to
order Ms Jones’ transfer to Mental Health Facility
the MHFPA. With the help of submissions from Ms Jones’ lawyer, and the
lawyer for Justice Health and the Forensic Mental
Health Network (JHFMHN), I
concluded that the Tribunal does have the power to make that order.
4. There are some practical issues to be finalized before Ms Jones moves to
Mental Health Facility B. Therefore, I ordered that Ms
Jones is to be
transferred to Mental Health Facility B on or before a specified
PRELIMINARY COMMENTS
5. At the Tribunal review the Tribunal was satisfied that Ms Jones was a
mentally ill person and that transfer to Mental Health Facility
B was clinically
appropriate. However, the question of whether the Tribunal had the power to
order her transfer under
was not determined. Before commencing
this review, I read the material that was before the Tribunal on the last
occasion and listened
to the recording of that hearing.
6. Ms Jones did not attend this review. She was brought to the video link
room at the Correctional Centre but would not enter. She
then held tight to a
bookcase and refused to go any further. The Psychiatry Registrar said that she
could not be brought to attend
without significant use of force. He decided that
was not appropriate and she returned to her cell. With Mr Davis’ consent,
I decided that the Tribunal could continue the
hearing in her
CLINICAL EVIDENCE
7. The Psychiatry Registrar told the Tribunal that there had been no change
in Ms Jones’ mental state since the last review.
She refuses to speak to
any mental health staff. She interacts with officers and other inmates in only a
limited way. She will usually
ask to return to her cell after about an hour in
the common area. However, she has been seen to laugh and talk to herself, in
that are difficult to explain.
8. There is no collateral information available from the [country]. However,
she has told another [language] speaking inmate that
she believes her food is
poisoned, although her weight seems to be at an acceptable level.
9. In other custodial settings, Ms Jones has continued to press for pregnancy
tests despite regular negative results, feigned a seizure,
refused to walk and
required a wheelchair and attempted to assault nursing staff.
10. Two independent psychiatrists (Psychiatrist B and Psychiatrist C) have
prepared court reports in which they conclude that Ms Jones
is psychotic.
Several psychiatrists from JHFMHN have reached the same view.
11. Because of the difficulty in engaging with Ms Jones (exacerbated by
language barriers) the Psychiatry Registrar said that she
needs close
observation, which is not available in the correctional centre. This is
available in Mental Health Facility B. It would
also be best if an interpreter
were able to regularly and easily visit. That is also not possible in a
correctional centre, which
generally relies on telephone interpreters.
12. The Tribunal was told that the current Mental Health Facility is a very
restrictive environment for female inmates, because of
the need for gender
segregation. In addition, the Psychiatry Registrar said that while Ms Jones
appears to be mentally very unwell,
she is not causing a behavioural
disturbance. Therefore, she will be a lower priority for admission to Mental
Health Facility B.
LEGAL ISSUES
13. The Tribunal was asked by Mr Davis to consider making an order for Ms
Jones to be transferred to Mental Health Facility B within
two weeks of the
Tribunal hearing.
14. The clinical evidence outlined above supported the making of a transfer
order. The only issue was whether it had the power to
make such an order, and if
a time limit could be imposed.
15. In considering this issues, I had the benefit of very helpful submissions
from Mr Davis and Mr Sterry.
TRANSFER OF INMATES TO A MENTAL
HEALTH FACILITY
16. The transfer of a person detained in custody for the purpose of mental
health treatment is dealt with under Div.3 of
of the MHFPA.
17. The process of transfer begins when two certificates are written under
of the MFHPA. The certificates require two medical practitioners to
certify that a person is:
a mentally ill person or suffering from a mental condition for
which treatment is available in a mental health facility
One of the medical practitioners must be a psychiatrist. This process is an
approximation of the certification process that occurs
Mental Health Act 2007
18. The phrase “
mentally ill person
” has the same meaning
as it has in the MHA.
19. For the purposes of this review, it was said that Ms Jones was a mentally
ill person. There is therefore no need to consider the
legislative scheme for
those who are said to have a mental condition.
20. If the Secretary of the Ministry of Health (or delegate) considers that a
person is a mentally ill person on the basis of the
information in the
certificates, the Secretary can order that the person be transferred to a mental
health facility:
section 55(3).
places an obligation on the Secretary’s delegate to
promptly review a person who has been transferred and to continue to review
person, to see if they continue to require treatment in a mental health
facility. That section provides that a person who is
transferred to a mental
health facility from a correctional centre must be transferred back within seven
days, unless the Secretary
remains of the opinion that the person is a mentally
ill person and that an appropriate kind of care would not be available in a
correctional centre:
section 56(2).
A person who has been transferred to a
mental health facility may also be transferred back to a correctional centre at
any time if
the person stops being a mentally ill person, or if there is other
appropriate kind of care in a correctional centre:
section 56(3).
22. If the person who has been transferred disagrees with the decision to
transfer them to a mental health facility or to continue
to detain them in a
mental health facility, the person has the right to seek a review by the
MHFPA. At a review under
, the Tribunal may order
that the person is transferred back to a correctional centre. The Tribunal may
also refuse to order the transfer
have the effect of maintaining the person’s detention in a mental health
23. When exercising the powers under
, the Tribunal must be
constituted by three members as required by
LIMITED REVIEW UNDER
provides for a “limited review” if a person has
not been transferred within 14 days of the Secretary’s decision
transfer. That section says in full:
58 - Review by Tribunal of persons awaiting transfer to mental health
(a) The Tribunal must conduct a limited review of the case of a person who
is subject to an order for transfer to a mental health
facility under this
Division but who is not transferred within the period prescribed by the
regulations
(b) The Tribunal must carry out such a review each month until the person
is transferred to a mental health facility or the Tribunal
or the Secretary
revokes the order.
(c) On a limited review, the Tribunal may make an order as to the
person’s detention, care or treatment in a mental health facility
(d) For the purposes of a limited review, a report as to the
person’s condition and the reason for the delay in transfer is
provided to the Tribunal by the Secretary and the Commissioner of Corrective
25. Clause 4 of the
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Regulation
sets a 14 day time limit for the first review under section 58. Clause
4 also provides that a limited review under section 58 may
be conducted by a
Presidential member of the Tribunal sitting alone.
SCOPE OF THE POWER
TO ORDER DETENTION IN A MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY UNDER SECTION 58(3)
26. As Mr Sterry submitted, the primary purpose of a review under section 58
appears to be to ascertain the reason for the delay in
transferring a person to
a mental health facility, when the Secretary has made an order for transfer.
Subsections 58(1), (2) and
(4) are all directed towards ascertaining the reasons
why a person has not been transferred and to maintain a regular review of that
27. Subsection 58(3) says that in conducting a review under section 58, the
Tribunal “may” make an order as to a person’s
care, detention
and treatment. In section 58(1) and (2) the word “must” is used.
28. There are other instances where the use of the word “may” in
the MFHPA has been said to mean “must”:
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Khoury
[2014] NSWCA 15.
However, when a similarly worded
provision (section 47) was considered by Lindsay J in of
A (by his tutor
Brett Collins) v Mental Health Review Tribunal (No 4)
[2014] NSWSC 31
his Honour found that in those circumstances “may” did not mean
“must”: at [109]. There, Lindsay J held
that there may be reviews
were the evidence compels a particular outcome. However, subject to that
possibility the Tribunal has the
discretion whether or not to exercise the
decision making power.
29. Similarly, I do not think that section 58(3) requires the Tribunal to
make an order at a section 58 review. A person who is being
reviewed under
section 58 is already subject to a direction to be transferred to a mental
health facility. The review is only being
conducted because the transfer has not
yet taken place. If the Tribunal forms the view that a transfer to a mental
health facility
is appropriate, there is no benefit served by making another
30. What then is the purpose of section 58(3)? It must be to do something
more (or something different) to what has already been ordered
by the Secretary.
In a practical sense, this opens up the possibility of the Tribunal having the
power to order a transfer to a specified
mental health facility, to a specified
other place and perhaps within a specified time frame.
31. Similarly worded provisions in the MHFPA have been broadly interpreted.
Section 47(1)(a) of the MHFPA provides that:
the Tribunal may make an order as to:
(a) the patient’s continued detention, care or treatment in a mental
health facility, correctional centre or other place ...
Lindsay J considered the expression
“continued detention, care or treatment” together with the use of
the word “may”
in section 47. His Honour held that the
Tribunal’s discretion was not unfettered but to be guided by the statement
in section 40 and the statement of principles in section 68 of the
MHA: [102] to [111]. Both those provisions are equally applicable
to section 58
review section In the exercise of this broad power, Lindsay J said that the
nature of the Tribunal’s decision
may take colour from the subject matter
of a particular decision: at [115].
33. The Tribunal has previously determined that sections 46 and 47 MHFPA,
when read together with section 68 of the MHA empower the
Tribunal to make an
order for transfer within a specified time frame:
34. The Tribunal’s power in relation to forensic patients is far
broader than for correctional patients. However, the approach
to the breadth of
the power conferred by the use of similar phrases in section 58(3) and section
47(1)(a) is persuasive.
35. Mr Davis relied on the decision in
support of the view that the Tribunal’s power under section 58(3) MHFPA is
a broad one. Both Mr Davis and Mr Sterry agreed
that the Tribunal had the power
under section 58(3) of the MHFPA to transfer a person imprisoned in a
correctional centre to a named
mental health facility, within a specified time
36. I agree. I consider the purpose of section 58 is to review the reasons
why a particular person has not been transferred in accordance
Secretary’s order. Section 58(3) is broadly expressed. The ordinary
meaning of the words allow the Tribunal a discretion
whether or not to make an
order for a person to be transferred to a mental health facility or other place.
If the Tribunal considers
that some alternative order is needed (either as to
place of detention or as to time frame for detention) then section 58(3)
the Tribunal that discretion.
37. In deciding whether to make an order, the circumstances under
consideration colour the Tribunal’s discretion. In this case,
is relevant to compare the mental health facility to which the person will be
transferred under the Secretary’s
order (the Mental Health Facility) with
the nature of the mental health care and restrictions available at alternative
( Mental Health Facility B). The Tribunal can also consider any
likely delays in admission to the different mental health facilities
legitimately available. The Tribunal should have regard to the fact that the
person has been remanded in custody, and consider the
nature of the security
available at the various mental health facilities that are under
consideration.
LOGISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
38. The Tribunal was told that if transferred, Ms Jones would be the first
adult correctional patient to be transferred to Mental
Health Facility B.
39. The Governor from Corrective Services NSW and the Manager of Security
from JHFMHN both told the Tribunal that they had met on
the day prior to the
Tribunal hearing. There is broad agreement about how the security arrangements
will work for inmates who are
transferred to Mental Health Facility B as
correctional patients. However, the details of those arrangements needs to be
and then approved by the Commissioner of Corrective Services and the
Chief Executive of JHFMHN.
40. As an example, the Governor said that if Ms Jones were to need urgent
medical treatment at the Prince of Wales Hospital, it has
been agreed that
Corrective Services would provide the security during any hospital stay.
However, they still need to decide the
details of exactly how to ensure that the
right number of Corrective Services officers will attend Mental Health Facility
B and transport
Ms Jones (with or without an ambulance) if the need should
41. The Tribunal accepted that these details are an important part of
ensuring that the security for Ms Jones is maintained. They
should be in place
before the transfer takes place.
42. The Manager of Security and the Governor both said that this would take
four weeks. I accepted that this was a realistic time
frame for documenting
these arrangements, circulating them for comment, including changes and
submitting them for approval to the
Commissioner and Chief Executive.
43. Mr Sterry suggested that it would be better if a novel transfer of this
kind took place on a Monday, rather than a Friday. In
that way clinical and
administrative staff will be available to resolve any difficulties that might
arise unexpectedly. I agreed
and accepted Mr Sterry’s submission that the
transfer should therefore take place on or before Monday 30 October 2017.
44. For these reasons, I am satisfied that in a review under section 58(3),
the Tribunal is empowered to transfer a person detained
in a correctional centre
to a specified mental health facility, within a particular time frame.
45. Before making that order, the Tribunal must be satisfied that the person
is a mentally ill person. The evidence here is that Ms
Jones is showing
sustained irrational behaviour suggesting that she is experiencing delusional
beliefs, hallucinations and potentially
disordered thought form. These
experiences jeopardise her fitness to stand trial as well as appearing to be
very distressing to her.
There are times when she has also jeopardized the
safety of others when appearing to act on these beliefs. Taken together, I am
that Ms Jones is a mentally ill person.
46. The Secretary’s order is that she be transferred to the Mental
Health Facility. I consider that her circumstances justify
an order under
section 58(3) for a transfer to the Mental Health Facility B. She needs the
level of holistic care, treatment and
observation that is available there, as
well as ready access to an in-person interpreter. Her needs would not be well
met at either
the Correctional Centre nor as a correctional patient at the
Mental Health Facility.
47. I am satisfied that certain practical arrangements need to be made before
the transfer takes place, and for this reason will make
an order that the
transfer should take place by 30 October 2017.
Anina Johnson
Deputy President
Dated this day 4 October 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (338 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter