URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPYT/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v DUONG [2010] NSWPYT 2 (22 October 2010)
PHYSIOTHERAPISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH
MATTER NUMBER: 03/2009
PY: 0108510
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 102
Physiotherapists Act
IN THE MATTER OF
JONATHAN VUONG DUONG
(AKA: Jonathan Vuong
Quang Duong)
(AKA: Jonathan Duong)
REASONS FOR
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
____________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Duong
[2010] NSWPYT
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms P McDonald of Counsel instructed by Ms F Westwood.
Jonathan Duong
(Respondent)
in person with respect to
Complaints One and Two and
represented by Mr L Livingston of Counsel,
instructed by Ms S Leibowitz, Solicitor, Kennedys (Mr L Livingston appearing)
for Complaints
Three and Four.
REGISTRATION
NUMBERS: PY 0108510 (NSW) PHY 0001268177 (AUSTRALIA)
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Elizabeth Ellis
(Physiotherapist Member)
Ms Ruth Perrott (Physiotherapist
Dr Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING: 6, 7, 9, 13 and 14 September 2010
DATE OF DECISION: 22 October 2010
ORDERS(summary): The Respondent is reprimanded, his name is cancelled from
the Register, is not entitled to reapply for registration
for a period of two
years. Respondent to pay costs of HCCC.
CATCHWORDS: physiotherapy - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – extraordinary number of claims
made through
HICAPS on private health insurers for services provided on particular days
– failure to take adequate history
or make appropriate initial assessment
and examination – role of unqualified assistant – inadequate record
LEGISLATION CITED:
Physiotherapists Act 2001
, Schedule 5 – Clause 6;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Public Health Act 1991
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw (1938)
[1938] HCA 34
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
v New South Wales Bar Association (1992)
176 CLR 239
Wilks v The Medical Board of South Australia
NSW Bar Association v Evatt (1968)
[1968] HCA 20
117 CLR 177
Richter v Walton
Craig v Medical Board of South
Australia (2001)
[2001] SASC 169
79 SASR 545
Health Care Complaint
Commission v
Litchfield (1997)
41 NSWLR 630;
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
New South Wales
Crime Commission v Vuletic and ors
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
Goodrich Aerospace Pty Limited v Arsic
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Physiotherapists Tribunal (the Tribunal), convened at the Tribunal Hearing Room
in the office of the Health Professional Councils
Authority in accordance with
the Physiotherapists Act 2001 (the Act) held an Inquiry into a Complaint made by
Ms Karen Mobbs, Director
of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission
(HCCC) dated 23 December 2009.
Complaints relate to claims made by the Respondent on various private health
insurers on 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004 and
the treatment of one patient
on 21 December 2007. Submissions were made by the parties with respect to the
Respondent’s application
to have Complaints One and Two heard separately
from Complaints Three and Four. The Tribunal did not allow the matters to be
and the Complaint before the Tribunal was in the same terms as the
Complaint referred by the Director Of Proceedings (with the correction
typographical errors)
3. The Respondent being a physiotherapist registered under the Act
COMPLAINT ONE
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of section 26 of the Act
in that he:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed or care exercised by the physiotherapist
in the practice of
physiotherapy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of physiotherapy
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
(i) The physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at 3D Physiotherapy,
First Floor Suites 1&2 69 John Street Cabramatta;
(ii) The practice was generally open seven days a week and during the hours
of 9am to 6pm;
(iii) On 9 November 2003 the physiotherapist was responsible for the
treatment of 71 patients. Details of the number of patients treated
November 2003 is set out in the Table in Schedule A to this complaint;
(iv) On 5 December 2004 the physiotherapist was responsible for the treatment
of 118 patients. Details of the number of patients treated
on 5 December 2004 is
set out in the Table in Schedule B to this complaint;
(v) On 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004 the physiotherapist failed to
provide appropriate treatment to the patients in that:
(a) a large
percentage of the treatments involved only non manual treatment such as the
application of hot packs and interferential
machine to the patient;
physiotherapist did not allocate sufficient time for the adequate treatment of
his patients;
(vi) The physiotherapist failed to keep adequate records of treatment of his
patients on 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004 in that
to record adequate current history notes of the patients;
to record adequate past history notes of patients;
to record relevant information for determining treatment such as occupation,
social history or hobbies of the patient;
to record adequate notations on the Body chart;
to record adequately the treatment plan for patients; and
to record ongoing subjective or objective notes for return treatment of
COMPLAINT TWO
is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of sections 25 and
26 of the Act in that he:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed or care exercised by the physiotherapist
in the practice of
physiotherapy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of physiotherapy
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint
COMPLAINT THREE
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of section 26 of the Act
in that he:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed or care exercised by the physiotherapist
in the practice of
physiotherapy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of physiotherapy
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
(i) The physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at 3D Physiotherapy,
First Floor Suites 1&2 69 John Street Cabramatta;
(ii) On 21 December 2007 the physiotherapist provided treatment to a patient
presenting as “Emad Abdul-Kareem” ( Patient
A-K as referred to in
Schedule C);
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K demonstrated a
lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
and/or improper or
unethical conduct in the following respects:
physiotherapist did not undertake an adequate initial assessment of the patient
or take an adequate history from the patient;
physiotherapist failed to perform a structured examination of the patient and to
provide a provisional diagnosis of the patient;
physiotherapist did not operate the interferential machine when it was applied
to the patient but allowed an unqualified assistant
to operate the
interferential machine on the patient in the absence of the
physiotherapist;
physiotherapist failed to supervise adequately the unqualified assistant during
the treatment of the patient; and
physiotherapist failed to keep adequate records of his treatment of Patient A-K
on 21 December 2007 in that the physiotherapist:
not complete the body chart;
not record past history or previous treatment;
not record daily pattern;
not adequately complete the section headed Special Questions;
not record Warnings, contra-indications and consent relating to the patient;
not record any instructions given to the unqualified assistant.
COMPLAINT FOUR
is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of sections 25 and
26 of the Act in that he:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed or care exercised by the physiotherapist
in the practice of
physiotherapy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of physiotherapy
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
Complaint Three.
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes throughout the Inquiry.
Suppression Orders
Tribunal made an Order in accordance with Schedule 5 of Clause 6 of the Act that
the names of the patients treated by the Respondent
referred to in this matter
are not be published. A schedule containing the identities of the patients is
attached to this original
Reasons for Decision document (and marked with the
letter E) and the copies that are forwarded to the parties. The pseudonym used
by the private investigator referred to in Complaints Three and Four is
‘Emad Abdul-Kareem’. His real identity Is subject
to the Suppression
Order made herein and he will be referred to as Patient A-K. This schedule
should not be reproduced if copies
of this Reasons document are made for any
purpose other than to provide it to an appeals court, and it should be marked
accordingly
by the parties.
Respondent made an application for the names of the three physiotherapists said
to have assisted him in his practice from time
to time during busy periods to be
suppressed. The Tribunal’s power to make a suppression order is most
commonly used to protect
the identity of patients treated by the Respondent. It
would be extremely unusual for there to be a forensic purpose in publishing
identity of any patient. The Respondent sought to rely upon the evidence of the
three physiotherapists. They are (or at least
are represented to the Tribunal to
have been at the relevant time) registered health practitioners. It has often
been stated in decisions
in similar jurisdictions that Registration is a
privilege, not a right. Where a practitioner holds evidence relevant to
proceedings
before the Tribunal there is an obligation on the practitioner to
provide that evidence. The proceedings before the Tribunal are
to be held in
public, unless otherwise ordered at the discretion of the Tribunal. There is no
legitimate reason why the identities
of the three physiotherapists should be
suppressed. The Tribunal declines to exercise the discretion to suppress their
Kindness, Mr Lucas (Peer Reviewer), Patient A-K were required by the Respondent
for cross-examination. The Tribunal required Ms
Thuy Bridges for
cross-examination. The Respondent also gave evidence. Mr Frank Derrick was also
required for cross-examination;
however he had passed away in June 2006.
Documentation
HCCC tendered four folders of documents with respect to Complaints One and Two
that came into evidence as volume 1 - exhibits
1 – 4, volume 2 –
exhibits 5-8, volume 3 – exhibits 18.3(a) –(e), volume 4 –
exhibits 9.1 – 9.5.
Another folder of documents related to Complaints
Three and Four which became volume 5. The Respondent indicated he relied upon
of the documentation already filed by the HCCC in addition to a letter
dated 2 June 2010. The Respondent tendered one folder of documents
Complaints Three and Four. It consisted of a statutory declaration dated 22 July
1975 which annexed various documents.
Relevant Law
Unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
26 of the Act relevantly defines ‘unsatisfactory professional
conduct’ as:
26 For the purposes of this Act, "unsatisfactory professional conduct", in
relation to a registered physiotherapist, includes any
of the following:
(a) any conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the physiotherapist in the
practice of physiotherapy is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the physiotherapist of a provision of this Act or
the regulations or of a condition of the physiotherapist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the physiotherapist to comply
with a direction by the Board to provide information with
respect to a complaint
under this Part against the physiotherapist,
(d) a failure by the physiotherapist to comply with an order made or a
direction given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the physiotherapist of section 34A (4) (Power of
Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of
Care Complaints Act
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a physiotherapist in the
course of the practice or purported practice of physiotherapy.
“Professional
misconduct” is defined in the section 25 of the Act:
25 For the purposes of this Act, "professional misconduct", in relation to a
registered physiotherapist, means unsatisfactory professional
conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
physiotherapist’s registration.
Standard of proof
standard of proof required to establish this Complaint is the civil standard,
however because of the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their
consequences, the Tribunal needs to be comfortably satisfied that the Complaints
have been established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) said at 362–363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR
at 250-251). The object is not to punish the practitioner but to protect
the public and to maintain proper standards in the profession.
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High
Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
the matter of
Wilks v The Medical Board of South Australia
[2010] SASC
Gray J stated at [62]:
As can be seen from the remarks of Doyle CJ, attainment of
the objective of protection of the community can have many varied aspects,
at times may result in consequences for the practitioner which are more adverse
than those which may have resulted had punishment
been an objective.
preceding paragraph included the comments made by Doyle CJ. Paragraphs 59 and 60
also contain comments of assistance on this issue.
Paragraphs 59 to 61 read
(citations included in text rather than as footnotes):
59. In NSW Bar Association v Evatt, [NSW Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
at 183-184] in a much cited passage, the High Court found
that the conduct in question demonstrated that the practitioner was unfit
practise as a barrister, and then went on to say:
...The Supreme Court thought, moreover, that as the exercise of its
disciplinary powers was, to some extent, a punishment for wrongdoing,
might be shown towards a young man who had not understood the error of his ways.
The power of the Court to discipline a barrister
is, however, entirely
protective, and, notwithstanding that its exercise may involve a great
deprivation to the person disciplined,
there is no element of punishment
involved. This has already been pointed out by this Court in Clyne v NSW Bar
Association. The respondent's
failure to understand the error of his ways of
itself demonstrates his unfitness to belong to a profession where, in practice,
client must depend upon the standards as well as the skill of his
professional adviser.
[Footnote omitted]
60. A similar point was
made in Richter v Walton [Richter v Walton
[1993] NSWCA 233]
where Kirby P and
O’Keefe AJA said:
Necessarily, the exercise of a disciplinary power in respect of a
professional person may have a consequence that seems punitive and
results for the person that are burdensome and hard. But that is not their
purpose in the eye the law. In a case such as
the present, punishment can be
left to the application (if any) of the criminal law, to the consequences for
the practitioner's practice,
to any civil action that may be taken and to the
shame of the publicity that has attended these proceedings. Punishment is not
purpose of the proceedings. That purpose remains, from first to last,
........ the protection of the public who deal with medical
practitioners upon
the assumption of their integrity and ethical behaviour, including those who
deal with this practitioner.
Doyle CJ in Craig v Medical Board of South Australia, [Craig v Medical
Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
] having cited the above
extract from Evatt observed:
Apart from emphasising that the purpose of disciplinary proceedings is the
protection of the public, and not punishment for wrongdoing,
this passage makes
the point that sometimes the protection of the public will require the making of
an order with a greater adverse
effect on the practitioner than might be
warranted if punishment alone were the relevant consideration. The protection of
did not permit mercy to be shown in that case.
This statement by the Court has often been cited as stating the basis upon
which orders are made by professional disciplinary tribunals.
A contrast is
often drawn between orders made for the protection of the public, against
professionals who have departed from proper
professional standards, and orders
or sentences by way of punishment as part of the administration of the criminal
While there is a fundamental difference between an order made by a
professional disciplinary tribunal for the protection of the public,
punishment imposed by a court administering the criminal law, disciplinary
orders made by professional bodies may nevertheless
have elements in common with
criminal sanctions.
In the case of a professional disciplinary tribunal, an obvious type of order
protective of the public is an order cancelling the
registration or recognition
of a person as a member of a profession. Such an order removes the right to
practise in the profession,
thereby protecting the public against a person found
unfit to be a practitioner. And, as Evatt shows, such an order will be made
though, if punishment of the practitioner were the only consideration,
considerations of mercy might lead to a less severe order.
In other cases the protection of the public or the public interest may
justify an order intended to bring home to the practitioner
the seriousness of
the practitioner's departure from professional standards, and intended to deter
the practitioner from any further
departure. A fine might well be imposed with
this object. An order imposing a fine might look like a punishment imposed by a
exercising criminal jurisdiction, but in professional disciplinary
proceedings it is imposed on a different basis. An order might
also be made in
professional disciplinary proceedings to emphasise to other members of the
profession, or to reassure the public,
that a certain type of conduct is not
acceptable professional conduct. In the latter case the order is made in part to
protect the
profession, by demonstrating that the profession does not allow
certain conduct. This, in the end, is also in the public interest.
I make these points merely to emphasise that the protection of the public has
various aspects. The public may be protected by preventing
a person from
practising a profession, by limiting the right of practice, or by making it
clear that certain conduct is not acceptable.
These are merely illustrations of
the sort of order that may be called for.
Tribunal not only has to protect the public but it is in the community interest
that the profession of physiotherapy should retain
and be entitled to retain the
respect and high regard in which it is held. Deterrence is also a relevant
trust placed in physiotherapists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client
to disclose highly
personal information to the physiotherapist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
respect to the assessment of demeanour, the Tribunal relies upon principles as
outlined below. The observations of Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ in
(2003) 214 CLR 118
at [31] are apt:
Further, in recent
years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt
on the ability of judges (or anyone
else) to tell truth from falsehood
accurately on the basis of such appearances. Considerations such as these have
encouraged judges,
both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the
appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as
on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the
apparent logic of events. This does not
eliminate the established principles
principles are seen
as critical.
Tribunal also has regard to the NSW Court of Appeal decision in
Aerospace Pty Limited v Arsic
[2006] NSWCA 187
where His Honour Justice Ipp
JA (as he then was) stated at paragraph 27:
27. These problems and doubts about demeanour findings explain
why trial judges are expected to weigh their impressions as to demeanour
carefully against the probabilities and to examine whether the disputed evidence
is consistent with the incontrovertible facts, facts
that are not in dispute and
other relevant evidence in the case. Of course, demeanour may trump the
probabilities, but it should
be apparent from the judge’s reasons that the
probabilities and consistency with other relevant evidence have properly been
taken into account.
Background material
The Respondent
Respondent (D.O.B. 22 July 1975) was first registered as a physiotherapist on 22
May 1998. Documentation provided to the Tribunal
by AHPRA (Australian Health
Professional Registration Authority) recorded the Respondent is currently
registered until 30 December
2010. However, the Respondent provided to the
Tribunal copies of letters that he had forwarded to the NSW Physiotherapists
Registration
Board and AHPRA Registration on 15 July 2010 requesting that his
name be removed from the Register. The Tribunal has been unable
to ascertain
from AHPRA as to whether this letter had been acted upon. As at the date of this
reasons for Decision document this
matter had not been clarified and the
Tribunal proceeded to make Orders that took into account both eventualities.
essentially as a sole practitioner, in Cabramatta. The
Respondent’s CV
(exhibit 20 and annexure A to statutory declaration of Respondent dated 22 July
2010) set out details of the
Respondent’s experience as a physiotherapist.
Respondent was previously a member of the Australian Physiotherapy Association
(APA) but was not a member at the relevant time.
Background to the Complaint
NSW Physiotherapist Board (Board) received a letter from the HCF dated 15 March
2006 (volume 1 – exhibit 4.6) making complaints
regarding the
Respondent’s treatment of 54 HCF patients on one day, what appeared to be
the irregular record keeping at the
practice and the attitude to record keeping
displayed by the Respondent when interviewed by HCF staff (Ms Kindness and Mr
– see summary of their evidence below).
identifying the fact that 54 claims had been made on one day (5 December 2004)
by the Respondent for people insured by HCF,
notification was sent by HCF to
other private health insurers. Subsequent investigations by NIB, Medibank
Private and MBF revealed
the Respondent had made claims for the treatment of a
further 59 patients (NIB – 27 patients with 28 claims (volume 2 - exhibit
5.1 & 5.2), Medibank Private - 20 patients with 26 claims (volume 2 –
exhibits 6.1 & 6.4), MBF – 12 patient claims
(nine paid) (volume 2
– exhibits7.1, 2 & 3) on that day. In total the Respondent made (or
attempted to make claims) for
113 people via these private health funds on that
day. The documents also identified that claims for services to 71 patients had
also been made for 9 November 2003. These claims formed the basis for Complaints
One and Two.
Subsequently,
a private investigator was sent to consult the Respondent. The consultation was
vision recorded (i.e. without sound
recording) in part. This formed the basis of
Complaints Three and Four.
HCCC forwarded a section 40 letter (being a letter required under section 40
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
) to the Respondent on 5 March 2007 (volume 1
– exhibit 2).
22 April 2009 the HCCC wrote to the Respondent stating that additional grounds
of complaint had been identified. The letter states
that the further ground
relates to the quality of the treatment and the time allocated per patient
falling significantly below the
standard expected on 9 November 2003 and 5
December 2004. The letter sets out details of the number of patients treated by
Medibank Private on these particular days. Details of 71 services being
provided to patients covered by these insurers on 9 November
2003 and 123
services (to 113 patients) on 5 December 2004 (noting that these figures do not
take account of
‘private patients’
letter from the HCCC requested contact details for the three physiotherapists
the Respondent indicated in an earlier letter had
assisted him in his practice,
asked for confirmation as to whether they assisted on the relevant dates and
asked for examples of
the ‘improved record keeping’.
Evidence regarding Complaints One and Two
Summary of private health insurance claims made
for patients - 5/12/04
1 - exhibit 4.10 provides a list of HCF patients that the Respondent made claims
for through the HICAPS system for treatment
said to have been provided on 5
December 2004. Volume 2– exhibit 5.1 is a list of NIB patients for whom
claims were made for
treatment on 5 December 2004. Volume 2– exhibit 6.2
provides a list of Medibank Private patients for whom claims were made.
of the claims made for MBF patients are provided at volume 2 exhibit 7.1). Not
only is the total number of patients allegedly
treated by the Respondent on that
day of interest, the Tribunal notes that there appears from the records produced
by the private
insurers to have been 32 ‘family groups’ treated on
the same day. By ‘family groups’ the Tribunal means members
by the same health insurance cover (as confirmed in many cases by the patients
having the same residential address). Of the
32 family groups there are two
groups involving four member of the same ‘family’, one group with
three members and the
balance with two members.
1- exhibit 4.8 is a record of all claims made by the Respondent for HCF patients
between 8 November 2003 and 31 December 2004.
A summary of the total numbers of
claims made on each day is found at volume 1 - exhibit 4.9. There were 26 days
on which the Respondent
provided more than 20 HCF patients with treatment on the
one day, 53 on 5 December 2004. HCF also provided details of four other
that were processed manually, bringing the total number of claims made by the
Respondent for 5 December 2004 to 57 (volume
1 - exhibit 4.10).
Summary of the nature of complaints recorded in the clinical
notes for the members of the ‘family groups’
clinical notes provided by the Respondent reveal that in many instances the
members of the ‘family groups’ were complaining
of suffering from
very similar symptoms and in many instances received identical treatments.
Other dates of treatment of the ‘family groups’
clinical notes provided by the Respondent also record that the members of the
‘family groups’ were seen on the same
days more often than not.
There was also a distinct skewing of the appointments towards the last two
months of the year. These are
not matters relevant to the Particulars and have
not been taken into account by the Tribunal in reaching any of the findings made
HCCC File Note dated 10 August 2006
file note (volume 1 - exhibit 3.1, page 1) reads:
9.8.6 Received phone call from Ms Thuy Bridges, physiotherapist,
Physio wise, Marsfield (98766863) regarding this matter. She advised
2003/4 she had assisted Mr Duong in providing physiotherapy services to clients
at Mr Duong’s rooms in Cabramatta.
She also advised that she had done
this as a personal favour, receiving no monetary recompense, and was aware that,
on some occasions,
Mr Duong had up to 3 physiotherapists assist him. She was
aware that none of these persons were registered on HCF’s HICAPS
nor did she believe that this was necessary.
HCCC File Note dated 15 August 2006
file note (volume 1 - exhibit 3.1, page 2) reads:
Rang and spoke with Mr Tan Duong, the Respondent’s
brother. He advised that he and his sister, Ms Thuy Bridges, had often assisted
their brother in his physio practice. Could not remember exact dates but stated
that whenever the workload was heavy they would
assist and would be paid in kind
ie: be taken out to dinner etc. Mr T Duong now works for Burns Bay
Statement of Ms Thuy Bridges
statement provided by Ms Bridges to the HCCC dated 31 December 2007 is found at
volume 1 - exhibit 3.3.
Bridges confirms she is a registered physiotherapist and states that the
Respondent is her brother.
6 to 10 of her statement reads:
2003 and 2004 I assisted Mr Duong in his practice at times when he was busy, at
that time I was a registered Physiotherapist.
I do not recall any specific
dates and have not retained any diaries from that time. I did not put clients
names into a diary anyway
– as the clients were Jonathon’s. I
recall some days being at the practice for quite a long time from say 7am to
Not all of this time was necessarily seeing clients.
provided physiotherapy treatments to Mr Jonathon Duong’s patients. He
would see his clients initially and then introduce
the client to me and then
suggest treatment, which I would provide. I would provide soft tissue massage,
mobilisation and EPA (Electro
Physical Therapy). All treatment was supervised,
as much as he was a few metres away and able to be able to be called on for
consulting.
receive any monetary recompense.
certain times Mr Duong would have 3 physiotherapists assisting him.
was not registered on the HICAPS system at Mr Jonathon Duong’s practice,
and I don’t believe this was a problem. I
believe I was working as a
casual locum for him. The primary care, and responsibility was given by Mr
Jonathon Duong, as they were
his patients.”
Correspondence with Mr Tuan Duong
HCCC wrote to Mr Tuan Duong on 17 October 2007 and 11 November 2007 requesting
he make contact with the HCCC, following up on
a telephone conversation he had
with an officer of the HCCC on 15 August 2007.
HCCC file note dated 13 November 2007 records a telephone conversation with Mr
Tuan Duong. Mr Tuan Duong is the Respondent’s
brother. He is recorded as
advising that he had been told by his professional indemnity insurer that he
should not provide a statement
until the insurer gave approval for him to
discuss the matter. Each of these records are found in volume 1 - exhibit 3.4.
Correspondence with Mr Cuong Le
HCCC wrote to Mr Cuong Le on 2 November 2007 (volume 1 - exhibit 3.5) and
17October 2007 asking him to contact the HCCC. A file
note dated 1 December 2007
indicates that Mr Le had not made contact with the HCCC and that Ms Bridges had
advised she did not know
his contact details.
HICAPS Provider Agreement
1 - exhibit 3.6 is a copy of the HICAPS agreement signed by the Respondent.
Documents from HCF
provided a bundle of documents to the HCCC (volume 1, exhibit 4).
provided print-outs of services provided by the Respondent to 55 of its patients
on 9 November 2003 (volume 1, exhibit 4.1). The
records indicate that 19
‘family groups’ received treatment from the Respondent on this day.
By ‘family groups’
the Tribunal refers to groups where two or more
persons covered by the same family insurance policy.
file note dated 27 January 2005 from Mr Graham Maher (the HCF Investigator)
recording the observations he made when he visited the
Respondent’s
practice on 27 January 2005 is found at volume 1, exhibit 4.2. When the clinic
records of the 55 patients for
whom claims for treatment provided on 9 November
2003 were made were inspected they confirmed the patients had been provided with
further file note dated 2 February 2005 from Mr Maher is found at volume 1,
exhibit 4.2. This file note records the observations
made when he attended the
Respondent’s practice on 2 February 2005. The file note states:
I confirmed the computer records for services received by member
Thi C. Tang on 7.11.2004, 13.11.2004, 14.11.2004, 20.11.2004, 21.11.2004,
27.11.2004, 28.11.2004 and 4.12.2004.
I also asked Jonathon Duong about his charges for services, in particular
the charge of $15.00. He informed me that as the health
fund had reduced their
cover down to $15.00 after a certain number of visits, he then offered them the
choice of either a full treatment
visit lasting forty minutes to one hour and
then pay the difference. Or they can have treatment for twenty minutes at a
of $15.00. It is the patient’s choice.
Also whilst I was there two male patients were lying on the two large
massage beds, watching TV in one room and I could hear two females
in the Physio
with Duong.
Mr. Duong appears to work at this practice on his own, on the five
occasions I have visited him during the last week he has always
been on his own.
He doesn’t even have a receptionist.
file note written by the HCF Inspector on 12 April 2005 records that he had
visited the Respondent’s practice that day
and did not observe a
receptionist to be present. Further, the Respondent informed him that he only
held electronic records for patients
apart from those which were workers’
compensation cases for which he kept a paper record. The Respondent is recorded
as informing
the Inspector that he can treat up to four or five patients at one
time and that he considered this to be usual practice for most
physiotherapists.
The Inspector also recorded that the Respondent expressed the view that HICAPS
was promoting the keeping of computer
records only, that 80% of his patients
were HCF members and that it was quite acceptable for him to treat up to 50
patients per day.
The Respondent was informed that he was not to use the HICAPS
system to make claims for any HCF patients as of 18 April 2005. This
writing to the Respondent in a letter from the HCF to the Respondent dated 13
April 2005 (volume 1, exhibit 4.7).
Report of Ms Helen Kindness re visit to Respondent’s
practice 10 February 2006
Kindness is a registered physiotherapist who undertook an inspection of the
Respondent’s practice on behalf of HCF in her
role as a HCF Consultant
Physiotherapist Advisor. Her report is at volume 1, exhibit 4.3. Ms Kindness
observed four massage chairs
and a television in the waiting room of the
practice and observed the physiotherapy assistant accompany a male patient from
the treatment
room to a massage chair. The massage chair was reclined and began
to vibrate and a towel was wrapped around the patient’s neck.
questioned by Ms Kindness about the massage chairs, the Respondent stated that
patients could sit there while waiting for their
treatment so that they did not
become disgruntled. Ms Kindness noted that this did not accord with her
observation of the patient
who reclined in the massage chair after leaving the
treatment room.
Kindness inspected the clinical records kept by the Respondent as word documents
for four patients (copies at volume 1, exhibit
4.5). The statement of Ms
Kindness continued as follows:
It is normal practice that a physiotherapist will record areas
of pain or surgery on a body chart which will also identify any neurological
deficits or referred areas of pain. When I asked Mr Duong whether he kept body
charts for each patient, he replied that it was no
longer his usual practice.
It is also usual clinical practice for a physiotherapist to take a
subjective history and then to perform an objective examination
which clearly
identifies the areas that require treatment and will also establish baseline
measurements to help determine the effectiveness
of treatment, and when to
discharge a client. This was not evident in any of Mr Duong’s typed
documents. When I queried Mr
Duong regarding this issue, he replied that he
kept more detailed records for workers’ compensation clients, but did not
the need to do this for private clients.
All of the treatment entries ie entries detailing the treatment for each
client for each attendance were identical for the duration
of the episode of
treatment. (See record printouts collected by Frank at the interview.) Dr
Duong did not detail any responses
to treatment or any subjective reporting for
each attendance. He did not record any asterisk signs which will indicate
patient is responding to the treatment. Again Mr Duong did not appear
to see the need for this. None of the entries were signed
and there were no
clinical indicators for patient discharge. When I asked if Mr Duong could
verbally recall the response of the
identified patients to treatment, he was
unable to do so. There was no indication that any of the identified patients
well to treatment. Mr Duong was also questioned as to his treatment
intervention choices as there is little or no evidence for the
interventions chosen for conditions described. He was not able to clinically
support any of the treatment interventions
listed for the identified clients.
This is somewhat unusual as it is usually possible to remember a patient and
their response to
treatment if you have taken adequate clinical records.
I asked Mr Duong if he attended any continuing education lectures with the
Australian Physiotherapy Association or attended any seminars
or conferences.
He replied that he did not. He was not a member of the APA.
Kindness made the following observations regarding the staff member of the
I asked Mr Duong about the role of the woman who appeared to be
working as a physiotherapy assistant. Mr Duong stated that she applied
packs, performed the ultrasound treatments and performed massage. He stated
that she did so under his supervision but she appeared
to working independently
while we were having the clinical discussion regarding his patients. She
appeared once and motioned whether
to commence an ultrasound (?) treatment while
we were still talking. Mr Duong did not see the patient before he told her to
with the treatment. Mr Duong stated that he usually assessed the
patient initially, performed the appropriate joint mobilizations
and gave them
the required exercises. There was no real evidence of this in the clinical
entries on the computer.
I asked if the assistant had done the physiotherapy assistant training and
he replied that she had not. I have downloaded the APA
standards and will
forward these as a hard copy. It is not clear that Mr Duong’s assistant
is performing duties as described
in the APA and Registration Board standards
but this would need to be followed up by the appropriate regulating authority,
the Registration Board.
Kindness made the following record of a conversation that occurred between the
HCF inspector who accompanied her on the inspection
and the Respondent on the
topic of the alleged treatment of 54 HCF patients on one day:
When Frank questioned Mr Duong regarding the day when he
allegedly treated 54 HCF patients, he was not able to plausibly describe
had been possible to treat that many patients on 1 day, even with the assistance
of physiotherapy assistants. He was also
unable to explain the highly unusual
occurrence of treating 54 members from the one fund on a single day.
At the conclusion of the interview, Mr Duong kept repeating that he did
not want trouble and just wanted to continue running his business
as usual. He
did not once mention patient care or any commitment to clinical excellence, but
rather that his business was suffering
because he did not have access to Hicaps
and his patients were going to other practitioners who did have Hicaps.
Oral evidence of Ms Kindness
Kindness was required by the Respondent for cross-examination. Ms Kindness gave
evidence that she had been a physiotherapist since
1980 and had undertaken a
wide variety of work, including working in private practice for a ten year
period, working in hospital
settings as well as being an adviser for the
Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) and for private health insurance companies
in addition
to being a rehabilitation consultant. Relevantly, Ms Kindness also
has experience providing supervision to physiotherapy students
undertaking
clinical placements.
Kindness identified the document at exhibit volume 1 – exhibit 4.3 as a
document she produced. She confirmed the contents
of that document were true and
Kindness confirmed she attended the practice of the Respondent with Mr Frank
Derrick, a retired detective who was working as an
inspector for HCF.
Kindness also identified four patient records (exhibit volume 1 – exhibit
4.5) as word documents she first read on the computer
screen in the
Respondent’s practice and then as printouts from the computer. She
indicated she had concerns regarding these
records as there was no indication
that they were contemporaneous. A word document may be created, added to,
altered or deleted by
any person, not just the treating practitioner. Later in
her evidence she stated that she was of the view that the records should
considered to be a medico-legal record and therefore should be initialled or
signed off.
being shown some other clinical records kept by the Respondent that included
body charts (exhibit volume 3 – exhibit 3.3)
Ms Kindness indicated that
the body charts included were the type she was referring to when she stated that
it was normal practice
for a physiotherapist to keep these as part of the
Kindness reinforced her view that there should be a subjective history and an
objective examination made so that areas to be treated
could be identified and
an evaluation made of the effectiveness of the treatment. She also expressed the
view that these type of
records should be kept so that another practitioner
could safely take over the care of the patient with reference to the notes.
Kindness stated that when she asked the Respondent to provide further details of
the patient’s history he was unable to do
so. It was her experience that a
practitioner can often add further details over and above what is written in the
clinical notes
and give a clear account of the presentation and response to
treatment even when they have deficient notes.
Kindness stated that as a first contact practitioner it was important that the
appropriate screenings be undertaken so that appropriate
treatment can be
formulated and appropriate referrals made if required. Details such as
medications taken, current state of health
and any changes from the last
occasion. This is what sets physiotherapy apart from other allied health
services such as massage therapists,
exercise physiologists and Pilates
instructors.
Kindness recalled the conversation she had regarding the Respondent how he
managed to treat 54 HCF patients in one day. She commented
that this was a high
workload and would also have expected there to have been a mixture of patients
from other health funds. It
was her expectation that there would be 15 minutes
of one-on-one time with each patient. A 10 minute one-on-one period may be
appropriate
if it was merely for the purpose of a quick check of a plaster or a
Kindness also recalled the conversation with the Respondent regarding his
assistant. The Respondent was not able to provide a clear
picture of the role of
the assistant in his practice. Ms Kindness confirmed that the Respondent did not
mention that he had other
physiotherapists working in his practice at any time.
‘audit’ was conducted over a period of about one hour and was held
in a room off the reception area that was not the
treatment area. During the
audit Ms Kindness heard a person enter the practice and shortly after this
occurred the assistant appeared
at the door and spoke to the Respondent in a
language other than English. The assistant made a movement with her hand which
Ms Kindness
interpreted as the assistant asking the Respondent whether she
should undertake ultrasound. Ms Kindness indicated in her evidence
could not verify or be certain that this was what was being indicated. However,
after the audit Ms Kindness spoke to Mr
Derrick and he had also made the same
interpretation of the gesture made by the Assistant.
Kindness stated that she was concerned that the Respondent did not talk about
patient care or clinical excellence during the audit,
rather he concentrated on
the viability of his business without access to HICAPS.
Kindness confirmed that she was present with Mr Derrick throughout the whole
audit. She was asked if she heard Mr Derrick say to
the Respondent words to the
effect that the matter could be dropped and settled if the Respondent paid a
monetary contribution to
HCF. Ms Kindness emphatically stated that Mr Derrick
had not said words to that effect to the Respondent. She stated that this was
not part of an investigator’s brief. He may have said that if the
Respondent had received any payments on an improper basis
then the health fund
would expect the practitioner to repay those monies.
Kindness indicated that the standard of the notes she reviewed during the audit
would not meet the standard expected of undergraduate
cross-examination Ms Kindness confirmed that she only undertook one practice
audit on 10 February 2006 and did not accept the
possibility that she had
confused her observations at the Respondent’s practice with those at
another practice. She confirmed
that she wrote rough notes during the audit
which she used to complete the document found at volume 1 – exhibit 4.3,
and confirmed
the details with Mr Derrick.
confirmed that it was her interpretation that the actions made by the Assistant
were asking the Respondent if she should apply
ultra sound to the patient who
had arrived at the practice during the audit. She agreed she did not hear the
word ultra sound at
the time or see the ultra sound being used during the audit.
She confirmed that ultrasound was discussed with the Respondent later.
Kindness confirmed her evidence regarding reasonable lengths of time for
consultations. She also gave evidence that she was not
only concerned about the
length of time treatment was provided but also the records indicating a type of
‘recipe’ treatment
i.e. the same treatment being provided to the
patient during each consultation over a long period of time rather than being
on an individual needs basis. She agreed that the same treatment could
be repeated if there was documented and demonstrated improvement.
Ms Kindness stated there was no fixed fee for the provision of physiotherapy
services (outside of those services provided under Workers’
Compensation
and Compulsory Third Party claims).
answer to a question from the Tribunal Ms Kindness indicated that Mr Derrick had
made an appointment to visit the Respondent’s
practice. She confirmed the
audit took about one hour and that the Respondent was with them the whole time.
She also confirmed that
the Respondent did not ask to be excused to attend to
patients while they were there, which often happened when they made Audit visits
to other physiotherapists.
re-examination Ms Kindness gave evidence that she considered it most unusual
that a patient presenting with the particular symptoms
recorded for Patient B
was not provided with joint mobilisation, taping and stability exercises.
Generally she considered the record
reflected an unusual treatment presentation.
Kindness also commented on the lack of variation in the grade of mobilisations
applied on each occasion to Patient B and a wide
range of other patients.
Statement of Frank Derrick dated 10 February 2006
Derrick accompanied Ms Kindness on her visit to the Respondent’s practice.
Mr Derrick also observed a patient moving from
the curtained off treatment area
to the waiting room and being directed to sit in one of the four massage chairs
in the waiting area.
Derrick observed Ms Kindness and the Respondent discussing patient records and
clinical/professional matters. Later in the conversation
he observed them
talking about the standard of the clinical notes required by the Act.
Derrick showed the Respondent a list of 54 patients for whom claims had been
made on HCF. The Respondent told Mr Derrick that he
had performed the services
for these patients. Mr Derrick stated to the Respondent that he found it very
difficult to understand
how he could have seen that many HCF patients on one day
given the market share of HCF and the fact that working alone he would have
a period of eight minutes (given an eight hour working day) to not only treat
the patient but also to record the service and
undertake the transaction.
Derrick also records the following:
I then stated to the provider that I had noticed that he had at
least two other patients arrive during our interview and that the
appeared to be treating them by herself
He stated that she was acting under his instructions
I stated how that could be whilst he was being interviewed and not
personally attending to any of the patients that I had seen from
He stated that he told her what to do
I stated who is the Asian Lady and what are her qualifications to treat
He stated that she was as Assistant and that he also had access to at
least two other Assistants – he did not have a dedicated
Receptionist
Peer Review Report – Complaints One and Two – Mr Ashton
Report dated stamped 4 September 2006
HCCC requested Mr Lucas provide an independent review of the matter. In
particular the HCCC asked Mr Lucas to comment upon the
following matters:
Whether the
Respondent undertakes excessive and/or unnecessary treatments.
Whether the
Respondent did not make sufficient and/or appropriate clinical records of the
treatment provided.
Whether the
Respondent had untrained and/or underqualified assistants performing
physiotherapy related duties.
The number of
treatments recorded as being provided by the Respondent on 9 November 2003 (54
treatments provided to HCF patients).
In particular,
Ms Lucas was asked to review the clinical notes provided by the Respondent and
to comment as follows:
(1) Can you review the relevant
clinical notes [
being the notes relating to treatment afforded on 9 November
for each matter and advise whether:
(a) An adequate patient history was taken
(b) An adequate management/treatment plan was completed
(c) The nature of the recorded treatment is appropriate
(d) The duration of the treatment is appropriate
(e) The frequency of the recorded treatment is appropriate
(f) The extent of the clinical notes is appropriate
(2) Having examined the clinical notes for 9 November 2003 are you able to
determine whether the nature and extent of treatment afforded
to the 50 listed
patients appears an excessive amount of treatment for (no more than) three
physiotherapists to complete?
(3)If you are able to determine this can you advise what would constitute a
‘normal’ patient load for a single physiotherapist
‘normal’ working day?
(4) With reference to Ms Kindness’ memo can you advise whether the
duties Mr Duong’s physiotherapy assistant is alleged
to have been
undertaking (on 9 November 2003) are appropriate for a physiotherapy
When responding to each of the above questions, please advise whether Mr
Duong’s conduct fell below the standard expected of
a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training and experience. If conduct did fall below the
standard please indicate:
(a) the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience, applicable at the time of
the complaint;
(b) whether the departure from the standard was significantly below the
standard or otherwise, and
(c) whether the departure from the standard invites your strong
You may wish to make reference to any professional guidelines, standards or
literature that you consider relevant.
his report Mr Lucas expressed the view with respect to the patient history
contained in the clinical notes that the quality and
content of the notes was
significantly below an acceptable standard.
Lucas expressed the view that a reasonably trained physiotherapist would find
the notes inadequate and would be highly critical
of the standard of the notes.
Tribunal notes that Mr Lucas commented that:
Current patient
history notes were minimal
There were no
past history notes for most patients
Generally there
was no indication of occupation, social history or hobbies which may have a
bearing on the type of presenting injury
The notations on
the body charts were below acceptable standard, without a record of the quality,
severity or irritability of the
pain, no record of the spread or pattern of the
pain, no record of the relationship of pain areas, no record of neurological
and symptoms (or if they were not present) in spinal patients
consistently recorded information in the clinical records is the HCF membership
respect to management/treatment planning, Mr Lucas expressed the view that a
reasonably trained physiotherapist would find this
treatment plan inadequate and
would be highly critical of the standard displayed by the Respondent. Mr Lucas
expressed the view that
the plans would be deemed as inappropriate. In
particular, Mr Lucas commented:
There was no
treatment plan for many of the patients
treatment is recorded as provided time after time
There was no or
minimal notification of response to treatment
There was no
indication of subjective or objective change in signs and symptoms, yet the same
treatment is recorded as being provided.
respect to the appropriateness of the treatment record Mr Lucas stated:
Treatment records would be below clinically acceptable standards
and attract strong criticism from a reasonably trained physiotherapist
same experience as Mr Duong.’
Lucas also commented that there was:
subjective or objective notes for return treatments; physiotherapist could not
tell if there have been changes in response
to the treatment
No asterix signs
to highlight the major clinical signs and symptoms
treatments with a menu of massage, interferential and hot packs
No indication of
warnings, consent and contra indications being recorded at the beginning and end
of the sessions
No signing off
of the notes at the end of each treatment
respect to the question as to whether the duration of the treatments was
appropriate Mr Lucas stated:
The duration of treatment would be considered to be below
acceptable standards of clinical practice and invite moderate criticism
reasonably trained physiotherapist with the same experience as Mr
particular Mr Lucas commented:
That he failed
to see how the Respondent could adequately treat a patient in eight minutes or
There seemed to
be minimal or no manual therapy provided and very little evidence of exercise
prescription
Lucas was not critical of the frequency of recorded treatment. He noted that
there were notes for every treatment, that the patients
would attend two or
three times a week and then it would taper off.
respect to the nature and extent of the treatment provided Mr Lucas
The quality of treatment and the time allocated per treatment
would be considered substantially below the standard one would expect
University graduate of Mr Duong’s experience and would invite strong
criticism from an equally trained physiotherapist,
with the same
experience.’
Lucas made the following particular comments:
With respect to
the 54 HCF patients treated on 9 November 2003, if the Respondent worked a 10
hour day he would be attending to more
than five patients an hour even if no
breaks were taken this would translate into treatments of between eight and
twelve minutes
per patient.
This pattern of
treatment would be improbable
The information
provided only related to HCF patients and no details were provided about other
percentage of treatments were non manual i.e. they involved the application of
hot packs and interferential
respect to his opinion regarding a ‘normal’ treatment load Mr Lucas
Most reasonably trained physiotherapists would consider 20
minutes as an absolute minimum treatment time for a return patient and
minutes for a new patient.
Lucas also commented:
calculation a physiotherapist would see a maximum of 24 to 30 return patients a
levels of treatment would not be safe for patients or sustainable on a daily
respect to the appropriateness of the duties carried out by the
Respondent’s assistant Mr Lucas noted that if they occurred
contrary to the APA standard for Physiotherapy Assistants. This standard states
that a non physiotherapist is not to be
permitted to apply interferential or
ultrasound under the direct supervision of a physiotherapist. (volume 4, exhibit
3 - page 7)
the notes indicated that if the Respondent did not assess the patient either pre
or post the treatment or physically apply
the ultrasound himself then this would
be a severe breach of professional standards.
Lucas made comments regarding the claim made by the Respondent that the HCF had
offered to drop any action and
‘settle the matter’
Respondent made a monetary contribution.
Further report from Mr Lucas re Complaints One and Two
report essentially repeats the opinions expressed in the earlier report (undated
– volume 4, exhibit 9.2). Given the Tribunal’s
view accords with the
opinions expressed by Mr Lucas any further account of his evidence is not
required in this document.
Documents from NIB Health Fund
NIB Health Fund provided details of the claims made by the Respondent for
treatment of patients covered by health insurance policies
for 5 December 2004
(volume 2, exhibit 5.1). It appears 28 claims were made for 27 patients by the
Respondent on that day.
6 May 2008 NIB informed the Board that the Respondent had been permanently
derecognised (volume 5, exhibit 2A).
Documents from Medibank Private
Private provided details of the 16 claims made by the Respondent for the
treatment of 11 patients insured by Medibank Private
on 5 December 2004 (volume
2, exhibit 6.2).
2, exhibit 6.4 includes a statement of Mr Ian Victor Miles a Consultant
Investigator with Medibank Private dated 5 August 2008.
Mr Miles accessed the
computer system (business records) of Medibank Private and as a result stated
that on 5 December 2004 20 members
of Medibank Private made 26 claims for
services allegedly provided by the Respondent on 5 December 2004.
records provided by Medibank Private indicate that an ‘initial
consultation’ fee was charged to one patient for
8, 9, 15 and 16 November
2003 as well as another consultation on 8 November 2003.
email from Ms Jillian Beall, from the Benefits Risk Management department of
Medibank Private (volume 2, exhibit 6.7) states that
a member can use their
HICAPS card for backdated services. With respect to two patients (being members
covered by a family membership)
the HICAPS card was only swiped twice by the
Respondent to make a total of 21 services.
Documents from MBF Australia
Australia provided information regarding 12 services claimed by the Respondent
for services provided to MBF members on 5 December
2004. A benefit was paid for
nine of these claims (volume 2, exhibits 7.1 & 2).
statement dated 5 August 2008 made by Ms Margaret Street (volume 2, exhibit 7.3)
explains that only nine claims were paid as three
patients had reached their
limit for physiotherapy claims.
Clinical Notes – Various patients
large bundle of clinical notes is found at volume 2, exhibit 8.1 & 2.
clinical notes record data such as:
the Respondent
only providing 12 types of treatment regimes to the patients he records as
treating on one particular day,
the use of Grade
3 mobilisations on every patient to which a mobilisation was administered on a
particular day including a patient
over 80 years of age,
members of the
same family suffering from the same condition, commencing and ending treatment
on the same day and in approximately
80 % of occasions receiving treatment on
the same days.
Other documentary evidence
Respondent was interviewed by HCF employees on 10 February 2006 (recorded in
volume 1 - 4.3 and 4.4). When asked how he was able
to treat 54 HCF clients on
one day even working with a physiotherapy assistant the Respondent is recorded
as not being able to provide
a plausible explanation. The Respondent is recorded
as stating that he had performed all the services to these patients and would
have also attended to the recording of the service and issue of the transaction.
Evidence with respect to Complaints Three and
documents relied upon by the HCCC with respect to Complaints Three and Four were
provided in a separate volume that was marked
as volume 5.
Complaints relate to the treatment of one particular patient, being a licensed
private investigator.
Documentation from NIB
provided by NIB record that a private investigator attended the practice of the
Respondent. The documents record that the
investigator received treatment from a
female member of staff, however the receipt issued indicated the service had
been provided
by the Respondent (volume 5, exhibit 2A).
to the attendance of the private investigator the following correspondence had
passed between the Respondent and NIB and is
recorded here for completeness. On
4 October 2007 NIB wrote to the Respondent requesting that he provide them with
copies of the
original treatment records, clinical notes and HICAPS receipts for
certain identified NIB patients. NIB also provided details of
the NIB Fund Rules
that allow the NIB to request this information while still observing client
confidentiality (volume 5, exhibit
Respondent replied on 12 October 2007 (volume 5, exhibit 2E). The Respondent
expressed concern that he would be breaching the
‘Privacy Act’ if he
provided the information without a signed authority from each patient. He
declined to provide the
information requested but did provide copies of the 2007
HICAPS receipts for the patients listed. The Respondent stated that some
faded and so did not photocopy well and others had been lost. The Respondent
also advised of days on which the HICAPS terminal
was not used for some
patients, rather, a paper receipt was issued.
replied to the Respondent by letter (undated – volume 5, exhibit 2F). The
NIB set out details of Respondent’s obligations
under the HICAPS Provider
Agreement that he had signed and other matters relevant to the
Respondent’s concerns regarding confidentiality.
The letter asks for the
information originally requested be provided by 2 November 2007.
letter dated 2 November 2007 NIB advised the Respondent that as he has not
complied with the HICAPS Provider Agreement, his access
to HICAPS was
indefinitely suspended (volume 5, exhibit 2G).
13 March 2008 NIB again wrote to the Respondent (volume 5, exhibit 2H)
requesting copies of clinical notes.
Respondent replied on 31 March 2008 maintaining his refusal to provide clinical
or treatment notes on the grounds of privacy.
Evidence of Patient A-K including DVD footage
A-K visited the practice of the Respondent on 21 December 2007 with a covert
camera (which gave the appearance of being a
mobile telephone) having been
retained by NIB on 18 December 2007. He reported on his visit to the practice in
a statement dated
21 December 2007 (volume 5 – exhibit 3).
Tribunal also viewed a DVD recording of the vision taken by Patient A-K during
this consultation. The covert camera was turned
off for a substantial part of
the treatment and there was no sound recording as part of the footage.
Tribunal noted that Patient A-K struggled to explain the process he underwent
using physiotherapy terminology.
Oral evidence of Patient A-K
oral evidence of Patient A-K was generally consistent with the statement he
made, particularly with respect to matters not involving
physiotherapy
terminology.
Peer Review Report – Complaints Three and Four – Mr
Ashton Lucas
Letter from HCCC dated 22 December 2008
HCCC wrote to Mr Lucas on 22 December 2008 seeking his opinion regarding the
tape of the treatment provided to a private investigator
(Patient A-K) who posed
as a patient seeking treatment (Complaints Three and Four).
HCCC noted that Patient A-K was asked to pay $30 cash prior to receiving
treatment and then was allocated to a female assistant.
The female assistant
provided massage.
HCCC requested Mr Lucas comment upon the fact that the massage was provided
before the Respondent took a history or made an assessment,
and what appeared to
have been the lack of consideration of a provisional diagnosis or a treatment
plan. Further, Mr Lucas was asked
to comment upon whether the description
provided by Patient A-K indicated an appropriate level of supervision of the
assistant during
treatment, whether the Respondent should have stayed in the
room to observe the assistant’s care, whether the signs and symptoms
provided by Patient A-K warranted the use of the interferential, whether the use
of the Assistant complied with the Guidelines of
the Board and the accepted
standards in the profession. Mr Lucas was asked to assume that the account given
by Patient A-K was correct.
HCCC also asked for Mr Lucas to comment upon whether it was reasonable and
appropriate for the Respondent to claim for the services
in the circumstances
described from the health fund. Mr Lucas was asked to comment upon the record
keeping of the Respondent and
whether they met the standards of the profession.
a question with the statement that the HCCC had been unable to ascertain the
training and experience of the massage therapist,
the HCCC asked Mr Lucas to
comment upon the minimum training and experience expected by members of the
physiotherapy profession for
an assistant to carry out the massage as described
by Patient A-K.
HCCC asked Mr Lucas to comment on all of the above matters with reference to a
number of criteria. The criteria are essentially
the standards set out in the
legislation.
Report dated 22 March 2009
Lucas replied by way of a report dated 22 March 2009 (volume 5 – exhibit
Lucas noted that he had previously provided a report regarding the Respondent
and had made comments critical of the Respondent
in that report. Mr Lucas
stated that he had watched the DVD and read the statement of Patient A-K and had
noted a number of anomalies.
Lucas gave the opinion that it appeared that no initial assessment or history
was taken by a qualified physiotherapist prior to
the provision of treatment. Mr
Lucas stated that he considered that this conduct was a significant departure
from the conduct expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
and experience and would attract strong criticism.
respect to the issue of structured examination and provisional diagnosis, Mr
Lucas expressed the view that neither appear to
have occurred. This is
‘significantly below an acceptable standard by most physiotherapist and
would earn their strong disapproval and criticism’.
Lucas stated that there was no evidence that the Respondent discussed the case
with the assistant or gave instructions for further
action or supervised her
appropriately. Mr Lucas stated that he would be mildly critical of this conduct.
Lucas commented that from the statement of Patient A-K the Assistant attached
the interferential machine without supervision. The
use of an interferential
machine could be considered appropriate at the end of a treatment to
‘settle any lingering treatment soreness and muscle spasm’
again from the description given by Patient A-K it appeared to Mr Lucas that the
Assistant undertook the treatment without supervision
and turned on the
interferential machine without the Respondent being present. He noted that
despite what appeared in the clinical
records there does not appear to have been
a physiotherapist present. Mr Lucas stated that this is contrary to the APA
Position Statement
‘Working with Physiotherapy Assistants 2002
Lucas noted that the Respondent did demonstrate some exercises to assist but
these were only provided after Patient A-K made a
request. The notes recorded
that a subjective and objective examination had taken place. Mr Lucas expressed
the view that this would
constitute as ‘short treatment’ and if done
by the Respondent then it would be reasonable for him to make a claim.
respect to the clinical notes Mr Lucas expressed the view that they were
inadequate and below the standard for someone of the
Respondent’s training
and experience. Mr Lucas made the following particular comments regarding the
notes kept by the Respondent:
The body chart
was not completed (subjective observation)
No past history
No mention of
previous treatment
No record of
daily pattern of pain, symptoms etc
questions are inadequately filled in
Warnings, contra
indications and consent are not noted on the chart
Notes not up to
APA standards
giving oral evidence Mr Lucas accepted that the abbreviations W, CI, IC were
acceptable notation for ‘warnings given’,
‘contraindications
checked’ and ‘Informed Consent obtained’.
Lucas noted that currently there was no legal requirement for physiotherapists
to employ people with training. The APA defines
a ‘Physiotherapy
Assistant’ (PTA) as a health care worker who works under the supervision
of a registered physiotherapist
and holds a Certificate IV in Allied Health
Assistants (Physiotherapy) or equivalent as a minimum requirement for
employment.
Evidence of the Respondent
transcript of the Respondent’s evidence clearly demonstrates the evasive
manner adopted by the Respondent when answering
questions, particularly under
cross-examination.
the Respondent provided little further information or clarification of the
relevant issues over and above the evidence set
out in writing in the documents
tendered to the Tribunal.
was little evidence that would allow the Tribunal to find that the Respondent
had a true appreciation for the nature of his
conduct. This may account for his
lack of contrition or remorse, apart from the patent disruption the Inquiry had
on the Respondent’s
new employment with an insurance company.
Respondent’s evidence regarding Complaints One and
Respondent indicated that he relied upon documentation included in the HCCC
material (being parts of volumes 1 to 4) in addition
to his letter dated 2 June
2010 with respect to Complaints One and Two.
of the earlier correspondence with the Respondent are set out below.
Letter dated 23 May 2006
Respondent wrote to the HCCC on 23 May 2006 (volume 1, exhibit 2.6) replying to
a letter from the HCCC dated 2 May 2006 which
detailed a complaint made by HCF
in a letter dated 15 March 2006.
page one of his letter dated 23 May 2006 the Respondent replied to the issue of
‘suitability’
‘note taking’.
The Respondent stated that he had always been able to provide HCF with details
they had requested in the past. However, with respect
to the comments made by
the Physiotherapy Adviser sent by the HCF to the Respondent’s practice he
makes the following comments:
During the course of the interview on
February 2006, the physiotherapy advisor hired by
HCF requested copies of particular patients’ notes. Since my university
days I have always been led to believe that the treatment notes recorded by a
physiotherapist were confidential except in the case
of a direct court summons
or where the patient has provided their specific consent. However, I am not
sure if the confidentiality
rules have changed over the last few years and
despite the fact that no patient consent had been obtained by HCF I did not want
appear to be hindering the interview. Therefore I provided partial records
indicating the dates on which the treatment was provided
and the type of
treatment for each of the patients requested.
I am still not sure if I should even have handed these over and will be
reviewing this separately for future reference.
respect to the issue of the observation of the HCF
‘physiotherapy
as to the physiotherapy assistant in his practice appearing
to perform duties usually considered to be the role of the physiotherapist,
Respondent (on page 2) comments that the HCF complaint does not provide details
of the particular duties. The Respondent makes
the following comments regarding
his understanding of the role and training of a physiotherapy assistant:
Whilst I understand that there are one or two courses run each
year by the Australian Physiotherapy Association (APA) aimed at providing
information on the role and responsibilities of a physiotherapy assistant, I
also understand that these courses are not a compulsory
requirement, nor are
there any specific qualifications or training that is legislated or regulated by
the APA or any other body for
physiotherapy assistants.
My assistant is there to assist me in the provision of a physiotherapy
treatment. She is supervised at all times and does not make
any decisions or
have any input with respect to the treatment of a patient.
I have always advised staff, whether they be a receptionist, physiotherapy
assistant or another physiotherapist, of their role in
my practice.
respect to the complaint from HCF that the Respondent was unable to describe how
he was able to provide treatment of 54 HCF patients
on one day noting that he is
the only registered physiotherapist at the practice address the Respondent
There are particular times during the course of the year when
patient loads become a lot higher than usual. There are various reasons
this, however, one of the most common times which is experienced by my practice
and those of other health care providers in the
area is the period near the end
of the calendar year.
At these times patients will often seek treatment because they believe
that they possibly have some unclaimed benefits with their
private health cover
and, when combined with the desire to have a check up prior to the Christmas
holiday period, my practice is
subsequently quite busy at these times.
I am fortunate to have a number of colleagues (registered
physiotherapists) who have practices of their own and who do not work the
days that I do (typically on the weekends) who I can call upon at relatively
short notice to assist me during these busy periods.
Whilst this does not
happen regularly, on a given day I have had up to 3 additional physiotherapists
working in my clinic and assisting
with the patient load.
I possibly could have registered my colleagues on the HICAPS system to
avoid the confusion that this has created for HCF, however
my reasons for not
doing so are twofold;
colleagues do not have any meaningful long term view of working in my practice
or forming any form of partnership. They merely
requires it and they are able to commit the time themselves. In addition,
although my colleagues are
registered and practising physiotherapists, the
overall treatment decisions are made by myself (as the patients are typically
to me from previous visits). Seeing as I remunerate my colleagues
directly, I felt there would be no problems that the payments
made through the
HICAPS system were made to myself.
April 2005, HCF advised me that they were suspending HCF access through my
electronic HICAPS terminal, thus forcing my patients
who were members of HCF to
pay me in full and then submit their claim manually. The reason provided by HCF
for this suspension was
that I had not been keeping adequate clinical notes,
even though HCF had never seen nor requested access to my notes until a year
later at the interview on 10
HCF confirmed in their letter of
April 2005 that I was to
“immediately
stop using the Network to process health insurance claims in respect of a fund
where the fund tells you to do so.”
Therefore, even though I believed
that the reason for the suspension of my electronic access was inadequate and
incorrect, they
nonetheless had the contractual right to suspend the service at
their discretion and that I would simply be wasting my time trying
In the meantime, whilst I have managed to keep many of my existing
patients who appreciate the level and quality of service that I
offer, it has
been very difficult for me to attract new patients who are members of HCF as it
is all too easy for them to go to another
physiotherapist in the area where they
can swipe their card on the electronic HICAPS terminal and only have to pay any
for this reason that during the interview on
February 2006 I was reluctant to divulge the names
of my colleagues who assist me from time to time. HCF has made life quite
for me in recent times and I have no desire for them to obtain the
names of my colleagues or where they practice.
If I can be assured that the names and practice details of my colleagues
can be kept confidential within the Health Care Complaints
Commission then I
would be only too happy to provide their details.
Respondent reinforced his concern regarding providing the names of the
colleagues who assist him and indicated that he would provide
the names if the
HCCC kept those names confidential.
Respondent stated that he considered the complaint made by HCF to be
‘spurious at best’
‘given their lack of detail,
could easily be considered mischievous’
Letter dated 12 July 2006
Respondent’s letter to the HCCC dated 12 July 2006 (volume 1, exhibit 2.4)
responds to a letter from the HCCC dated 30 June
2006 (volume 1, exhibit 2.5).
The Respondent advises that his assistant, Cam Tran, has no formal
qualifications in physiotherapy.
He states that he has trained her ‘
the operations of the practice and her abilities in this regard are the reason
why she remains employed as a useful physiotherapy
respect to the duties of the physiotherapy assistant the Respondent states:
As noted in my previous letter, my physiotherapy assistant has
no input or involvement in the treatment of patients. Her primary
relate to the reception of the practice and assisting with interpretations. She
assists me with treatments inasmuch as
she will obtain items that I request from
other parts of the practice or provide that necessary “third hand”
difficult taping technique. At no time is she left unsupervised during
a physiotherapy treatment of a patient.
Respondent also states in this letter that he had the assistance of three
physiotherapists – Cuong Le, Thuy Bridges and
Tuan Duong.
letter also advises that a number of records were lost when a robbery occurred
at his premises on 28 March 2006. The letter also
records that his access to
HICAPS with respect to HCF members had been terminated.
Tribunal notes at this point that the Police Report (volume 1, exhibit 3.2)
records that the Respondent reported on 29 march 2006
that the following items
were stolen: LCD flat screen monitor, DVD player, foot massager, ice cream (both
a container thereof and
some consumed from another container during the
robbery), fire extinguisher, mouse and a key board. However in this letter of 12
July 2006 the Respondent states that he no longer has access to his past
physiotherapy appointment books because a satchel was stolen
that contained
computer equipment, physiotherapy equipment, money and the ‘like’.
Letter from the Respondent to the HCCC dated 17 January
Respondent replied to a letter he received from the HCCC on 15 January 2007 by
way of a letter dated 17 January 2007 (volume 1,
exhibit 2.1).
Respondent confirmed that he had previously provided the names of the fully
qualified and registered physiotherapists who had
assisted him in his practice.
The Respondent stated that his only records were the electronic
‘back-up’ of records that
did not identify the names of the
physiotherapists who assisted him on the dates in question.
Respondent also stated that as his records were kept in the form of
‘Microsoft word documents’ he was unable to provide
a list of all
the patients seen in his practice on 9 November 2003 or the percentage of
patients funded by HCF on that date.
Letter to HCCC dated 5 April 2007
Respondent wrote the HCCC on 5 April 2007 (volume 1 - exhibit 2.3) in response
to the section 40 letter. The Respondent stated
that he was of the view that the
opinion expressed by the Peer Reviewer regarding the manner in which client
files should be maintained
to be a ‘fair review’. The Respondent
stated that from the content of the Peer Reviewer’s undated report it
not all relevant information may have been provided to the Reviewer.
The letter from the Respondent continues:
In essence, the summary by Kieran Pehm in the letter dated
March 2007 (received on
March 2007) that the care of my clients is
significantly below a reasonable standard, is based on the information provided
expert and relates to two key issues;
my clients’ notes are insufficient in their content and that this implies
that the care of my clients is affected as a
consequence.
the time made available for my clients is less than a reasonable standard and
that the care of my clients is affected as a consequence.
With regard to the second issue, the summary by Kieran Pehm in
this regard has been based on a false premise in the expert’s
noted in my letter to the HCCC on 23
confirmed in my letter to the HCCC on 12
and reconfirmed to the HCCC in my letter on 17
January 2007, there have been times in the past when other registered
physiotherapists assisted me in my practice.
I understand that the HCCC has contacted these other physiotherapists last
year and so it is with surprise that I note that this information
has not been
provided to the expert for inclusion in the expert’s review.
Once this information is taken into account, it is obvious that the issue
relating to the amount of time made available for the treatment
of clients above
is no longer a problem.
With regards to the first issue (standard of client notes), upon review of
the information contained within the expert’s report
and subsequent
discussions with other physiotherapy colleagues, I acknowledge that my note
taking may appear substandard when compared
to others’.
I have therefore taken steps to improve this aspect of my clinical
It should be noted that my previous level of note-taking has not in any
way affected the level or quality of treatment as I inherently
understand the
notes that I make and what they mean. In addition, I have never received even
the hint of a complaint from a client
with regards to my treatments.
Having said that, I do recognize that in the event of a complaint being
made or some external review of my notes being required, then
my previous level
of note-taking would be considered inadequate for that purpose.
Respondent also states that his ‘assistants’ only ever prepared the
patient but did not apply ultrasound or interferential
to the patient.
response to the Peer Reviewer’s comment that the only factor that had been
consistently recorded on each of the patient cards
was the HCF Membership Fund
Number, the Respondent claimed that he had just ‘got into the habit of
routinely collecting this
Respondent also stated that he did in fact record the patients’ areas of
reported pain and neurological signs by using a
notation on the body chart and
making the short hand notation ‘P+N’ in the clinical notes.
respect to the comments made in the Peer Report regarding the same treatment
regime being applied ‘time after time’
with minimal notations
regarding treatment (in particular on consecutive days there was no indication
of subjective or objective
changes in signs and symptoms) the Respondent
I have structured my treatments in a way that is systematic and
reproducible and this is indeed the reason for many of my referrals.
majority of clients are elderly private clients with chronic pain symptoms.
Thus the majority of treatments are “maintenance”
treatments that
allow the client to continue with activities of daily living and manage their
pain or condition. Clients who find
that the treatment I offer is of value to
them and offers them effective pain relief come back requesting the same
treatment. Except
where I feel that such a treatment would be detrimental, I
would have no reason not to perform the same maintenance procedure. Clients
know what to expect and what is expected of them and will in fact often recall a
particular modality and request the same.
Whilst I realise that performing the same treatment over and over may
attract criticisms from other physiotherapists, please bear
in mind that these
are private clients who are willingly coming, seeking and even requesting the
service I provide to maintain a
level of reduced pain and increased function.
If they have found benefit from the treatment in the past, they can confidently
back knowing that they will get the same result. Private clients have the
option of going elsewhere if the treatment provided is
not helping them,
particularly when there are a number of other physiotherapists in the local
Of course there are times when treatment may vary due to circumstances
such as the client’s signs and symptoms and specifics
which are unique to
the client and the diagnosis.
on in his letter the Respondent stated that he not only used the regimen of
massage, interferential (IF) and hotpacks but
also used ice and ultrasound to
relieve ‘the type of pain symptoms’ he encountered in the patients
at his clinic.
response to the comments made by the Peer Reviewer regarding the lack of ongoing
subjective or objective notes (to provide a basis
for assessment on return
visits and the formulation of appropriate treatment) The Respondent agreed that
there were ‘infrequent
‘subjective and objective’ notes. The
Respondent continued:
I must admit that I did not feel that this was absolutely
necessary to report how clients were feeling; my assumption being that their
condition was not resolved and hence their attendance at the physiotherapy
appointment. Additionally I did not record positive responses
to treatments
with each session note as I considered it inherent that they felt that their
condition was improving and the problem
was being addressed otherwise they would
not come back as a privately paying client. As noted in my comments at the
start of this
letter, I recognise my previous limitations in this regard and
have taken steps to improve the quality of my note-taking by making
record subjective and objective notes with each treatment.
response to the criticism made by the Peer Reviewer regarding there being no
record of warnings, consent or contra-indications
being recorded in the notes,
the Respondent stated that warnings for heat and electrical therapy were
‘posted in each treatment
room’. He stated that warnings were given
at the beginning of each treatment, however he acknowledged that he failed to
this information for each treatment. He stated that he considered that if
he had given the patient a verbal warning and had received
‘no contrary
advice by the client’ he understood that informed consent had been given
and he did not believe he needed
to record that for each consultation. The
Respondent stated that he now saw the ‘potential significance’ of
and had addressed the issue in his clinic at the time of writing the
respect to the comment made by the Peer Reviewer that the notes were not signed
off on each occasion the Respondent stated that
this was difficult to achieve
with the electronic records that he kept and he felt that combined with an
appointment book that would
constitute an appropriate record.
Respondent commented upon the calculation made by the Peer Reviewer that the
Respondent must have seen five patient an hour, every
hour without a break to
have seen the volume of patients recorded by confirming that he had
‘colleagues’ to help him
out when client loads demanded it. He
described his typical treatment sessions as follows:
Typically I spend approximately 50 percent of time hands on with
the client and approximately 50 percent of the other time with EPA
modalities.
Typically treatment is approximately 10-15 minutes hands on and 10-15 minutes
EPA modality resulting in total treatment
of 20mins-30mins (as it transpires,
this is very similar to the
“20 minutes as an absolute
suggested by the expert in point 3). I am aware of a lot of
physiotherapy clinics who follow a similar treatment pattern and some
reduced treatment times and charge accordingly.
I would also like to point out that the typical physiotherapy fee for
standard 20 minute consultation is $55. Also there are many
physiotherapy
practices that charge extended consultation fees as well as short duration fees.
On a cost to time ratio, seeing as
I charge HCF’s clients only $35 for
initial and $30 standard fee, I feel that I would be justified in performing a
duration of treatment if warranted. I am not implying that I do this
however, but just raising the point that some physiotherapy
centres have the
option of short consultations (ie 10-15mins) depending on the symptoms and
nature of the problem and charge $30
or possibly more for short
To my knowledge there is no rule as to how much to charge or the duration
that a treatment should extend, rather just guidelines.
Ultimately, It’s
up to the clients and what they are willing to pay for a particular duration of
Respondent stated that his assistant only prepared the patients for ultra-sound
or interferential treatments.
Respondent admitted he used ‘MAPA’ indicating he was a member of the
Australian Physiotherapy Association when he
was not currently a member. He
states that he had previously been a member and the notation remaining on his
letterhead was an ‘oversight’
that had now been rectified.
Respondent clarified that the use of the massage chair was not recorded as
‘massage’ on the patient records. Massage
was only recorded if it
was ‘hands on’. The massage chair was only used as an
‘optional extra’ for patients
to assist them in overcoming the
frustration of waiting for their treatment.
Respondent also commented upon the statement made by the Peer Reviewer regarding
the comments made by HCF regarding ‘settling
the matter’ if the
Respondent made payments to HCF. This issue is not relevant to the matters
before the Tribunal.
Letter from the Respondent dated 18 May 2009
Respondent replied to the letter from the HCCC dated 22 April 2009 (details set
out above under heading of Background to the Complaint)
by letter dated 18 May
2009 (volume 1, exhibit 2.8). In this letter the Respondent confirmed that he
had up to three ‘additional
physiotherapists’ helping him on an
‘as-needs’ basis, particularly on weekends as this was his busiest
Respondent advised that the physiotherapists assisted with the treatment of
patients after he had undertaken the initial assessment.
He would then suggest
treatment that would be carried out by the assisting physiotherapist.
to the question regarding whether or not the other physiotherapists were in fact
assisting him on the relevant dates the Respondent
Assuming then information provided in your letter with respect
to the number of treatments provided on the 9.11.2003 and 5.12.204
is accurate
then I would suspect that they would have assisted me on those days given the
higher than usual number of clients.
the letter from the Respondent encloses three examples of recent client note he
does not confirm or deny whether or not the
three other physiotherapists were
present on the relevant days. Further he comments:
Assuming there were 123 services on 5.12.2004 cared for by 4
therapists, this would be an average of 30.75 patients per therapist.
that there are several practices that see 30 or even more patients on a regular
quality of the three sets of clinical notes demonstrated an improvement in
standards from those provided to the Physiotherapy
Adviser and Inspector on 10
February 2006.
Respondent’s evidence regarding Complaints Three and
Respondent’s legal advisers provided a statutory declaration dated 1 July
2010 which set out for the best part the evidence
he relied upon with respect to
Complaints Three and Four. The statutory declaration is set out at Annexure C
Letter dated 16 June 2008
letter written by the Respondent to the HCCC dated 16 June 2008 is volume 5 -
exhibit 13. The Tribunal has considered the totality
of the contents of this
letter but notes on page 2 of this letter at paragraph 2) the Respondent
The female staff member is my physiotherapy
aid/assistant/’support worker. Physiotherapy aid/assistant/support workers
common use in hospitals as well as private practice. Her role is to
assist me in the provision of a physiotherapy treatment. She
is supervised at
all times and does not make any decisions or have any input with respect to the
treatment of a patient. Her actions
in and of itself alone do not constitute a
physiotherapy treatment nor is she premitt4ed to perform actions which would be
exclusively that of a registered physiotherapist. It is with my
assessment, instruction and supervision combined with other physiotherapy
modality and note taking which constitutes a physiotherapy consultation. This
treatment was processed under my name.
Letter received by HCCC on 22 October 2008
letter from Kennedy’s on behalf of the Respondent was received by the HCCC
on 22 October 2008 (volume 5 - exhibit 15). The
entirety of the contents of the
letter has been considered by the Tribunal.
paragraph 2.1 the letter states:
We are instructed that Mr Duong’s assistant did not
perform a ‘treatment’ on [Patient A-k], rather Mr Duong, after
had examined and prescribed a treatment regime for [Patient A-K] instructed his
assistant to give him as massage.
paragraph 2.2 the letter states:
On Mr Duong’s instructions and in his presence his
assistant placed the hot packs and the pads for the interferential machine
[Patient A-K]. Mr Duong checked the placement of the hot pack and the
interferential pads. After directing and checking the placement
of the hot pack
and the interferential pads Mr Duong turned on the interferential machine. Mr
Duong was the only person allowed to
operate the interferential machine.
paragraph 8.4 the letter states:
The only task that Mr Duong delegated to his assistant was the
administration of a massage. In doing so Mr Duong made an assessment
assistant’s level of competence, training and experience and deemed that
his assistant could perform the massage. He
chose a task that in his
professional opinion was within the training, experience and skill of his
assistant and provided an appropriate
level of supervision.
Letter received by HCCC on 17 June 2009
letter from Kennedy’s on behalf of the Respondent was received by the HCCC
on 17 June 2009 (volume 5 - exhibit 18). The entirety
of the contents of the
letter has been considered by the Tribunal.
respect to the issue of whether a structured examination was performed and
whether he provided an adequate provisional diagnosis,
anatomical explanation or
prognosis, the Respondent provided the following comments (at paragraph 11):
Nevertheless, we are instructed that a short assessment was
performed to determine a provisional diagnosis and refer the Commission
paragraph 9 above. We are further instructed that the diagnosis was explained to
[Patient A-K] verbally.
respect to the criticisms made regarding the clinical notes kept, the Respondent
comments at paragraph 12 as follows:
Taking each point in turn our client instructs us as
(a) The body chart is filled in to the extent that it is required with
the area of pain (left shoulder) marked clearly;
(b) Areas of pain (left shoulder) are clearly marked and as there are no
other areas of pain or concern it was unnecessary record
other joints
(c) It is likely that no past history or past treatments were disclosed
by [Patient A-K] when his oral history was taken and therefore
not recorded in
the notes. Further, we are instructed that the completion of this part of the
note is not essential to the identification
of the problem that [Patient A-K]
presented with. We are instructed that once a preliminary diagnosis was
performed this information
could have been obtained, if necessary;
(d) [Patient A-K] did not report any daily pattern to his pain;
(e) The only special question not asked was concerning weight loss to
rule out the possibility of cancer, a condition unlikely given
A-K]’s age, fitness area of pain, and mechanism of injury; and
(f) The notations that our client used were recorded in shorthand and we
invite the Commission to examine the clinical notes were
the shorthand W CI and
IC appear for warning, contraindications and informed consent
respectively.
Submissions
Submissions made by the HCCC
HCCC made oral submissions at the end of the Inquiry.
Submissions made by the Respondent
Respondent made submissions in person with respect to Complaints One and
Respondent’s legal representatives provided a comprehensive written
submission with respect to Complaints Three and Four
which was supplemented by
oral submissions during the Inquiry. The submission is reproduced at Schedule C
HCCC Submissions in reply
HCCC made submissions in reply orally at the conclusion of the Inquiry.
General Findings regarding aspects of the Respondent’s
Respondent claimed that he was helped in his practice from time to time when he
was busy by his sister, Ms Thuy Bridges, his brother,
Mr Tuan Duong and his
friend, Mr Cuong Le. The Respondent stated that as he was busy on the days set
out in the Particulars that
he assumed he had their assistance on these days. He
was unable to provide any documentation or extraneous evidence to support this
Tribunal further notes that the Respondent first made this assertion on 23 May
2006 in a letter to the HCCC despite the fact that
he had been interviewed by Mr
Maher, the HCF Investigator on three occasions (27/1/05, 2/2/05 12/4/05) and by
Ms Kindness and Mr
Derrick on 10 February 2006. The records of the interview
between the Respondent and Ms Kindness and Mr Derrick indicate that they
specifically asked the Respondent to account for the very high number of
patients he had seen on 9 November 2003.
cross-examination the Respondent confirmed he was still in contact with each of
these physiotherapists. Despite the fact that
the Tribunal informed the
Respondent that Ms Bridges was required for cross-examination the Respondent
gave evidence that he had
not even asked her to attend before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal does not put any weight on the evidence of Ms Bridges.
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination (T 49.53-
55.12, 9/9/10):
Q. Have you produced one document in your case that shows that
these other physiotherapists did attend on certain days?
A. My submissions - I believe the - the HCCC contacted
various people.
Q. No, I'm talking about your case, what you've produced, either to this
A. I've only produced what I've submitted.
Q. There supposedly were three physiotherapists who used to help out at your
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Your sister?
Q. Tuan Duong?
Q. Your brother?
Q. And is it Kuong
Q. Who's he?
A. A friend.
Q. Is he still around? Still living in Sydney?
A. I believe so.
Q. Do you still keep in contact with him?
A. I haven't been in contact for a while.
Q. And you used to remunerate those physiotherapists when they used to work
at your premises? You'd remunerate them directly?
A. I'd like to clarify that. I did not pay them in any way.
Q. No, answer my question. You remunerated them directly didn't you?
A. I did not pay them in any way.
Q. No, answer my question Mr Duong. Did you or did you not
remunerate them directly?
A. I took them out to lunch. If that's remuneration.
Q. So that's what you meant by remuneration, lunch?
A. Yes, or dinner.
Q. How many days in 2003 did these physiotherapists work for you?
A. I wouldn't know.
Q. Right. How many days in 2004 did they work for you?
A. I - I cannot answer that.
Q. Because you don't know.
A. Yes, I don't know.
Q. There's no record, is there? There's no record you can produce which
evidences the days on which they supposedly worked for you?
A. I do not have the evidence.
Q. There is no evidence Mr Duong, is there?
A. I do not have the evidence.
set out above, the Tribunal received some evidence from Ms Bridges. She stated
that she had helped her brother in his practice
but had no records of the dates
that this had occurred. It is also of concern that she stated that (despite the
fact she was a registered
physiotherapist at the time) she would undertake
treatment as suggested by the Respondent rather than treating the patient based
on her own assessment and judgment.
Tribunal does not accept the evidence of the Respondent that he was assisted on
the particular dates in question by any other
physiotherapist(s).
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated in his letter to the Tribunal dated 2
June 2010 that he admitted Complaint One. This
was retracted in some small
respects at the hearing as indicated below.
Tribunal’s Findings of Fact – re the Particulars
of Complaint One (and Two)
(i) The physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at 3D
Physiotherapy, First Floor Suites 1 & 2 69 John Street Cabramatta
Particular was admitted by the Respondent and is not in dispute. There is
substantial evidence to support this Particular. It
is established.
(ii) The practice was generally open seven days a week and
during the hours of 9am to 6pm
Particular was admitted by the Respondent and is not in dispute. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established. The Respondent
clarified this issue by stating that during busy periods, such as occurred on 5
December 2004, he would
work from 8.00 am to 8.00 pm.
(iii) On 9 November 2003 the physiotherapist was responsible for
the treatment of 71 patients. Details of the number of patients treated
November 2003 is set out in the Table in Schedule A to this complaint
Particular was admitted by the Respondent and is not in dispute. There is
substantial evidence to support this Particular. It
is established.
(iv) On 5 December 2004 the physiotherapist was responsible for
the treatment of 118 patients. Details of the number of patients treated
December 2004 is set out in the Table in Schedule B to this complaint
Particular was admitted by the Respondent and is not in dispute. There is
substantial evidence to support this Particular. It
is established.
(v) On 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004 the physiotherapist
failed to provide appropriate treatment to the patients in that:
(a) a large percentage of the treatments involved only non manual
treatment such as the application of hot packs and interferential
machine to the
(b) and/or the physiotherapist did not allocate sufficient time for the
adequate treatment of his patients
Respondent admitted part (a) of this Particular. There is substantial evidence
to support this part of the Particular. It is established.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent did not admit part (b) of this Particular.
As set out above, the Tribunal does not accept
the Respondent’s evidence
that he was assisted by other physiotherapists. It therefore becomes impossible
for the Respondent
to have allocated sufficient time to patients on 9 November
2003 or 5 December 2004 even with the extended hours of work.
Respondent gave evidence that he operated his practice without a dedicated
receptionist, but at times he had a
‘physio assistant’
Tribunal had evidence from Ms Cam Nhung Tran. She was a ‘physio
assistant’ for the Respondent for about 12 months
in around 2007. There
was no evidence regarding the employment of any physiotherapy assistants at the
times relevant to this complaint.
that the records before the Tribunal indicate that the Respondent made claims
through the HICAPS system for the treatment of
approximately 71 patients on 9
November 2003 and approximately 118 patients on 5 December 2004 the Tribunal
cannot accept that he
provided appropriate treatment to those patients on those
the circumstances of the Respondent’s practice, any physiotherapy
consultation would require, at a minimum, sufficient time
for the following
matters to be attended to:
Assessment of
the patient’s current condition – which should include subjective
and objective indicators
Formulation of a
physiotherapy diagnosis if not already made or consideration of altering the
physiotherapy diagnosis on the basis
of the patient’s response to previous
treatment and their current presentation.
Planning and
Implementation of the treatment
Re-evaluation of
signs and symptoms after treatment
Adjustment to
any exercise regime and provide advice and education on continued management
Recording of
findings and treatment provided
Appropriate
administration of the payment for the treatment and making any future
appointment
twelve hour day equates to 720 minutes. Without allowing for any toilet or meal
breaks this would equate to approximately 6 to 10
minutes per patient.
Tribunal cannot accept that the Respondent allocated sufficient time for the
adequate treatment of his patients. This Particular
is established.
(vi) The physiotherapist failed to keep adequate records of
treatment of his patients on 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004 in that
(a) failed to record adequate current history notes of the patients;
(b) failed to record adequate past history notes of patients;
(c) failed to record relevant information for determining treatment such
as occupation, social history or hobbies of the patient;
(d) failed to record adequate notations on the Body chart;
(e) failed to record adequately the treatment plan for patients; and
(f) failed to record ongoing subjective or objective notes for return
treatment of patients.
Tribunal has reviewed the notes for the patients seen by the Respondent on 9
November 2003 and 5 December 2004. The Tribunal notes
the Respondent’s
evidence that these records were mostly kept as word documents that could be
altered at any time.
notes rarely contain any records of current or past history. The notes rarely
recorded information relevant to determination of
treatment such as occupation,
or social history.
body charts in the notes kept by the Respondent for treatment provided on these
dates were inadequate.
was little in the notes that could be characterised as a treatment plan. A
record of the treatment provided is not a treatment
plan and there is a distinct
lack of variation in the treatment provided over time.
is nothing in the notes that indicates subjective or objective notes for return
patients apart from the occasional notation
such as ‘much better’ or
‘good relief’ which is inadequate.
Particular was admitted by the Respondent and is not in dispute. There is
substantial evidence to support this Particular. It
is established.
Tribunal’s findings in relation to the Complaint One
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the evidence supports a finding that the
Particulars of Complaint (i), (ii), (iii), (iv),
(v), (vi) are established as
indicated above and that the Respondent engaged in conduct that demonstrates
that the skill and judgment
possessed, and care exercised, by the
physiotherapist in the practice of physiotherapy is significantly below the
standard reasonably
expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience and has been guilty of improper and unethical conduct
the course of the practice of physiotherapy.
conduct of the Respondent was far below acceptable standards of physiotherapy
practice. The character of the operation may have
been seen as a vehicle for
obtaining money from private health insurers on the pretext of providing
physiotherapy services. The service
provided appeared to be so far below minimal
standards it does not, in the opinion of the Tribunal, amount to physiotherapy
Tribunal finds that the conduct of the Respondent is of a sufficiently serious
nature to warrant his suspension or removal from
the Register and therefore
makes a finding of professional misconduct. Complaint Two is therefore
established.
Tribunal is of the view that any application for registration (or
re-registration with respect to physiotherapy) made by the Respondent
considered by a Tribunal (or the equivalent thereof).
Tribunal’s Findings of Fact – re the Particulars
of Complaint Three (and Four)
(i) The physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at 3D
Physiotherapy, First Floor Suites 1&2 69 John Street Cabramatta
Particular (i) from Complaints One and Two above.
(ii) On 21 December 2007 the physiotherapist provided treatment
to a patient presenting as “Emad Abdul-Kareem” (Patient
referred to in Schedule E)
Particular is admitted by the Respondent and is not in dispute (see paragraph 19
of the Respondent’s statutory declaration
dated 1 July 2010). The Tribunal
is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established. The Tribunal notes
that the clinical
records made by the Respondent for this consultation was a one
page document found at volume 5 - exhibit 6.
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
improper or unethical conduct in the following respects:
(a) The physiotherapist did not undertake an adequate initial assessment
of the patient or take an adequate history from the patient
submissions made by the Respondent (Annexure B hereto) with respect to this
Particular are found at paragraphs 25 to 34. The Respondent’s
declaration (Annexure C hereto) deals with this matter in paragraphs 29 to 32.
Tribunal has carefully reviewed the contents of the clinical notes made by the
Respondent for the relevant consultation. There
is a brief record of the current
history, there is however no record of the diurnal pattern of pain, what factors
aggravate or ease
the pain since the injury, past history of previous treatment,
previous weight loss and cauda equina symptoms.
Respondent’s claim that he did undertake an adequate assessment and take
an adequate history but chose not to record negative
findings, the Tribunal is
of the view this is inconsistent with an appropriate standard of note taking and
inconsistent with the
evidence of Patient A-K.
failure to record to these matters allows the Tribunal to find that the
Respondent failed to undertake an adequate initial assessment
of the patient or
take an adequate history from the patient. The Tribunal finds this Particular
established.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient A-K that the Respondent did not ask him
social history, the presence
of a pace maker, whether he was suffering from pins and needles, past history
(including surgery), previous
problems with back, vertebral artery questions,
previous treatment, diurnal pattern of pain, aggravating factors or weight loss.
an aside at this point, the Tribunal notes that the evidence from Patient A-K is
that he reported an injury to his right shoulder.
Further, he did in reality
have an injury to his right shoulder. In contrast to this evidence the body
chart in the clinical notes
indicated that the left shoulder was the injured
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
improper or unethical conduct in the following respects:
(b) The physiotherapist failed to perform a structured examination of the
patient and to provide a provisional diagnosis of the patient
submissions made by the Respondent with respect to this Particular are found at
paragraphs 35 to 37. The Respondent’s statutory
declaration deals with
this matter in paragraphs 33 to 37.
Tribunal has carefully reviewed the contents of the clinical notes made by the
Respondent for the relevant consultation. There
is a brief note under the
‘Observation’
range of movement under two of the four movement directions. There is no
notation next to two of the direction movements. There is
another brief note
next to ‘Palpation’ that reads ‘
pain/tenderness’
. There are no other notations recording a structured
examination.
Respondent’s evidence is that the notation made under the heading
‘Current History’
that reads ‘
SH strain 1 week ago
after working out at gym – deltoid mm with pully’
provisional diagnosis. The Respondent also gave evidence that he said to the
‘This seems to be a minor muscle strain or tear in the
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient A-K that the Respondent did ask him to
move his arm up and down while he was standing at
the counter when he presented
at the practice. Patient A-K also gave evidence that he was not tested for hot
and cold sensations.
There was nothing in the evidence of Patient A-K that could
be interpreted to be part of a structured examination. Patient A-K agreed
the Respondent may have told him he though he was suffering from a
‘minor muscle strain or tear in the shoulder’
. Even on the
Respondent’s evidence he does not recall undertaking a check of forced
internal rotation or a supra-spinatus test
of the injured area. The testing the
Respondent claimed to have undertaken would not be sufficient to constitute a
structured examination.
Other elements that should have been completed for an
examination to be considered an adequate structured examination in the
circumstances
of this presentation could have included be an examination of the
joints above and below the injury, a comparison with the non-injured
passive joint mobilizations and measurement of active, passive and resisted
range of movement. The Respondent accepted that
there were many elements to a
structured examination (T75, 9/9/10).
identification of a minor muscle strain or tear in the shoulder is not an
adequate provisional diagnosis. The Respondent may have
undertaken some elements
of a physical examination but not a structured examination.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent failed to perform a
structured examination of the patient and to provide
a provisional diagnosis of
the patient. This Particular is established.
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
improper or unethical conduct in the following respects:
(c) The physiotherapist did not operate the interferential machine when it
was applied to the patient but allowed an unqualified assistant
to operate the
interferential machine on the patient in the absence of the
physiotherapist
submissions made by the Respondent with respect to this Particular and the next
Particular are found at paragraphs 38 to 50. The
Respondent’s statutory
declaration deals with this matter in paragraphs 38 to 45.
regard to the evidence of Ms Tran, in particular noting she was not required for
cross-examination the Tribunal cannot be reasonably
satisfied that the
Respondent did not operate the interferential machine when it was applied to the
patient but allowed an unqualified
assistant to operate the interferential
machine on the patient in the absence of the physiotherapist. This Particular is
not established.
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
improper or unethical conduct in the following respects:
(d) The physiotherapist failed to supervise adequately the unqualified
assistant during the treatment of the patient;
submissions made by the Respondent with respect to this Particular and the
previous Particular are found at paragraphs 38 to 50.
The Respondent’s
statutory declaration deals with this matter in paragraphs 38 to 45.
evidence of Patient A-K was not clear in terms of the actual physiotherapy
treatment provided to him. His oral evidence did not
clarify his evidence
regarding the physiotherapy treatment to a degree that would allow the Tribunal
to be reasonably satisfied that
the Respondent failed to supervise adequately
the unqualified assistant during the treatment of the patient. This Particular
is therefore
not established.
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K
demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
improper or unethical conduct in the following respects:
(e) The physiotherapist failed to keep adequate records of his treatment
of Patient A-K on 21 December 2007 in that the physiotherapist:
not complete the body chart;
not record past history or previous treatment;
not record daily pattern;
not adequately complete the section headed Special Questions;
not record Warnings, contra-indications and consent relating to the patient;
not record any instructions given to the unqualified assistant.
submissions made by the Respondent with respect to this Particular and the
previous Particular are found at paragraphs 52 to 58.
The Respondent’s
statutory declaration deals with this matter in paragraphs 48, 49 and 51.
‘did not complete the body chart’
the Tribunal
notes the evidence of Mr Lucas as set out in paragraph 7 of page 3 of the peer
report and his oral evidence that the
notations on the body chart should not
only include a shading to the affected area but should also include information
quality, severity and intensity of the pain (T45.11-14, 9/9/10).
Further (at T7, 9/9/10) Mr Lucas also stated that the distribution
of the pain,
referral of the pain, a record of whether the joints above and below have been
assessed and the outcome of those findings
should be recorded on a body chart.
The Tribunal notes that this information is not contained elsewhere in the
clinical record in
any other format apart from the words
next to the word ‘Palp’. The Tribunal notes that
this was a record of the pain upon palpation and not a record of the
at rest or during active, passive or resisted movement. The shading on the body
chart does not amount to a completed body
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the body chart is not complete.
respect to ‘
did not record past history or previous
the Tribunal notes there is nothing in the clinical record
apart from the notation regarding the
occurring in
1 week ago’
. There is no record of previous
treatment. If there had been no previous treatment then the Respondent should
have ensure this was
Tribunal notes that Mr Lucas stated that ‘negatives’ should also be
recorded (T8.31, 9/9/10). The record regarding
previous treatment is absent.
Tribunal is of the view that the record of how the injury occurred is
insufficient. Details such as the type of exercise being
undertaken, the
duration and intensity of the exercise, the stage of the workout, the pattern of
the pain in relation to the injury,
how the pain had altered since the time of
the injury. The record regarding past history is incomplete and does not
represent a past
history rather it is a presenting complaint.
Tribunal is satisfied that this Particular is established.
‘did not record daily pattern’
the Tribunal notes
the evidence of the Respondent. If Patient A-K did not report any variations to
the Respondent when asked, then
the Respondent should have recorded that there
was a lack of diurnal variation in the clinical notes.
Tribunal is satisfied that this Particular is established.
respect to ‘
did not adequately complete the section headed Special
the Tribunal notes that the clinical record is
substantially completed.
Tribunal cannot be reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
With respect to
‘did not record Warnings, contra-indications and
consent relating to the patient’
the Tribunal notes that the
Respondent did record these matters in an abbreviated form. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that this Particular
is established.
respect to ‘
did not record any instructions given to the unqualified
the clinical record does not specify instruction for an
unqualified assistance beyond the record of the treatment. The Tribunal has
evidence from the Respondent that he wrote the notes following the completion of
the treatment (paragraph 48 – statutory declaration
of Respondent –
R1). The Tribunal also notes the evidence that the
was not conversant with the English language.
is no record of the instructions provided to the assistant. The Tribunal is
satisfied that this Particular is established.
Tribunal’s findings in relation to the Complaint Three
Tribunal has found Particulars (i), (ii), (iii)(a), (iii)(b), (iii)(e)1,
(iii)(e)2, (iii)(e)3 and (iii)(e)6 are established as
indicated above. The
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent engaged in conduct that demonstrates
that the skill and judgment
possessed, and care exercised, by the
physiotherapist in the practice of physiotherapy is significantly below the
standard reasonably
expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and has been guilty of improper and unethical conduct
the course of the practice of physiotherapy.
Tribunal finds Complaint Three established.
the Tribunal is of the view that the unsatisfactory professional conduct is of a
serious nature it is not reasonably satisfied
that the conduct would warrant
suspension or deregistration of the Respondent. It would however warrant
significant restrictions
on his practice.
Section 54 Protective Orders
Tribunal has made one finding of professional misconduct and one of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The nature of the conduct
demonstrates that
the Respondent has put the public safety at risk, brings the reputation of the
profession into disrepute and has
the potential to adversely impact on the trust
reposed in physiotherapists by members of the public.
conduct of the Respondent demonstrates a persistent pattern of behaviour. The
Respondent achieved his educational qualification
as a physiotherapist from an
Australian University relatively recently which was sufficient for the purpose
of registration. He is
not without experience. The clinical notes and manner of
operation of his practice does not demonstrate ethical, proper or professional
Tribunal also noted the Respondent has not worked as a physiotherapist since
late 2008 and recency of practice may be a significant
consideration,
particularly given the findings of the Tribunal regarding the limited range and
the nature of the treatment provided
to his patients (e.g. his management of
patients with chronic back pain) and the potential deficits in his clinical
knowledge (e.g.
his views on the symptoms of a cauda equina lesion and the role
of clinical notes). His practice was limited in scope, he did not
progress his
treatment throughout the episode of care and he applied the same treatments to a
patients with a range of conditions
with a range of ages, and he relied heavily
on electrotherapy.
Tribunal is concerned by the Respondent’s lack of insight as to his
professional responsibilities. For example, even after
concerns were raised with
him regarding the manner in which he practised he continued to practise in an
improper manner. The ‘improvements’
in his record keeping are not of
any moment when considered in the overall picture of his practice. The
Respondent will have to carefully
consider the characteristics of an ethical and
proper physiotherapy practice and be able to demonstrate his commitment to same
he apply in the future for registration.
was nothing, apart from the high likelihood that the Respondent would have
difficulty accessing the HICAPS scheme, to reassure
the Tribunal that the
Respondent would not engage in practising in the manner demonstrated by the
Particulars of Complaints One and
Tribunal is also concerned about the Respondent’s attitude to the practice
of physiotherapy. The patients were proffered
little privacy and an assistant
who did not have a common language with a patient was allowed to provide
treatment. He did not appreciate
the purpose of a proper evaluation and history
taking of the patient or the importance of keeping proper records. When asked
what risks may flow from not taking a thorough history from a patient he
initially stated that he considered the worse consequence
would be that it would
be wasting the physiotherapist’s time. He also did not appreciate the
health and safety risks involved
in administering the same treatment regimen to
a wide range of patients.
Tribunal must make a further observation regarding the Respondent’s
evidence on the issue of record keeping. It is of great
concern that the
Respondent thought it was appropriate to keep records of a different standard
and quality having regard to factors
such as whether the patient was privately
insured or receiving treatment as a result of some compensable injury. The
Respondent’s
evidence could have been interpreted as indicating he was of
the view that he was not obliged to keep records for privately insured
He did not appreciate, even after detailed questioning by the Tribunal, the
significance of clinical records. The Tribunal
notes that the accepted
professional practise is that clinical records for all patients are kept with
sufficient detail and clarity
to allow the ready identification of matters such
as the patient’s details, past history, presenting issue, conditions upon
presentation, treatment applied (including the identification of the person
undertaking the treatment), the outcome of the treatment
etc so that not only is
the practitioner able to confidently recount what occurred during the session
and make report thereon if
called upon but also so that another practitioner
would be in a position to safely take over the care of the patient if required.
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent demonstrated little or no appreciation
for the demands of and potential risks associated
with providing physiotherapy
services for up to 12 hours a day, seven days a week without respite.
is troubling that the Respondent allowed any treatment to proceed with Patient
A-K, whether administered by him or the untrained
assistant, when there had not
been an adequate history taking, when he had not undertaken an adequate initial
assessment, did not
perform a structured examination or provide a provisional
diagnosis of the patient.
aspect of the evidence before the Tribunal that is troubling was the manner in
which the Respondent kept his clinical records,
such as they were. The
Respondent kept the notes as word documents that could be altered at any time.
On his own admission he also
did not keep body charts as part of his clinical
notes at all during some periods of time.
is no doubt that the type of conduct engaged in by the Respondent is to be
deterred within the profession of physiotherapy.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent would require a minimum period of
two years to address the defects identified by the
findings made by this
is indeed unfortunate that the Tribunal has been unable to ascertain from AHPRA
whether or not action had been taken on the Respondent’s
letter requesting
that his name be removed from the Register. The Tribunal therefore has no
alternative than to make Orders that
cover both eventualities.
would be appropriate for any application for re-registration (once the two year
period has expired) to be considered by a tribunal.
The Tribunal makes the following Orders in this matter:-
Respondent is hereby reprimanded in terms of Annexure D hereto.
the Respondent’s name is not currently on the Register, the Tribunal
orders that the Respondent is not entitled to apply
for re-registration for a
period two year from the date hereof. Alternatively, if the name of the
Respondent remains on the Register
then his Registration is to be cancelled and
he is not entitled to apply for re-registration for a period two year from the
Respondent is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed. No submissions
were received regarding the apportionment of
costs between Complaint One and Two
as opposed to Complaints Three and Four. If the parties cannot agree on costs
(including the
apportionment thereof, if relevant) liberty is granted for an
application to apply to have the matter re-listed before the Tribunal
determine costs.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:-
1) The Respondent and his legal advisers
various private health insurers mentioned in this matter (HCF, Medibank Private,
NIB and MBF)
3) The HCCC and its legal advisers
4) AHPRA (NSW
5) The Physiotherapy Board of Australia
6) The New South Wales
Physiotherapy Council
others as the Physiotherapy Board of Australia and the New South Wales
Physiotherapy Council sees fit.
Dated: 22 October
_______________________
JOANNE MULLER
_______________________
ELIZABETH ELLIS
_______________________
RUTH PERROTT
_______________________
NOEL GREENAWAY
Annexure A – Schedule of Documents in Evidence
Annexure B –
Respondent’s Submissions
Annexure C – Respondent’s
statutory declaration dated 1 July 2010
Annexure D –
Annexure E - Schedule of Suppressed Names (Only to be kept with the
original Reasons for Decision Document and not to be published
in any version of
the document)
SCHEDULE OF EXHIBITS
HCCC V DUONG
HCCC – Volumes 1-4
Formal Documents
1.1 Complaint
1.2 Certificate of Registration (to be provided)
Correspondence between Health Care Complaints Commission
(“HCCC”) and Respondent
2.1 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 17 January 2007
2.2 Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 5 March 2007
2.3 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 5 April 2007
2.4 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 12 July 2006
2.5 Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 30 June 2006
2.6 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 23 May 2006; and
Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 2 May 2006.
2.7 Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 22 April 2009
2.8 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 18 May 2009
Other Witnesses/ Additional Documents
3.1 HCCC Investigator (Michael Randell) file notes of telephone
conversations with Thuy Bridges and Tuan Duong
3.2 Letter from NSW Police to HCCC dated 2 August 2006 and COPS
3.3 Statement of Thuy Bridges dated 31 December 2007
3.4 Attempts by HCCC Investigator to obtain statement from Tuan Duong
– 3 letters and a file note
3.5 Attempts by HCCC
Investigator to obtain statement from Cuong Le – file note and a
3.6 Hicaps agreement of Jonathan Duong Duong dated 8 December 1999
HCF Material
4.1 Letter from Newman to Randell dated 12 July 2006 to HCCC
Patient profiles
for 9 November 2003
4.2 Records of visits by Maher on 27 January 2005, 2 February 2005, 12
April 2005 and 2 pages of handwritten notes
4.3 Records of visit by Helen Kindness on 10 February 2006
4.4 Records of visit by Frank Derrick on 10 February 2006
4.5 Treatment entries of patients (4 pages)
4.6 Complaint by HCF to NSW Medical Board (“the Board”) dated
16 March 2006
4.7 Letter from HCF to Respondent dated 13 April 2005
4.8 (a) HCF Claims
Includes Data – claims for Duong 8 November 2003 to 31 December
4.8 (b) Letter from HCF to HCCC dated 4 June 2008 re name changes of
patients; Change of Name certificate; Customer Enquiry
4.9 Letter from HCCC to HCF received 2 October 2007;
Letter from HCF to HCCC received 12 October 2007 (plus 4 page
attachment)
4.10 Email from Luke Givney of HCF to HCCC dated 11 June 2008 plus
attachment – Claims for Duong for 5 December 2004
4.11 Email from Luke Givney of HCF to HCCC dated 10 June 2008 re: (a
NIB Material
5.1 Email from Scott Casey of NIB to HCCC Investigator dated 23 May 2008;
List of NIB members who received treatment by Mr Duong on 5 December
Emails between NIB and HCCC on 23 May 2008 (2 pages)
5.2 Email from HCF to HCCC dated 24 December 2007;
File note by HCCC Investigator dated 6 November 2007;
Letter from NIB to HCCC dated 2 November 2007
5.3 Letter from HCCC to HCF dated 5 May 2008;
Letter from NIB to HCCC dated 11 August 2008;
Email from NIB to HCCC dated 20 August 2008 with attached NIB records (1
Medibank Private Material
6.1 Letter from Medibank Private Limited (“Medibank”) to HCCC
dated 12 May 2008
6.2 List of patients for 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004
6.3 Letter from HCCC to Medibank dated 5 May 2008
6.4 Statement of Ian Miles dated 5 August 2008 and Annexure A and Annexure
6.5 Letter from HCCC to Medibank dated 11 August 2008
6.6 Email from HCCC to Medibank dated 15 August 2008 and attached Table (1
6.7 Emails from Medibank to HCCC and replies by HCCC on 15 August 2008 (2
MBF Material
7.1 Letter from HCCC to MBF dated 5 May 2008;
Patient data for claims relating to Mr Duong on 5 December 2004
7.2 Letter from MBF to HCCC
dated 2 November 2004
7.3 Statement of Margaret Street dated 5 August 2008 including Annexure
Patient Records
8.1 Mr Duong’s patient records for 9 November 2003
8.2 Letter from Mr Duong to HCCC dated 2 November 2007 and attached
patient files (11 pages)
8.3 (a) Letter from HCCC to Mr Duong dated 17 June 2008
8.3 (b) Letter from Kennedys to HCCC dated 4 July 2008
8.3 (c) Clinical Records for HCF patients
8.3 (d) Clinical Records for MBF patients
8.3 (e) Clinical Records for NIB patients
Expert reports and Correspondence
9.1 Letter to Mr Ashton Lucas from HCCC dated 4 September 2006
9.2 Revised Expert by Mr Ashton Lucas and CV of Ashton Lucas
9.3 First Report by Mr Lucas Ashton received 24 November 2006 and
Statement of Personal, Financial, Professional Connection
9.4 Email from HCCC Investigator to Expert dated 23 January 2007 (plus
attached letter);
Email from HCCC Investigator to Expert dated 16 February 2007
9.5 Australian Physiotherapy Association Code of Conduct
Formal Documents
1.1 Complaint
1.2 Certificate of Registration (to be provided)
Correspondence between Health Care Complaints Commission
(“HCCC”) and Respondent
2.1 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 17 January 2007
2.2 Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 5 March 2007
2.3 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 5 April 2007
2.4 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 12 July 2006
2.5 Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 30 June 2006
2.6 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 23 May 2006; and
Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 2 May 2006.
2.7 Letter from HCCC to Respondent dated 22 April 2009
2.8 Letter from Respondent to HCCC dated 18 May 2009
Other Witnesses/ Additional Documents
3.1 HCCC Investigator (Michael Randell) file notes of telephone
conversations with Thuy Bridges and Tuan Duong
3.2 Letter from NSW Police to HCCC dated 2 August 2006 and COPS
3.3 Statement of Thuy Bridges dated 31 December 2007
3.4 Attempts by HCCC Investigator to obtain statement from Tuan Duong
– 3 letters and a file note
3.5 Attempts by HCCC Investigator to obtain statement from Cuong Le
– file note and a letter
3.6 Hicaps agreement of Jonathan Duong Duong dated 8 December 1999
HCF Material
4.1 Letter from Newman to Randell dated 12 July 2006 to HCCC
Patient profiles
for 9 November 2003
4.2 Records of visits by Maher on 27 January 2005, 2 February 2005, 12
April 2005 and 2 pages of handwritten notes
4.3 Records of visit by Helen Kindness on 10 February 2006
4.4 Records of visit by Frank Derrick on 10 February 2006
4.5 Treatment entries of patients (4 pages)
4.6 Complaint by HCF to NSW Medical Board (“the Board”) dated
16 March 2006
4.7 Letter from HCF to Respondent dated 13 April 2005
4.8 (a) HCF Claims
Includes Data – claims for Duong 8 November 2003 to 31 December
4.8 (b) Letter from HCF to HCCC dated 4 June 2008 re name changes of
patients; Change of Name certificate; Customer Enquiry
4.9 Letter from HCCC to HCF received 2 October 2007;
Letter from HCF to HCCC received 12 October 2007 (plus 4 page
attachment)
4.10 Email from Luke Givney of HCF to HCCC dated 11 June 2008 plus
attachment – Claims for Duong for 5 December 2004
4.11 Email from Luke Givney of HCF to HCCC dated 10 June 2008 re: (a
NIB Material
5.1 Email from Scott Casey of NIB to HCCC Investigator dated 23 May 2008;
List of NIB members who received treatment by Mr Duong on 5 December
Emails between NIB and HCCC on 23 May 2008 (2 pages)
5.2 Email from HCF to HCCC dated 24 December 2007;
File note by HCCC Investigator dated 6 November 2007;
Letter from NIB to HCCC dated 2 November 2007
5.3 Letter from HCCC to HCF dated 5 May 2008;
Letter from NIB to HCCC dated 11 August 2008;
Email from NIB to HCCC dated 20 August 2008 with attached NIB records (1
Medibank Private Material
6.1 Letter from Medibank Private Limited (“Medibank”) to HCCC
dated 12 May 2008
6.2 List of patients for 9 November 2003 and 5 December 2004
6.3 Letter from HCCC to Medibank dated 5 May 2008
6.4 Statement of Ian Miles dated 5 August 2008 and Annexure A and Annexure
6.5 Letter from HCCC to Medibank dated 11 August 2008
6.6 Email from HCCC to Medibank dated 15 August 2008 and attached Table (1
6.7 Emails from Medibank to HCCC and replies by HCCC on 15 August 2008 (2
MBF Material
7.1 Letter from HCCC to MBF dated 5 May 2008;
Patient data for claims relating to Mr Duong on 5 December 2004
7.2 Letter from MBF to HCCC dated 2 November 2004
7.3 Statement of Margaret Street dated 5 August 2008 including Annexure
Patient Records
8.1 Mr Duong’s patient records for 9 November 2003
8.2 Letter from Mr Duong to HCCC dated 2 November 2007 and attached
patient files (11 pages)
8.3 (a) Letter from HCCC to Mr Duong dated 17 June 2008
8.3 (b) Letter from Kennedys to HCCC dated 4 July 2008
8.3 (c) Clinical Records for HCF patients
8.3 (d) Clinical Records for MBF patients
8.3 (e) Clinical Records for NIB patients
Expert reports and Correspondence
9.1 Letter to Mr Ashton Lucas from HCCC dated 4 September 2006
9.2 Revised Expert by Mr Ashton Lucas and CV of Ashton Lucas
9.3 First Report by Mr Lucas Ashton received 24 November 2006 and
Statement of Personal, Financial, Professional Connection
9.4 Email from HCCC Investigator to Expert dated 23 January 2007 (plus
attached letter);
Email from HCCC Investigator to Expert dated 16 February 2007
9.5 Australian Physiotherapy Association Code of Conduct
HCCC Volume 5
(a) Complaint dated 23 December 2009
(b) Certificate of Registration (to be provided at hearing)
Complaint by NIB Health Fund includes:
(a) Covering letter from NIB to the Board dated 6 May 2009 and provider report
dated 6 May 2008
(b) Receipt for session with Abdul-Kareem dated 21 December 2007;
(c) Electronic receipts for $30 and $40
(d) NIB letter to Mr Duong seeking treatment records dated 4 October 2007
(e) Mr Duong’s response to NIB advising of unavailable patient records
dated 12 October 2007
(f) NIB letter to Mr Duong seeking patient records (undated)
(g) NIB letter to Mr Duong advising of suspension of HICAPS contract dated 2
November2007
(h) NIB letter to Mr Duong seeking patient records dated 13 March 2008;
(i) Mr Duong’s response to NIB refusing provision of patient records dated
31 March 2008
Statement by Patient A-K, Investigator for NIB dated 22 October 2009
Statement dated 21 December 2007
receipt for payment
Statement of Daryl Bull dated 29 September 2009 and
Annexures A
(a) Transcript of Interview with Mr Duong’s former assistant, Ms Cam Nhung
Tran recorded on 22 July 2009
(b) Copy of ERISP CD recording of interview with Ms Tran recorded on 22 July
Patient record for “Patient A-K” dated 21 December 2007
Patient receipt from 3D Physiotherapy signed by Mr Duong
Record of transaction dated 21 December 2007
(a) Copy of DVD recording of visit by private investigator dated 21 December
2007 (vision only). Copied at HCCC on 25 May 2009
(b) DVD Timelog prepared by Commission Investigator (Julie
Request to Expert Reviewer dated 22 December 2008
Report of Expert Reviewer dated 22 March 2009
Commission letter advising Mr Duong of Investigation of Complaint, Section
28 dated 14 July 2008
Mr Duong’s response to the Commission dated 16 June 2008
Commission letter seeking a response to specific issues dated 23 September
Kennedy’s letter on behalf of Mr Duong providing response to specific
issues dated 23 September 2008, includes:
(a) Patient records for Patient A-K dated 21 December 2007
(b) Australian Physiotherapy Association Position Statement
with a physiotherapy assistant of other support worker”
dated March
Letter from Mr Duong to the Commission dated 9 January 2009
Section 40 letter from the Commission to Mr Duong dated 7 May 2009
Kennedy’s response to the Commission’s Section 40 letter dated
15 June 2009
Kennedy’s fax requesting copies of evidence dated 21 May 2009
Kennedy’s fax requesting evidence to prepare Section 40 response
dated 25 May 2009
Commission’s letter to Kennedy’s dated 27 May 2009 including
attachments:
(a) Commission’s email dated 25 May 2009 (1 page)
(b) Commission’s email dated 25 May 2009 and email from Kennedy’s
to Commission dated 25 May 2009 (2 pages)
(c) Kennedy’s letter dated 9 December 2008
Kennedy’s fax to the Commission dated 28 May 2009
Kennedy’s letter to the Commission dated 10 June 2009 with
attachments:
(a) NIB’s letter to Mr Duong re breaches dated 13 March 2008
(b) NIB Provider Requirements, Terms and Conditions
(c) Mr Duong’s letter to NIB re his practice dated 31 March 2008
(d) NIB’s letter to Mr Duong requesting treatment records dated 4 October
(e) Requested Records schedule
(f) NIB Summary of NIB Fund Rules
(g) Mr Duong’s letter to NIB dated 12 October 2007
(h) NIB’s fax to Mr Duong re Suspension of HICAPS status dated 2 November
(i) NIB’s letter to Mr Duong requesting records, undated
(j) Mr Duong’s letter to NIB dated 12 November
NIB’s letter to Mr Duong notifying of permanent
derecognition dated 6 May 2008.
Commission’s response to Kennedy’s letter dated 11 June
Kennedy’s letter to the Commission dated 11 June 2009
Letter from Physiotherapist Registration Board to the Commission dated 15
HICAPS Provider Agreement Details
NIB provider requirements, Terms and Conditions
Physiotherapists Registration Board Policy Statement No.2:1996
‘Physiotherapy Students’
DOCUMENTS RELIED UPON BY RESPONDENT
ONE AND TWO
Letter dated 2 June 2010 in addition to some of the documents filed by
COMPLAINTS THREE AND FOUR
Statutory declaration dated 22 July 2010
A. Respondent’s Resume
B. User Manual
– Interferential machine
C. Pictorial representation of an
Interferential machine
Physiotherapy Registration Board – Policy for working with therapy
E. Clinical notes – Patient A
Physiotherapy Registration Board – Policy for documentation in the
physiotherapy clinical record
HCCC V DUONG
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS IN RELATION TO COMPLAINTS 3
3 and 4 relate to the alleged events which occurred in respect of the treatment
of a single “patient” on 21
December 2007. The
“patient” was a private investigator (Mr Imad Zaineddine), engaged
by a private health fund, who
posed as a patient.
at 21 December 2007, the respondent (“
approximately 9 years’ experience in physiotherapy
Complaint 3
, the Healthcare Complaints Commission
Complainant
”) alleges that Mr Duong engaged in
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” within the meaning of
Physiotherapists Act
on the grounds that he:
in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed or
care exercised by the physiotherapist in the
practice of physiotherapy is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an
equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or
in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the practice of
physiotherapy.
Complaint 4
, the Complainant alleges, on the same grounds, that Mr Duong
engaged in “professional misconduct” within the meaning
of sections
25 and 26 of the Act.
In order to make good this complaint, the Complainant must establish that Mr
Duong engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
physiotherapist’s registration
Complainant relies upon the same particulars in relation to both complaints.
Those particulars are as follows:
(i) The physiotherapist
practised as a physiotherapist at 3D Physiotherapy, First Floor Suites 1 &
2, 69 John Street Cabramatta;
(ii) On 21 December 2007 the physiotherapist provided treatment to a
patient presenting as “Emad Adbul-Kareem” (Patient
A-K as referred
to in Schedule C);
(iii) The physiotherapist’s treatment of Patient A-K demonstrated a
lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and/or care
and/or improper or
unethical conduct in the following respects:
(a) The physiotherapist did not undertake an adequate initial assessment
of the patient or take an adequate history from the patient;
(b) The physiotherapist failed to perform a structured examination of the
patient and to provide a provisional diagnosis of the patient;
(c) The physiotherapist did not operate the inferential machine when it
was applied to the patient but allowed an unqualified assistant
to operate the
inferential machine on the patient in the absence of the
physiotherapist;
(d) The physiotherapist failed to supervise adequately the unqualified
assistant during the treatment of the patient; and
(e) The physiotherapist failed to keep adequate records of his treatment
of Patient A-K on 21 December 2007 in that the physiotherapist:
1. did not complete the body chart;
not record past history or previous treatment;
record daily pattern;
not adequately complete the section headed Special Questions;
not record Warnings, contra-indications and consent relating to the patient;
not record any instructions given to the unqualified assistant.
Particulars
(i) and (ii) are admitted. The other particulars are all denied.
the reasons given below, Mr Duong makes the following submissions:
as a matter of fact, the Complainant has not proven, to the comfortable
satisfaction of the Tribunal, that what occurred during
the treatment of the
private investigator on 21 December 2007 accords with the particulars of the
complaints.
on a correct understanding of what occurred during the treatment of the private
investigator on 21 December 2007, Mr Duong engaged
in neither unsatisfactory
professional conduct nor professional misconduct.
no order should be made against Mr Duong.
in the alternative to (c) above, if (contrary to these submissions) the Tribunal
is satisfied that Mr Duong’s conduct in relation
to the private
investigator on 21 December 2007 merits a protective order, such order should be
confined to an order for further
education, supervision or mentoring. In all
the circumstances, the Tribunal should decline to cancel Mr Duong’s
registration
as a physiotherapist.
The Complainant has
not proven its factual allegations concerning the treatment of the private
investigator on 21 December 2007
as here, professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct is
alleged, the civil standard of proof applies. However,
because of the
seriousness of the allegations and the gravity of their consequences, the
Tribunal must be “comfortably satisfied”
that the complaints have
established.
determining whether the Complainant has established its allegations on the
balance of probabilities, the Tribunal must have regard
to the seriousness of
the allegations and the gravity of their consequences. The nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process
by which reasonable satisfaction is
present case, “reasonable satisfaction” should not be produced by
“inexact proofs, indefinite testimony,
or indirect
inferences”.
the Tribunal “must feel an actual persuasion” of the occurrence or
existence of a fact before it can be found.
A fact cannot be found as a result
of “a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independently of any
belief in its
the present case, the Complainant’s evidence falls well short of
establishing, to the comfortable satisfaction of the Tribunal,
the factual
allegations in particulars (iii)(a) to (iii)(d). This is so for at least the
following reasons.
the DVD footage contains no audio at all. It is impossible to know what was
said by Mr Duong, the private investigator or the physiotherapy
assistant. The
peer reviewer, Mr Lucas, accepted that, in order to give an opinion about the
adequacy of a physiotherapist's treatment
of any particular patient, it would be
critical to know what was said by the physiotherapist to the patient and what
was said by
the patient to the
physiotherapist.
the DVD footage contains no vision for the critical 37 minutes commencing soon
after the private investigator enters the treatment
room up to the final few
minutes of the consultation. The vast majority of the time spent in the
treatment room, and the vast majority
of the consultation, is not recorded in
the footage. When asked whether, for the purpose of forming his view about the
or competence of Mr Duong's conduct, those were the critical
37 minutes,
Mr Lucas responded that he “
would've like to
have known what happened in that
Further, Mr Lucas accepted that those 37 minutes would have been
for him in forming his view about the competence and adequacy of
Mr Duong's conduct than the minutes of footage at the reception
the end when Mr Duong was demonstrating the
other than in respect of the highly selective portions of (silent) footage
depicting the opening minutes of the conversation at
the reception desk and the
final few minutes of the consultation in which Mr Duong demonstrates the
exercises, the private investigator’s
testimony has no independent
corroboration.
the private investigator’s evidence as to the detail of what occurred
during the consultation is not reliable. This is for
several reasons:
private investigator’s recollection of the events of 21 December 2007 is
poor. The events in question in Complaints 3 &
4 occurred almost 3 years
ago. Patient A-K’s evidence was that he attended “
” undercover investigations “
in that period
used the same story for all of
He said he conducted “
roughly 100
” of these investigations in
probably another 40
” in 2008 and “
” in 2009: at least 160 investigations in total since
He admitted
that he does not have a clear recollection of every single one of those
investigations.
Further, his evidence was that: “
Mr Duong could walk past me and I
wouldn't know
A-K accepted that his statement signed on 22 October 2008 did not record all the
words spoken by him or Mr
accepted that his statement does not even record that he said to Mr Duong
that he had injured his shoulder at the gym in the
Patient A-K
said in his evidence in
Mr Duong may have said to him that he thought he had a minor muscle strain;
and that, after the “
massage process
” was completed, Patient
A-K walked from the treatment room into a different room at the clinic where Mr
Duong demonstrated
the exercises. However, as Patient A-K accepted in
cross-examination
his statement dated 22 October 2008 did not contain any reference to either
of those facts.
In his evidence in chief, Patient A-K was confused about what document Mr
Duong had given him to prior to the consultation. At first,
Patient A-K
confidently said that Mr Duong had printed out and given to him a copy of his
clinical record.
Only when further questioned about this did Patient A-K correct his earlier
evidence and confirm that what Mr Duong had printed
out and given to him was a
receipt for his cash
Patient A-K’s evidence was that the suction cups on Mr Duong’s
interferential machine were
transparent.
fact, as Mr Duong said in his examination-in-chief, the suction cups on his
machine are not
transparent.
The correct conclusion is that Patient A-K has no independent recollection of
what occurred on 21 December 2007, other than what he
saw in the DVD footage and
what is recorded in his written statement. During cross-examination, the
following exchange
Q. ... it's fair to say, isn't it, that you have no independent
recollection of your consultation with Mr Duong on 21 December 2007,
other than what is seen in the footage and what you've recorded in your
A. Is there anything else I need to remember, other than what's in the
footage? I really don't understand what you're - you know,
the footage and what job I was instructed to do, Mr Duong could walk past
me and I wouldn't know him.
Q. I see. Other than footage and your statement, you have no other
recollection of what happened on 21 December, do you?
A. Footage, statement, the actual massage, half an hour; that's all I
need to remember.
There is a real risk that the private investigator has confused aspects of
his consultation on 21 December 2007 with one or more of
the many other very
similar investigations he has undertaken.
In all the circumstances, it is inherently likely that Patient A-K’s
recollection of the details of the events of 21 December
resisted by the private investigator in
cross-examination
the whole of the evidence strongly suggests that the focus of his undercover
visit was the financial transaction with Mr Duong,
not the details of his
diagnosis or treatment. On its face, the private investigator’s statement
signed 22 October 2008 evinces
a concern to record only those words spoken which
related to the financial transaction, not the diagnosis or
private investigator did not see who operated the interferential machine or what
directions or supervision was provided by Mr
Duong in relation to the assistant.
Patient A-K’s evidence was that, without viewing the video, he was not
certain that it
was the female who placed the machine on his
it was the female who turned on the
course, the footage does not show who placed or operated the interferential
machine. Patient A-K sought to explain this by saying
that, if it had been
Mr Duong who turned on the interferential machine, he “
kept the video
The reason he proffered for this was that his prime aim was to capture
Mr Duong, and not his assistant, on
explanation should be rejected. Objectively viewed, there is no plausible
reason why Mr Duong would have stopped filming at
all. Although he
resisted this
is likely that, if Mr Duong returned to the room unexpectedly, Patient A-K would
not have had sufficient time to resume filming
without arousing suspicion. That
is particularly so in light of his evidence in re-examination that, because of
the position of
the camera in the treatment room and the other circumstances, it
wasn’t as easy
” to turn the camera back
In any event,
as was exposed by the questioning from the
A-K’s explanation was internally inconsistent: he accepted that part of
the reason he was engaged by NIB was to ascertain
who provided which services,
and how much of the treatment Mr Duong did or did not do – in those
circumstances, it was not
correct, and entirely illogical, for Patient A-K to
say that he had no interest in capturing the assistant on
Patient A-K accepted that “
the only reason
” he said it was not Mr Duong who turned on the interferential
machine was the he did not capture Mr Duong doing that on
Patient A-K frankly admitted that, sitting in the witness box, he did not
have a mental picture of seeing who turned on the interferential
The private investigator’s evidence does not provide any reliable basis
for concluding that it was the assistant who turned
on or operated the
interferential machine.
private investigator does not speak
Vietnamese.
follow that he does not know what verbal instructions or directions were given
by Mr Duong to his assistant or what oral communications
passed between
private investigator’s evidence contains a glaring discrepancy in relation
to timing which the private investigator was
unable to explain in
cross-examination. Patient A-K accepted that, for the purpose of his
investigation, he knew it was important
to keep an accurate record of precisely
when he arrived and left the clinic and how long he spent in the treatment room,
as possible to the
that he arrived for his appointment at
there was no initial
consultation
that the massage process occupied
and that the massage was completed by about
Patient A-K
version of events left a period of 20 minutes for which no account is
A-K has given inconsistent evidence in relation to important details of the
consultation and treatment:
his statement signed 22 October 2008, the private investigator said that Mr
did not take part in the massage process at any stage, and was
not present in the
Under cross-examination, Patient A-K confirmed that his evidence was Mr Duong
was not present in the room at any time during the
massage process, and did not
come back into the room to check on the massage process at any
in his evidence in chief, Patient A-K had said that he recalled that, on one or
maybe two occasions during the massage
process, Mr Duong opened the curtain
and asked if he was in any
confronted with the inconsistency during cross-examination, Patient A-K conceded
that he made no mention in his statement signed
on 22 October 2008 that
Mr Duong at any time came into the room or opened the curtain and asked if
he was okay during the massage
his statement signed 22 October 2008, the private investigator said that the
Asian female placed the machine on his “
In cross-examination, he said it was the “
shoulder, and indicated the front part of the shoulder and down onto the arm and
up towards the deltoid
Subsequently in the cross-examination, he said he had meant “
and, later again, that it was “
the front, that’d be the back and
that’d be the
private investigator’s various descriptions as to whether he received an
interferential machine treatment, or a manual or
machine massage, or both, are
confused, imprecise and unreliable. His statement signed 22 October 2008
appears to suggest that he
received a single 30-minute manual massage from Ms
both in his
his oral evidence
Patient A-K described a vibrating sensation or “surges”. According
to the evidence of
is consistent with the use of a massage machine. In his statement, the private
investigator did not describe a tingling sensation
or electrical pulse –
that is the sensation he would have experienced from the interferential
Lucas accepted.
However, in his oral evidence, Patient A-K was more equivocal: he said he
” felt a tingling
private investigator’s evidence, in the witness box, that he received a
single 30-minue interferential machine treatment
no other machine treatment (such as hand-held massage
inconsistent with:
Tran’s (unchallenged) description in her interview with the Complainant as
to the usual treatment prescribed by Mr Duong:
hot packs for about
10 minutes, interferential machine for about 15 minutes, and a massage of
5 minutes with a massage
Duong’s clinical
records that the private investigator received a manual massage, followed by a
hot pack and interferential machine treatment
(15 minutes); and
Duong’s evidence that he prescribed treatment with hot packs,
interferential machine, massage and a regime of strengthening
Lucas’s evidence that a 30-minute interferential treatment would be highly
unusual and, in the context of a first consultation
with a new patient, would be
extremely unusual.
Mr Lucas said he has never prescribed a 30-minute interferential treatment for a
patient on a first
the common treatment period, including for a first-time patient presenting with
a minor muscle strain in the shoulder, would
be 10 to 15
Duong’s clear and emphatic evidence that his usual treatment time for an
interferential treatment is 10 to 15 minutes; and
that he would only prescribe
a 30-minute interferential treatment for any patient in extremely rare
circumstances, particularly for
a new patient at a first
consultation.
This indicates that the private
investigator’s evidence is inaccurate in relation to an important detail
in circumstances where
it was part of his task to monitor and record precisely
what Mr Duong did, and did not, do. Further, this indicates that, in preparing
his statement, the private investigator did not take basic steps to ensure that
his statement accurately recorded what had occurred.
A-K’s explanation of the process by which he created his written statement
reflects adversely on the reliability of
the whole of his evidence. Patient A-K
accepted that the initial version of the statement that he provided to NIB on or
was prepared
on the very afternoon of his visit to Mr Duong’s clinic, at a time when
the events were fresh in his memory, and
consequently that this version of the
statement was more likely to be accurate, complete and comprehensive than any
accepted that, in the statement, he had said that it accurately set out the
evidence which he would be prepared, if necessary,
to give in court as a
Patient A-K then identified four sentences in paragraph 7 of that version of the
statement which addressed an entirely
different investigation, unrelated to Mr
Duong, which appeared in this statement by error on Patient A-K’s part:
an error in “cutting” and “pasting” from
another statement of his in relation to a different investigation,
or an error
in failing to save and email the correct, final version of the statement after
using a previous statement from a different
investigation as a
Patient A-K confirmed that, after NIB had brought these errors to
his attention, Patient A-K made changes to the statement: he could
when that was.
In the course of his evidence explaining this error, Patient A-K
Because as I stated earlier, that was an error. It’s passed
through to the keeper. That happens.
The manner in which Patient A-K prepared and corrected his statement, and his
oral evidence on this topic, demonstrate, from the very
day of the events in
question, an attitude to the preparation and presentation of his evidence which
was imprecise, unprofessional
and cavalier.
Patient A-K’s protestations to the
a real risk that the reliability of the private investigator’s evidence,
or his reconstruction of events in his own
mind, is undermined by a bias,
whether conscious or subconscious, in favour of the private health fund (NIB)
which engaged him, paid
his fee and was likely to have substantial continuing
demand for the services of private investigators such as Patient
the statements made by the physiotherapy assistant (Ms Tran) in her interview
Complainant
strongly corroborates Mr Duong’s
Duong never permitted Ms Tran to operate the interferential machine;
Tran never operated the inferential machine;
Duong was not absent from the treatment room for the entire duration of a
patient’s treatment;
was Mr Duong’s practice to examine the patient in the treatment room after
taking the patient’s details and recording
them in the computer; and
Tran would conduct massages, and apply hot packs, at the direction of Mr Duong
and in accordance with his instructions.
Complainant has not in any way impugned the reliability of the statements made
by the assistant in that interview and has not
sought to call or cross-examine
the assistant on those statements.
Mr Duong’s statutory declaration is detailed, comprehensive, supported by
his contemporaneous clinical note and corroborated
in fundamental respects by
statements made by Ms Tran in her interview with the Complainant.
Mr Duong’s recollection in respect
of the critical features of the
events of 21 December 2007 has been consistent over several years: see his
letter dated 31 March
letters from his solicitors dated 22 October
and 15 June
respectively.
In cross-examination, Mr Duong made reasonable concessions where
appropriate but was not shaken on the critical issues
of who operated the
interferential machine, what treatment the private investigator received and
what questions were asked and answered
during the consultation.
all the circumstances, the private investigator’s evidence should be given
no weight. Alternatively, the private investigator’s
evidence does not
discharge a burden of comfortable satisfaction, or create a feeling of actual
persuasion, that his account is,
on the balance of probabilities, an accurate
description of the events that occurred.
Mr Duong’s conduct
in relation to the private investigator on 21 December 2007 did not constitute
“unsatisfactory professional
conduct” or “professional
misconduct”
Mr Duong’s credibility
if the Tribunal forms adverse views in relation to Mr Duong’s credit in
respect of Complaints 1 and 2, those adverse views
should have no necessary or
logical connection to Complaints 3 and 4. The subject matter of Complaints 3
and 4 post-date the conduct
the subject of Complaints 1 and 2 by several years.
They concern different patients, different private health funds and different
documents. Further, as a fundamental matter of procedural fairness, each
complaint must be addressed separately, on its merits,
and by reference only to
the evidence led in respect of that complaint.
relation to Complaints 3 and 4, Mr Duong frankly admitted that his recollection
of the events of 21 December 2007 was neither precise
nor comprehensive. He
admitted that, due to the passage of time and the number of patients treated, he
required reference to his
clinical notes and usual practice to support his
recollection.
suggestion, put to Mr Duong in cross-examination, that he had altered his
clinical notes for 21 December 2007 sometime after that
date (in particular,
after a request was made for production of those notes) was emphatically denied
by Mr Duong.
There is no evidence which supports the allegation. The unfounded speculation
or suspicion of the Complainant on this topic did
not rise above the level of
unsubstantiated assertion. That assertion should be rejected.
the contrary, the clinical notes provide substantial contemporaneous
corroboration of key details of Mr Duong’s evidence
where it conflicted
with that of the private investigator.
Duong gave evidence during cross-examination which was, at times, difficult to
follow and, in respect of the details of the consultation
on 21 December
2007, could be said to contain some apparent inconsistencies or qualifications
in respect of evidence previously given.
However, any difficulties perceived by
the Tribunal in that regard in relation to Mr Duong’s evidence are
explicable by his
incomplete memory of events and his nervousness when giving
evidence. Overwhelmingly, those difficulties related to matters of detail
the precise events of 21 December 2007 and not fundamental matters of Mr
Duong’s usual practice (such as his insistence
that at no time did he
permit his assistant to operate the interferential machine) or significant
features of the private investigator’s
behaviour (such as the private
investigator’s evasive answers). The apparent inconsistencies or
qualifications were not such
as to undermine the reliability of Mr Duong’s
evidence as a whole. Nor do they demonstrate that Mr Duong was being untruthful
when giving evidence. Rather, the apparent inconsistencies or qualifications
demonstrate that, where appropriate, Mr Duong made
concessions or admissions
against his interest. This indicates that Mr Duong was answering questions
to the best of his ability
and was striving to assist the Tribunal to arrive at
the truth as to what occurred on 21 December 2007.
Duong’s initial assessment and taking of the private investigator’s
private investigator accepted in his oral evidence that he has no physiotherapy
training; no medical training of any kind (other
than first aid); and no
training or experience in faking an
evidence was that, prior to the consultation, he “absolutely” had
not spent time thinking up, or imagining in his
own mind, a detailed account of
his alleged injury or such matters as the intensity of the pain, any variation
of the pain throughout
the day, any medication that he would say he was taking,
any details about his general health that he wanted to tell Mr Duong or
details of his medical
private investigator gave evidence that, when he visited Mr Duong, he was
“absolutely” very concerned to maintain
his cover; that the whole
purpose of the exercise “absolutely” was to avoid detection; and
that his purpose was to
avoid detection at all
the private investigator, implausibly, resisted this
inherently likely that he was aware that there was a greater risk that Mr Duong
might suspect he was not a genuine patient,
if he gave too many details about
his condition or medical history.
private investigator agreed that all he told Mr Duong about his alleged injury
was that it was an injury to his shoulder that
he had sustained at the gym the
previous week.
did not give Mr Duong any other details about the injury, such as the intensity
of the pain,
that the pain varied during the day or during the
his undercover role, the private investigator was unable or unwilling to provide
details as to his “condition” and
medical history which a genuine
patient would have provided. Instead, the private investigator gave very brief,
almost evasive,
answers and appeared reluctant to provide anything more than
information.
is for this reason – and not due to any inadequacy on Mr Duong’s
part – that the taking of the oral history occupied
no more than a few
Notwithstanding
the private investigator’s reticence, Mr Duong elicited, and recorded in
his clinical notes, at least the bare
minimum information necessary for the
formation of a diagnosis and treatment plan: that the “patient” had
an injury to his left shoulder while doing some deltoid exercises the
previous week; that there were no “pins and needles”,
no pacemaker,
no past history or previous treatment; that the “patient”
experienced good general health, no vertebral
artery insufficiency, was not on
steroids or medication and had not undertaken any
Lucas gave evidence that if a patient is a “bad historian”, it can
be difficult getting a good subjective
patient does not provide detailed answers to questions when taking an oral
history and in fact gives evasive answers and general
rather than specific
answers, Mr Lucas agreed that in his opinion those circumstances would be
relevant to assessing whether the
physiotherapist has taken an adequate oral
Lucas accepted that if the patient provides only very brief answers and nothing
more, then it would be consistent with competent
practice for the
physiotherapist to take an oral history that occupies only a few minutes;
although Mr Lucas qualified this by saying
that it depends what is meant by
“a few minutes”: in his view, less than 7 minutes may be adequate,
but not less than
Accordingly,
the evidence does not support the allegations in particular
Mr Duong’s structured examination and
provisional diagnosis
Lucas accepted that, even on the factual assumptions on which he prepared his
report, a subjective examination, minimal though
it was, did take place and that
an that an objective examination also took place, which justified
Mr Duong’s claim for a rebate
from the private health
the initial assessment and oral history, Mr Duong conducted a structured
examination of the private investigator involving
the following
the general movement of the shoulder for flexion and abduction in order to
determine the range of
of the left shoulder
a check of forced internal rotation and a supra-spinatus test of the injured
area (although Mr Duong frankly concedes that
he does not now specifically
recall doing this and his clinical notes make no mention of
skin test involving the placing of hot and cold test tubes, and then sharp and
blunt instruments, against the skin in order to test
sensitivity to temperature
follows that there is no sufficient foundation in the evidence for a finding in
the terms of particular (iii)(b).
Mr Duong operated the
interferential machine himself and adequately supervised his
Lucas agreed that his single most significant criticism of Mr Duong's
conduct in relation to the events of 21 December 2007 is
that he allowed an
unqualified physiotherapist assistant to use and operate an interferential
in his report
in his oral
Mr Duong operated the interferential machine himself, then Mr Lucas was not
critical of his conduct.
Lucas accepted that the degree and closeness of appropriate supervision will
vary with the circumstances, including the nature
of the delegated task, the
severity of the patient's condition, the complexity of the patient's needs and
the experience and skills
Lucas’s opinion is that, as a general rule, a more experienced assistant
supervision.
Lucas added that, in his view, the question of the appropriate role for a
physiotherapy assistant is “a very grey area”,
and he did not know
whether there were any published policies of the Australian Physiotherapy
Association or the NSW Physiotherapists
Registration Board on this topic as at
Tran was the most experienced physiotherapy assistant who worked at
time of the events in issue in the present case, Ms Tran had been employed
at the clinic for approximately 1 year and 9 months;
prior to that, she
had been employed by another physiotherapist and chiropractor for at least 2
recommended to Mr Duong by other
Ms Tran first joined Mr Duong’s practice, he ascertained her level of
experience and satisfied himself that she knew how
to carry out typical tasks
such as performing manual massage, placing hot packs upon a patient and placing
upon a patient the suction
cups of an interferential
Mr Duong instructed Ms Tran in clear terms that she must never turn on the
electrical supply of the interferential machine or use
the machine in any
Consistently with that direction, Mr Duong never saw Ms Tran use the
interferential machine and never suspected that she had done
so, with any
Ms Tran’s statements in her interview with the
Complainant
are emphatic and unambiguous: Ms Tran did not use the interferential machine on
the private investigator. That evidence should
be accepted. Mr Duong was not
shaken on this issue in cross-examination. His evidence is consistent with the
objective probabilities
and the logic of events: Ms Tran lacked the English
language skills and knowledge to turn on and operate the interferential machine,
which requires the selection, in sequence, of various options from a number of
menu systems expressed in
accordance with his usual
Duong checked that Ms Tran had correctly placed the suction cups on the private
investigator, made any necessary adjustments
and then operated the
interferential machine himself, by turning it on and selecting the appropriate
treatment. In accordance with
Duong did not remain in the treatment room for the duration of the
pre-programmed treatment.
Lucas accepted that, if this is what occurred, Mr Duong acted consistently with
proper professional
than the equivocal statements made by Patient A-K in his oral evidence, there is
no evidence contradicting Mr Duong and Ms Tran’s
statements that
Mr Duong operated the interferential machine himself. The private
investigator’s statement does not allege
that Ms Tran operated the
interferential machine; his statement contains no reference to an
interferential machine at all. The
DVD footage does not show Ms Tran operating
an interferential machine. As Mr Lucas accepted in his report, and confirmed in
who actually operated and turned on the machine is
questionable
Lucas expressed the opinion that it is consistent with competent practice for a
physiotherapist to delegate tasks to a physiotherapy
assistant such as a manual
massage, the use of a hand held massage machine (not an interferential machine),
the placing of hot packs
(once told where to put them) and the placing of the
suction cups of an interferential machine on a patient's
in Mr Lucas’s view, it would be consistent with competent practice for a
physiotherapist to be absent from the room
when these tasks are performed by an
experienced physiotherapy
Lucas gave evidence that, assuming it is an experienced assistant and that the
treatment regime involves a hand held massage machine,
an interferential machine
and hot packs, it would be consistent with competent practice for the
physiotherapist to be absent from
the room for a substantial period of the total
time during which the patient is in the treatment
only tasks that Mr Duong delegated to Ms Tran was the administration of the
manual and machine massage, the placing of the hot
packs and the position of the
suction cups of the interferential machine. In doing so, Mr Duong made an
assessment of his assistant’s
level of competence, training and
experience. His assessment was that Ms Tran was able to perform the massage to
an appropriate
standard. That assessment was not, and has not been shown to be,
in any way incorrect.
evidence does not support a finding that Mr Duong acted otherwise than in
compliance with Policy No 8 of the NSW Physiotherapists
Registration Board,
entitled “Policy for physiotherapists working with therapy
assistants”
Consistently with that policy, Mr Duong provided adequate supervision and
instructions to Ms Tran, having regard to her competencies,
the severity and
complexity of the private investigator’s “disorder” and the
these reasons, the allegations made in particular (iii)(c) or (iii)(d) should
not be accepted.
Adequacy of Mr Duong’s records of his
treatment of the private investigator
a preliminary review, Mr Duong’s clinical record for the consultation on
21 December
the reader as somewhat truncated or sparse in form. It may well be open to the
Tribunal to conclude that there are certain
inadequacies in relation to the
amount of detail contained in the note, particularly in relation to the
recording of negative or
nil responses which might be of potential relevance (if
only for the purpose of excluding remote possibilities) if another
physiotherapist
were to take over the treatment of this “patient”.
However, having regard to the particular circumstances of this case,
clinical record does not fall significantly below the standard reasonably to be
expected of a physiotherapist of equivalent training
and experience.
Lucas expressed the opinion
not uncommon for physiotherapists to design their own format of clinical notes
for their own use;
format of the clinical notes may vary from physiotherapist to
physiotherapist;
is consistent with competent practice to use abbreviations in clinical
consistent with competent practice to sign off a clinical note with one's
initials rather than a name or a signature;
patient presents with a shoulder complaint it would be consistent with competent
practice for the physiotherapist not to fill
in any parts of the form that
relate only to a back complaint;
amount of detail that is required to be recorded in the clinical notes will vary
according to the nature and severity of the patient's
condition, the amount of
detail provided by the patient in his or her oral history, the nature of any
treatment history for that
patient, the general health of the patient and the
nature of the treatment that is prescribed.
are four critical features of the present case which are relevant to a
consideration of whether the clinical record exhibits
any conduct that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of
Mr Duong’s level of training
and experience:
because the private investigator was performing an undercover surveillance role,
his behaviour did not conform to that of a genuine
patient. He was unable or
unwilling to provide details as to his “condition”, medical history,
previous treatment or
daily pattern. Of necessity, this absence of detail is
reflected in the clinical record.
the injury described by the private investigator was a minor muscle strain that
was almost recovered and was not presently
symptomatic.
it was Mr Duong’s usual practice to use short-hand abbreviations for
common and widely recognised clinical terms when completing
the medical
in accordance with his usual
Duong completed only those parts of the clinical notes form which were relevant
to the “patient” or his “condition”:
complete those parts dealing with a back complaint, since the private
investigator presented with a shoulder
Duong expressly recorded a “nil” response to those questions which
he considered may be of potential clinical significance,
such as matters which
any treating physiotherapist would need to know before commencing
the case of the private investigator, this included the fact he had not
experienced pins and needles, did not have a pacemaker
device, had no vertebral
artery insufficiency, was not taking steroids or medication and had not
undertaken any
to the specific complaints made in particulars (iii)(e)(1)-(6):
to particular (e)(1), Mr Duong did complete the body chart, by shading the area
of the left shoulder to record this as the
location of the affected
intensity of the pain was recorded elsewhere in the form, in the bottom
left-hand corner: “
relation to particular (e)(2), the reason Mr Duong did not record “past
history” or “previous treatment”
was that the private
investigator described the shoulder complaint as a recent injury (1 week old):
there was no information that
relation to particular (e)(3), the reason Mr Duong did not record “daily
pattern” was that the private investigator
did not report any variations
in pain throughout the
said words to the effect: “
relation to particular (e)(4), assuming this is a reference to that part of the
clinical record commencing with the question relating
to general health
”), the answers given by the private investigator are
adequately recorded. The information recorded reflects the generally
non-responsive nature of the private investigator’s communications.
to particular (e)(5), Mr Duong’s clinical record did expressly record
warnings (“
”), contra-indications (“
and the “patient’s” informed consent
to particular (e)(6), the clinical record did record instructions given to the
assistant, insofar as the form recorded that
the prescribed treatment was a
massage together with hot packs and the interferential machine for 15
Lucas agreed that Mr Duong’s clinical notes for 21 December 2007
represented a significant improvement on Mr Duong’s
clinical notes which
Mr Lucas saw relating to 2003 and
Lucas agreed in cross-examination that Mr Duong’s clinical notes for
21 December 2007, even if far from ideal, did
fall significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of equivalent
training and
experience.
elaborating his answer, Mr Lucas said: “
We all have busy days or bad
days when things aren't perfect, and I'd accept this as a minimal
the circumstances, the evidence does not support the allegations made in
particular (iii)(e). Nor does it support a finding that
clinical notes for 21 December 2007 fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a physiotherapist
of equivalent training and
experience.
The evidence of the expert reviewer, Mr
criticisms expressed by Mr Lucas in relation to the conduct of Mr Duong on 21
December 2007 should be approached with caution,
for four reasons:
those criticisms were premised upon factual assumptions which have not been
established by the Complainant and, in some cases, are
contrary to the weight of
the evidence.
Mr Lucas relied, to a very significant degree, upon the DVD footage which, of
its nature, is a highly selective, fragmented and
incomplete picture of what
occurred on 21 December 2007.
as Mr Lucas himself conceded in his oral evidence, his report contains some
significant inaccuracies in relation to the content
of Mr Duong’s
clinical notes, in respect of some of the very alleged inadequacies of which Mr
Lucas was critical in his report.
there is a real risk that the reliability of Mr Lucas’s evidence is
undermined by an unconscious or perceived bias or prejudgment
arising from his
previous highly critical report in 2006 of unrelated (but similar) conduct of Mr
Duong in 2003.
of these difficulties is dealt with in turn below.
assumptions
Lucas conceded that, when preparing his report, he assumed that:
to the treatment, Mr Duong carried out no initial
consultation;
did not carry out an assessment or take a history prior to the
“massage” taking
did not consider any provisional diagnosis and did not plan a structured care
plan for the private
investigator;
assistant placed an interferential machine on the private investigator’s
back and at no time during the interferential treatment
process was
Mr Duong inside the room with them to
the end of the session, Mr Duong re-entered the room and only after being
asked by the private investigator did he suggest exercises
that could be done at
factual assumptions have not been established by the Complainant to the
requisite degree of satisfaction, or at all.
Lucas confirmed that, when preparing his report, he assumed that the statement
dated 22 October 2008 of the private investigator
was readily accepted by Mr Lucas that if he were asked to assume different
facts, it may be the case that his opinion would be
on DVD footage which is highly selective, fragmented and incomplete
Lucas confirmed in his oral evidence that, in addition to the private
investigator’s statement, Mr Lucas relied upon the
DVD footage in forming
his view that there was no initial assessment or history taken by a qualified
physiotherapist: that there
was no structured examination; that there was no
mention of a provisional diagnosis; that the patient was not given an
explanation, or prognosis, of his condition; and that “it
doesn't seem as though” Mr Duong enters the treatment room
until requested by the patient at the conclusion of the
Lucas agreed that that his viewing of the DVD footage was critical to his
conclusions on each of those issues and that the DVD
footage was for him more
significant than the private investigator's statement in forming those
inherent difficulties in Mr Lucas’s evidence arising from that degree of
reliance upon the DVD footage are illustrated in
the following exchange during
cross-examination:
It is correct, isn't it, that the footage contains no audio at all?
A. That's correct.
Q. And you specifically mention that in your report?
A. I did because I thought that was a mistake and I found out afterwards
the reason for it.
Q. And when you made that comment in your report in relation to the
absence of sound on the DVD footage you thought it was important
forming your views that you hear what was said on the DVD footage,
A. It helps forming the opinion, yes.
Q. In fact it could potentially have changed your opinion if you had the
audio, correct?
A. That's correct, if Mr Duong's talking off camera I can't hear
what he's saying, that would change my opinion.
Q. Mr Lucas, you're aware, aren't you that on the DVD footage there
is no vision for approximately 37 minutes commencing soon after
the patient
enters the treatment room up to the final few minutes of the
consultation?
A. That's correct.
Q. And on your viewing of the DVD footage did that appear to be a period
of time in which on your understanding the patient was inside
the treatment
Q. Is it your understanding that the total time spent by the patient in
the clinic was approximately 50 minutes?
A. I haven't added it up but if you say so, yeah, that's so.
Q. Well, if I ask you to assume that the total time spent in the clinic
by the patient was 50 minutes would you say that the 37 minutes
which there is no visual footage was the most critical part of the total time
spent by the patient at the clinic?
A. It's the majority of the time, yes.
Q. And not only is it the majority of the time but on your viewing of the
footage is it the vast majority of the time spent by the
patient inside the
treatment room specifically?
A. Yes, I'd have to agree with you.
Q. And you would agree with me, wouldn't you, that for the purpose of
forming your view about the adequacy or competence of Mr Duong's
those were the critical 37 minutes?
A. I would've like to have known what happened in that
37 minutes.
Q. And those 37 minutes would have been more important for you in
forming your view about the competence and adequacy of Mr Duong's
than the minutes of footage you did see at the reception desk or at the end
where Mr Duong was demonstrating the exercises,
A. Correct.
the circumstances, the Tribunal can have no confidence that Mr Lucas’s
criticisms of Mr Duong’s alleged conduct on
21 December 2007 have any
sound factual foundation.
Inaccuracies in Mr Lucas’s
analysis of Mr Duong’s clinical notes
Lucas said that before he signed his report, he was satisfied that it was
accurate and complete, based on the information he had;
that he carefully
checked his report before submitting it; that he carefully reviewed
Mr Duong's clinical notes for the purpose
of preparing his report; and
that he understood the importance of reading and understanding those clinical
notes before expressing
any opinion about their
Mr Lucas conceded that his report contained errors in relation to
Mr Duong’s clinical notes for 21 December 2007:
Lucas accepted that, in his report, he said that the body chart was not
adequately filled in with no area of pain or intensity
shown. However, in oral
evidence, Mr Lucas agreed that, in fact, the clinical note does show an area of
pain by means of the shading
on the left shoulder; and that, in the bottom
left-hand corner of the clinical record, the statement "nil pain/tenderness" was
indication in relation to the intensity of
Lucas accepted that, in his report, he said that "warnings contra-indications
and consent are not noted on the chart". However,
in oral evidence, Mr Lucas
agreed that, in fact, those matters are noted in the chart by way of
abbreviations.
inaccuracies and retractions undermine not only Mr Lucas’s particular
criticisms of Mr Duong’s clinical notes for
21 December 2007, but also any
confidence the Tribunal might otherwise have that Mr Lucas’s report was
prepared with appropriate
care, precision and attention to
Risk of unconscious or perceived bias or
prejudgment
the outset of his report, Mr Lucas
should mention at this point that I was part of an investigation into this
clinic and Mr Duong in 2007 for a very similar incident
and complaint by
HCF. At that time, I was very critical of Mr Duong's treatment and
professional and ethical standards and made
that clear in my
cross-examination, Mr Lucas said that he wrote those words because he
“thought it was important to note that I had done one
before in case that
jeopardised any future action”; that he thought this was a matter that
was important for the Complainant
to know; that he included this statement
upfront about his previous review of Mr Duong's conduct because he thought
there was at
least a possibility that his previous history might affect the
weight that the Healthcare Complaints Commission should give to his
Lucas said that “it went through [his] head at the time” that it was
a serious possibility that the Complainant might
take the view that his previous
history would affect the weight that the Complainant should give to his opinion;
and he thought there
was a serious possibility that his opinion would be
discounted for that
Lucas said that “
at the back of mind, I kept trying to compartmentalise
human nature is, you can't rub out your
Mr Lucas said that he “
tried not to let
” his views about
Mr Duong's conduct on 21 December 2007 be affected by his previous
very critical views about Mr Duong’s
previous conduct, but conceded that
here is a risk of having a preconceived prejudice,
Lucas accepted that his previous report in relation to Mr Duong's conduct
included: comments that were very critical of the number
of patients
Mr Duong is alleged to have treated on a particular day in 2003; very
critical comments about the appropriateness of
Mr Duong's treatment of
particular patients in 2003; and very critical comments about the adequacy of
Mr Duong's clinical notes
for particular patients in
agreed that the appropriateness of Mr Duong’s treatment of a patient
was one of the very issues that he was being
asked to comment upon in his report
in 2009; and that the adequacy of Mr Duong’s clinical notes was one
of the very issues
he was being asked to comment upon in his report in 2009;
and that the only differences were that the conduct related to a later
period (December 2007) and a single
asked whether he could exclude the possibility that his previous very critical
views about Mr Duong's treatment and clinical
records affected his opinion
in 2009, Mr Lucas said he “
tried not to let it
”, but frankly
acknowledged that “
whatever best efforts Mr Lucas may have made to guard against that risk of
contamination or prejudgment, the risk of erosion
of his independence as an
expert is too great for this Tribunal to rely upon his
Conclusions
the reasons given above, the evidence supports the following 6 conclusions of
to 21 December 2007, Mr Duong had ensured that his assistant (Ms Tran) was
suitably experienced to apply hot packs, to perform
manual massage and machine
massage, and to place the suction cups of the interferential machine on a
patient’s body.
21 December 2007, by asking questions of the private investigator, Mr Duong
took a brief oral history and elicited the following
information: the private
investigator had sustained an injury to his left shoulder while doing deltoid
exercises the previous week;
the private investigator had no “
”, did not have a pacemaker, and had no past history or
previous treatment for the condition; the private investigator’s
health was good, he had no vertebral artery insufficiency, he was not on
steroids or medication and he had not undertaken
any surgery.
Duong conducted an examination which involved: testing the general movement of
the shoulder for flexion and abduction; palpating
the left shoulder; and a
skin test (using hot/cold test tubes and sharp/blunt instruments).
Duong formed a diagnosis: a muscle strain that was almost recovered and was not
presently symptomatic. Mr Duong said to the private
investigator words to the
effect of: “
This seems to be a minor muscle strain or tear in the
” Mr Duong prescribed a treatment with hot packs,
interferential machine (15 minutes), massage and a regime of strengthening
Duong programmed and operated the interferential machine himself. His assistant
did not program or operate the interferential
machine. All the assistant did in
relation to the interferential machine was place the suction cups on the private
investigator’s
body, as directed by Mr Duong.
Duong was present in the treatment room for the following parts of the
consultation: when checking the placement of the hot packs;
when checking
placement of the suction cups and turning on the interferential machine; around
the end of the programmed interferential
treatment; and at the end of the
consultation when Mr Duong explained and demonstrated the strengthening
Lucas agreed that, if he made these 6 assumptions of
be his opinion that:
Duong’s conduct on 21 December 2007 was not significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of
an equivalent level of
training or
experience;
” would have been consistent with the
standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or
experience: although not “
a very good treatment
it nonetheless would have been
“adequate”;
Duong’s conduct did not breach the requirements of paragraph 2.5
(“Treatment Modalities”) of the New South Wales
Physiotherapists
Registration Board’s Policy 8 “Policy for physiotherapists working
with therapy assistants”
even if (contrary to Mr Duong’s primary submission), the Tribunal is not
satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that findings in the terms identified
in paragraph
above should be made, it
does not follow that Complaints 3 and 4 have been established.
the contrary, for all the reasons set out in these submissions, even if the
Tribunal is not prepared to accept Mr Duong’s
evidence in whole or in
part, the Tribunal would not be comfortably satisfied that the version of events
described in the private
investigator’s evidence is reliable or
these reasons, the Tribunal would not be comfortably satisfied that
Mr Duong’s treatment of the private investigator on
21 December 2007
demonstrated improper or unethical conduct, or knowledge, skill, judgment or
care which was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
Mr Duong’s registration should not be
events of 21 December 2007 involved highly unusual circumstances. The private
investigator’s behaviour did not conform,
in critical respects, to that of
a genuine or typical patient. The circumstances alleged in Complaints 3 and 4,
even if established
to the comfortable satisfaction of the Tribunal, provide no
reliable guide to Mr Duong’s usual practice in the assessment,
diagnosis or treatment of patients or the keeping of clinical records.
protection of the public does not require the cancellation of Mr Duong’s
registration as a physiotherapist. There is evidence
that Mr Duong’s
therapy has been of real benefit: the private investigator volunteered in his
evidence that, of all the investigations
he has conducted, Mr Duong pointed
out a correct way to do a shoulder raise at the gym, which the private
investigator found helpful
and which he continues to use
Mr Duong has demonstrated a capacity to bring about improvements in his clinical
practice. The evidence of Mr Lucas establishes
that the standard of Mr
Duong’s clinical notes has improved significantly over
relation to his clinical notes, Mr Duong has recognised the need for improvement
and, after the events of 21 December 2007, has
successfully implemented
improvements.
his conduct, Mr Duong has demonstrated a willingness and a capacity to implement
improvements in his professional practice.
Complainant has not alleged, or established, that any patient was harmed, or has
made an allegation or complaint against Mr Duong,
as a consequence of any
treatment received from Mr Duong.
Duong has expressed his desire to return to practice as a registered
physiotherapist.
the Tribunal is minded to impose a protective order in relation to
Complaints 3 and 4, it would be appropriate to require Mr Duong
to attend a
suitable education course, or undertake a suitable period of mentoring or
supervision, to address those aspects of his
professional conduct which the
Tribunal considers would benefit from improvement.
substantial part of the criticisms of Mr Duong’s professional conduct
relate to his record-keeping, his financial and business
management practices,
the supervision of his staff and his management of his clinic, including
allocation of time to each patient.
No specific departure from competent
practice in respect of diagnosis or treatment, and no harm to any patient, has
been demonstrated.
It has not been suggested that the private investigator was
misdiagnosed, or that the treatment prescribed by Mr Duong was incorrect
harmful or that Mr Duong’s conduct caused any detriment to the
private investigator (or would have done so to any genuine
patient presenting
with the condition described by the private investigator).
the Tribunal is satisfied that there have been departures from the standard
reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of equivalent
training and experience,
they are departures of a kind which could be addressed by a further period of
education, supervision or
Duong is a young man at a relatively early stage of his professional career. He
frankly admitted that, prior to establishing his
own clinic, he did not have the
benefit of a period in private practice properly supervised by someone with
experience.
all the circumstances, if the Tribunal considers that protective orders are
necessary, it would be appropriate for the Tribunal
to design and impose a
regime of further education, supervision or mentoring which would ensure that Mr
Duong now receives the benefit
of an improved understanding of the requirements
of proper professional practice in a private
Duong respectfully submits that the appropriate orders are:
dismissal of Complaints 3 and 4.
Alternatively,
if (contrary to these submissions), the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr
Duong’s conduct on 21 December 2007 merits
a protective order, this should
be a requirement for a period of further education, supervision or mentoring
directed at those aspects
of Mr Duong’s conduct which the Tribunal
considers are inadequate.
HCCC V DUONG
Respondent’s statutory declaration dated 1 July
make this statutory declaration in respect of the allegations made in Complaints
Three and Four in the Notice of Inquiry dated 12
Qualifications and professional experience
graduated with a Bachelor of Applied Science in Physiotherapy from the
University of Sydney – Cumberland College of Health
Sciences in 1998.
From August 1998 to July 1999, I was employed by the Illawarra Area Health
Service in a variety of disciplines
(musculoskeletal outpatients,
orthopaedics/surgical and hydrotherapy/domiciliary). From July 1999 I spent
several months in private
practice as a physiotherapist in Blacktown.
opened my own practice in late 1999. In the period 1999 to approximately
October 2008 I practised as a self-employed physiotherapist
at my clinic in
various locations in south west Sydney, trading under the name “3D
Physiotherapy”.
copy of my resume is annexed and marked
Employment of Miss Cam Tran as
physiotherapy assistant
employed Miss Cam Tran as a physiotherapy assistant from approximately
19 March 2006 until 21 December 2007. Prior to working for
me, Miss Tran
had been employed by another physiotherapist and chiropractor for at least two
years. I do not now recall what Miss
Tran’s formal qualifications were,
but I considered her to be an experienced physiotherapy assistant. Miss Tran
was the most
experienced physiotherapy assistant who worked in my clinic.
usually communicated with Miss Tran in Vietnamese. When Miss Tran first joined
my practice as a physiotherapy assistant, I spoke
with her about her experience.
I instructed her how to use my hand-held massage machine, which was a different
she had previously used. I also satisfied myself that she
knew how to carry out typical tasks as a physiotherapy assistant, such
performing manual massage, placing hot packs upon a patient and placing upon a
patient the suction cups of an interferential machine.
Miss Tran commenced employment at my clinic, I said to her (in Vietnamese) words
to the following effect: “
You may place the suction cups of the
interferential machine on a patient, in the way I have shown you. However, you
must never turn
on the electrical supply of the interferential machine or use
the interferential machine in any way. Only I can do that.
with that instruction, in the entire time Miss Tran worked for me, I never saw
her turn on the electrical supply of the
interferential machine or use the
interferential machine in any way. Nor did I ever have any cause to believe or
suspect that she
had ever done so, with any patient.
and marked “
” is a copy of a user manual for the
“Intelect Advanced” range of interferential machines. The
interferential machine
in my clinic is from this range. Annexed marked
’ is a picture of the machine which most closely resembles
mine although I cannot say with certainty that it is the exact model.
description of turning on the machine for electrotherapy waveform (including
interferential) treatments at pages 43 to 45 of
the user manual (and, in respect
of a patient data card, at pages 70 to 72) accords with the way I used the
machine. Turning on
the machine for an interferential treatment requires a
sequence of steps involving selection of various options from a number of
systems expressed in English. Preparation of the suction cups is similar to
that described at page 35 although it illustrates
the use of pads, not
on my observation of Miss Tran over the period during which she worked for me,
and having regard to the fact that she does not
read English well, I do not
believe Miss Tran would have known how to turn on the interferential machine and
use the menu system,
even if she wanted to do so. The placement of suction cups
on a patient did not require Miss Tran to operate the menu system.
was at all times concerned to ensure that Miss Tran acted only under my
supervision and direction. It was my usual practice to
give oral instructions
to Miss Tran, in Vietnamese, identifying what it was I required her to do in
relation to each patient. For
example, I would give instructions to Miss Tran
in relation to which part of the patient’s body required massage, whether
hand or using the massage machine, and whether or not I required Miss Tran to
place hot packs or the suction cups of the interferential
machine upon the
patient. If I asked Miss Tran to place hot packs or the suction cups of the
interferential machine upon a patient,
I would always check that she had done so
correctly in accordance with my instructions and I would always make any
adjustments to
their placement which I considered necessary.
of the comparatively routine nature of many of the tasks performed by Miss Tran,
including manual massage and use of the massage
machine, once I was satisfied
that Miss Tran had the competence and experience to perform these tasks I saw no
need for me to be
personally present in the treatment room while she performed
these tasks. In my experience, that is consistent with competent practice
amongst registered physiotherapists. One of the purposes of having a
physiotherapy assistant is to enable the assistant to perform
functions such as
massage (manual or machine) without direct and continuous supervision, so that
the physiotherapist may attend to
other patients.
time to time, I observed Miss Tran perform her functions as a physiotherapy
assistant. At no time did I have any concern about
the adequacy or quality of
her performance of that role. On the contrary, based upon my observations, I
considered Miss Tran to
be a competent and conscientious worker, who listened
carefully to and complied with my instructions, performed her functions to
entirely adequate standard and provided a professional level of service to
patients. At no time did I receive any complaints
from patients in relation to
the work performed by Miss Tran. Indeed, from time to time I received
compliments from patients in
relation to the work performed by Miss Tran.
am familiar with Policy No 8 of the NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board
entitled “Policy for physiotherapists working
with therapy
assistants” (issued 2008), a copy of which is annexed and marked
”. At all times during my practice I sought to comply with
the standards and requirements in that policy. I refer to paragraph
policy. In my opinion, I provided adequate supervision and instructions to Miss
Tran during her employment, having regard
to her competencies, the severity and
complexity of each patient’s disorder and the clinical setting. At no
time did I delegate
to Miss Tran any service or treatment which I
considered Miss Tran was not, or may not be, qualified and competent to
Usual practice in relation to clinical notes
clinical notes for my clinic are created, updated and stored electronically on
computer. I open a new file for each consultation.
The file is in a pro-forma
format and includes sections for patient details, oral history including pain
location and intensity,
observations, case history, past history, previous
treatment, tests, general health, treatments and outcomes. I refer in further
detail below to the clinical notes I prepared in relation to
on 21 December 2007.
is my usual practice, when taking an oral history or recording test results, to
complete only those parts of the clinical notes
form which are relevant to the
patient or his or her condition. For example, if a patient presents with a
shoulder complaint, I
would typically not complete those parts of the clinical
notes form which relate only to a back complaint or which are not relevant
the circumstances of the particular patient.
the other hand, if I regard a patient’s “nil” response as
being of potential clinical significance (which may
be the case, for example, in
respect of the questions in the form dealing with case history or general
health), I would typically
record this in the form by typing the word
“nil”. I would invariably do this if I regarded the
“nil” response
as being something that I, or any other treating
physiotherapist, would need to know before commencing treatment (such as the
the patient was not on medication or had not undertaken surgery).
is my usual practice to use short-hand abbreviations for common terms, when
completing my clinical notes. For example, I would
typically type
contra-indications
informed consent
experience, such abbreviations are commonly used and readily understood by
practising physiotherapists and their use
is consistent with competent
professional practice.
Treatment of
[Patient A-K]
December 2007
21 December 2007, a person who identified himself as
[Patient A-K]
attended my physiotherapy practice located at 69 John Street Cabramatta, Sydney
I do have some independent recollection of
[Patient A-K]’s
attendance and my treatment of him, it is not a precise recollection due to the
passage of time and the number of patients I have
treated since December 2007.
The reason that I have some independent recollection of his attendance is that
Asian patients mostly
attended my practice and it was quite rare for a Lebanese
man to attend at my practice.
Accordingly,
unless otherwise indicated, I rely on my contemporaneous clinical notes and
usual practice to support my recollections
in making this declaration.
21 December 2007, I was the only physiotherapist at the practice and was being
assisted by my physiotherapy assistant, Miss Tran.
may have also been a work experience student or volunteer worker present at the
practice on that date but I cannot recall with
certainty one was present.
December 2007 was the first time that
[Patient A-K]
attended the practice
and I recall having to create a new patient file for him.
creating the file I first took his details such as name, address, date of birth
and then his history, which he recounted orally.
It is likely that, consistent
with my usual practice, I did this at the reception desk of the clinic, where
the computer is located.
Annexed and marked “
” is a copy of
my clinical notes for
[Patient A-K]
. I completed the patient details
(top right-hand corner) and the insurance details (top left-hand corner) in the
clinical notes.
with my usual practice, I asked
[Patient A-K]
for payment (in this case
$30) prior to the treatment.
recall that
[Patient A-K]
was a member of MediBank Private and sought to
pay using his Medibank card. However, when I attempted to run the card through
network the card would not work. This could have been because the card
was invalid or the HICAPS network was down though in my view
this is unlikely as
other patients paid using the HICAPS network on that day.
that his Medibank card was not working I then asked for a cash payment, which
[Patient A-K]
made. I provided
[Patient A-K]
with a typed
receipt. I recorded the transaction in the bottom right-hand corner of my
clinical notes by typing: “
Card not work, paid $30.30
informed me that he had sustained an injury to his left shoulder while
doing some deltoid exercises at the gym and he informed me
that this was the
only injury that he required treatment for. I noted this in my clinical notes
by writing in the “
” (current history) section in the
middle of the form the following: “
strain 1 week
ago after working out at gym – deltoid mm
the diagram on the top right-hand side of the form, I shaded the area of the
left shoulder to record this as the affected area.
In the first column on the
left-hand side of the form, after “
” (aggravating factor),
[abduction]”.
[Patient A-K]
did not report that the pain was any different in the
night-time, morning or day-time, so I did not record any information in that
column after the words “
” (night-time),
” (morning) or “
”. I did not
record any information in relation to the other entries in that column,
[Patient A-K]
did not report any easing
factors (that is, steps or measures that reduced any pain),
” because they were
not relevant to
[Patient A-K]’s
condition. I asked
some further questions concerning his general health and recorded the
responses as follows: “
” (meaning no pins and needles)
Nil pacemaker
[Patient A-K]
have a pacemaker device).
[Patient A-K]
described his shoulder complaint
as being a recent injury, so there was no information I could record in relation
history” or “previous treatment” and I left
those portions of the form (“
[Patient A-K]
some questions about his general health. He reported
his general state of health as “
” so I recorded this on
form after “
” (general health). I recorded
” (vertebral artery) to
indicate that he had no vertebral artery insufficiency. I also recorded
” to indicate that
[Patient A-K]
reported that he
was not taking steroids or medication. I asked
[Patient A-K]
had undertaken any surgery and I recorded his negative response as
” (surgery). Mr
Abul-Kareem had not identified any back complaint or weight loss so I left blank
those sections of the form
referring to “
equina) and “
”. The column on the far-right in the
middle of the form relates to a variety of back conditions, none of which were
to Mr Abul-Kareem. Accordingly, I left that portion of the form
recall that, when taking his oral history,
[Patient A-K]
gave very brief,
almost evasive, answers, both in relation to his personal details and his
condition. He declined to provide his
telephone number or his driver’s
licence. When I took his oral history,
[Patient A-K]
appeared to be
reluctant to provide anything more than very basic information. His responses
were general rather than specific.
For this reason, the taking of the oral
history occupied only a very short period of time – probably less than a
few minutes.
taking his oral history, I conducted a physical examination of
. The examination involved testing the general movement of the shoulder
for flexion and abduction in order to determine the range
of movement.
[Patient A-K]
seemed to have a full range of movement and showed very
little pain when the left shoulder area was palpitated. I recorded this
clinical notes by writing in the “
” (observations) section
in the bottom left-hand corner of the form the following: “
[abduction]
[palpation]
pain/tenderness
”. I did not complete the sections of the form
relating to “
” (side flexion) or
” (rotation), because these movements would not have
assisted my diagnosis and therefore I did not ask
[Patient A-K]
perform them.
may have also performed a check of forced internal rotation and performed a
supra-spinatus test of the injured area, but I do not
specifically recall doing
this and my clinical notes make no mention of it.
then performed a skin test on
[Patient A-K]
. This involved placing hot
and cold test tubes against the patient’s skin, and then sharp and blunt
instruments against the
skin, in order to test sensitivity to temperature and
sharpness. The test did not disclose any problems. I recorded the result
the skin test in my clinical notes by typing “
Skin test done
in the column headed “
” (current history). It is my
usual practice to perform this test in the treatment room, where the equipment
is located. The
skin test typically takes approximately one minute or less to
taking the oral history and conducting the physical assessment I was in a
position to make an assessment of
[Patient A-K]’s
problem. In my
view the diagnosis was a muscle strain that was almost recovered and was not
presently symptomatic. My best recollection
is that I said to
words to the effect of: “
This seems to be a minor muscle
strain or tear in the shoulder.
my assessment and diagnosis I prescribed treatment with hot packs (using the
heat treatment to relax the muscles), interferential
machine (to provide pain
relief through the introduction of electric currents via suction cups to the
affected area), massage (to
relax the affected area) and a regime of
strengthening exercises.
I had determined his treatment I instructed Miss Tran (in Vietnamese) to provide
[Patient A-K]
with a shoulder massage and get the hot packs and
interferential machine ready.
do not now recollect the sequence in which the massage, hot packs and
interferential machine were administered. The hot packs may
have been applied
at the same time as the interferential machine.
hot packs are located in a pre-heated tub within the larger treatment room and
either Miss Tran or I would have taken the hot
pack from the tub and placed it
[Patient A-K]’s
shoulder. I allow Miss Tran to do this and it
is my invariable practice to check that the hot packs are placed correctly. If
were not placed correctly I would adjust them accordingly. I am certain
that I would have checked the placement of the hot packs
. The hot pack treatment ordinarily lasts 15 minutes. Consistent with
my usual practice, I would not have remained in the treatment
room for the
duration of the hot pack treatment. It is likely that I was only in the
treatment room momentarily to check the placement
of the hot packs. I cannot
now say whether or not
[Patient A-K]
saw me check the placement of the
interferential machine is also located in the treatment room and Miss Tran
would have placed the suction cups on the affected
area. This will have
involved placing the four suction cups on the affected area and turning a dial
to turn on the vacuum or suction
effect of the suction cups so they remain in
place. That is all that Miss Tran is allowed to do in terms of assisting
with the interferential
machine; she is not allowed to operate or turn the
machine on. It is my invariable practice to check the placement of the suction
and program the wavelength, frequency, intensity and time on the
interferential machine. Once this has been done I would turn on
the machine.
The treatment using the interferential machine would ordinarily last 15 minutes.
The interferential machine turns off
automatically after the programmed
treatment time.
the four suction cups of the interferential machine are placed on a patient, the
patient will feel a suction sensation. This
is purely the force of the suction
or vacuum effect which ensures the suction cups remain in place; this does not
involve any electrical
wave. When I turn on the electricity supply to the
interferential machine, the patient will feel successive surges of electricity,
which are typically described as a tingling sensation.
with my usual practice, I would not have remained in the treatment room for the
duration of the treatment using the interferential
machine. It is likely that I
was only in the treatment room momentarily to check the placement of the suction
cups, program the
wavelength, frequency, intensity and time on the
interferential machine, and turn on the machine. I cannot now say whether or
[Patient A-K]
saw me do this. Consistent with my usual practice, I
would have returned to the treatment room at or around or shortly after the
of the programmed treatment (usually 15 minutes).
Tran mostly performs the massage. On some occasions patients would request that
I perform the massage, though these occasions
are rare. The massage would
ordinarily take 10 to 15 minutes in total. I cannot now recall whether Miss
Tran used the massage machine
or performed a manual massage, although it is
likely she did both. It is my usual practice, particularly on a first
consultation,
to direct my physiotherapy assistant to perform both a machine
massage and a manual massage, unless the patient requests otherwise.
massage machine is a percussive hand-held device which causes vibrations through
the body; it does not contain a heat component.
If Miss Tran had used the
massage machine,
[Patient A-K]
would have felt vibrations when it was
applied to his body.
with my usual practice, I would not have remained in the treatment room for the
duration of the massage by Miss Tran.
the completion of the massage, I returned to the treatment room and I explained
and demonstrated each of the strengthening
exercises that I had prescribed to
[Patient A-K]
. This process may have taken up to approximately 5 to 10
entire treatment (including the massage) lasts approximately 40 to 45 minutes.
As described above, consistent with my usual practice,
I would have been present
in the treatment room for only certain parts of the treatment process (initial
consultation, checking placement
of hot packs, checking placement of suction
cups of the interferential machine and turning the interferential machine on, at
or shortly after the end of the programmed treatment using the
interferential machine, and explaining and demonstrating the strengthening
exercises at the end of the treatment).
completion of the treatment, I typed the following in the bottom right-hand
corner of my clinical notes: “
Rx: massage, HP/IF 15 min, adv re
X’s for deltoid, ir/er/ext with theraband, SH ret/dep X’s, W, CI, IC
// ok, nil problems
”. This was my short-hand way of recording
that the treatment (“
”) was hot packs
”) and interferential machine (“
for 15 minutes; that I gave advice (“
”) in relation to
exercises (“
”) for the deltoid muscle, which
internal rotation, external rotation and extension
exercises (“
ir/er/ext with theraband
”); that I demonstrated
shoulder retraction and depression exercises (“
”); that I gave the necessary warnings
”), that there were no relevant contra-indications
”) and that I obtained
[Patient A-K]’s
informed consent (“
”) to the treatment; and that the
treatment proceeded with no difficulties and without
[Patient A-K]
expressing any problems. I typed my initials (“
conclusion of the clinical notes.
did not have or produce any x-rays for me to review so therefore I
left blank the section of the form headed “
never returned to my practice.
am familiar with Policy No 9 of the NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board
entitled “Policy for documentation in the physiotherapy
record” (issued 2008), a copy of which is annexed and marked
”. At all times during my practice I sought to comply with
the standards and requirements in that policy. I refer to paragraph
policy. In my opinion, having regard to the nature of Mr Adbul-Kareem’s
reported condition, my clinical notes contained
sufficient information to allow
a physiotherapist of similar skill to continue the treatment of that patient if
letter dated 13 March 2008, NIB informed me that a private investigator hired by
NIB had attended my practice and sought treatment.
This person was
the purpose of preparing this statutory declaration, I have viewed the footage
contained on a DVD served by the Healthcare Complaints
Commission entitled
“3D Physio – DVD Recording”. It appears from the footage that
this was filmed secretly by
the private investigator using a concealed camera.
I note that the DVD contains no sound and that there is no vision for a period
of approximately 37 minutes (from 14:42 to 15:19), being substantially the
entire period during which
[Patient A-K]
was in the treatment room. The
footage, for those periods during which there is vision, is consistent with my
recollection of
[Patient A-K]’s
attendance at my clinic on 21
December 2007, as described above.
Current occupational
am not presently practising as a physiotherapist. I ceased practising on or
practice as a
physiotherapist is dependant, among other things, on whether I will be in a
position to secure arrangements with private
health insurance providers which
are necessary to make the practice financially viable.
it were, or became, financially viable for me to return to private practice as a
physiotherapist, I would very much like to do
HCCC V DUONG
Jonathan Duong, the Physiotherapists Tribunal has found you guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct.
You are hereby
reprimanded for your conduct. Your actions constituted a serious breach of the
standards expected of a registered
physiotherapist in that you exploited your
position of trust. Your actions demonstrated a total disregard for patient
professional responsibility.
Your conduct has brought the profession of physiotherapy into disrepute and
your conduct would attract the severe criticism of your
peers. The profession of
physiotherapy has always maintained the highest of professional standards with
respect to the conduct of
its members. Conduct of this nature puts at risk the
high level of confidence that the public has in the profession of physiotherapy.
The Tribunal found that you acted improperly and unethically by failing to
uphold the professional standards expected of a registered
physiotherapist.
Further, you conduct demonstrated that you lack the skill, judgement and care
required to practice physiotherapy.
The Tribunal is of the view that you pose a substantial risk to public safety
working in health services and therefore will not allow
you to continue to have
physical access to patients for a period of two years. It is for this reason
that a Prohibition Order is
The Tribunal is of the view that you need a minimum period of two years to
reflect upon your conduct and address the deficits in your
character, clinical
skill, care and judgment and ethical practice identified by this Decision. It is
for this reason that the Tribunal
has Ordered that you not re-apply for
re-registration for a period of two years.
In reaching these Orders the Tribunal has been mindful of its role to be
protective and not punitive.
Annexure A to
Duong, 1.7.10 (Exhibit
s 139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
See now s 139E of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
HCCC v Rezk
[2009] NSWPYT 1
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 363 (Dixon
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362 (Dixon
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361 (Dixon
Transcript,
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 33:49 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript,
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 28:50 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 39:41 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Duong, 1.7.10 at [11] (Exhibit R1); Transcript, 7.9.10 at 33:11-25
(Zaineddine).
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [7] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [7] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [8] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [9] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [8] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 44:49 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [8] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [8] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Zaineddine, 22.10.08 at [8] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 25:16-18; 38:27-29,
Duong, 1.7.10 at [44] (Exhibit
interview, 22.7.09 at p
1.7.10 at [42] (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Tran interview, 22.7.09 at p
to Duong, 1.7.10 ((Exhibit
1.7.10 at [37]-[47] (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 12:42 –
Annexure E to Bull, 24.9.09 (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 47:31 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 48:22 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 49:32 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Tran interview, 22.7.09 at pp 4-6, 8, 11-12 (Volume 5, Exhibit
1.7.10 at [7]-[8], [41]-[43] (Exhibit
24.9.09 at Annexure G (Volume 5, Exhibit
Exhibit 15.
Volume 5, Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [20]-[21] (Exhibit
Transcript,
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at 30:42 –
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Duong, 1.7.10 at [32] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [29]-[31] (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 27:48 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 28:33 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Duong, 1.7.10 at [33] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [33] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [34] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [35] (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Lucas, 22.3.09 at [4] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 15:50 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 16:30 –
Duong, 1.7.10 at [5] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [5] (Exhibit
Transcript,
Duong, 1.7.10 at [6] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [7] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [8] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [41]-[43] (Exhibit
interview, 22.7.09 at pp 4-6 (Exhibit 5, Volume
1.7.10 at [9]-[10] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [11] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [12] (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 11:09-11;
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Lucas, 22.3.09 at [4] (Volume 5, Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 18:50 –
Annexure D to Duong, 1.7.10 (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [13]-[14] (Exhibit
Annexure E to Duong, 1.7.10 (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 24:06 –
Duong, 1.7.10 at [36] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [18] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [16] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [31] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [17] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [30]-[31] (Exhibit
1.7.10 at [30] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [30] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [30] (Exhibit
Transcript,
Duong, 1.7.10 at [18], [48] (Exhibit
Duong, 1.7.10 at [37]-[38], [48] (Exhibit
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 27:10-16.
Transcript,
9.9.10 at 27:18-21. But note that, in re-examination, Mr Lucas said:
if this was a student's report and treatment, I would have failed
”: Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 19:41 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 30:09 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 31:39 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Volume 5, Exhibit 11 at p
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 32:45 –
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 35:49 – 36:02.
Transcript,
9.9.10 at 22:40-45. But note that, in re-examination, Mr Lucas said:
if this was a student's report and treatment, I would have failed
”: Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at 23:01-37. See Annexure D to Duong, 1.7.10 (Exhibit
Transcript, 7.9.10 at
Transcript, 9.9.10 at
See Volume 1, Exhibit
1.7.10 at [55] (Exhibit
Transcript, 13.9.10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter