URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2013/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v HINDE [2013] NSWPHT 5 (11 September 2013)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
MARGARET HINDE
AN INQUIRY BY THE
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED UNDER SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No. 86a
(“THE NATIONAL LAW”) INTO
COMPLAINTS REFERRED TO THE TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER
SECTION 167, THEREOF.
NON-PUBLICATION DIRECTION APPLIES
Pursuant to
Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law, the Tribunal has made a
non-publication Direction in respect of the name
and address of any person,
other than the Respondent, who was at any time, a patient or client of the
Respondent during her ownership
of the Aberdeen Pharmacy at Aberdeen, New South
Wales; or of any material that may identify any such patient or client.
HCCC v HINDE
[2013] NSWPHT
Health Care Complaints Commission of New
South Wales
(Complainant);
Margaret Hinde
(Respondent pharmacist);
Mr. Peter Dwyer, Chairperson
Ms. Elizabeth Anderson
(Pharmacist Member)
Mr. David Preswick (Pharmacist Member)
Ms. Margaret Knibb (Lay Member)
: 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, March 2013.
: 11 September 2013
APPEARANCES:
Ms. N. Sharp, of Counsel, instructed
by Ms. S. King, Solicitor (HCCC), for the Complainant;
Gibson, of Counsel, instructed by Kent Attorneys, for the Respondent;
Pharmacist—
Convictions—
aggravated dangerous driving causing death and grievous
bodily harm--
impairment—
alcohol abuse—
Not a suitable
person to hold registration in Pharmacy profession;
LEGISLATION
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No.
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
CASES CITED
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Ex parte Tziniolis Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
[2012] NSWCA 80
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
Law Society of New South Wales v
[1994] NSWCA 69
34 NSWLR 408
HCCC v Litchfield
Respondent practitioner (“the Practitioner”) has been
of criminal offences in new South Wales;
Practitioner has an
alcoholism;
to the Practitioner satisfying the
Pharmacy Board of Australia
of Practice Registration
as to current
competence to resume practice as a registered pharmacist, the following
are imposed on the Practitioner’s registration upon the
Practitioner becoming registered as pharmacist:
1.1 The Practitioner is to abstain from alcohol;
1.2 The Practitioner is to undertake
Carbohydrate Deficiency Transferrin
(CDT) testing; Urine
Ethyl Glucuronide
(EtG) testing; monitoring of her
liver function tests; mean cell volume and any other biochemical or
haematological parameter or
parameters, which may assist monitoring of her
abstinence from alcohol, as determined by her treating
Drug and Alcohol
specialist physician
or by the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales. Such
testing and monitoring is to commence within one (1) month immediately
registration; and thereafter, at a frequency to be determined from
time to time, by her treating
Drug and Alcohol specialist physician
as required by the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales (the Council). Upon
registration, the Practitioner is to notify the Council
promptly, of the name
and contact details of such medical specialist physician; and likewise,
promptly notify the Council of any
change from any such medical practitioner to
another medical practitioner;
1.3 The Practitioner is to maintain treatment attendances with her current,
specialist psychiatrist
; with her treating
psychologist
with her treating
Drug and Alcohol specialist physician
; and with a
Drug and Alcohol Counsellor
, at a frequency to be determined by each
such practitioner; and the Practitioner-pharmacist and each of the above
health practitioners,
is to advise the Council of such treatment attendance
requirements not later than one (1) month immediately following the
Respondent’s
registration;
1.4 Not later than one (1) month following restoration of her registration,
the Practitioner is to authorise each of the above
practitioners
Psychologist
Drug and Alcohol
to notify the Council promptly, should the Respondent without
reasonable cause: fail to comply with agreed treatment including
consultation
attendances with any such practitioner and prescribed medication regimens; or
cease treatment; or of any significant,
adverse changes in the
Respondent’s health; and the Practitioner is to advise the Council that
she has so authorised each
of the above practitioners;
1.5 Not later than one (1) month following restoration of her registration,
the Practitioner is to authorise her treating
Drug and Alcohol specialist
General Medical Practitioner
, to provide the
Council with the results of such of the testing and monitoring procedures
identified in Condition 1.2, considered
necessary by the Practitioner’s
treating Drug and Alcohol specialist physician or by the Council, to be
undertaken to assist
monitoring of the Practitioner’s abstinence from
alcohol; and the Practitioner is to provide promptly, evidence of such
authorisation,
to the Council;
1.6 Upon registration, the Practitioner is to promptly notify the Council of
the name and contact details of each of her treating,
practitioners
including her
General Medical Practitioner
psychologist
; and of her
Drug and Alcohol Counsellor
whom is to be authorised by the Practitioner, to provide the Council with a
report as and when required by the Council;
1.7 The Practitioner is to provide a copy of the Tribunal’s
Conditions on registration
Reasons for
to each of the above health practitioners not later than one (1)
month following her restoration to registration; and to promptly
Council that she has complied with this condition;
1.8 The Practitioner must notify the Council of the name and contact details
consequent upon any change in any of those treating
health practitioners
described above, within ten (10) days of any such change;
1.9 The Practitioner is to attend for a review by a Council-nominated
specialist medical practitioner, within six (6) months following
registration;
and thereafter, at such intervals as the Council may determine; and the Council
is to meet the costs of such reviews;
1.10 The Practitioner is to notify the Council in writing, prior to commencing
any employment as a pharmacist, of the name and
every prospective, pharmacist-employer together with details of the nature and
extent of any proposed
employment as a pharmacist; and the Practitioner is to
provide a copy of the Tribunal’s
Reasons for Decision
, to each such prospective pharmacist-employer prior
to commencing employment; and to provide the Council with confirmation that
each such prospective employer has been provided with them;
1.11 The Practitioner is not to practise in any pharmacy without another
registered pharmacist being present at such pharmacy, at
all times; and the
Respondent is not to practise at any pharmacy, at any time, in the capacity of
a Pharmacist-in-Charge, except
for a period of one hour, but only should this
be necessary to facilitate a meal break for the Pharmacist-in-charge;
1.12 Prior to the commencing any employment as a registered pharmacist, the
Practitioner is to authorise each employer whether
as proprietor-pharmacist or
Pharmacist-in-Charge, to notify the Council immediately, should it appear that
the Practitioner may
not be fit to practise as a registered pharmacist
including any unexplained absences from such employment;
1.13 Upon registration, the Practitioner is to accept as a
registered pharmacist approved by the Council, to assist the
Practitioner’s return to practice as a registered pharmacist;
approved person is to be authorised to provide the Council with a report
following each such
session which is to be held at such
intervals and for such period as the Council shall determine; and the Council
shall determine
in consultation with the Practitioner, the nature, extent and
subject matter, of such
; and the costs thereof are to be borne
by the Practitioner. Such
is to be provided with a copy of the
Reasons for
, prior to the commencement of such
1.14 Following registration, the Practitioner is to notify the Council
regularly, of her attendances upon either or both, of the
organisations known
”; and to authorise such organisation, if so requested by
Council, to advise it of the Practitioner’s progress;
1.15 Other than where indicated otherwise, the Practitioner is to meet the
costs of these conditions imposed on her registration;
application for review
of the above
Division 8 of the National Law, may not be made until a period of eighteen (18)
months has elapsed, such period to commence
on and from, the date the
practitioner becomes registered as a pharmacist; and for the purpose of any such
application for review
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
appropriate review body
above, numbered 1.1 and 1.2, are
compliance conditions
—meaning, as provided by section 149A (4) and
(5) of the National Law, that
contravention
either of such
will result in the practitioner’s
registration being cancelled;
Practitioner is to advise the Council promptly, of any changes made to the
Terms and Conditions
Parole Order
; or should the
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed; or if agreement
is not reached, either Party may have the matter
relisted, for assessment by the
REASONS FOR
Introduction
facts in this inquiry are tragic. The Respondent’s alcohol abuse caused a
motor vehicle accident in late 2007, killing the
driver of another car,
seriously injuring his partner and consequently, leaving their child without a
father. The Respondent also,
was seriously injured; her blood alcohol level was
measured at 0.275g/100ml. Alcohol abuse provided the pathway to her criminal
convictions
and imprisonment, following the fatal collision. The
Respondent’s alcohol-related decline over a number of years prior to these
tragic events, was in itself also, a tragic, personal episode given her
achievements and professional practice experience as a pharmacist;
2009 the Respondent was sentenced to a six year term of imprisonment with a
non-parole period of three years and four months, following
her conviction of
one count of aggravated dangerous driving causing death (for which the maximum
penalty was 14 years); and one count
of aggravated dangerous driving causing
grievous bodily harm (for which the maximum penalty was 11 years). She pleaded
each of those charges. She was released from prison in October 2012
subject to a three-year probation period with conditions imposed
South Wales
Probation and Parole Service
1997, the Respondent had been found guilty of driving with a
Prescribed Concentration of Alcohol
offence; she was discharged without a conviction being recorded, on entering a
two-year good behaviour Bond. In her evidence
before the Tribunal, she now
realised upon reflection, that she “...
did have the beginnings of an
alcohol addiction, but...didn’t realise or
...[its]...
seriousness
was convicted in 2005, of a
PCA offence and placed on a two
year good behaviour bond which included a condition requiring her to accept the
supervision and guidance
of a local area Drug and Alcohol
to her evidence before the Tribunal, the Respondent’s use of alcohol
commenced prior to her marriage in 1991, following
a relationship that began in
1984, during which there was physical abuse causing her to make several attempts
to leave the marital
drinking of alcohol using it as a ‘
. The marriage ended
in 1992. Thereafter, the Respondent experienced various difficulties in her
personal life including relationship
problems, described more fully in her
evidence before the Tribunal. She was first prescribed antidepressant medication
) by a general medical practitioner (“GP”) in 1995;
followed as she described “...
by several episodic periods
in which different GPs prescribed some different, antidepressant
medications;
Respondent came from country NSW, growing up on a dairy farm owned by her
parents; and where she completed her education. She
graduated from the
University of Sydney in 1983 with the degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy. Thereafter
until 1988, she practised in
some NSW and Queensland hospitals and various
community pharmacies in both States. Between 1988 and 1996 she worked for
pharmaceutical manufacturing companies as a representative relevant to
medical specialists and general practitioners; and as a
Clinical Research
, engaged in monitoring ‘
trials of new drugs prior to their release for human use; and ‘
’ trials of currently marketed medications, with an emphasis on new
indications’
1997 and 2001, the Respondent practised as a
pharmacist in various
community pharmacies in country NSW including in the area where she later opened
her own pharmacy;
2001 the Respondent opened her own pharmacy in the country NSW area in which she
grew up and where most of her family resided,
hoping to create a home in that
area. Although small, the pharmacy was successful as it served the needs of the
community. She became
involved in local, rural associations and activities. With
the local Progress Association she was instrumental in attracting a medical
practitioner to the town, assisting the community especially the
Respondent had a horse-riding accident in 2001 about six months after opening
her pharmacy, injuring her back and hip, requiring
ongoing medical and some
hospital, treatment. She continued in her role in the pharmacy believing she
could not at that stage, afford
the costs of a
pharmacist; her
recovery was slow. She was also experiencing the aftermath of a further,
personal relationship breakdown at that time;
early 2002 the (then) NSW Pharmacy Board (“the Board”) received a
report that the Respondent appeared to be under the
influence of alcohol at her
pharmacy; following which the Board’s Inspector visited the pharmacy and
found the Respondent to
be adversely affected by alcohol; the issue as to
whether she was actually consuming alcohol at the pharmacy or was relevantly
by residual alcohol following consumption prior to attending the
pharmacy, was explored during the Complainant’s Counsel’s
cross-examination of the Respondent, during the inquiry. In her affidavit in
evidence before the Tribunal, the Respondent admitted
that on certain days she
was under the influence of alcohol
...[when]...
she went to work
on these days
”. Contact with the Board continued, addressing the
Respondent’s alcohol consumption and its effects relevant to her
as a pharmacist including in 2006, consideration by a
of the Board;
Respondent experienced another, personal relationship decline between 2002 and
2006 which, according to the evidence before the
Tribunal, involved physical
abuse causing her to take out an ‘
apprehended violence order’
(“AVO”) against the relevant person; and the relationship ceased;
oesophagitis
gastrointestinal
, related to her alcohol consumption. In
her affidavit, the Respondent described in effect, how she could no longer cope
was occurring in her life and “...
I just needed to drink...I
couldn’t believe how bad my life had got
...[and]...
didn’t know how to start climbing out of this hole I was in so I just
chose to sit at the bottom and drink
In 2006 until early 2008, she entered another personal relationship which
apparently failed, described more fully in the evidence
Respondent conceded that she was “...
only partially honest with the
Board about my drinking
September 2007 the Respondent’s registration was
, until 1 July 2010, the date on which the
commenced; and from which date,
her registration has continued;
The Complaints
the first day of the Inquiry, the Tribunal granted leave to the Complainant to
amend the original
Notice of Complaint,
which became Exhibit C-1. There
were three Complaints within the amended
Notice of Complaint
as follows,
together with the Particulars of the complaints:
COMPLAINT ONE
The pharmacist has been
convicted of criminal offences
in New South
Particulars
The pharmacist has been convicted of
one count of aggravated dangerous driving occasioning death and one count of
aggravated dangerous
driving occasioning grievous bodily harm on 3 April 2009 at
East Maitland District Court.
COMPLAINT TWO
The pharmacist
, namely alcohol abuse.
Particulars
pharmacist abused alcohol for a number of years commencing when she was aged in
her twenties;
pharmacist was charged with the offence of driving with a mid range prescribed
concentration of alcohol on 13 September 1997 and
dealt with pursuant to the
provisions of s. 556A upon entering into a good behavior bond on 19 November
pharmacist was charged with driving with a high range prescribed concentration
of alcohol on 5 September 2005 and convicted
on 12 October
pharmacist was reported to the then Pharmacy Board (“ the Board”) as
appearing to be adversely affected by alcohol
whilst working as a pharmacist at
the pharmacy that she owned and operated, the Aberdeen Pharmacy in Aberdeen New
South Wales, (“the
pharmacy”) in February 2002, October 2005,
November 2005 and during 2007;
13 February 2002 a Board inspector visited the pharmacy at about 14:10. The
pharmacist was adversely affected by alcohol and had
been drinking alcohol at
the pharmacy.
29 August 2006 the pharmacist attended a meeting of the Health Panel of the
Board and signed an undertaking in which she agreed,
inter alia, to continue to
receive medical treatment for her alcohol problem and not to practice pharmacy
under the influence of
14 September 2007 a customer attended the pharmacy and observed that the
pharmacist was unsteady on her feet and incoherent whilst
she was working in the
14 September 2007 at 2:30pm two police officers attended the pharmacy. The
pharmacist was adversely affected by alcohol. The police
officers took the
pharmacist to hospital and closed the pharmacy;
19 September 2007 two police officers attended the pharmacy. The pharmacist was
adversely affected by alcohol. The pharmacist was
taken to hospital by
21 September 2007 the Board suspended the pharmacist’s registration as a
pharmacist. The pharmacist was advised she could
only attend the pharmacy if
accompanied by another registered pharmacist;
26 September 2007 at about 18:30 two police officers attended the pharmacy. The
pharmacist was in the pharmacy by herself. The
pharmacist told police she had
recently printed up some prescriptions, in contravention of her 21 September
2007 suspension by the
Pharmacy Board;
12 October 2007 the pharmacist misled Dr Larry Brash, psychiatrist, whom she was
attending at the request of the Board in that
she told Dr Brash that she had
abstained from alcohol for the previous 3 weeks. A drug and alcohol urine test
from a sample collected
the same date indicated that the pharmacist had recently
consumed alcohol;
15 October 2007 at about 11:30 the pharmacist drove whilst under the influence
of alcohol. The motor vehicle the pharmacist was
driving crossed over on the
wrong side of the road and collided with another motor vehicle. As a result of
the collision, the driver
of the other vehicle was killed and the passenger of
the other vehicle and the pharmacist were both seriously injured. A blood sample
taken from the pharmacist collected at about 13:30 the same day revealed a
reading of 0.275 grams of alcohol in 100 millilitres of
15 October 2007 and about 30 October 2008 when the pharmacist was imprisoned,
the pharmacist continued to consume alcohol.
COMPLAINT THREE
The pharmacist
is not a suitable person to hold registration in the
pharmacy profession
Particulars
particulars of Complaints One and Two are repeated and relied
pharmacist failed to inform the Pharmacy Board of being charged in September
1997 with a mid-range PCA offence and that she had
been given a conditional
release by the Court under s.556A of the Crimes Act and put on a good behaviour
bond for two years in November
pharmacist failed to inform the Pharmacy Board of being convicted of the offence
of high-range PCA on 12 October 2005.
pharmacist lacked candour during her meeting with the Health Panel of the
Pharmacy Board on 29 August 2006 as set out in paragraphs
74 and 75 of her 10
October 2012 statement to the Pharmacy Tribunal.
pharmacist breached the 29 August 2006 undertaking she provided to the Health
Panel of the Pharmacy Board by (i) failing to obtain
medical treatment for
alcohol problem and (ii) practising in the pharmacy while impaired by
pharmacist lacked candour during her meeting with the Health Panel of the
Pharmacy Board on 20 September 2007 in claiming that
until her father's stroke
she had been abstaining from alcohol when in fact that was not the
Complainant’s evidence
Complainant’s documentary evidence included records relevant to the
Respondent, held by the Pharmacy Council of New South
Wales (“the
Council”) including those of its predecessor Board; and including a
medical report from
Dr. Larry Brash
, psychiatrist, dated 26 November
2007, further described, below; relevant NSW District Court records concerning
the Respondent’s
convictions the subject of Complaint 1 and sentencing
proceedings, including the judge’s remarks on sentencing the
Respondent;
Health Care Complaints Commission
(HCCC) investigation were
included in the Complainant’s documentary evidence together with those
produced under summons by
Corrective Services
NSW including a
Probation and Parole Service
report; and relevant documents
produced under summons, by the
Penrith Community Centre
Hunter Drug & Alcohol Service
Justice Health
report dated 27 February 2013, by Psychiatrist
Dr. Anthony Samuels
included in the Complainant’s evidence based upon documentation the
Complainant provided to him and upon his examination
of the Respondent on the
above date; Dr. Samuels gave evidence before the Tribunal during the
Respondent’s documentary evidence
Respondent’s documentary evidence included a
and her affidavit sworn on 10 October 2012; she gave
evidence before the Tribunal. There were affidavits including that of her
Ron Chittick
, who also gave evidence before the Tribunal; and
those of various friends and relatives, in support of the Respondent, one of
Mrs. Anneta Vaughan
a friend, gave evidence to the Tribunal by
telephone, during the inquiry; and a
Pre-Release
report by the NSW
Probation and Parole Service
included were documentary materials explanatory of the program—
Management and Recovery Training—
known as “SMART”, in
applying techniques to assist persons gain independence from addictive
behaviours; including especially,
a document outlining some differences between
the SMART and
Alcoholics Anonymous
reports from
Dr. Thomas Clark
, a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, dated
1 August 2012, 17 February 2013 and 14 March 2013, were included in the
Respondent’s
documentary evidence, based on two separate examinations: 1
August 2012 and 28 November 2012. The third report (above) followed his
consideration of documents, including those of the Complainant relevant to the
Tribunal’s inquiry; and the report by Dr.Samuels
noted above. Dr. Clark
gave evidence before the Tribunal;
clinical records of psychiatrist
Dr. Farzaan Mehta
—who practises at
The Lawson Clinic—Depression & Bipolar Disorder
Specialists
—of her assessment of the Respondent on three
consultations: 23 October 2012, 13 November 2102 and 29 January 2013—were
in evidence together with a computer-generated document from the
, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, described as a
Assessment Program (MAP
), based on an assessment performed on 19 October
2012. Dr. Mehta gave evidence to the Tribunal, by telephone;
To whom it may concern
”—dated 5 February
2013 concerning the Respondent, from Clinical Psychologist
Breakthrough
Psychology’
was admitted
into evidence; Dr. Thomas was no longer treating the Respondent, having moved
interstate; relevant treatment was apparently,
to continue with psychologist,
Dr. Karen Edwards
Psychology’
Penrith. The Complainant required Dr. Thomas for cross-examination but it
appeared that she was currently in South America. Despite
ongoing efforts
undertaken by the Respondent’s solicitor during the course of the inquiry,
to arrange a telephone conference
with Dr. Thomas for the purpose of taking her
evidence before the Tribunal, this proved unsuccessful;
evidence also, were the clinical records of a GP,
Dr. A. Gergis
Emu Plains Family Mediclinic
during 2012; a letter together with various
clinical findings, dated 14 March 2013, from her current GP
Dr. V. Prasad
Silverdale Medical Centre
who as Associate Professor, is Clinical Director of
Alcohol Services
Nepean District Hospital
, seeking his review
of the Respondent; other materials introduced into evidence also described
Associate Professor Weltman’s
role as the Director of
Gastroenterology
& Hepatology
at the above hospital;
Guild Pharmacy Academy
‘CPD’ (i.e. Continuing
Professional Development) Activities—Report Years 2012-2013’ was
admitted into evidence,
confirming the programs the Respondent had completed and
including their accreditation status and the ‘
competency’
they covered;
Respondent’s admissions
Respondent’s
Statement of Admissions
in evidence as Exhibit R-21,
included her admissions to the convictions particularised in the first and
second complaints described
above; and that she had abused alcohol since her
early twenties...until 25 March 2009
.” She admitted her
failure to advise the Board of her alcohol-related driving offence and its
outcome, in 1997; and of her
offence and conviction in 2005, described above;
admitted, was the Respondent’s breach of her signed, agreed undertaking to
the Board on 29 August 2006 to continue to receive
medical treatment for her
alcohol problem; and she admitted that her assertion to the
Health Panel
on 20 September 2007 that until her father’s stroke she had abstained
from alcohol, was untrue. The Respondent conceded that
on 14 and 19 September
2007, two police officers found her adversely affected by alcohol at her
pharmacy; and on the first such occasion
the officers took her to the hospital;
and on the second, she was conveyed to hospital by ambulance. Also admitted, was
her attendance
at her pharmacy on 26 September 2007 following suspension of her
registration, contrary to the Board’s advice, that she could
only attend
at her pharmacy if accompanied by a registered pharmacist. She admitted telling
Dr. L. Brash
, a psychiatrist she was attending at the Board’s
request, on 13 October 2007, that she had abstained from alcohol for the three
previous weeks when
of a sample collected on that same day,
confirmed recent alcohol consumption;
Psychological evidence
the nature and extent of the complaints and relevant to its reasons for decision
and any consequential Orders it might make,
the Tribunal considers it useful
that a more detailed analysis and expression of the
medical and psychological
both prior to and following, the Respondent’s release on
probation from prison, be included in these reasons;
of Dr. Clarke
was Dr. Clarke’s “...
firm diagnosis
...” that the
Respondent suffers from a recurrent
Major Depressive Disorder
currently stabilised; he found that she was not disturbed psychotically and
showed no signs of psychosis; that she has suffered
a Substance Abuse
Disorder—alcohol—that had many features of a recurrent depressive
disorder; and that a ‘
differential
possibility
”, was Bipolar II Disorder; He noted that her
antidepressant medication treatment was apparently, effective;
Clarke noted the absence of any evidence to suggest the Respondent to be using
alcohol; and that her Substance Abuse Disorder
to her depression “...
rather than any form of addictive
...” He noted the Respondent’s three year period of
abstinence from alcohol, indicating control and insight; and that
she is now in
a much more stable position and enjoys a “...
relationship
Dr. Clarke’s opinion of the Respondent’s recurrent depressive
disorder, he believed she remains vulnerable; and
that it was therefore wise for
her to continue treatment by her psychiatrist and psychologist and with
antidepressant medication,
which she may need to continue for several years;
such treatment being the “
” to her survival without
alcohol. Responding to a question—whether her alcohol dependency is an
—Dr. Clarke expressed the view that there is no evidence
that she is impaired to any significant degree. Based on his second
of the Respondent he noted that the Respondent was now stabilised; she continue
with treatment and he regarded her prognosis
his final report, in evidence before the Tribunal, Dr. Clarke noted Dr.
Samuel’s view that the Respondent is now in treatment;
her symptoms in
abeyance. The Respondent’s history taken by Dr. Samuels confirms in Dr.
Clarke’s view, the diagnosis
Major Depressive Disorder
...[Dr. Samuels]...
does not name it as such, since
she is in treatment and presents relatively well
.” Before the
Tribunal, Dr. Clarke expressed his opinion that the Respondent’s
depression is the “...
primary cause
...” of her alcohol abuse
rather than “...
any compulsive or addictive behaviour
believed if she continued her treatment, it was unlikely she would relapse;
although if some catastrophe affected her
life, personal or social
relationships, she could relapse; but currently “...
she is doing all
the right things...I can’t fault her
.” Dr. Clarke described Dr.
Samuel’s report as “
” noting that the only
difference between their respective views was that Dr. Samuels
seemed unsure about the depression, the major depressive
Clarke told the Tribunal it would be beneficial for the Respondent to
voluntarily submit to
testing to confirm the absence of alcohol;
and should she be permitted to return to practice as a pharmacist, this should
on a part-time basis, ideally in a pharmacy with another pharmacist or
pharmacists present, such measures being consistent in effect,
rehabilitation. He told the Tribunal “...
it would be a waste
...[the Respondent]...
not to be rehabilitated
describing her as intelligent; and noting her positive description of her
current relationships and activities, without
alcohol; despite this favourable
prognosis, he emphasised the importance of ongoing care
for some time,
given her background of recurrent depression;
cross-examination, Dr. Clarke agreed that
is known as a
substance abuse disorder
; and that it had also caused various physical
symptoms in the Respondent; he also agreed that it would be appropriate for her
receive the benefit of care from a
Drug and Alcohol Counsellor
told the Tribunal he was not really familiar with what the SMART program
entails; again stressing the importance of ongoing care,
Respondent’s recurrent depressive disorder which must be appropriately,
managed; and because of such disorder, she
remained vulnerable to relapse; he
noted that “...
once an alcoholic always an alcoholic...That’s the
during Complainant’s cross-examination, to the opinion expressed by Dr.
Samuels, that the Respondent was presently “...
at a moderate to high
risk of relapse
...” Dr. Clarke told the Tribunal that if she stopped
medication or her ongoing psychiatric care, she would be at such a level
relapse, but that currently, there is no evidence of any such cessation and he
therefore disagreed with Dr. Samuels’ view
(above). He agreed with Dr.
Samuels’ suggestion that “...
for some time
alcohol-detection
would be worthwhile;
re-examination, Dr. Clarke told the Tribunal that the Respondent could not
obtain an appointment at the
Black Dog Institute
and then turned to
Lawson Clinic
; he suggested that Dr. Mehta was
not obviously, concerned with the Respondent’s progress given the periods
between consultations
with her “...
or she would
...[otherwise]...
seen her more often
.” Given the
Respondent’s
liver and some
problems, he
agreed the Respondent should be under the care of a “...
alcohol specialist
conclusion, having expressed his opinions on continuing treatment including
medication, Dr. Clarke also emphasised the ongoing
importance of
support and back-up
...” He acknowledged the
Tribunal’s “...
public responsibility
...” but added
in the long term, to waste a person such as
Respondent]...
is not appropriate
of Dr. Samuels
Samuels assessed the Respondent on one occasion, 27 February 2013, having
received considerable documentation from the Complainant,
fully described in his
report, including Dr. Clarke’s report of 1 August 2012; a letter from
Respondent’s treating psychiatrist
Dr. Mehta to her referring GP Dr.
Prasad, dated 13 November 2012; and a letter from Respondent’s (then)
psychologist Dr. Kerri
Breakthrough Psychology
) dated 5 February
Clarke’s opinion that the Respondent suffered from recurrent depression
with her alcohol dependency secondary to it, was
noted by Dr. Samuels; as was
Dr. Mehta’s opinion that the alcohol dependency was in remission and that
she a had a “...
mood disorder
...” probably recurrent
depressive disorder and possibly a Bipolar Disorder; and should continue on
Sertraline (“Zoloft”)
50mg. Asked by the Tribunal whether he was
familiar with the
Langton Clinic
where Dr. Mehta spent three six-monthly
terms as a Registrar in Psychiatry, Dr. Samuels confirmed his familiarity with
worked there many years ago; he agreed that it is an alcohol treatment
centre for immediate and ongoing, treatment;
Samuels noted Dr. Thomas’ statement, that she had seen the Respondent on
ten occasions; that she was always punctual and
never cancelled or missed, an
appointment; and her opinion, that she did not consider the Respondent as
” but saw her as an intelligent woman, demonstrating
great levels of openness and humility
expressed tremendous remorse and remains deeply affected by her
actions which ultimately resulted in
... [the]...
...[in October 2007].”
his report, Dr. Samuels addressed the Respondent’s history, including
a number of traumas in childhood
noted that GPs had intermittently prescribed antidepressant
medication for her; and that since leaving prison, her psychiatric treatment
included a “...
low dose of Zoloft
...” and psychotherapy with
a psychologist, which she “...
seems to find quite
...”. He regarded the Respondent as fulfilling the
(Diagnostic & Statistical Manual IV) criteria for
Alcohol Abuse
and Dependence
, currently in remission for a significant period; but he
regarded her as being “...
at moderate to high risk of relapse of her
alcohol abuse and dependence and, given her very long history there certainly is
a likelihood
that relapse could occur in the future which could detrimentally
affect her capacity to practise pharmacy
observed that the Respondent seems committed to alcohol abstinence; and noted
that abstinence is included in her
conditions which continue to
March 2015; and that she attends Dr. Mehta “...
deal with mood
issues which appear to bear some relationship to her alcohol abuse and
.”; and also attends a psychologist to deal with the
many traumatic events that have occurred in her life.”
was Dr. Samuels’ opinion that she should also be under the care of a
drug and alcohol specialist
sclerotic liver
the Respondent’s attendance at the SMART program is dependent on when she
finds she is “...
getting quiet or
withdrawn...” or when her
partner “...
thinks things are not good
...” Dr. Samuels
expressed some reservations about this approach. He noted the Respondent’s
reservations about attending
(Alcoholics Anonymous) but expressed some
uncertainty as to whether SMART is “...
a particularly robust
arrangement
...” and thought it would be much better to
regularly attend
...” some kind of support group; he was
...” she will always be able to
determine when she needs to attend SMART; and hence he favoured more regular
attendance at a
group program as more beneficial.
was important Dr. Samuels told the Tribunal, that apart from the necessity for
treatment undertaken by the Respondent, there should
ensure there is no abuse of a
; including
Carbohydrate Deficiency
Transferrin
(CDT) testing,
Ethylene Glucuronide
(EtG) testing,
monitoring of her liver functions and
told the Tribunal he found it difficult “...
what her depressive symptoms were like
...[and that]...
they would have
been absolutely coloured by her alcohol intake...
“ thus making it
in hindsight, to know what sort of mood
she had during those years
.” He thought she
probably did have some chronic low grade mood disturbance related
to her personality style...”
but he would “...
probably call
it more a ‘dysthymia’
...” noting her currently, small dose
; and that she is
...[in effect, as the Tribunal
understand this description—mood normal]...
...[although]...
it is quite possible
she has had a
major depression
...[but]...
with all those years of alcohol abuse...it is
very difficult to know and characterise the nature of that mood
Dr. Samuels seemed to disagree with Dr.
Clarke’s opinion of the Respondent having a “...
his evidence, Dr. Samuels emphasised
a significant portion of the
Respondent’s life involved drinking extremely heavily, which only ceased
in the context of a catastrophic
event; followed “...
...” by abstinence while in prison. He saw the
telling time
...” will be the period free from
custody--currently in his view, very short; and she therefore must be regarded
as having a
high degree of relapsing, given her “...
entrenched almost
life-long alcohol abuse
...” especially given
her apparent
intervention, despite a history including alcohol-related
offences and Pharmacy Board interventions;
whether he would regard the Respondent as an “
practitioner
” Dr. Samuels told the Tribunal he would see her as
having an impairment—alcohol dependence—currently in remission;
well as “...
some personality vulnerability and a mood disorder of some
...” the latter managed with a small dose of
antidepressant medication and under Dr. Mehta’s ongoing treatment which he
regarded as a “...
...”; but presently, there was no
need for intensive contact with Dr. Mehta unless the Respondent’s mood
state changed.
He regarded Dr. Thomas as clearly beneficial and hoped that the
Respondent and her newly engaged psychologist (consequent upon Dr.
move interstate) will work together, especially in addressing “...
long-term personality vulnerabilities
...” importantly, should she
Samuels emphasised the need for a
Drug and Alcohol
physician or
psychiatrist, to treat the
aspects of the Respondent’s
alcohol abuse, with their main role looking at the
medico-pharmacological aspects of the illness
noted that “...
risk prediction is not a science
.” He regarded
the Respondent’s “
comparatively short time as “...
very positive
...” given the
length of her drinking and the impact it had on her life. He described
...” as a “...
moving object which fluctuates
from day to day
with the issue of “
”, Dr. Samuels told the Tribunal
there is “...
no scientific test
...” to determine it; although
the Respondent is currently “...
doing the right
...”, the test of her level of
is what occurs over the next five years; one can “...
intellectual insight and understanding of what has happened and why...but
really, it is ... action ultimately, that confirms
the fact that you have
actually developed true insight
.”; and the longer the abstinence from
alcohol, the greater the confidence “...
...[relapse is]...
not going to happen, but it doesn’t completely preclude
the risk of relapse goes on into perpetuity.
did not think, he told the Tribunal in effect, that there would ever be, no risk
of alcohol abuse “...
but over the years she will move towards low
.” As the Respondent is a ‘
professional’
, he regarded this as being in her favour, as such
professionals “...
generally do well
...” especially given
their knowledge of the tests used to determine alcohol abuse or that of other
time, with the Respondent’s progress, Dr. Samuels told the Tribunal,
consideration could be given as to whether any condition
or conditions, on the
Respondent’s registration if imposed by the Tribunal, remained
appropriate, following review of any such
condition or conditions. He described
the Respondent as “...
on the path to recovery and I think she is doing
fitness to practise
, Dr. Samuels believed she could be fit to
practise as a pharmacist “...
if there were a number of safeguards in
...” including her current specialist treatments and importantly
also, the role of a fully informed GP to be caring for her;
accepting care by a
Drug and Alcohol specialist; together with objective and “...
stringent monitoring
...”; and not being in sole practice, thereby
allowing supervision by others; he regarded her preference to practise on three
days only, weekly “...
as a very positive
considering supervision of the Respondent if she returns to practice as a
pharmacist, Dr. Samuels suggested that a senior member
of any pharmacy in which
she might practise, should be made fully aware of the Respondent’s
situation and of any conditions
the Tribunal might impose on her registration.
He also suggested a mechanism for the Council to be alerted should there be any
regarding alcohol. There was benefit also, he told the Tribunal, for the
Respondent to have a
external to any pharmacy in which she may
practise, with whom she could engage on returning to practice and
thereafter;
Evidence of Dr. Mehta
Mehta continues as the Respondent’s treating psychiatrist, whose
provisional
diagnosis is a recurrent major depression, currently in
remission, for which she advised her patient to continue with the 50mg dose
Zoloft (Sertraline), a so-called, SSRI antidepressant medication. Dr.
Mehta’s special areas of practice interest includes
anxiety disorders and
women’s mental health. She has worked at the
Black Dog Institute
in Psychiatry she had also worked for three six-monthly
periods part-time, at the
(or Centre) where she had
a role in treating alcohol-addiction issues. Her next appointment with the
Respondent was to take place
in April 2013 following her most recent (and third)
appointment on 29 January 2013;
the Respondent’s second appointment in November 2012, Dr. Mehta felt she
mood disorder...
the most likely diagnosis was
recurrent major depression disorder
‘euthymic’ at the time of the assessment, which means her mood was
...[and]...
she wasn’t depressed or any other kind of problem
with her mood
.” She was “...
fairly confident...”
her diagnosis of recurrent major depression. She had raised by way of query or
differential
” diagnosis, Bipolar Disorder Type 2, but this
was not something she definitely felt the patient had at that time. Dr.Mehta
emphasised to the Tribunal, that she was treating the Respondent for depression
and not “...
in the capacity of alcohol
taken to the
Mood Assessment Program
(MAP) used by the
, Dr. Mehta described its use whereby a patient provides answers
directly, by computer response, to the program’s questions;
which in turn,
provides a “guide” when a practitioner sees that patient, as to
diagnosis and treatment;
Respondent had informed Dr. Mehta about her alcohol dependence history and that
according to what she told Dr. Mehta, it seemed
to be in remission. She also
gave her history of periods of major depression including some
possible highs
...” as a result of which Dr. Mehta had
considered the possibility of bi-polar disorder as “...
something I was
querying in the back of my mind
...”; but felt she had a recurrent
major depressive disorder and which she communicated as her
”, to the Respondent’s GP, Dr. Prasad. She
also emphasised that, as she had not yet had the opportunity to see the
over a long period of time
...”, she had used
the description “
.” She had advised her patient to
continue treatment by her psychologist; to maintain the antidepressant
medication; and to
” which she said,
based on some studies, showed some beneficial effect on
depression;
Mehta described the psychologist’s ongoing treatment as very important, by
engaging with the Respondent and dealing with
any difficulties; also in
addressing the alcohol dependency; and by applying
, looking at past issues including domestic
violence which could have contributed to her depression; and other,
family-related issues;
Mehta limited her response by again, stressing
that she could only comment on
the depression for which she was treating her. However she suggested that the
Respondent being now
in a different situation, receiving psychiatric and
psychological, treatment, any further episodes of alcohol abuse would likely
detected and addressed; and the patient was aware how to seek help if she were
to have a relapse in her depression. Although not
an expert in alcohol
, Dr. Mehta was aware that it is a “...
...” and “..
.that some patients do relapse and some
during cross-examination, to Dr. Samuels’ assessment of the Respondent,
that he “...
was unclear whether or not she has ever fulfilled criteria
for a major depression
...[and from]...
...[the Respondent]
describes to me
sounds like a chronic
Dysthymia...”
, Dr.Mehta responded: that “...
it is possible,
but based on what she told me about her depression, it did sound like it was
more severe than that when she had it,
but obviously, I haven’t assessed
her at the time when she was depressed
Complainant’s
Counsel sought Dr. Mehta’s response to a query as to whether, if a person
commenced drinking alcohol at
7.00 pm and consumed two full bottles of wine,
that person “...
would be pretty intoxicated by work the next day...if
work started at 9.00 am
...”, Dr.Mehta claimed no
expertise in
this area as to exact, alcohol-elimination rates but she imagined the person
would still have some alcohol on board
Mehta told the Tribunal she was not familiar with the
Program but
she was aware of its philosophy being different from that of
good reports of it by some patients who had done the
...” but she had no knowledge of the course
to the Tribunal’s question as to whether major depression in a patient who
is alcoholic, has any causal connection
with alcoholism, Dr. Mehta responded
yes...it can be both ways...so major depression can lead to or
exacerbate, problems with alcohol...but also, alcohol specifically,
can cause a
worsened depression
Evidence of Dr.
report dated 5 February 2013 by Dr. Thomas, a clinical Psychologist, (then) with
Breakthrough Psychology
, was in evidence. The Complainant had requested
to have Dr. Thomas available to give evidence before the Tribunal. Despite
efforts by the Respondent’s solicitor during the inquiry, it was
not possible the Tribunal was informed, to have Dr. Thomas
give evidence by
telephone given that she was in South America and relevant contact could not be
Thomas had been provided as her report confirmed, with the
Expert Witness
Code of Conduct
which she had read and by which she agreed to be bound, in
providing as requested, a “
her work with the Respondent;
first consulted with the Respondent on 24 April 2012, when incarcerated at
Bolwara House Transitional Centre
(“Bolwara”)
followed by 10 further consultations over a seven-month period. The Respondent
had described, that since receiving
psychological treatment in prison
her insight and emotional intelligence has greatly
improved...
[and that she had]...
greater awareness and understanding of
the precipitating factors that ultimately led to alcohol dependence and clinical
Thomas recorded the Respondent’s insight into alcohol abuse and
dependence, as a means of “...
coping with and avoiding, life and
emotional trauma
...” and since being on parole, she had faced several
opportunities where relapse could have occurred, but she had exhibited
determination in not wanting alcohol to be part of her life; showing
great resilience
...[obtaining]...
support through volunteer
work, friends and family and psychological support
...[from Dr.
Thomas]...” and she believes the Respondent has a significant
...” in place, to help her. Dr.
Thomas noted the Respondent’s considerable, academic achievement whilst
incarcerated,
completing a
Graduate Diploma in Legal Studies
she is now pursuing a degree in
Psychological Science
to Dr. Thomas, the Respondent has shown “...
great levels of openness,
honesty and humility
...” and she regards her as “...
impaired in any way
...” and having sufficient insight “...
judge her own competencies and abilities to return to work
describes how the Respondent has expressed remorse for her actions causing the
fatal event in 2007;
Thomas regarded the Respondent’s likelihood of again becoming
alcohol-dependent as very low; and described her “...
to confront a traumatic and emotionally and physically,
damaging past...”
and that she is “...
positive and
...”; Dr. Thomas has “...
...”, the Respondent will “...
maintain a stable
mental state
...[and be]...
successful, irrespective of what work that may
Psychiatric and Psychological evidence at
Sentence proceedings
his remarks on
3 April 2009
, in evidence before the
(as Exhibit C-33), His Honour Judge Lakatos SC, included
references to a
Probation and Parole Service
Pre-Sentence Report
Ms. Mandy Thomas
; and to medical and psychological, evidence tendered on behalf of the
prisoner (the Respondent). Ms. Thomas stated that the Respondent
was originally
referred to the PPS and to a drug and alcohol counselling service in 2005 and
which she attended twice, noting that
the records indicated that
the prisoner was in total denial regarding her alcohol
.” [Exhibit, Ibid];
Respondent had told Ms. Thomas “...
she had been on antidepressants for
two years and... had attended upon a
...[psychologist service called
on three occasions in
” (Emphasis
added). A psychologist from
told Ms. Thomas that the Respondent
very intelligent...but somewhat manipulative
in that she
said what the counsellor wished to hear
.” Apparently, there was no
further contact between the Respondent and
; Ms. Thomas was also told of the Respondent’s alcohol-drinking
history, but she denied having a current problem; and that she
did not continue
with the drug and alcohol counselling in
because she felt
uncomfortable attending with
users also present, to whom she
dispensed drugs, but she did not seek an alternative counsellor
Honour’s remarks also include (from Ms. Thomas’ PPS report)
reference to the Respondent’s “...
family confirming her
long-standing alcohol addiction
...[and the family’s]...
to assist her, but
...[she]...
failed to follow through
and often, was not frank
...[with the family]...
The remarks also note that she did attend the
House Detox Centre
for three weeks but “...
having completed that
program, declined to be assessed for the further six-week program or for the
long-term rehabilitation program
.” [Ibid.];
proceedings, three expert reports were relied on by Counsel
representing the Respondent and presented to the court. The first was
psychologist
Ms. Monica Ortiger
to whom the Respondent
was referred in April 2008 for
alcohol abuse,
saw her on three occasions during which the (motor vehicle) accident was only
briefly discussed. Ms Ortiger assessed the Respondent
articulate, intelligent, but guarded
...[and that]...
she viewed herself as
a loser even though she had high achievements, academically and perhaps,
professionally
...” and told Ms. Ortiger that she thought she had her
alcohol abuse problem “...
fairly well under control
Respondent also told her that “...
she hated knowing what she had
and thinks about the accident every day
...” and its
effects on others [Ibid.];
report from psychiatrist
Dr. Adam Martin
was presented to the Court on
behalf of the Respondent, at the
proceedings. It was Dr.
Martin’s opinion that “...[the Respondent]...
has an alcohol
dependence and a past diagnosis of major depressive disorder
she requires continued assistance from a psychologist or
psychiatrist
final report before the Court was from a
the Respondent acknowledged her chronic
difficulties with alcohol abuse; and it was his opinion that she
needs to resolve her alcohol issues and needs close supervision to
...”[Ibid.];
Honour considered a number of
mitigating factors
including that the
Respondent’s pharmacy had “...
been firebombed
(apparently, soon after the accident on 15 October, 2007); and subjectively, her
respect in the community as a pharmacist,
her work in business and civic
organizations and her “...
significant charity work...”.
Honour described the matters before the Court as “...
serious and tragic
...[and that the Respondent]...
displayed a gross degree of moral
culpability and abandonment...
[and that the offences]...
represent a sad
and tragic outcome to many lives, the lives of innocent people.
sentencing the Respondent His Honour applied “...
circumstances
...” including that “...
there is clearly a
continuing need for rehabilitation
... [and] ...
there might well be in
the future...”
and His Honour accepted that “...
depression may well continue or be exacerbated and that will need to be attended
.” He recorded a request that if possible the Respondent
be accommodated in a correctional centre able to care for her
medical issues
...” [Ibid.];
Respondent’s
evidence before the Tribunal
Respondent’s extensive affidavit was in evidence to which she made some
amendments when commencing giving evidence before
the Tribunal. Again, given the
nature of the complaints, it is important for the Tribunal to refer to
significant parts of the Respondent’s
evidence, all of which it has
considered;
sentenced, the Respondent first went to
Mullawa Correctional Centre
Emu Plains Correctional Centre
from which she was later taken to
Long Bay Prison Hospital
for treatment of complications to her leg; and
thereafter, she was transferred to
Dillwynia Correctional
imprisonment, she commenced some courses including that named “
” designed to enable those having committed a crime, to take
responsibility for it, to individuals, families and the wider community;
found the course “...
confronting
...” but it started the
process of “...
looking at myself
...”. She also undertook a
‘drug and alcohol addiction’ program during which she realised
I had been in denial for so long
...” that she was an
alcoholic. She described such programs as “...
eye-opening stages of my
.” Yet, she told the Tribunal, she was not
opening up and getting the full benefit from those
...” and, it was not until she requested to go to the
Bolwara House Transitional Centre
(“Bolwara”) which
specifically addresses drug and alcohol rehabilitation by
...intensive
...”, that she made
Respondent described
the SMART program and its comparison with AA;
emphasizing SMART requiring involvement in and taking control and responsibility
one’s own management, looking forward rather than dwelling on the
past; which she told the Tribunal “...
maintains your motivation to stay
...”. Various SMART documents including a comparison between it
and AA, were admitted into evidence. The Respondent has completed
facilitator training program
...” which permitted her to
conduct SMART recovery programs. She told the Tribunal that
...[SMART program]...
skills are acquired, to
manage your problems without any meetings, you no longer require
...” however, she emphasised that if a person is feeling vulnerable
at any time “...
SMART meetings are open for you to attend
Questioned about Dr. Samuels’ view that the SMART program is not
sufficiently “
the Respondent told the Tribunal, she
believed that in the community there is not “...
a great awareness of
...[and this]...
may have been reflected in Dr. Samuels’
” adding that SMART “...
self-management; and maintaining the motivation to stay abstinent is... the
...” in the program;
Respondent described the difficulties in pursuing her Law studies when in
prison; and how she achieved transfer to Bolwara, the
final stage in the
imprisonment process, to which access is restricted to prisoners with addictions
to alcohol or drugs; and which
like an intensive
rehabilitation
with a maximum of 16 girls at a time
” and where
attendance at certain activities is compulsory. She described how some inmates
” (or Category 1) status were able to go
unattended, outside prison to pursue programs and return; but, being unable to
this category status, the Respondent had to be accompanied, in order to
undertake programs outside the Centre. She described the
daily programs at
Bolwara and the weekly meeting of AA or NA (“Narcotics Anonymous”);
and her attendance at a brief course
addressing ‘domestic violence’.
Admission to Bolwara is achievable she told the Tribunal, only when an inmate is
the final 12 month period of a sentence;
Bolwara, the Respondent received significant benefit from a counsellor named
“Tia”; asked to comment on a Bolwara record
made by Tia, which
included her recording the Respondent’s words: “...
says she will
definitely never drink and drive, although she may drink again
the Respondent told the Tribunal: “...
at that time I was still
contemplating whether I may be able to have a drink
...[but]...
and the work I have done, I’ve realised that I cannot have a drink
again...I’m an alcoholic...a recovering
alcoholic and the only way for me
to maintain that recovery is through complete abstinence
Respondent’s acknowledgement of being an alcoholic, is also recorded in
Pre-release report
, in evidence;
to describe her
, she told the Tribunal how at Bolwara, she was
grateful for the chance “...
to confront my past
relevant, underlying issues, including the need for more open communication; and
of wanting to give something back
to the community for the suffering she had
caused and for “...
the disrepute it put
on the pharmacy
on her parole, specifically that requiring her to
undertake “...
testing for drug and alcohol use where facilities are
available, at the direction of the
...[responsible]...
...” she confirmed to the Tribunal
that since her release from prison (on probation) she had not been required to
testing whether on attending the PPS or when its designated Officer
visited her at home;
the Respondent told the Tribunal she would be “...
quite happy to submit
to blood or urine tests on a regular basis
...” including those
described by Dr. Samuels; nor did she have any difficulty in bringing herself
under the care of a
Drug and Alcohol specialist
suggested, which she has now arranged by her GP Dr. Prasad, referring her to
Associate Professor Weltman
at the Nepean Hospital and with whom an
appointment had been made. It was Dr. Prasad who referred the Respondent to her
psychiatrist, Dr. Mehta; and his letter of referral to A/Professor
Weltman was without objection, admitted into evidence;
Respondent described the benefit from her consultations with clinical
psychologist
Dr. Kerrie Thomas
who was always, readily available by
telephone, if needed; but with Dr. Thomas moving interstate, ongoing
psychologist care will
be provided by her recommended colleague
. The Respondent told the Tribunal she is presently studying
Psychology whereby she will gain greater knowledge for herself and to
others to avoid the problems she has encountered;
the Respondent was waiting for an appointment at the
Black Dog Institute
(“BDI”) suggested by Dr. Clarke at their initial session, in the
context of possible ‘bipolar disorder’ she
completed the MAP survey,
referred to above; because of the long wait for an appointment she made further
investigations and contacted
Lawson Clinic
where she is under Dr.
Mehta’s continuing psychiatric care, including her advice to continue with
the antidepressant medication,
with a daily dose of 50mg in the
taken to the
Particulars
of Complaint 3, citing the Respondent’s
lack of candour
, she told the Tribunal she was then in
active alcohol addiction, part
...[of which]...
is trying to
cover up what you are actually doing
...” and her condition was
worsening; and looking back to the relevant period, she conceded that she
undertook no efforts to
correct her condition. She offered similar explanation
for misleading the Board in relation to her
undertakings
to it; and that
she had “...
lost control
...”. As to the impact her behaviour
had on the profession, she told the Tribunal “
I am absolutely
disgusted by the way I behaved...”
she be allowed to resume practice as a pharmacist, the Respondent told the
Tribunal she accepts that
should be imposed on her
registration given her conduct and prior behaviour, to safeguard the community;
and she is willing to commence
immediately, routine
alcohol. She intends continuing treatment by her psychiatrist and by her
psychologist, at a frequency they require, wanting to
do so, to create
for myself...a brighter future
...” and also,
to practise my profession...in the way
practised, not the way I was before.
Tribunal that accepting the SMART program objective
”, she would prefer to work
pharmacist, to allow her continuing treatment and other pursuits. In the
meantime, she has been attending to on-line Continuing
Professional Development
(“CPD”) activities through the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia
(“PGA”) website and other publications; in the current year,
achieving thus far, 58 CPD ‘points’—above
the ‘initial
year’ required minimum of 40 ‘points’, evidence of which was
before the Tribunal;
Respondent told the Tribunal she would not deny her ‘alcohol
dependency’ to any prospective employer; noting also
that since release
from prison, she has agreed to complete forms asking about a ‘
’; and she accepts the need to do so;
by Counsel, whether she could now cope with “
triggering events
” she told the Tribunal that she was now “...
in a very good
...[and felt]...
the strongest emotionally and mentally, that I
can really remember in my adult life
.” She described measures she had
in place for a “...
disaster plan
....” by way of her partner
Mr. Chittick, family members, friends and with her continuing contact if needed,
(mentioned above) and others, at Bolwara, available at
all times; she expressed optimism for her future;
cross-examination by Complainant’s Counsel, the Respondent disputed
versions about in effect, her appearance and whether
she was consuming alcohol,
when working at her pharmacy in 2002. Concerning that condition of the
following conviction for a
High Range PCA
in 2005, requiring her attendance at the
Upper Hunter Drug and Alcohol
, she disputed the version put by Counsel that there was only one
such attendance responding in effect, that on two other occasions,
the relevant
Counsellor from the above
attended at her pharmacy prior to commencing work. This exchange with Counsel
occurred in the context of a challenge to the
Respondent’s assertion
(above) that she had told the Board’s
2006, that she had attended on three occasions. The Counsellor
“Garry” did not give evidence before the Tribunal;
Respondent told the Tribunal, that she did pursue one of the
“recommendations”, that she attend AA, by attending meetings
Muswellbrook area on several occasions and at another AA group in the Scone
area, neither of which as she explained to the
Tribunal, was beneficial to her
because of the nature of those attending those meetings;
Cross-examined
the Respondent admitted not telling
High Range PCA
in October 2005; and expressed sorrow that she didn’t, due to her
condition at the time. She was cross-examined at
length, directed to whether
anecdotal reports
” of her being under the influence of
alcohol while working at her pharmacy in August 2006, were in fact, correct. She
consuming alcohol while working, at that time; but conceded that in
effect, given alcohol’s rate of metabolism, she may well
under the influence
at least to some extent,
consumption “...
basically every night
to paragraphs 9 and 10 of her
(Exhibit R-23), the Respondent
admitted breaching her
undertaking
to the Board’s
, by not obtaining treatment for her “
undertaking
not to practise if impaired
by alcohol, medications or other substances
...” because
she told the Tribunal, she was “...
as an after-effect
from the night before
.” She also
that in about April
2007 she was “...
drinking before work
...” and in breach of
undertaking,
I was in such a state...of active
alcohol addiction
...[and that it]...
was a dereliction of my duty as a
Respondent was taken during cross-examination, to her telephone conversation
with the Board’s Deputy-Registrar Mr. Freeman
on 30 April 2007, reporting
that according to a telephone call he had received, she appeared to be
under the influence of alcohol, smelt strongly of liquor and
...[was]...
unsteady on
feet while dispensing
medication”;
and she denied to him that “...
she was drinking
yesterday and that she only drinks at home
.” The Respondent conceded
this was inaccurate and admitted her conduct as part of trying to hide her
alcoholism and the nature of her deceitful conduct...that is all
part of it.”
She admitted being impaired by alcohol whilst working as
a pharmacist at that time;
Complainant’s
Counsel’s cross-examination included also, addressing Complaint
—the final particulars of which were that
...[the fatal collision on]...
15 October 2007 and
... [the Respondent]...
...[she]...
continued to consume alcohol
Exhibit R-21 (admissions) the Respondent admitted Complaint 2 and did not
dispute the particulars. However the Tribunal
notes that her admission to
Complaint 2 is that “...
an impairment namely alcohol
...[but that]...
she no longer
.”(Emphasis added). The Tribunal discusses this
qualification further, below;
pattern of drinking
...” from 2002 to 2007 and
the amounts of alcohol consumed over that period, the Respondent was unable to
provide exact amounts
but told the Tribunal that “...
it was increasing
the whole way through that time
.” She also told the Tribunal of her
very serious injuries sustained in the fatal collision, their nature and extent,
the necessary
hospitalisation and ongoing pain management, including the need
opioid analgesic
medication; and responding to a specific question,
having “...
any concerns about addiction
those medications]...”;
Respondent described her re-established, family connections. As already noted
above, there was documentary support of her by family
and friends. She also
described her relationship with her partner, Mr. Chittick and that they have
shared interests and shared goals
questioned about her preference for participation in the SMART program to that
offered by AA—in the context of Dr. Samuel’s
views (referred to
above)—she described her capacity to respond if needed, to relevant
indicators, by attendance at SMART meetings.
Relevant to the
on her parole including that specifically citing AA, she confirmed that her
parole officer
” was aware of her participation in the SMART
program; and accepts the importance also, of ongoing treatment by the
Respondent’s
psychiatrist and by her psychologist;
, she described how early in 2012, she developed
true insight
...’ that she must never again drink alcohol;
and accepting “...
it is going to be a continuing regime of treatment
and therapy and I’m the first to acknowledge that...
[and that]...
all won’t be easy
either, but I am also very, very
Evidence of Mr. Chittick
Chittick appeared before the Tribunal and his affidavit was in evidence. He told
the Tribunal of the development of his relationship
with the Respondent; and of
their agreement to live together as partners when the Respondent was released
from prison; and their
relationship continues, satisfactorily;
to questions concerning alcohol, he told the Tribunal it was kept at their home;
and that it would be possible for the
Respondent to access it if he wasn’t
there; but he has never had any suspicion of this. He is an occasional drinker
and when he and the Respondent go out for dinner, in both situations he
drinks alcohol in her presence;
Chittick described the Respondent’s progress since leaving prison;
including how, over time, she has developed more self-esteem
and confidence in
her own ability to do things for herself; and is self-motivated and determined.
He told the Tribunal she had obtained
her motor vehicle driver’s licence
at her first attempt. He has never smelt alcohol on her breath. Asked whether he
the Respondent to have “...
insight into her drinking
...” Mr. Chittick replied
...”. He told the Tribunal he had
...” that the Respondent would “...
...” be prepared to practise as a pharmacist if the Tribunal
allowed her to and under whatever conditions it deemed
appropriate;
Evidence of Mrs. Vaughan
Vaughan first met the Respondent in about 2001 when she opened her pharmacy; and
described her as “...
very helpful
...” often assisting with
number to her should there
be any need to contact the Respondent
after hours
...”; she regarded the Respondent as a
good pharmacist
told the Tribunal of the Respondent’s involvement in community events
including the local
Association
; and that she had never
personally, experienced any dispensing errors made by the Respondent; she had
rumours going around
...” related to the Respondent
and alcohol, at her pharmacy prior to the motor vehicle collision in October
2007; and following
which, “...
people started talking about
...”. She had never personally, seen the Respondent under the
influence of alcohol; she told the Tribunal she would be “...
...[the Respondent]...
and trust her with my pharmaceutical
...” should she again practise as a pharmacist. Mrs. Vaughan said
she had no recollection of anyone telling her they would not
again use the
Respondent as their pharmacist;
Vaughan had made contact with the Respondent during her imprisonment; and since
her release, has spoken with her on four or five,
Submissions
for the Complainant and Respondent provided written submissions and also
addressed the Tribunal, relevant to its
consequential,
. Their submissions are not
repeated in their entirety but have been taken into account by the Tribunal in
reaching its determinations;
Complainant’s
submissions—an outline
Complainant’s written submissions were accompanied by an extensive,
detailed chronology and a list of authorities together
with a list of
health conditions
employment conditions
on the Respondent’s
registration should these become relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration
protective orders
contrary to the Complainant’s primary
submissions—that the Respondent’s registration be
that no review pursuant to Division 8 of the National law be permitted before
the expiration of two years from date of the Tribunal’s
orders; and that
the Council be the
appropriate review body
for any such review. The
Complainant also sought an order for costs, in its favour;
Complainant emphasised the Respondent’s long history of alcohol abuse,
since 1992, including the two offences for driving
in excess of the prescribed
concentration of alcohol, the first in 1995 and the second, in 2005; and
emphasised reports of the Respondent
being intoxicated by alcohol while working
as a pharmacist, in 2002, 2005, 2006 and 2007; together with the incidents which
suspension of her registration in September 2007 following which, the
fatal collision occurred on 15 October 2007;
Honour Judge Lakatos’ sentencing remarks were referred to, including the
Respondent’s resumption of drinking alcohol
following the fatal accident;
her declining to continue ongoing assessment in the program conducted by the
Jarrah House Detox Centre
following the fatal accident; and His
Honour’s rejection of the Respondent’s statement that she had not
been drinking
alcohol on the day of that fatal accident. Complainant’s
Counsel noted the judge’s remark that there was “...
continuing need for rehabilitation
...”. Further to that identified
need, the Tribunal notes His Honour’s request or recommendation, on
sentencing the Respondent
to a term of imprisonment, to the effect that she
receive appropriate medical care while in prison;
Complainant emphasised the reports of the Respondent’s dispensing errors
at her pharmacy including the account by, Monique
Mohr, who worked for her for
Although acknowledging that
alone, cannot attract cancellation
of registration, the Complainant submitted that the Respondent’s
alone or taken together with other
particulars
including her “...
past lack of candour and breach of undertakings
...”, in effect, justified the
Tribunal’s finding that she is not a suitable person to be registered as a
pharmacist.
Counsel also emphasised the Tribunal’s exclusively protective
to the maintenance
of proper professional standards; to protect the profession’s standing and
reputation; and with
, in respect of the practitioner and the
profession generally, another important objective;
a decision of the High Court of Australia involving a barrister who drove whilst
intoxicated by alcohol and caused the death
of a motor cyclist—
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
Complainant referred to the extremely serious nature of the offences of which
the Respondent was convicted, causing the
death of one and serious bodily injury
to another; together with her high degree of moral culpability by driving whilst
intoxicated.
The Complainant noted that unlike in
there are no mitigating factors
...” in the
Respondent’s offences; nor could there be any challenge to the Respondent
having caused the accident by driving
whilst intoxicated, as there was in
the medical evidence that the Respondent will remain an alcoholic, the
Complainant referred to the definition of “
National law requiring that any such “...
impairment detrimentally
is likely to detrimentally affect
practitioner’s capacity to practise the relevant profession (Emphasis
added). Given Dr. Samuels’ opinion that
the Respondent’s risk of
relapse is “...
...” and by accepting
the contextual interpretation of the word “
question of Law, the Complainant, citing relevant authority, submitted that it
should be interpreted as “...
a real and not remote
possibility
...”; and all the more so, it was submitted, given the
Respondent’s present, early stage of recovery; that her
not yet complete; and that her current treatment regimen was unsatisfactory,
especially given her preference to attend meetings
in effect, on
a ‘needs’ basis, rather than adopting regular attendance at meetings
of an organisation such as
; and because she had not yet had a
sufficient “...
proving period
...” to demonstrate abstinence.
Finally, as to this question, the Complainant submitted that the Respondent
bears the onus of
persuading the Tribunal there is no risk or an acceptable
risk, of recurrence of alcohol abuse;
the complaint (numbered 3) of
unsuitability
to be registered as a
pharmacist, the Complainant relied on the Respondent’s “...
...” in her dealings with the Board, demonstrated by her
lack of candour with it; in breaching her undertakings given to the
relation to her practice as a pharmacist. Citing
Ex Parte Tziniolis: Re
Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
at 461, the Complainant
submitted that having exhibited serious deficiencies in her standards of
conduct, “...
clear proof
...” was needed to demonstrate that
the Respondent has “...
established
...[herself]...
...[person]...” which, it was submitted, in effect, she had
not done [Ibid.];
the Tribunal determine contrary to the Complainant’s submissions as to the
Orders it should make, that
be imposed on her practice as a
pharmacist, the Complainant
provided a document setting out
Health Conditions
for the Tribunal’s
assistance;
however, the Complainant submitted, this was not an appropriate case for
conditions to be imposed;
Respondent’s submissions: an
Respondent’s Counsel also provided the Tribunal with a so-called,
evidence matrix
relevant to the three complaints; and referred to her
Statement of Admissions
in evidence;
was the Respondent’s submission that the
convictions
particularised
in Complaint 1, were not related to her Pharmacy practice; the question for the
Tribunal relevant to its protective
culpability to render her unfit to practise. Counsel submitted that the
Respondent accepts
the moral culpability inherent in those convictions and its
effects on those adversely affected—the victims and their families;
that the offences were committed as a result of her “...
...” but that now, “...
absent that...addiction, the
chances of repetition are
the second Complaint, Counsel described the Respondent as having
an impairment...namely, alcohol
...” [Emphasis added] but that she no longer
impairment that affects or is likely to affect, detrimentally, her capacity to
practise as a pharmacist, there being no longer,
an impairment;
submissions, the Respondent’s Counsel referred to the Respondent’s
admissions to most of the matters particularised
in Complaint 3 adding that they
relate to her past behaviour
and quite properly they should
be admitted
...”; and described her “...
descent into chronic
alcoholism through 2002, through 2005 to 2007
...[and]...
there is no
shying away from it
.” Responding to the Complainant’s
submissions concerning the risk of relapse, adopting Dr. Samuels’
as moderate to high, it was submitted that any remaining concerns
with relapse, could be addressed by appropriate conditions on her
registration;
the Respondent’s acceptance of her alcoholism had taken many years,
finally, categorically and unequivocally, in 2011
Counsel submitted that she had accepted the “...
responsibility
...” for her past behaviour; and since such acceptance
she had taken measures to assist her, including her application for transfer
where she benefited from psychological assistance and support. It
was submitted that her evidence before the Tribunal, confirmed the
she continues to apply to her acceptance of her alcoholism; and her positive
response to ongoing treatment to maintain
abstinence; all of which indicate her
serious and genuine, efforts to address her dependency;
was the Respondent’s submission, that evidence before the Tribunal from
those closest to her, confirm her present condition,
including from her sister;
from Mrs. Vaughan; and from the Respondent’s partner, Mr. Chittick. It was
submitted that her current
treatment regimen is adequate, including her arranged
consultation with Professor Weltman, Director of the Drug and Alcohol Services
Clinic at the Nepean Hospital upon the referral of her GP Dr. Prasad. This
followed Dr. Samuels’ suggestion during his assessment
at the request of
the Complainant, given some physical, alcohol-related, conditions he
to the Respondent’s suitability or otherwise, to practise as a pharmacist,
Counsel cited various decisions to the effect
that the Tribunal must assess this
as at the time of its determination; and finally, emphasising that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction
is protective, not
Tribunal must consider the evidence before it, according to the standard
articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but that having
regard to the serious nature of the complaints and
the consequences, such
satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect references
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
Complaint 1
has been proved.
Complaint 2
, as defined in section 5 of the
National Law, the Tribunal notes that the complaint describes the impairment as
namely alcohol abuse
.” It particularises the history of
the Respondent’s abuse of alcohol; of her driving-whilst-intoxicated
charges, the
first in 1997 and the next in 2005; and reports of her apparent
intoxication whilst practising as a pharmacist at her pharmacy, including
observations of the Board’s Inspector in 2002; and those of two police
officers on two occasions—14 and 19 September
2007, approximately one
month prior to the fatal collision the subject of the convictions described in
the first complaint; on 12
October 2007, three days prior to the fatal
collision, misleading a psychiatrist Dr Larry Brash about the recency of her
when she saw him at the Board’s request; together with her
breached undertakings to the Board; and suspension of her registration
September 2007, followed by her being found in her pharmacy contrary to such
suspension, without the presence of a registered
pharmacist—as detected by
two police officers; and her continued drinking following the fatal collision
prior to her initial
imprisonment;
Tribunal notes the wording of the second complaint that she
an impairment
namely alcohol abuse
” (Emphasis added). Having regard for the medical evidence, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent’s
is that she
is and will remain
. As Dr. Clarke told the Tribunal
once an alcoholic always an alcoholic...that’s the
.” The Respondent accepts that she is an alcoholic and will remain
so. She accepts that abstinence is the only approach to her
alcoholism. Although
the complaint describes the impairment as “...
...” and particularises this accordingly, it is
which is manifested by abuse. It is this condition that has potential
implications for the Respondent as submitted on her behalf,
should she be
permitted to resume practice as a pharmacist. The Tribunal notes that according
to the evidence, the Respondent has
remained abstinent since 2009; hence, there
has been no ‘
alcohol abuse
’. Alcoholism is the condition that
in effect, also underpins the Complainant’s submissions outlined above.
The Tribunal
further considers these issues when addressing the need for any
protective orders. According to the evidence and having regard for
Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the
Respondent has an
second complaint has been
proved accordingly;
only particulars of
Complaint 3
, numbered 1 to 6 inclusive, were as noted
above, by leave, included in this complaint, on the first day of the
Tribunal’s inquiry.
suitable person
’ ground for a
complaint about a registered practitioner is found in section 144 (e) of the
National Law—“
A complaint the practitioner is
not a suitable person to hold registration in the practitioner’s
“ (Emphasis added). During submissions, the Tribunal
queried and invited submissions from both Counsel, as to the intent or
of the word “
” in section 144 (e) following
reference to the
criminal conviction or finding
Unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct
of competence
—in section 144 (a), (b), (c), and
(d) respectively. Complainant’s Counsel submitted that
suitability
very broad concept to pick up character and fitness and
any number of things in the particular circumstances of the case, can feed
questions of character and fitness
.” Counsel was unaware of any
authorities addressing this specific provision in the National Law, but
submitted that “...
it at least picks up the idea of fit and proper or
good character which was the older terminology but one might assume that a
was introduced...
[in Counsel’s submission]...
to broaden out
the criteria that could be considered under the general rubric of
”. Respondent’s Counsel was also unable
to identify any relevant authority. The Tribunal sought the assistance of both
Counsel to advise it, should either ascertain any authority on ‘
suitable person
’. The Tribunal has not received any such
authorities;
the absence of any authoritative, decision to guide its consideration of what is
intended by section 144 (e), relevantly the words
otherwise not a
suitable person
...” the Tribunal notes the definition of the word
Concise Oxford Dictionary
in a different way
.” Applying these definitions it seems to the Tribunal that a
not unreasonable interpretation of section 144 (e) in the overall
section 144, is that is intended to apply to conduct not embraced by the
“ preceding paragraph
criminal conviction or finding
[section 144 (a)];
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct
lack of competence
[section 144 (c)] or
[section 144 (d)]. Of the stated
for a complaint
section 144, the Respondent’s
criminal convictions
(in April 2009)
were included in Complaint 1; and her
, in Complaint 2.
is also noted in this context, that section 149C (1) of the National Law
provides that the Tribunal may
practitioner’s registration, in effect when satisfied a practitioner is
not competent to practise the relevant profession;
where there is a finding of
professional misconduct; where the circumstances of an offence resulting in a
criminal conviction or
finding, within or outside the jurisdiction, renders the
practitioner unfit in the public interest, to practise the profession; and
the Tribunal is satisfied the practitioner “...
is not a suitable
person to practise the
profession.
” Each of these findings is
dealt with discretely, in section 149C (1);
noted above, until the first day of the Tribunal’s inquiry (18 March
2013), Complaint 3 was confined to the assertion that
the Respondent
is not a suitable person to hold registration in the pharmacy
.” At the commencement of the inquiry, the Tribunal granted
leave to the Complainant to amend Complaint 3, by inclusion of Particulars
numbered 1 to 6 inclusive, the first of which (paragraph 1)
repeated and relied on
...” the Particulars of
Complaints 1 and 2;
is the Tribunal’s conclusion given its interpretation above, of section
144 (e) of the National law, that the Complainant’s
inclusion of the
Particulars of Complainants 1 and 2 (
convictions
respectively) in paragraph 1 of the amended Complaint 3, is not appropriate each
having been dealt with separately in the other complaints.
However, the balance
of those Particulars of Complaint 3 are relevant given the matters they address,
including failures to inform
the Board of charges and convictions; breach of
undertakings to the Board’s Health Panel; and lack of candour during
with the Health Panel. As noted above, during submissions the
Respondent’s Counsel described her admissions concerning Complaint
Respondent’s failures in her dealings with the Board’s
—whose purpose is to assist pharmacists with any health
difficulties—are inconsistent with her obligations as a registered
pharmacist; those failures were causally connected to her alcoholism / abuse of
alcohol at such relevant times;
those Particulars in paragraph 2 and 3 of Complaint 3, relevantly, failure to
inform the Board of the 1997 charge with
conditional release and the 2005
conviction, each for driving whilst intoxicated by alcohol, the Tribunal notes
that following its
request to the Complainant, for any statutory or other,
requirements operative in 1997 and 2005 for registered pharmacists to inform
Board, the only evidence was that admitted as Exhibit C-83, produced by the
Complainant, having been obtained from the Council.
The Complainant’s
Counsel noted that those documents were “...
and in response to the Tribunal’s question, Counsel was unable to say
whether at the relevant time, there was a
requirement for the disclosure of
convictions
...”. The exhibit included, in anticipation of
the commencement on 1 January 2008, of the
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
Voluntary Annual Return
” for the registration year 2008
which the Board was “...
...” to assist planning of
mandatory introduction in 2009
”, 2009 form was also part of Exhibit C-83. Both
versions included questions relevant to any criminal proceedings and
convictions.
It seems therefore, as the Tribunal understands the situation
relevant to 1997 and 2005 (paragraphs 2 and 3 of Complaint 3), that
there was no
reporting requirement for renewal of pharmacists’
registration;
Complainant’s submissions, in seeking a finding that Complaint 3 was
proved, in summary relied on the fact of the convictions,
the impairment and the
Respondent’s “...
past lack of candour and dishonesty with her
regulatory body...”
namely, the Board;
Tribunal notes the wording of Complaint 3, reflecting the word
”— when assessing suitability to hold
registration—used in each of
sections 144
(e) and 149C (1) (d) of the
National Law, by looking to a
situation. Accordingly, the
Tribunal has considered the Complainant’s submissions--including its
reliance on the observations
recorded above—to the
effect that the Respondent has not now established herself as a person different
from that whose actions
caused the death and serious bodily injury relevant to
the convictions the subject of the first complaint; which in turn are relevant
—alcoholism—that was causally connected to
the offences of which she was convicted and sentenced to a term of imprisonment
commencing in 2009 and from which she was released on probation in July 2012
upon conditions set by the Probation and Parole Service.
Her alcoholism, by
reason of her dependence on alcohol, is the causal factor relevant to the
Complaints before the Tribunal. Based
upon the evidence before it, the Tribunal
is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent has established herself as a
different person;
but as the medical evidence confirms, that ‘different
person’ remains an alcoholic—an extremely important condition
significant relevance to the Tribunal’s
relevant also, to any Orders considered necessary to ensure that the Respondent
maintains her abstinence from alcohol
if she be permitted to practise as a
pharmacist. Her recovery although apparently successful, is in an early stage;
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied that the Respondent is
suitable person to hold registration in the Pharmacy profession
accordingly, finds that Complaint 3 has not been proved;
provided by the National law, two members of the Tribunal are registered
pharmacists; as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
expert professional
’ so described by the NSW Court of Appeal in respect of
another professional disciplinary tribunal, in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
Tribunal also notes the observation of
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
The purpose of any order
consequent upon a finding that a complaint has been proved, is said to be
protective of the interests of
the public at large, but more particularly
patients or potential patients of the practitioner concerned. However the
public interests
include indirectly, the standing of the medical profession and
the maintenance of public confidence in the high standards...of
practitioners.
There is also an element of deterrence or, to put it more positively,
encouragement to other practitioners to recognize
the importance of complying
with professional standards and the risks of failing to do so. The powers of a
Tribunal having two
members of the medical profession should, at least in
relation to professional standards, be accorded a degree of flexibility which
might not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal differently
constituted.
Complainant cited various authorities in its submissions as to consequential
addressing issues similar to those in this Inquiry.
Relevant to consideration of any protective orders consequent upon its
concerning the Respondent, the Tribunal also notes the Court of
Appeal decision:
[2012] NSWCA 80:
when referring to the words
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
, the Court
said, at [30] per
“His Honour
agreed that other cases might be of value as examples in indicating a range of
appropriate orders but could not
be seen as precedents
“Just as the characterisation of conduct as professional
misconduct entails the exercise of judgment by a specialist tribunal,
it seems to me, does a decision about the order that should be made where such
conduct is proved.”
Complainant Counsel’s reference above, to the need for “...
, above) when the Tribunal considers
the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the Tribunal notes the
observations of
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of its
orders and their purpose, to protect the community:
“In judging whether an applicant will, in the future,
act differently from the past, the Court is not required to act on
psychological
theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide
what a man will do and the decision in a particular case is, to
a greater or
lesser extent, dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And
in making that assessment it may draw
inferences from what he has done in the
past and, in particular, what led to his being removed from the roll. An
understanding of
that may assist the court to determine what are his standards
and his understanding...[of his]...responsibility and, from this,
apt to do in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what has
been done in the past has been sufficient
to indicate his ‘probably
permanent unfitness’:
parte Lenehan
at 422; the court
will require ‘
solid and substantial grounds’
conclusion that his standards have changed or that he will act
differently.”
(Emphasis added]
convictions
in the first Complaint are extremely serious,
involving death and serious bodily injury, caused by the Respondent’s
whilst significantly intoxicated with alcohol, confirmed at a level of
0.275 grams in 100 millilitres of blood. The offences involved
significant,
moral culpability, acknowledged by the Respondent; and were dealt with by the
criminal law by a sentence of imprisonment;
noted above, the Tribunal may cancel or suspend, registration by section 149C
(1) (c) of the National Law given its finding that
Complaint 1 (the convictions)
has been proved; but only if the circumstances of those offences render her
unfit in the public interest
to practise as a pharmacist. Given the
Tribunal’s views expressed above, concerning the causal association of
alcohol with
the events leading to her convictions; and her recovery thus far,
from the demands of dependence, by her continuing abstinence, the
Tribunal is
not comfortably satisfied that suspension or cancellation of registration is
needed in the public interest;
Complaint of
has been proved. According to the evidence, the
Respondent is and was at the relevant times of the complaints, an alcoholic with
a significant history of alcohol abuse, over approximately twenty years. She
remains and will remain, an alcoholic. Since her incarceration
in 2009 to the
time of the Tribunal’s inquiry, she has remained abstinent from alcohol.
Only comparatively recently, during
and following her imprisonment, has she
finally accepted her alcoholism and its life-long duration. She has developed
insight into
her alcoholic dependence together with an awareness of potential
‘triggers’ for possible relapse; and has measures in
place, to deal
with any such events. She has undertaken and continues to receive, psychiatric
treatment from Dr. Mehta; and continues
with apparently effective,
anti-depressant medication, given a not unlikely association between a
depressive disorder and her long
history of alcohol abuse together with past
relationship problems, likely to have contributed to her reliance on and
significant
abuse of, alcohol. Dr. Mehta described her as
—meaning, that “...
her mood was
...”; she has received and will continue to receive,
psychological support. The Respondent has exhibited determination with
personal recovery and rehabilitation, during imprisonment including her academic
achievement in her study of the Law. Her partner
Mr. Chittick, family members
and friends support her; she wants to do well now that she has confronted the
many lost and damaging
years of her life including the ravages of alcohol and
its consequences. The Tribunal was impressed with her overall evidence including
her willingness to confront and address, distressing aspects of her life,
especially her causing the death of one and serious injury
Tribunal is mindful of the medical evidence, including Dr. Samuels’
opinion concerning the Respondent’s moderate to
high risk of relapse from
abstinence; and that restoration to practice would in effect, be beneficial,
provided appropriate--likely
to be effective—
are imposed;
finding a complaint proved, the Tribunal may exercise any one or more of the
general powers
included in section 149A of the National Law, pursuant to
practitioner’s registration that the Tribunal considers appropriate;
ordering medical or psychiatric treatment or counselling, including but not
limited to, psychological counselling. Section 149A
also allows the Tribunal to
make an order that contravention of an
result in cancellation of the practitioner’s registration—such
then becomes a
critical compliance order or
Respondent was released from prison on parole; and must abide by the conditions
imposed on her by the
NSW State Parole Authority
including abstinence
from alcohol and relevant measures to achieve that objective. The Respondent was
released on parole on 25 July
2012, the earliest date on which she was eligible
to be so released, consistent with her sentence, which expires on
Parole Order
remains in force until
25 March 2015
unless it is revoked. Pursuant to section 135 of the NSW
(Administration of Sentences) Act 1999
Parole Authority
must not make a
Parole Order
unless satisfied on the balance of
probabilities, that the offender’s release is appropriate in the
including the need to protect the
community’s
; section 132 of that Act provides that when
released on parole, the offender “...
is taken to continue serving the
sentence during the parole period
considering its orders, protective of the community, the Tribunal also has
regard for the words of
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
34 NSWLR 408
at 409, at [10]:
"... Improvement – The
final consideration concerns an aspect of the public interest to which, as I
believe, insufficient attention
has been paid in these cases. I expressed my
views in this regard in Kotowicz v Law Society of New South Wales (Court of
7 August 1987, unreported). I was there in dissent as to the result of
the application. But, I hold to my opinion, as applicable
to this case. It is an
opinion which has enjoyed some favour in other Australian jurisdictions:
‘Because the jurisdiction is for the protection of the public,
regard also may be had, to the public’s interests in the
restoration to
the Roll, of such persons as have demonstrated, including by their work,
activities and life, a fitness to be restored.
For cultural and historical
reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the shared
morality of our society. In
part, this is because of the teachings of religious
leaders who have profoundly influenced our community’s perception of
and fairness, reflected from the earliest time in the courts: see, eg.
St Matthews Gospel 18, 11ff; The Acts, 3, 19. In part, it
derives from the
self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation of those
who lapse and to hold out to them
the hope that, by diligent and honourable
efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be restored to
opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society. The
public’s interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having misconducted
themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and trust.’"
formulating its orders, the Tribunal is also mindful of the guiding principle in
section 3A of the National Law, that “...
the protection of the health
and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration
Respondent’s experience in the Pharmacy profession has already been
described; as also, unfortunately, at times,
her deficient practice as a
pharmacist when adversely affected by alcohol abuse, thereby placing the
community at serious risk. There
was some evidence before the Tribunal
suggesting that the Respondent had made errors in dispensing whilst affected by
alcohol; evidence
also, that at times she was practising in her pharmacy, whilst
under the influence of alcohol. These are matters highly relevant
paramount need for the community to be protected;
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is protective of the community and of the
profession:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
NSWLR 630 at 637D and 637F.
Tribunal considers there are “
...solid and substantial
Dawson v Law Society of NSW
, Op. Cit.) for
concluding that the Respondent has changed and will act differently in the
future, acknowledging however, as she has
done before the Tribunal, that she
remains an alcoholic. Accordingly, the Tribunal has decided to restore the
Respondent to registration
as a pharmacist but only upon appropriate, stringent
conditions to protect the community. The Respondent has accepted those
submitted by the Complainant to the Tribunal should it not cancel the
Respondent’s registration contrary to its primary submission.
from considering the Complainant’s proposed conditions relevant to alcohol
monitoring, health assessments and employment
conditions, the Tribunal has
considered the Council’s
Health Program
(sometimes referred to as the
Impaired Registrants
which include an
Alcohol Testing Protocol
Carbohydrate-deficient Transferrin
(CDT) testing; and a protocol for
Urine Ethyl Glucuronide
(EtG) testing, both of which are included in the
Complainant’s suggested conditions.
According to the
(above) CDT testing is “...
to identify excess consumption or harmful use of alcohol
.”; and EtG
testing “...
is the best marker currently available to monitor
from alcohol and has been adopted by the Council for use in
circumstances where
is required
.” (Emphasis added);
The Council’s
is based on the
produced by
Medical Council of New South Wales
and is adapted for use by the
(Pharmacy) Council with the permission of the Medical Council;
Health Program
aims to ensure protection of the public
while allowing pharmacists with health problems, to remain in practice. The
appreciates that its
in effect, be burdensome to the Respondent but they are in no way intended to be
; they have been formulated for the
community served by the profession of Pharmacy. The Respondent must now
demonstrate her commitment to the high standards of
her profession in serving
the community, by her acceptance of and compliance with, the Tribunal’s
to the Practitioner satisfying the
Pharmacy Board of Australia
of Practice Registration
as to current
competence to practise as a registered pharmacist, the following
are imposed on the Practitioner’s registration upon the
Practitioner becoming registered as a pharmacist:
Conditions:
1.1 The Practitioner is to abstain from alcohol;
1.2 The Practitioner is to undertake
Carbohydrate Deficiency Transferrin
(CDT) testing; Urine
Ethyl Glucuronide
(EtG) testing; monitoring of her
liver function tests; mean cell volume and any other biochemical or
haematological parameter or
parameters, which may assist monitoring of her
abstinence from alcohol, as determined by her treating
Drug and Alcohol
or by the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales.
Such testing and monitoring is to commence within one (1) month immediately
registration; and thereafter, at a frequency to be determined from
time to time, by her treating
Drug and Alcohol specialist physician
as required by the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales (the Council). Upon
registration, the Practitioner is to notify the
Council promptly, of the name
and contact details of such medical specialist physician; and likewise,
promptly notify the Council
of any change from any such medical practitioner to
another medical practitioner;
1.3 The Practitioner is to maintain treatment attendances with her current,
psychiatrist
; with her treating psychologist;
with her treating
Drug and Alcohol specialist physician
; and with her
Drug and Alcohol Counsellor
, at a frequency to be determined by each
such practitioner; and the Practitioner-pharmacist and each of the above
health practitioners,
is to advise the Council of such treatment attendance
requirements not later than one (1) month immediately following the
Respondent’s
registration;
1.4 Not later than one (1) month following restoration of her registration,
the Practitioner is to authorise each of the above
practitioners
Psychologist
Drug and Alcohol
to notify the Council promptly, should the Respondent without
reasonable cause: fail to comply with agreed treatment including
consultation
attendances with any such practitioner and prescribed medication regimens; or
cease treatment; or of any significant,
adverse changes in the
Respondent’s health; and the Practitioner is to advise the Council that
she has so authorised each
of the above practitioners;
1.5 Not later than one (1) month following restoration of her registration,
the Practitioner is to authorise her treating
Drug and Alcohol specialist
General Medical Practitioner
, to provide the
Council with the results of such of the testing and monitoring procedures
identified in Condition 1.2, considered
necessary by the Practitioner’s
treating Drug and Alcohol specialist physician or by the Council, to be
undertaken to assist
monitoring of the Practitioner’s abstinence from
alcohol; and the Practitioner is to provide promptly, evidence of such
authorisation,
to the Council;
1.6 Upon registration, the Practitioner is to promptly notify the Council of
the name and contact details of her treating
practitioners
including her
General Medical Practitioner
psychologist
; and of her
Drug and Alcohol Counsellor
each of whom
is to be authorised to provide the Council with a report as and when required
by the Council;
1.7 The Practitioner is to provide a copy of the Tribunal’s
Conditions on registration
Reasons for
to each of the above health practitioners not later than one (1)
month following her restoration to registration; and to promptly
Council that she has complied with this condition;
1.8 The Practitioner must notify the Council of the name and contact details
consequent upon any change in any of those treating
health practitioners
described above, within ten (10) days of any such change;
1.9 The Practitioner is to attend for review by a Council-nominated medical
specialist, within six (6) months following registration;
and thereafter, at
such intervals as the Council may determine; and the Council is to meet the
costs of such reviews;
1.10 The Practitioner is to notify the Council in writing, prior to commencing
employment as a pharmacist, of the name and contact
details of each and every
prospective, pharmacist-employer together with details of the nature and extent
of any proposed employment
as a pharmacist; and the Practitioner is to provide
a copy of the Tribunal’s
for Decision
, to each such prospective pharmacist-employer prior to
commencing employment; and to provide the Council with confirmation that
such prospective employer has been provided with them;
1.11 The Practitioner is not to practise in any pharmacy without another
registered pharmacist being present at such pharmacy, at
all times; and the
Respondent is not to practise at any pharmacy, at any time, in the capacity of
a Pharmacist-in-Charge, except
for a period of one hour, but only should this
be necessary to facilitate a meal break for the
Pharmacist-in-charge;
1.12 Prior to the commencement of any employment as a registered pharmacist,
the Practitioner is to authorise each employer whether
as proprietor-pharmacist
or Pharmacist-in-Charge, to notify the Council immediately, should it appear
that the Practitioner may
not be fit to practise as a registered pharmacist
including any unexplained absences from such employment;
1.13 Upon registration, the Practitioner is to accept as a
registered pharmacist approved by the Council, to assist the
Practitioner’s return to practice as a registered pharmacist;
approved person is to be authorised to provide the Council with a report
following each such
session which is to be held at such
intervals and for such period as the Council shall determine; and the Council
shall determine
in consultation with the Practitioner, the nature, extent and
subject matter, of such
; and the costs thereof are to be borne
by the Practitioner. Such
is to be provided with a copy of the
Reasons for
, prior to the commencement of such
1.14 Following registration, the Practitioner is to notify the Council
regularly, of her attendances upon either or both, of the
organisations known
”; and to authorise such organisation, if so requested by
Council, to advise it of the Practitioner’s progress;
1.15 Other than where indicated otherwise, the Practitioner is to meet the
costs of these conditions imposed on her registration;
application for review
of the above
Division 8 of the National Law, may not be made until a period of eighteen
(18) months has elapsed, such period to commence
on and from, the date the
practitioner becomes registered as a pharmacist; and for the purpose of any such
application for review
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
appropriate review body
above, numbered 1.1 and 1.2, are
compliance conditions
—meaning, as provided by section 149A (4)
and (5) of the National Law, that
contravention
of either of such
will result in the practitioner’s registration being
Practitioner is to advise the Council promptly, of any changes made to the
Terms and Conditions
Parole Order
; or should her
be revoked by the NSW
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed; or if agreement
is not reached, either Party may have the matter
relisted, for assessment by the
-----------------------------------------
Peter Dwyer
Chairperson
-----------------------------------------
Elizabeth Anderson
Pharmacist Member
-----------------------------------------
David Preswick
Pharmacist Member
------------------------------------------
Margaret Knibb
Date of Decision: 11 September 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (727 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter