URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kocic v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force (GD) [2013] NSWADTAP 53 (28 November 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Kocic v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (GD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 53
Hearing Date(s):
14 October 2013
Decision Date:
28 November 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Judge K P O'Connor, President
Interlocutory appeal dismissed. Application remitted to Tribunal.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING - Firearms - Whether administrator may have regard
to spent conviction history - statutory interpretation -
relationship of spent
convictions law with firearms law - administrator must disregard history in
relation to fitness - may have
regard to history in exercising public interest
discretion - appeal dismissed - matter remitted:
Firearms Act 1996
Criminal Records Act 1991
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Records Act 1991
Firearms Act 1996
Security Industry Act
Spent Convictions Act 1988
Cases Cited:
Commissioner for Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
DP v Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police
[2007] NSWADT 277
Goodwin v Phillips
[1908] HCA 55
(1908) 7 CLR 1
Mahabir v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2006] NSWADT
Oliver v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2007] NSWADT 153
O'Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
Pearce v Commissioner of Police,
NSW Police Service
[2000] NSWADT 99
Saraswati v The Queen
[1991] HCA 21
(1991) 172 CLR 1
Stranges v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2004] NSWADT
Interlocutory applications
Nedzad Kocic (Appellant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(Respondent)
Representation
I Lloyd QC with D Accoto (Appellant)
(Respondent)
- Solicitors:
A Bye, Kells The Lawyers (Appellant)
J Mattson, Bartier Perry
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
General Division
- Date of Decision:
25 June 2013
- Citation:
Kocic v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2013] NSWADT 146
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
appellant is a review applicant who is challenging the decision of the
Commissioner of Police, as administrator of the
Firearms Act 1996
refusing his application for a firearms licence Category 1A/B/C. The
Commissioner took into account the appellant's criminal
history. The appellant
submitted to the Tribunal at first instance that this was unlawful, having
regard to the protections on spent
conviction information conferred by the
Criminal Records Act 1991
Tribunal agreed with the submission in relation to one of the two statutory
grounds that the Commissioner relied upon (FA,
s 24(3)(a))
but not the other
These provisions state:
(3) A licence must not be issued unless:
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper
person and can be trusted to have possession of firearms
without danger to
public safety or to the peace,
(7) Despite any other provision of this section, the Commissioner may refuse
to issue a licence if the Commissioner considers that
issue of the licence would
be contrary to the public interest.
appellant appeals the Tribunal's ruling as it relates to
Commissioner agrees with the Tribunal's reasoning on that point, but has filed a
notice of contention disputing the Tribunal's
reasoning in relation to
The Commissioner's position is that the CRA has no application to
administrative decision-making under the FA.
appeal is an interlocutory one, for which leave to proceed has been granted
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
the Panel is constituted as permitted by a presidential member sitting alone
24A(2)(a)).
appellant's criminal history comprises a conviction in 1988 (driving in a
dangerous manner), a conviction in 1992 (goods in custody),
and findings of
guilt without conviction in 2000 (stating false name and address to police) and
again in 2008 (driving a vehicle
when not licensed).
parties have made detailed submissions, and both were represented by
will not repeat here all the detail given in the Tribunal's reasons as to the
CRA's scheme. The four items of criminal history,
including the two findings of
guilt without entry of convictions, all constitute 'convictions' within the
extended meaning found
in the CRA,
Further, all of them are 'convictions'
that are capable of becoming 'spent' under the CRA. None of them fell within any
of the exclusions
or limitations from protection
the case of the findings of guilt of 2000 and 2008, they became 'spent'
immediately: see
In the case of the convictions of 1988 and 1992 they
became 'spent' in 2002, after ten years had passed in relation to the second
conviction: see
Furthermore, '[a] conviction which is spent is not
revived by a subsequent conviction'
Tribunal's Reasoning
principal objective of the CRA is:
'to implement a scheme to limit the effect of a person's conviction
for a relatively minor offence if the person completes a period
of crime-free
behaviour. On completion of the period, the conviction is to be regarded as
spent and, subject to some exceptions,
is not to form part of the person's
criminal history':
Tribunal reached its conclusion differentiating between the two grounds after
having regard to the CRA's key provision,
12 What are the consequences of a conviction becoming
If a conviction of a person is spent:
(a) the person is not required to disclose to any other person for any
purpose information concerning the spent conviction, and
(b) a question concerning the person's criminal history is taken to refer
only to any convictions of the person which are not spent,
(c) in the application to the person of a provision of an Act or statutory
instrument:
(i) a reference in the provision to a conviction is taken to be a reference
only to any convictions of the person which are not spent,
(ii) a reference in the provision to the person's character or fitness is not
to be interpreted as permitting or requiring account
to be taken of spent
convictions.
inquiring as to criminal history are common in contexts such as applications for
employment, applications for insurance
and applications for statutory licences
will be seen that paras (a) and (b) of
focus on the right of the convicted
person. The first provision allows for - what has sometimes been called - the
'statutory lie'
and the second provision confines the meaning to be given to
generally-expressed questions asked of the convicted person.
(c)(i) applies the same limitation as (b) to statutory references to
convictions. Paragraph (c)(ii) applies the limitation
to statutory provisions
relating to 'character or fitness'.
(c)(ii) is the only provision that refers to the exercise of discretion by a
decision-maker: see the words 'is not interpreted
as permitting or requiring
account to be taken of
spent convictions' (emphasis added).
gap leaves open the interpretation that this Tribunal has preferred at first
instance, namely that taking account of spent convictions
is barred in the
assessment of character and fitness but it is not barred in the case of other
permitted grounds of assessment such
as, here, whether the grant of the licence
would be 'contrary to the public interest'.
contrast to some laws in other jurisdictions there is no primary broad
restriction requiring decision-makers to disregard spent
convictions (cf.
Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
ZV, ZW; the broad anti-discrimination
protections given by Western Australian law,
Spent Convictions Act 1988
Tribunal has consistently applied the following reading to these provisions. A
person with the appellant's history is not required
to disclose any of it
(paragraph (a)), and is entitled to construe a question expressed in general
terms about conviction history
so as not to apply to any matter that constitutes
a spent conviction (paragraph (b)). So far as statutory references to
convictions
are concerned, they are to be read down to apply only to convictions
that are not spent (paragraph (c)(i)). In relation to exercises
administrative discretion, a reference to a person's character or fitness is not
to be interpreted as permitting the administrative
decision maker to take into
account spent convictions.
result is that it has consistently ruled that a decision maker cannot have
regard to spent conviction information when applying
a provision that refers to
fitness and character. Similarly the Tribunal has consistently ruled that the
reference to fitness and
character must be express (or necessarily to be
implied), with the result that exercises of discretion based on other heads of
are not circumscribed if conviction information could properly be seen as
relevant. See for example,
DP v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
[2007] NSWADT 277
Oliver v Commissioner of Police, NSW
[2007] NSWADT 153
Mahabir v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2006] NSWADT 358
(before me); and
Stranges v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Service
[2004] NSWADT 221.
Tribunal's decision was in line with these authorities. Both parties in effect
invite me, sitting as the Appeal Panel, to reject
that line of authority.
Commissioner's Case
I would begin by examining the appellant's grounds of appeal. However in this
case the Commissioner's submissions are more
fundamental. The Commissioner
submits that the Tribunal erred in giving any role to the CRA in the
administration of the FA. I will
deal with the Commissioner's submissions first.
Commissioner submits that because the FA is 'inconsistent' with the CRA, it, as
a later Act, should be preferred. The Commissioner
adopts the view expressed in
Pearce v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2000] NSWADT 99
since not followed in the Tribunal. (The decision was disapproved in the line of
authority beginning with
, and set out in para [11].)
the Tribunal referred to the law's approach of giving preference
to the more recent statute where its provisions are in conflict
with an earlier
statute, and the further approach that if the later statute is wholly
inconsistent the former is to be treated as
repealed by implication, referring
to dicta in the leading case,
Goodwin v Phillips
[1908] HCA 55
(1908) 7 CLR 1
Griffith CJ at 7, per Barton J at 10 and per Isaacs J at 16. The Commissioner's
submissions took me to a number of authorities
the starting point in the consideration of statutory provisions said to be in
conflict with each other is not
Goodwin v Phillips
. It is as stated by
Gaudron J in
Saraswati v The Queen
[1991] HCA 21
(1991) 172 CLR 1
It is a basic rule of construction that, in the absence of express
words, an earlier statutory provision is not repealed, altered
or derogated from
by a later provision unless an intention to that effect is necessarily to be
implied. There must be very strong
grounds to support that implication, for
there is a general presumption that the legislature intended both provisions
should operate
and that, to the extent that they would otherwise overlap, one
should be read as subject to the other ... More particularly, an intention
affect the earlier provision will not be implied if the later is of general
application ... and the earlier deals with some matter
affecting the individual
... . Nor will an intention to affect the earlier provision be implied if the
later is otherwise capable
of sensible operation.
CRA is legislation that serves important social objectives in relation to the
protection of offenders from prejudice in decision
making (disproportionate
emphasis being given to old convictions as a measure of suitability) and in that
way promotes the rehabilitation
of offenders. It is beneficial legislation and
should not lightly be read as inconsistent with, or repealed by, later
legislation.
there were two statutes both dealing with the subject matter of
'convictions', the CRA and the
Security Industry Act 1997
Tribunal was seeking to reconcile the difference between the date a Children's
Court conviction was to be treated as spent
and the less generous setting of the
date that an old offence was treated as mandatorily disqualifying a person from
a licence under
there is no clash of this nature. There is nothing in the provisions under
notice in the FA that might be said to give extended
operation to a spent
conviction.
Commissioner nonetheless submitted that the FA stood apart from all other
licensing legislation because of the circumstances that
surrounded its drafting
(national response to the Port Arthur massacre), its focus on protecting the
community from the misuse of
firearms and the complexity and detail of its
regulatory provisions. The Commissioner repeatedly submitted that the
legislation conferred
a 'privilege' and accordingly the exercise of any
discretion ought not be regarded as circumscribed by the CRA.
accept what was said about the legislative background to the law. It introduced
significant restrictions on the ability of individuals
lawfully to possess and
use firearms, as compared to previous laws on the subject.
FA has no express terms constraining the operation of the CRA. The CRA has a
regulation making power that allows for exclusions
to be applied. The
regulations made pursuant to
do have a number of express exclusions
(several examples of express exclusions were itemised in
[20]), but none include the firearms legislation. In my view the Parliament, in
passing the CRA, contemplated that any exceptions
from the basic protections
would ordinarily be effected by express exclusions made by regulation.
it can be said of any licensing scheme that it confers a privilege and does not
confer a right. Were the argument put on
this occasion by the Commissioner to be
acceded to, a similar argument would be difficult to resist across the host of
other licensing
schemes to which this Tribunal is connected (an example of one
obviously concerned with community safety is explosives licensing,
another which
has a significant community safety component is the regulation of passenger
transport driver authorities, i.e. taxi
drivers, long distance coach drivers,
tow truck drivers). In my view the Parliament cannot reasonably be presumed to
have intended
that in passing the firearms legislation it intended to set at
naught the limited protections given in relation to conviction history
CRA. In any case even if that could be discerned to be Parliament's intention,
there is nothing in the text of the firearms
legislation to suggest that it
intended to displace or override a general, beneficial law of the kind that CRA
argument put by the Commissioner related to the breadth of the language used in
ground. To reiterate, the discretion to refuse is to be
exercised if the Commissioner is not satisfied that 'the applicant is a fit
proper person and can be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger
to public safety or to the peace'. The Commissioner
argues that the reference to
whether a person 'can be trusted' (etc) alters the character of the discretion,
and it is not one exclusively
concerned with character and fitness, and
therefore does not fall within the scope of
s 12(c)(ii)
of the CRA.
my view, the two elements of the provision do not go to separate subjects, they
are interdependent, and the reference to trustworthiness,
is simply reinforcing
the point that character and fitness are to be assessed having regard to the
community protection objectives
that the FA upholds. This is consistent with the
basic proposition that the assessment of a person's character or fitness is to
done having regard to the objectives of the statutory scheme. Character and
fitness assessments will vary in their intensity as between
different categories
of licence holder having regard to the nature of the tasks allowed to be
performed by the licence and the risks
to the community that flow from misuse of
the licence.
Appellant's Case
Tribunal has consistently reiterated that a discretion that concerns itself with
the 'public interest' is necessarily a wide one,
often citing a passage from the
Appeal Panel's reasons in
Commissioner for Police v Toleafoa
, which is set out at [24] in the reasons presently under
that regard, I accept the appellant's submission that the considerations seen as
bearing on the public interest must be ones that
may properly be regarded as
relevant, having regard to the scope and purpose of the relevant enactment, here
the FA. See, for example,
O'Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 216:
[T]he expression 'in the public interest, when used in a statute,
classically imports a discretionary value judgment to be made by
reference to
undefined factual matters, confined only ...
'in so far as the subject matter and scope and purpose of the statutory
enactments may enable ... given reasons to be [pronounced]
definitely extraneous
to any objects the legislature could have had in view':
Water Conservation
and Irrigation Commission
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission
(NSW) v Browning
[1947] HCA 21
(1947) 74 CLR 492]
, per Dixon J at 505.
appellant's submissions raise a further possibility, that it would be unfair to
allow an administrator to make a decision on the
basis of character and fitness
but attach to it the label 'public interest' to get around the restriction
imposed by CRA
s 12(c)(ii)
, and thereby achieve the 'ulterior purpose' of
exercising the fitness and character discretion by reference to information that
have been proscribed had that discretion been exercised. Were a decision
maker to have regard to character and fitness as part of
a public interest
assessment, and bring to bear in that regard a spent conviction, the effect
might be to subvert the protection
given by paragraph (c)(ii). Therefore it is
said, any discretion to which character and fitness can be said to be relevant
be read down so as to ensure that the spent conviction history is not
allowed to be taken into account. In my view this submission
is consistent with
the spirit of the legislation, its rehabilitation objectives and the avoidance
of unfair prejudice in decision-making
that the law seeks to promote.
am faced, however, as I see it, with the apparent narrowness of the words used
in paragraph (c)(ii). They limit the restriction
to circumstances where there is
'a reference in the provision to the person's character or fitness'. They
clearly apply to any provision
that makes express reference to a person's
character and fitness. It may be that a clause could fall under this description
though it did not use the specific words 'character' or 'fitness', but
fairly construed the words that were used related to the subject
of 'character'
or the subject of 'fitness'. I do not regard the words 'public interest' as a
synonym for 'character' or 'fitness'.
Appeal Panel referred to the relationship between 'character' based grounds for
refusal and 'public interest' based grounds in
at [25] when it
'As the possibility of refusing an application on the ground of
character is dealt with elsewhere in the same section, it is reasonable
that the Parliament intended that the public interest discretion operate in
areas to which the character ground was not
relevant or, possibly, in
circumstances where an objection on character grounds would not be sufficient in
its own right to warrant
is for the Tribunal, on remittal, to decide whether the 'public interest' ground
was not properly invoked, and the only discretion
that might properly have been
relied upon was the character and fitness discretion.
Other Submissions
appellant's submission also referred to CRA, s 13, and its prohibitions on
disclosure of spent conviction information:
13 Unlawful disclosure of information concerning spent
convictions
(1) A person who has access to records of convictions kept by or on behalf of
a public authority and who, without lawful authority,
discloses to any other
person any information concerning a spent conviction is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
(2) It is not an offence for the officer in charge of the Criminal Records
Section of the NSW Police Force to make information relating
conviction available to a law enforcement agency or to the holder of an office
prescribed by the regulations.
(3) It is not an offence for an archive or library (or an authorised officer
of an archive or library) to make available to a member
of the public, or to
another archive or library, in accordance with the normal procedures of the
archive or library, material that
is normally available for public use and that
contains information relating to a spent conviction.
(4) It is not an offence for a law enforcement agency (or an authorised
officer of a law enforcement agency) in the discharge of its
duties (or of the
authorised officer's duties) to make information relating to a spent conviction
available to another law enforcement
agency or to a court in compliance with an
order of the court.
(4A) It is not an offence for a person to make information relating to a
spent conviction available in accordance with
or 40A of the
Child Protection (Working with Children) Act 2012
(4B) It is not an offence for a public authority or other government agency
that has a record of a spent conviction (or an authorised
officer of the
authority or agency) to make information about the conviction available to the
person who was convicted.
(5) In this section:
law enforcement agency
means any of the following:
(a) the NSW Police Force,
(b) the Australian Federal Police,
(c) the police force of another State or a Territory,
(d) the Australian Crime Commission,
(e) the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence,
(f) the National Exchange of Police Information,
(g) the Independent Commission Against Corruption or a similar body
established under the law of another legislature in Australia,
(h) the New South Wales Crime Commission or a similar body established under
the law of another legislature in Australia,
(i) the Attorney General for the Commonwealth or for a State or
(j) persons employed in the Attorney General's Department or a similar
Department of the Commonwealth, another State or a Territory,
or employed in a
body administered by such a Department, being persons whose primary function is
the institution or conduct of proceedings
for offences,
(k) the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions or a similar body
established under a law of another legislature in Australia,
(l) the Director of Public Prosecutions, or a person performing a similar
function, appointed under a law of another legislature in
(m) a Crown Prosecutor,
(n) an Australian legal practitioner to the extent to which the Australian
legal practitioner is engaged by or on behalf of the Crown
to prosecute an
(o) a person or body prescribed for the purpose of this definition by the
regulations.
Commissioner appears to have taken the view that it was permissible for the
officer in charge of the Criminal Records Section
to make untrammelled
disclosure of conviction history to the registry that handles firearms licensing
applications, presumably on
the premise that the Registry is to be regarded as
forming part of the 'NSW Police Force'. Many of the other exceptions have as
focus operational policing as distinct from licensing functions housed in
a law enforcement agency. The appellant's submission argues
that it was wrong
for the Commissioner to allow the data to be used in the administration of the
licensing function. In my view s
13 operates separately from s 12. As previously
explained, s 12 gives wide rights of non-revelation to a person answering
It only deals in the limited way stated by s 12(c) in regulating the
use by decision makers of information they have by other means.
The provision
does not speak to circumstances where the decision maker might have acquired the
information unfairly or unlawfully
(provisions in privacy and personal data
protection laws typically deal with this subject).
the Commissioner referred to s 16(1) of the CRA which provides:
Section 12 does not apply to proceedings before a court (including
the giving of evidence) or the making of a decision by a court
(including a
decision concerning sentencing).
has an extended meaning that includes tribunals (CRA s 4(1)).
is argued that the CRA therefore has no application to proceedings before a
court or tribunal, including this Tribunal. Even if
the CRA is applicable to the
Commissioner (not conceded by the Commissioner), it is still open to the
Commissioner and the Tribunal
once the matter reaches the Tribunal for it to
have regard to spent conviction information. In my view, this submission is
The Tribunal is a review authority in relation to the administrative
decision of the Commissioner. To use a well-worn expression,
it 'stands in the
shoes' of the administrator. It is vested with the powers and functions of the
administrator for that purpose (see
generally ADT Act s 63(2)). It can, as
submitted by the Commissioner, have regard to new or fresh information which is
relevant and
post-dates the administrator's consideration of the matter,
applying s 63(1).
my view the proper interpretation of the scheme of the ADT Act is that the
Tribunal is to undertake its review function under the
same parameters that
apply to the administrator, and is faced with the same limitations that affect
the administrator, subject only
to any statutory variations. I do not consider
that s 16 was intended to afford a statutory variation to the review of
administrative
decisions so as to allow consideration to be given to spent
conviction information when that was banned before the administrator.
such an interpretation would fundamentally subvert the CRA's protections. The
interpretation would be particularly invidious
for persons who had properly not
disclosed conviction history, had had a licence application refused on other
grounds, and then were
deterred from applying for review because there was a
risk that the non-disclosed history would be revealed, and worsen their plight.
In my view s 16 is directed to conventional situations such as reference to
criminal history relevantly in the course of criminal
trials, and reference to
criminal history in sentencing.
Interlocutory appeal dismissed. Application remitted to Tribunal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter