URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2013/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v CAHILL [2013] NSWPHT 4 (27 May 2013)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
DANIEL CAHILL
AN INQUIRY BY THE
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED UNDER SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No. 86a
(“THE NATIONAL LAW”) INTO
COMPLAINTS REFERRED TO THE TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER
SECTION 167, THEREOF.
NON-PUBLICATION DIRECTION APPLIES
Pursuant to Clause
7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law, and with the exception of the Respondent,
the Tribunal has made a non-publication
Direction in respect of the name and
address of any patient or of any material that may identify any such patient.
HCCC v CAHILL
[2013] NSWPHT
Health Care Complaints Commission of New
South Wales
(Complainant);
Daniel Cahill
(Respondent pharmacist);
Peter Dwyer, Chairperson
Mrs. Elizabeth Frost
(Pharmacist Member)
Mr. Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Dr. Derek Anderson (Lay Member)
4 February 2013.
: 27 May 2013
APPEARANCES:
Ms. P. Dwyer, of Counsel, instructed by
Ms. J. Dinihan, Solicitor (HCCC), for the Complainant.
Respondent did not appear personally nor was he legally represented, at the
Pharmacist—Complaints—
Convictions—
offences—possession
and supply—
drugs of addiction
prescribed restricted
—self-administration—fail comply with storage requirements;
fail enter Drug Register;
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act; 1966
Drugs Misuse & Trafficking Act
Unsatisfactory Professional
Professional Misconduct—Not suitable person to hold
registration as Pharmacist—Impairment
LEGISLATION
Health Practitioner Regulation National law (NSW) No.
Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act
NSW 1985: s.10 (1); s.25
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
NSW 1966: s.16 (1); s.10
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
NSW 2002: Clause
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
NSW 2008: Clauses 76
(1); 85 (2), (3); 112;
CASES CITED
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
Regina v McGrath
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
parte Tziniolis Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW)
[2012] NSWCA 80
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
; (1960) CLR
Law Society of New South Wales v
Tribunal finds that the Respondent has been
convicted of criminal
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
Unsatisfactory Professional
Professional Misconduct
Tribunal finds that the Respondent is
not a suitable person
registration as a pharmacist;
Respondent suffers from an
within the meaning of section 5 of
the National Law;
Respondent is
reprimanded
for his conduct contrary to the legal and
ethical obligations governing the professional practice of a registered
pharmacist; and
contrary to the pharmacist’s protective, custodial role
concerning the possession and supply of
medications;
the Respondent were still registered, the Tribunal would have
his registration as a pharmacist consequent upon its
numbered 1, 2 and 3; and accordingly, pursuant to section 149C (4) of the
National Law, the Respondent is
disqualified from being registered as a
pharmacist for a period of two (2) years
commencing on and from, the date of
this decision;
to section 149C (4) (c) of the National Law, the Tribunal requires the
Pharmacy Board of Australia
to record the fact that the Tribunal would
have cancelled the Respondent’s registration, in the
kept by the
application for review
pursuant to Division 8 of the National law, of the
Tribunal’s Order above, by which the Respondent is disqualified from being
registered as a pharmacist for the period of two years,
may not be made until
a period of eighteen (18) months has elapsed from the date of this decision
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
is the appropriate review
body for the purpose
of any such application for review;
Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s costs as agreed; or if agreement
cannot be reached, either party may have the matter
relisted for assessment by
the Tribunal;
to section 167F (3) of the National Law, a copy of this
Statement of
is to be provided to the Respondent’s
REASONS FOR
Introduction
all times relevant to the complaints, the Respondent was the pharmacist
proprietor of the
Guardian Pharmacy
at Nelson Bay, New South Wales
(“the Pharmacy”) having acquired the Pharmacy in early 2007. He no
longer owns the Pharmacy;
Respondent graduated with the degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy, from the
University of Sydney and was first registered as a pharmacist,
in November 2003;
and he maintained his registration in New South Wales continuously, until 30
June 2010. Pursuant to section 80(5)
of the National Law, his renewal
application was deemed withdrawn, on 5 April 2012 from which date the Respondent
has not been registered
as a pharmacist;
March 2011 to January 2012, conditions were imposed on the Respondent including
that he was not to practise as a pharmacist nor
enter the Pharmacy other than
for administrative purposes and only during the Pharmacy’s opening hours
and whilst another pharmacist
was present; and he was not to manufacture,
possess or supply
Schedule 4D
drugs. From January
2012 to 5 April 2012 conditions applied to his registration including that he
was not to practise as a pharmacist
and the same conditions concerning the above
to commencing his studies at the University of Sydney, the Respondent suffered a
severe spinal injury in a 1995 workplace accident
when aged 19 years, resulting
in fractures of the T10, T11 and T12 vertebrae and apparently, also, an
incomplete T12 spinal cord
injury. In the following year he was wheelchair bound
graduating to crutches and eventually to independent gait by 2003. According
a history he apparently described to Psychiatrist
Dr. Anthony Samuels
examined him on 5 December 2012, at the Complainant’s request, the
Respondent was “...
medicated with opiates and pain killers over the
next few years with intense rehabilitation
and between 1998 and
...[whilst at university]...
he claims he used opiates
sporadically
and claimed he used opiates right up until
...” [Report, Exhibit C-42];
upon his injury above, the Respondent was left with some residual problems
described in a letter from
Dr. Paul Spira
, Consultant Neurologist to the
Respondent’s referring General Practitioner,
Doctor G. Manoliadis
of Nelson Bay, following Dr. Spira’s examination of the Respondent on 23
August 2010. Dr. Spira noted that the Respondent
believed his gait may have
deteriorated over the previous nine months or so, but that this was subtle and
appeared more related to
pain within his hips and back than any motor or sensory
changes. Although Dr. Spira believed that the above presenting problems were
to his original injury, he suggested that a
Respondent’s thoraco-lumbar spine be undertaken, to ensure there was no
ongoing pathology [Report, 24 August 2010: Exhibit
C-42]. There was no evidence
before the Tribunal as to whether this procedure had been
The Inquiry
duly signed by the Respondent and witnessed, dated 31 January
2013 provided by his then solicitors (
Newcastle) to the Tribunal Coordinator, he confirmed his receipt of the
documents in the Complainant’s
Brief of Evidence
to be relied on at
the Tribunal’s Inquiry; and that he had no objection to any of them.
Further, he advised that he had terminated
the retainer of his solicitors who
had been acting for him relevant to the complaints; and “...
without any
disrespect to the Tribunal or the Commission.
..” he would not be
represented; nor would he be appearing personally, at the Inquiry. Also by his
Statement, he
admitted each of the five (5) complaints as particularised
(described in more detail, below); and confirmed that “...
I do not now
or in the future, wish to practise as a pharmacist
...[and that]...
consent to the Commission’s proposed-order that my registration as a
pharmacist be cancelled or disqualified
.” [Statement, Exhibit R-1];
the commencement of the Tribunal’s Inquiry, Complainant’s Counsel
noted and the Tribunal agrees, that Part 8 of the
National Law addresses
Performance
; and that section 139G
therein, provides that proceedings
, may be taken under Part 8,
in relation to behaviour while a person is registered, but who is no longer
registered, as if that person
was still registered. As noted above, the
Respondent has not been registered since 5 April 2012;
by the Tribunal, the Complainant agreed that a copy of the transcript of the
proceedings of the Inquiry should be provided
to the Respondent. Counsel also
informed the Tribunal that the Respondent advised the Complainant he did not
wish to have a “...
two-stage hearing
...” wanting it instead,
to be dealt with as a single hearing. Prior to conclusion of the Inquiry and
following the Tribunal’s
raising the issue, the Complainant also agreed to
provide the Respondent with a copy of its written
submissions;
The Complaints
were five complaints before the Tribunal dated 28 June 2012—
convictions
of criminal offences
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
; that the Respondent
is not a suitable person
to hold registration as a pharmacist
; and that he
suffers from an
as defined in section 5 of the National
COMPLAINT—1
Particulars
28 June 2011 following guilty pleas in relation to all charges, the
practitioner
was convicted of seventeen (17) criminal offences being
(a) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prohibited drug,
namely, Oxycodone (50 tablets – 2 unopened boxes of
20 tablets and 1 open
box containing 10 tablets of Endone 5mg), contrary to
section 10(1)
Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(b) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prohibited drug,
namely, Morphine (220 tablets – 11 packets containing
20 tablets each of
MS Contin 5mg), contrary to
section 10(1)
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
(c) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prescribed restricted
substance, namely, Testosterone (3 vials of Sustanon
250), contrary to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(d) between 8 November 2010 and 21 November 2011 he did knowingly take part
in the supply of a prohibited drug, namely, Oxycodone
, contrary to
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(e) on 5 August 2010 and 21 November 2010 he did supply a drug of addiction
more than once on a prescription referred to in clause
85 (2) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
, contrary to clause 85(3) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(f) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prohibited drug,
namely, Morphine (3 tablets of MS Contin 200mg), contrary
section 10(1)
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(g) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prohibited drug,
namely, Morphine (60 tablets – 3 boxes - of MS Contin
30 mg), contrary to
section 10(1)
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
(h) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prescribed restricted
substance, namely, Testosterone (3 unopened boxes of
Primoteston), contrary to
section 16(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
(i) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prescribed restricted
substance, namely, Phentermine (59 tablets of Duromine),
contrary to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(j) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prescribed restricted
substance, namely, Testosterone (2 unopened boxes of
Reandron), contrary to
section 16(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
(k) on 11 January 2011 he did have in his possession a prohibited drug,
namely, Oxycodone (4 tablets of Oxycontin 80mg), contrary
section 10(1)
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
(l) on 8 November 2010 he did supply a restricted substance, namely,
Rivotril, otherwise than by wholesale, contrary to
section 10(3)
and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
(m) on 11 November 2011 he did not store a drug of addiction, namely Morphine
(3 tablets of MS Contin 200mg) apart from other substances
in a separate safe,
contrary to clause 76(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(n) on 11 November 2011 he did not store a drug of addiction, namely Morphine
(40 tablets – 2 boxes – of MS Contin 30mg)
apart from other
substances in a separate safe, contrary to clause 76(1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(o) on 11 November 2011 he did not store a drug of addiction, namely Morphine
(220 tablets – 11 boxes – of MS Contin 5mg)
apart from other
substances in a separate safe, contrary to clause 76(1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(p) on 11 November 2011 he did not store a drug of addiction, namely
Oxycodone (30 tablets of Endone 5mg) apart from other substances
in a separate
safe, contrary to clause 76(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(q) on 11 November 2011 he did not store a drug of addiction, namely
Oxycodone (4 tablets of Oxycontin 80mg) apart from other substances
separate safe, contrary to clause 76(1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2008
COMPLAINT—2
This second complaint claimed that the Respondent was guilty of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
under section 139B of the National
Law, in that the Respondent had:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of pharmacy is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience
[Section 139B (a)];
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of pharmacy
[Section 139B (l)].
Particulars
practitioner was convicted of seventeen offences (“the offences”) on
28 June 2011, as set out in Complaint One.
conduct constituting the offences of which the practitioner was convicted
occurred at the practitioner’s pharmacy or involved
medications received
into the pharmacy.
9 January 2011 the practitioner took MS Contin 200mg and Endone from the
(i) without
a prescription;
(ii) for his
own use; and
(iii) self-administered
MS Contin 200mg and Endone at the pharmacy.
11 January 2011, the practitioner took Duromine from the
(i) without
a prescription
(ii) for his
own use; and
(iii) self-administered
Duromine at the pharmacy.
5 January 2011 and 11 January 2011 that practitioner failed to enter into the
drug register drugs of addiction which had been
received into the pharmacy
between the same dates, namely Endone (26 boxes) and MS Contin 200mg, contrary
to clause 112 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
practitioner failed to account for 260 of the 580 tablets of Endone received
into the pharmacy between 5 January and 11 January
11 January 2011 the practitioner was in possession Schedule 8 medications which
were stored in his backpack and at the garage at
his home and not apart from
other substances or goods in a separate safe contrary to clause 76 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
2007 and 10 January 2011 the practitioner was regularly in possession of
quantities of Schedule 8 medications which were stored
in his backpack and at
the garage at his home and not apart from other substances or goods in a
separate safe contrary to clause
75 of the Poisons & Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 2002 and clause 76 of the Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
16 March 2009 and 16 March 2011, the practitioner failed to enter into the
pharmacy drug register 816 boxes of various drugs
of addiction received into the
pharmacy from pharmaceutical wholesalers API and Sigma, contrary to clause 112
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
16 March 2009 and 16 March 2011, the practitioner failed to account for the
following drugs of addiction:
boxes of Endone (oxycodone);
boxes of MS Contin 100mg (morphine);
boxes of Oxycontin 80mg (oxycodone);
boxes of MS Contin 5mg (morphine); and
(v) 26 boxes
of MS Contin 200mg (morphine).
16 March 2009 and 16 March 2011, the practitioner failed to account for the
following prescribed and special prescribed restricted
substances:
boxes of Alprax 2mg (alprazolam);
boxes of Rivotril 2mg (clonazepam);
boxes of Xanax 1 mg (alprazolam);
boxes of Deca-Durabolin 50mg/mL (nandrolone); and
(v) 37 boxes
of Sustanon 250mg/mL (testosterone).
COMPLAINT—3
third complaint claimed that the Respondent was guilty of
Professional
under section 139E of the National Law in that he had engaged in
unsatisfactory professional misconduct
of a sufficiently serious
to justify suspension or cancellation of his registration as a
pharmacist [Section 139E (a) National Law]; or that he had engaged
in more than
one instance of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
that, when the
instances are considered together, amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation
of his registration [Section 139E
(b), National Law];
Particulars
Complainant relied upon the same Particulars as for
Complaint 2
COMPLAINT—4
complaint claimed that the Respondent was
not a suitable person to hold
registration as a pharmacist
Complainant relied on the same
Particulars
Complaint 2
out, above;
COMPLAINT—5
complaint claimed that the Respondent suffers from an
the meaning of section 5 of the National Law;
Particulars
of this complaint are, that the Respondent has a mental
impairment, disability, condition or disorder which detrimentally affects
likely to affect his capacity to practise Pharmacy in that he has:
(a) a long standing history of
addiction; and
(b) suffers from
evidence—Complainant
to the above-cited exhibits, Complainant’s evidence also included
materials relevant to the investigations by the
(then) Pharmaceutical Services
Branch, New South Wales Health (“PSB”); relevant correspondence;
Dr. Marina Vamos
(Psychiatrist who examined the Respondent at
the request of the Pharmacy Council of NSW (“the Council”) dated 5
2011; report dated 5 August 2011, by
Mr. David Bates
Psychologist, obtained by Respondent’s then, solicitors; NSW Police Brief
of Evidence including statements from the Respondent’s
wife; from a
pharmacist employed part-time and a Pharmacy assistant employed, each
relevantly, at the Pharmacy; Newcastle and Raymond
Terrace Court Records;
correspondence between the HCCC and the Respondent: admitted as Exhibits C-1 to
C-42; and correspondence between
the Respondent’s then, solicitors and the
HCCC, during January 2013: Exhibits C-43, C-44, and C-45;
the Respondent’s admissions to the five complaints (Statement: Exhibit
R-1) the Tribunal must consider the evidence
before it, in order to be
reasonably satisfied that the complaints are proved according to the standard
articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but that having
regard to the serious nature of the complaints and
the consequences, such
satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect references
.” The Tribunal has considered
carefully, the evidence before it;
Evidence of Dr.
submitted by the Complainant that given the Respondent’s admissions to the
five complaints as particularised, it would
not be necessary to call Dr. Samuels
whose report was in evidence (Exhibit C-42) to give evidence, Counsel advised
that he was available
to do so. It was the Tribunal’s view, given the
complaint of
as particularised, that it would be beneficial to
have Dr. Samuels give evidence; and thereby, allow the Tribunal an opportunity
explore some relevant issues. Accordingly, Dr. Samuels was called and gave
Complainant had asked Dr. Samuels to assess the Respondent and address the issue
” accordingly. In his report Dr. Samuels noted
the Respondent telling him that in 2010 he started using
pharmacy stocks without a prescription; using up to 600mg of
and 100mg of
daily; and that he was also using
; and he denied using any
earlier in 2011 and denied any cravings since then
.” (Report,
Samuels had considered the reports (in evidence) of Psychiatrist
and the report of Psychologist
included in documents made available to Dr. Samuels,
Respondent’s E-mail to the HCCC dated 15 November 2011 [Exhibit C-16] in
which the Respondent referred to his “...
mistakes this
...”; and to his “...
entering into bankruptcy as a result
[actions]...
earlier this year
...”; he also
made reference to having undertaken “...
regular drug screens (with full
chain of custody requirements)
...[and]...
significant amounts of
Psychological Counselling and Drug and Alcohol Counselling since
...[January
2011]; and to his having been discharged from the supervision of the Department
of Corrective Services after fulfilling
the obligations set by that Department.
He also noted that the Department “...
seemed confident in my ability
and desire to stay clean indefinitely
...” (Exhibit,
Samuels took a history from the Respondent which included his claim that he
had no problems with drug dependency or drug misuse before 2010
” but he acknowledged he was taking “...
a lot of painkillers
under the direct prescription of health practitioners
During 2010 the Respondent told Dr. Samuels that his business was
...” and he was working long hours in the
Pharmacy “...
seven days per week for a period of four
...”; and his “...
back was playing up
his self-medication commenced with
Panadeine Forte
tablets but
quickly escalated
the point ...he was having 600mg
of morphine per day
...[and]...
he got dependent very quickly and he
didn’t really recognize it
.” He told Dr. Samuels of various
incidents relevant to his convictions. He told Dr. Samuels that he reached a
point where “...
things were out of control
...[but that]...
end of January 2011 he was off opioids altogether
...[and]...
has not used
opioids since that time
...”. Since approximately June 2011 partly at
his own request and with the advice of his general practitioner, he ceased
his anti-depressant medication
and (as at 5
December 2012—the date of his meeting with Dr. Samuels), has not taken any
since that time. [Report, Ibid.]
Respondent told Dr. Samuels that he is “...
currently working in a
pharmacy as an assistant
...[where]...
there are a number of safeguards in
place and his employers are aware of his history
...[and]...
doesn’t go near S4 or S
over-the-counter
.”; he was unsure as to whether he wanted to return to a
pharmacy role
...[but]...
at this stage he is keeping his
options open
...[however]...
he will never own a pharmacy
.”; He told Dr. Hughes that he had “...
voluntarily
relinquished his S4D and S
was Dr. Samuels’ opinion that the Respondent has an “
Dependence that is in remission
” but that given his long history of
exposure to
since the age of 19; and that he had developed
such a severe dependence in a short time
the possibility that he could be vulnerable to relapse
and Dr. Samuels noted in this respect, that the Respondent “...
worked with his current employer to minimize this likelihood
Samuels noted that although currently in remission, there remains the
possibility “...
relapse...particularly if he is having
ongoing pain in association with his neurological
he became depressed...he could resort to
use of opioids if he had access to them
.” Dr. Samuels concurred with
the opinion expressed by Dr. Vamos, that the Respondent “...
severe substance dependence problem that had probably been in the background for
a longer period than he admits to
...”; and although the Respondent
claims to have taken
only as prescribed, Dr. Samuels expressed
his opinion that “...
there certainly is a strong possibility that he
was taking them more frequently than he admits, or in doses higher than
Dr. Samuels found no evidence that the Respondent was currently
clinically depressed or anxious and he certainly does not fulfil
criteria for a major depressive or anxiety,
...[and found]...
no evidence to substantiate a Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder
.” [Report, Ibid.];
by the Complainant for the purpose of his report, to consider what minimum,
appropriate measures should be applied to the
Respondent should he be permitted
enable him to safely practise as a pharmacist...”
Dr. Samuels
suggested amongst others: no access to
medications;
regular urine drug screening; contact at an agreed frequency, with a
alcohol specialist
; regular contact with his general practitioner who should
be able to notify AHPRA of any concern relevant to fitness to practise
pharmacist; regular review by a Council-appointed psychiatrist; and in effect,
for the Respondent to have a senior colleague,
pharmacist to be aware of his
previous history and any conditions on his practice [Report,
his evidence before the Tribunal, Dr. Samuels gave his impression that the
Respondent’s
...somewhat
superficial
” and that he didn’t have “...
...” into his dependency problem; and that if he was in
remission, it would be in the very early stages of such remission; and
thought the Respondent “...
still has an impairment in the broader
.” Dr. Samuels expressed the view that with appropriate and very
close, monitoring and oversight, it was possible that the Respondent
practise as a pharmacist. Given
Respondent’s personal
and family, history, Dr. Samuels suggested that the Respondent has a
personality vulnerability
...” which places him at
greatest risk of relapse in stressful situations or if pain were to occur or
where there were “...
problems or conflicts in his life
was Dr. Samuels’ view that in keeping with those personality problems, he
anxiety depression...rather than
frank depression...”
although during 2010 it was certainly possible
that he was suffering from a
major depressive disorder
during which
period he was taking the anti-depressant medication,
was not taking when Dr. Samuels assessed the Respondent, at which time
he didn’t strike me as being depressed at
Samuels agreed that with respect to the Respondent’s serious injury when
aged 19, it was not unheard of that some patients
become dependent on
medications prescribed for pain; and in the Respondent’s case, analgesic
medications would have given him
some emotional relief as well; and because of
underlying vulnerabilities
...” he would have been
.” Relevant in this context also, were the
Respondent’s recent, personal, family and business events that have
by the Tribunal about
said to have been undertaken, Dr.
Samuels agreed there was no evidence of their results. He also agreed that if
there is any ongoing
orthopaedic problem in respect of which, Dr. Spira had
recommended to the Respondent’s general practitioner, that an
should be performed, then in effect, this should be resolved, as
further bouts of chronic pain would be a “...
major risk factor for
using opioids again
.” For this reason it was also his opinion that if
he does have chronic pain in the future, prescribed
unless there was an overwhelmingly good
...” as there are alternatives to
. Dr. Samuels
stressed that apart from having the
undertaken, the
Respondent should also seek the opinions of a pain specialist should there be a
need for pain management in the future,
in preference to a general
practitioner;
was Dr. Samuel’s opinion, responding to the Tribunal’s question,
that the Respondent needed a period during which in
effect, he could address the
various problems discussed, by way of an opportunity to prepare to resume
practice as a pharmacist,
notwithstanding his desire not to do so; and that such
period should be significant so as to have a “...
...” on which to consider his eligibility for returning to
Samuels was asked by Complainant’s Counsel about his reservations
(referred to above) on the Respondent’s
into his addiction;
and whether he had the opportunity to discuss with the Respondent
the very serious offence of supplying pharmaceuticals to members of
the community
.” Dr. Samuels told the Tribunal he thought the
Respondent had “...
brushed over it
and was minimizing the
seriousness of it
” and added: “
I think there is an
incongruity between his
...[the Respondent’s]...
account and the
facts sheet, I suppose
Other Medical evidence
(Complainant)
patient clinical and other, records of the Respondent’s current General
Medical Practitioner—
Dr. David Dalgleish
; and former General
Medical Practitioner
Dr. Warwick Yonge
having been produced under
Summons, were admitted as Exhibit C-46;
Testimonial
evidence—Respondent
Respondent provided the Complainant with a
in evidence as
Exhibit C-22, which included the names of three persons under the heading
Ken Hallgath,
Pharmacist / Owner, Stanford’s Pharmacy, Maclean;
Peter Mikhail,
Pharmacist / Owner Elanora Heights Medi-advice Pharmacy;
Sheehy, Taree Containers, Taree, NSW.
the reference to
Stanford’s Pharmacy
above, the Tribunal sought
confirmation from the Complainant as to whether this was the pharmacy where the
Respondent appeared to
be working as a “pharmacy assistant”. The
Complainant was unable to assist, not having been provided with any relevant
information by the Respondent. The Complainant undertook to obtain such
information by requesting it from the Respondent. Subsequent
to the conclusion
of the Inquiry, the Complainant was informed by the Respondent that this is the
pharmacy the Respondent is working
at as a “pharmacy assistant” and
where all his work is supervised by the pharmacist, Mr. Hallgath;
the conclusion of the Tribunal’s hearing, it requested the Complainant to
obtain copies of the “
to by the Respondent in Exhibit C-16, if possible; these were subsequently
obtained and provided to the Tribunal.
These letters in support of the
Respondent, were prepared for the purpose of the Court proceedings in respect of
the convictions
the subject of the first complaint and were provided to the
Court by the following:
Ian Cahill,
dated 15 July 2011;
Robert Duggan,
dated 15 July 2011;
Phillip Bodiam,
dated 21 July 2011;
Lisa Cahill,
dated 3 August 2011;
Jennifer and
Matthew Linabury, dated 4 August 2011;
Kerry Cahill,
dated 5 August 2011.
Complainant informed the Tribunal that the Respondent had not offered any
referees for the purpose of the Tribunal’s Inquiry
complaints;
Complainant’s submissions
Complainant provided written submissions and addressed the Tribunal relevant to
and consequential
. They are not repeated in
their entirety but have been taken into account by the Tribunal in reaching its
determinations;
the Respondent’s admissions and intention not to appear at the Inquiry as
confirmed in his statement—Exhibit R-1,
it was submitted that the Tribunal
could proceed with its Inquiry and make determinations accordingly.
Additionally, the Respondent
had communicated (ibid.) that he had no objection
to the documents comprising the Complainant’s Brief of
was the Complainant’s submission that in addition to the
Respondent’s admissions, independent evidence in the Complainant’s
Brief of Evidence, established to the requisite standard in
Briginshaw v
cited above, the particulars of the complaints alleged by the
Complainant;
Complainant submitted that
Complaint 1 (convictions)
was satisfied being
convictions following the Respondent’s
to each of 17 charges, in consequence of which he was sentenced to a 20
months period of imprisonment, suspended on conditions imposed
by the Court, as
set out in the evidence before the Tribunal. The Complainant emphasised the
above term of imprisonment as a very
serious penalty given that the Respondent
first time offender
was submitted that the facts giving rise to
Complaint 2 (
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct
), the Particulars thereof and the complaint itself,
are admitted by the Respondent; and are established to the requisite
Complaint 3 (
Professional Misconduct
) it was submitted
that the Respondent having admitted the facts giving rise to this complaint as
particularised and the complaint;
that taken together with complaint 2, the
complaint of
professional misconduct
is established pursuant to either of
the grounds in section 139E (a) or (b), of the National law;
Complaint 4
not a suitable person to hold registration as a
) the Complainant submitted that the facts admitted in respect
of Complaint 2 as particularised, relied on in Complaint 4, together
Respondent’s admission to Complaint 4, establishes this complaint, to the
requisite standard;
It was the Complainant’s submission concerning
Complaint 5
), that the Respondent has a long-standing
addiction, relying on the medical reports of the psychiatrists Drs. Vamos and
Samuels; the psychologist Mr. Bates; the
Pre-Sentence Report
Probation and Parole Service; and the statement of Maria Nicholls, the then,
wife of the Respondent, in evidence before the
Tribunal. The Complainant
referred to the Respondent’s medication history following his serious
injury when aged 19 years;
and his apparent, developed reliance on such potent
prescribed analgesics; and also, his sporadic use of such medications between
1998 and 2003; and in 2010 his commencing to use
Pharmacy’s stocks without a prescription, emphasizing the significant
doses he was taking at that time;
Complainant submitted that until the Respondent’s illicit use of
medications came to the attention of the investigating
authorities in late 2010,
leading to criminal charges dealt with in 2011, he did not seek help for his
drug addiction. Whilst the
Complainant welcomed the Respondent’s steps
taken to seek treatment and his claimed substantial progress towards
rehabilitation
(communicated in correspondence with the Complainant) it
submitted that the Respondent continued to have an
Complainant emphasised in Dr. Samuels’ report, his opinion that the
Respondent has an “...
opioid dependence in remission
...[and that
there is]...
certainly a possibility that
...[the Respondent]...
its submissions, the Complainant noted the absence after July 2011, of
definite objective evidence
...” concerning the
3 monthly drug
...” referred to by the
Respondent; but the Complainant did not thereby assert that the Respondent was
not truthful; it wished
only to emphasise the absence of objective
Complainant also referred to the produced records of
Dr. Dalgleish
Respondent’s current general practitioner [Exhibit C-46] in which a
Consultation Record
9 October 2012
, includes the following:
over time has been getting weaker in legs and spasms are worse / is
becoming more upset about things that have happened to him in
past / also feels
he has a shorter fuse and is more agitated / weakness in the legs when tired
.” The above consultation with Dr. Dalgleish followed the
date the Respondent attended upon Dr. Samuels—5 December
depression—
the other condition relied on as particularised, in the
complaint of
—it was the Complainant’s submission
that despite the absence of evidence that the Respondent is currently,
depressed, it was the history of long standing depressive episodes
that the Tribunal should consider in the context of long term
drug addiction
which led to the serious offences of which the Respondent was
was further submitted that there was no suggestion that the Respondent’s
was causally connected to his conduct particularised in
Complaints 1 to 4 inclusive; and that citing relevant authority, a finding
is no barrier to a finding of professional
misconduct;
Complainant submitted that in accordance with
section 149
of the National Law,
the subject matter of the complaints had been both proved and, admitted in
writing. Given the Respondent’s
grave breaches of the criminal law, had he
still held registration, it was submitted his registration would have been
and accordingly, he should be disqualified from seeking registration
for a period of two years;
Complainant emphasised the
nature of the Tribunal’s
; but that an important element
—with respect to
the Respondent and generally, to the profession;
Complainant sought Orders—that the Respondent be disqualified from being
registered as a pharmacist for a period of two
years; and that, had be been
still registered the Tribunal would have suspended or cancelled, his
registration; and that the National
Board (The Pharmacy Board of Australia)
record in the National Register kept by it, that the Tribunal would have
suspended or cancelled,
his registration, pursuant to section 149C (4) (c) of
the National Law; and that the Respondent be reprimanded; and pay the
Complainant’s
to the Tribunal’s question as to whether the Complainant sought any
pursuant to Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law as to
any non-publication of the name of any person named in the evidence
the Complainant sought such a
in respect of any
other than the Respondent. The Tribunal made such a
to apply to
the name of any patient with the exception of the Respondent;
Tribunal invited the Complainant’s view as to whether, given the nature of
these complaints against the Respondent and the
apparently working in a pharmacy as a
pharmacy assistant
, the Tribunal
could make a
prohibition order
pursuant to section 149C (5) of the
National Law. Following discussion the Complaint submitted that if the
Respondent was
currently registered
, such an order could be made; but the
Respondent was not currently registered and therefore, the
prerequisite
cancellation
of registration could not be fulfilled,
to enable the Tribunal to make such an order. Counsel submitted that this
amounted to a
in the legislation. The Tribunal agreed with the
Complainant’s submissions;
the above discussion concerning a
prohibition order
, the Tribunal invited
the Complainant’s view as to whether, again pursuant to its
Respondent’s pharmacist- employer (if and when, confirmed) a copy of its
reasons for decision
, the Complainant submitted this would be appropriate
as there was nothing in its view to prevent this; and especially, unless it
orders otherwise, the Tribunal’s
statement of decision
made publicly available [C/F section 167F (4), National
provided by the National law, two members of the Tribunal are registered
pharmacists and as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
expert professional
’, so described by the NSW Court of Appeal in respect of
another professional disciplinary tribunal, in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
Respondent admitted in writing, each of the five complaints as particularised;
and chose not to appear at the Tribunal’s
Inquiry whether personally or by
a legal representative. He was legally represented until shortly prior to
commencement of the Inquiry.
He did not object to the evidence to be adduced by
the Complainant at the Inquiry having been provided with a copy of such
The Tribunal does not draw any negative inference against the
Respondent for not giving evidence at its Inquiry given his early and
unreserved, admissions to each of the five complaints as particularised. Without
the Respondent’s participation in the Inquiry,
the Tribunal must therefore
consider the evidence placed before it by the Complainant;
Respondent’s
convictions
in respect of 17 offences, as
particularised in
Complaint 1
following his
attracted a significant sentence, albeit
by the Court. The
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied, to the requisite standard, that
has been proved and it finds accordingly;
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
—relies on the 17
convictions
and the other conduct as particularised, which occurred at
the Respondent’s Pharmacy and involved medications received by and
stock at, the Pharmacy; and for which the Respondent as the registered
pharmacist and proprietor, was legally and professionally
responsible. Having
considered the evidence and the Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied to the requisite
standard, that
Complaint 2
particularised, pursuant to section 139B (a) and (l) of the National Law, has
been proved and it finds accordingly;
Professional Misconduct
—relies on the Particulars in
Complaint 2. Whether considered by applying the definition of section 139E (a)
or (b) each in
effect, particularised in Complaint 2, the Respondent’s
unsatisfactory professional conduct
is of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration; and the Tribunal
is reasonably satisfied to the requisite
standard, that
Complaint 3
has been proved and it finds
accordingly;
considering
Complaint 4
—that the Respondent is not a suitable
person to hold registration as a pharmacist—
the Tribunal
notes the Respondent’s
plea to the 17 offences of which he
was convicted and sentenced, as particularised in Complaint 1, together with his
admissions to
it and to Complaints 2 and 3. Although there was some evidence
emanating from the Respondent in some documentary materials, suggesting
some residual problem consequent upon his serious back injury in a workplace
accident in 1995 may have prompted his need for
analgesic medications during
2010, this however, cannot justify his admitted misconduct. The community is
entitled to expect the
highest professional standards of a registered pharmacist
as a health professional. His convictions and admitted misconduct especially
illegal supply of potentially harmful medications, are
inexcusable;
Respondent’s admitted breaches of the NSW
Drugs Misuse and Trafficking
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
s 2002 and 2008, are extremely
serious and repugnant to a pharmacist’s paramount, legal and ethical
obligations, as the custodian
of potentially harmful medications subject to
strict statutory control, intended to protect the community that the profession
1971, the NSW Court of Appeal in
Regina v. McGrath
2 NSWLR 181
in an appeal from a conviction for the unlawful supply of
amphetamine
under the then applicable,
Poisons Act
1966, considered
, the purpose of the legislation (relevant also to the current NSW
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
legislation) and said (at page 187):
The subject matter...of the Act is one vital to
the welfare of the community and...designed for the protection of the
public...The
clear purpose...is that...
[Poisons and restricted
Substances]...
shall be in the hands of persons who may be expected to know
their purposes, effects and evils and who would sell them for proper
purposes only.
considered the evidence before it, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied to the
requisite standard that
Complaint 4
as particularised, has been proved
and it find accordingly;
particularises that the Respondent has a
long-standing opiate
and that he suffers from
; and accordingly, such
detrimentally affect or are likely to detrimentally affect, his capacity to
practise as a pharmacist. Section
5 of the National Law defines
’ and includes “...
physical or mental
impairment, disability, condition or disorder ...(including substance abuse or
are some areas relevant to the complaint of
that remain
unclear given the absence of any or any sufficiently objective, evidence
concerning the Respondent’s continuing
health; including any
urinalyses or other relevant assessments, able to confirm recovery
from the medication abuse-related aspects of his misconduct about
which there
was some documentary evidence from an earlier period, before the
medical and other evidence before the Tribunal has been referred to and
discussed above, especially that of Dr. Samuels. The Tribunal
has carefully
considered such evidence. It was Dr. Samuels’ evidence that the Respondent
opioid dependence
but that it was possible he
could have a
. The Complainant submitted that since July 2011
there is an absence of
evidence relevant to the three-monthly
described by the Respondent. The Tribunal has noted
consultation record
of the Respondent’s
Practitioner Dr. Dalgleish
, which included reference to the
Respondent’s increasing leg weakness. In this context the Tribunal also
notes the recommendation
Specialist Neurologist Dr. Spira
assessed the Respondent, that an
should be undertaken to
determine anything causally relevant to the Respondent’s back
symptoms—a problem which appears
to have been of significant concern to
the Respondent during 2010. The Tribunal also notes the evidence concerning the
Respondent’s
personal, family and business difficulties;
Samuel’s evidence also addressed the history given to him by the
Respondent as to his commencing to use
taken from the
Pharmacy’s stock, in 2010; he also noted the Respondent’s denial of
” since early in 2011. It
was Dr. Samuels’ opinion that given the Respondent’s long history of
exposure to
commencing after his workplace injury in 1995 when
aged 19 years; and that he developed such severe dependence in such a short
he remains vulnerable to relapse, particularly if he continues to have any
ongoing pain connected to his residual, neurological problem.
Dr. Samuels
concurred with the opinion expressed by
Psychiatrist, Dr. Vamos
concerning the Respondent’s substance-dependence problem;
the context of
the Tribunal also notes the view
expressed in the report by the Psychologist, Mr. David Bates who at the request
of the Respondent’s
solicitor, met with the Respondent on five occasions
in the period January to March 2011: “
It would appear that pain
management issues are likely to be relevant throughout Mr. Cahill’s life.
Strategies to cope with
this pain will be important to prevent
.” [Report, Mr. David Bates: Exhibit C-10, at page
upon his assessment of the Respondent, Dr. Samuels found
that he was
, clinically
that he did not meet the
criteria for major depression or anxiety,
disorder; nor was there evidence of
post-traumatic stress disorder
was his opinion that the Respondent has low-grade anxiety depression rather than
frank, depression; and that it was possible
that during 2010, he was suffering
from a major depressive disorder and was taking the anti-depressant medication
, which he was not taking at the time of his assessment, when Dr.
Samuels did not find him to be depressed, at all;
Tribunal had no current medical evidence before it, from Dr. Dalgleish or any
other medical practitioner, who might be treating
the Respondent, to assist its
consideration of the complaint of
as particularised;
considered carefully, the evidence before it, the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied to the requisite standard, that the Respondent
currently in remission, but that there is a possibility of
Dr. Samuel’s psychiatric examination and assessment, of the Respondent,
the Tribunal cannot be reasonably satisfied that
suffers from
...” as particularised in
Tribunal is therefore reasonably satisfied to the requisite standard, that the
Respondent has an
in respect of his
) dependence, that detrimentally affects or is likely to
detrimentally affect, his capacity to practise Pharmacy, as defined in section
of the National Law; and accordingly, the Tribunal finds
Complaint 5
Complainant submitted that there had been no suggestion that the
Respondent’s admitted conduct as particularised in Complaints
1, 2, 3 and
4 resulted from the Respondent’s impairment. There is some evidence that
the Respondent was experiencing back-related
problems during 2010; and also,
evidence of personal, family and business problems.
Respondent’s admissions are clear and unequivocal; he had retained a
solicitor until shortly before the Inquiry commenced;
additionally, he had
guilty plea
to the 17 offences of which he was convicted on 28
June 2011; and was sentenced to a 20 month term of imprisonment the execution
from 8 August 2011 upon his entering a
good behaviour bond
’ for a term of 20 months; and to appear
before the Court if called upon to do so at any time during the term of the
Department of Corrective Services
had apparently discharged the
Respondent from its supervision (according to his E-mail communication to the
Complainant on
15 November 2011
, Exhibit C-16), having fulfilled the
obligations it had set for him;
Unfortunately,
the Respondent has also sustained the loss of his Pharmacy in addition to other
problems referred to above; he has
expressed an intention not to again own
another pharmacy; and an intention also, should he practise again as a
pharmacist, it would
be in other areas of Pharmacy with more
...” content such as “...
reviews and Geriatric Pharmacy
...” (Exhibit C-16); He has also
recorded in his communications with the Complainant (Ibid.) his then current
...”with his treating doctor “...
undertake regular drug screens
...”; noting also, his having
undergone significant amounts of Psychological Counselling and Drug
and Alcohol Counselling, since January 2011
”; and he also expressed
to stay clean indefinitely
However, the Tribunal also notes his later statement (dated 31 January 2013) in
evidence before the Tribunal as Exhibit
R-1, that he “...
does not now
or in the future, wish to practise as a pharmacist
Respondent’s admitted conduct relevant to the proved Complaints 1, 2, 3
and 4, is extremely serious and totally repugnant
to his legal and professional
obligations as a registered pharmacist; and repugnant also, to his paramount,
custodial role concerning
potentially dangerous,
medications.
His admitted conduct cannot attract other than the utmost condemnation;
considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of its
orders and their purpose, to protect the community:
“In judging whether an applicant will, in the future,
act differently from the past, the Court is not required to act on
psychological
theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide
what a man will do and the decision in a particular case is, to
a greater or
lesser extent, dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And
in making that assessment it may draw
inferences from what he has done in the
past and, in particular, what led to his being removed from the roll. An
understanding of
that may assist the court to determine what are his standards
and his understanding...[of his]...responsibility and, from this,
apt to do in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what has
been done in the past has been sufficient
to indicate his ‘probably
permanent unfitness’:
parte Lenehan
at 422; the court
will require ‘
solid and substantial grounds’
conclusion that his standards have changed or that he will act
differently.”
(Emphasis added]
Ex parte Tziniolis Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
JA observed:
“Reformation of character and of behaviour can doubtless occur but
their occurrence is not the usual but the exceptional thing.
One cannot assume
that a change has occurred merely because some years have gone by and it is
not proved that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has
exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct and his attitudes,
it must require
clear proof to show that some years later he has established
himself a different man...In such cases it has been frequently said
heavy onus lies on the applicant.”
Tribunal is certainly hopeful that the Respondent maintains his declared
intention to address his problems and regain his health.
Although having
expressed an intention in effect, not to remain in the profession of Pharmacy,
the Respondent may well need further
time to improve his health, including the
removal or reduction of any residual neurological problems in his back following
injuries he sustained in 1995 in a work-related accident;
Complainant cited several authorities in its submissions as to consequential
addressing issues similar to those in this Inquiry.
Relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of Orders consequent upon its
[2012] NSWCA 80
, referring to the
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Court said, at [30] per
“His Honour agreed that other cases might be of value
as examples in indicating a range of appropriate orders but could not
as precedents.” And at [33] “Just as the characterisation of
conduct as professional misconduct entails the
exercise of judgment by a
specialist tribunal, so too, it seems to me, does a decision about the order
that should be made where
such conduct is proved.”
Respondent has consented by his written statement to the Tribunal (Exhibit R-1),
the Commission’s proposed order
...” that his
registration as a pharmacist “...
be cancelled or
disqualified
observed by
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
The purpose of any order consequent upon a finding
that a complaint has been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of
the public at large, but more particularly patients or potential patients of
the practitioner concerned. However the public interests
include indirectly,
the standing of the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence
in the high standards...of
practitioners. There is also an element of
deterrence or, to put it more positively, encouragement to other practitioners
to recognize
the importance of complying with professional standards and the
risks of failing to do so. The powers of a Tribunal having two
members of the
medical profession should, at least in relation to professional standards, be
accorded a degree of flexibility which
might not necessarily be accorded to a
Tribunal differently constituted.
the above words were directed to the medical profession and the Medical
Tribunal, they are apposite to pharmacists and to
the Pharmacy Tribunal. When an
order for suspension or removal is made, its purpose is “...
public point of view, for the protection of those who require protection, and
from the professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not
lead to loss of privilege
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
104 CLR 186
, at 201-202.
Tribunal is not unmindful of the difficulties the Respondent has had to deal
with in the past including significantly—given
the medication-related
issues in these complaints—a serious workplace injury in 1995 before he
had commenced his Pharmacy studies
at the University of Sydney which he
completed successfully, despite the aftermath of that injury. Notwithstanding an
apparent resurgence
of his back-related problems during 2010 and his resort to
those medications relevant to the complaints, his admitted conduct cannot
condoned. As a registered pharmacist and member of a health profession, he was
well aware of the need to seek relevant medical
assistance. He was also well
aware as a registered pharmacist, of his
role concerning
medications, in complying with the
controls of
such medications, their possession, storage and supply. Quite apart from such
restrictions, illegal supply of
medications to
others, is repugnant to a pharmacist’s paramount obligation to protect the
the Respondent entered a
guilty plea
in respect of the 17 offences of
which he was convicted; and admitted each of the five complaints before the
Tribunal as particularised,
the Tribunal notes with some concern, the opinion
expressed (above) by Dr. Samuels —that
the Respondent’s
“...was...[at the time he assessed the Respondent]...
somewhat superficial
...” and that he didn’t have
full insight into his dependency
Tribunal’s role is not
–the Court has already dealt
with the Respondent by the recording of the criminal convictions and its
sentence. Consistent
with the paramount consideration of the protection of the
health and safety of the public in the exercise of its functions under
National Law (C/f section 3A); and pursuant to the purpose of
consequent upon findings that a
has been proved as noted by
HCCC v Prakash
, quoted above,
the Tribunal makes
the following orders
(a) The Respondent is
reprimanded
for his conduct contrary to the
legal and ethical obligations governing the professional practice of a
registered pharmacist and
the pharmacist’s custodial role concerning
medications;
(b) If the Respondent were still registered, the Tribunal would have
his registration as a pharmacist consequent upon its
above, numbered 1, 2 and 3; and accordingly, pursuant to
section 149C (4) of the National Law, the Respondent is
disqualified from
being registered as a pharmacist for a period of two (2) years
on and from, the date of this decision;
(c) Pursuant to section 149C (4) (c) of the National Law, the Tribunal
requires the
Pharmacy Board of Australia
the fact that
the Tribunal would have cancelled the Respondent’s registration, in the
kept by the
application for review
pursuant to Division 8 of the National
law, of the Tribunal’s Order above, by which the Respondent is
disqualified from being
registered as a pharmacist for the period of two years,
may not be made until a period of eighteen (18) months has elapsed
the date of this decision; and the
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
is the appropriate review body for the purpose
of any such application
for review;
(e) The Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s costs as agreed; or if
agreement cannot be reached, either party may have the
matter relisted for
assessment by the Tribunal;
(f) Pursuant to section 167F (3) of the National Law, a copy of this
Statement of Decision
is to be provided to the Respondent’s
employer, the details of which, at the Tribunal’s request, the
Complainant has
been able to confirm;
made its orders, the Tribunal refers to the words of
Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
at 409, at [10]:
Improvement – The final consideration concerns an aspect of the public
interest to which, as I believe, insufficient attention
has been paid in these
cases. I expressed my views in this regard in Kotowicz v Law Society of New
South Wales (Court of Appeal,
7 August 1987, unreported). I was there in dissent
as to the result of the application. But, I hold to my opinion, as applicable
this case. It is an opinion which has enjoyed some favour in other Australian
‘Because the jurisdiction is for the protection of the public,
regard also may be had, to the public’s interests in the
restoration to
the Roll of such persons as have demonstrated, including by their work,
activities and life, a fitness to be restored.
For cultural and historical
reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the shared
morality of our society. In
part, this is because of the teachings of religious
leaders who have profoundly influenced our community’s perception of
and fairness, reflected from the earliest time in the courts: see, eg.
St Matthews Gospel 18, 11ff; The Acts, 3, 19. In part, it
derives from the
self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation of those
who lapse and to hold out to them
the hope that, by diligent and honourable
efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be restored to
opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society. The
public’s interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having misconducted
themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and trust.’"
..........................................................
Peter Dwyer
Chairperson
Dated: 27 May 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (390 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter