URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/189.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Regattieri v R [2025] NSWCCA 189 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Regattieri v R
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 189
Hearing Date(s):
07 November 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Adamson JA at [1]
Chen J at [2]
R A Hulme AJ at [3]
(1) Leave to appeal granted.
(2) Appeal against sentence
Catchwords:
CRIME — appeal against sentence — sentence approximates the
sentence actually sought at first instance — not manifestly
— parity ground — less severe outcome for co-offender amply
justified by differences between cases —
no question of principle
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Cases Cited:
[2014] NSWCCA 267
[2024] NSWCCA 197
; (2024) 390 FLR
Obeid v R (2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
Parente v R
[2017] NSWCCA 284
Postiglione v The Queen
(1997) 189 CLR 295
[1997] HCA 26
Principal judgment
Nathan Regattieri (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
S Schaudin (Applicant)
E Wilkins SC
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
McCristal & Co Lawyers
(Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions NSW (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2023/0086945
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
01 August 2024
Anderson SC DCJ
File Number(s):
2023/0086945
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
Nathan Regattieri (the applicant) pleaded guilty to eight drug supply and
related offences and asked that a further 18 offences be
taken into account.
After 25% discounts for his pleas of guilty were applied to the sentences
indicated for the eight offences, he
was sentenced to an aggregate term of 7
years, 6 months’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 5 years, 7
months. The most
serious of the offences was the supply of a large commercial
quantity of methylamphetamine carrying a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
The applicant’s co-offender, Ebony Bagnall, pleaded guilty to the large
commercial supply offence and fewer of the other offences
and was sentenced to 6
years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 3 years.
The applicant proposed two grounds of appeal, namely, that his sentence was
manifestly excessive and that he had a justifiable sense
of grievance as a
result of the sentence imposed on his co-offender (parity).
The Court held
(R A Hulme AJ, Adamson JA and Chen J agreeing),
refusing leave to appeal in respect of the manifest excess ground and
granting leave but dismissing the appeal in respect of the parity
As to the manifest excess ground
The aggregate sentence and the non-parole period are not manifestly
excessive. The sentence indicated for the large commercial supply
offence was
within range and the large number of other offences warranted at least a modest
additional reflection in the aggregate
sentence. The aggregate sentence was
within a range of sentence proposed by senior counsel who appeared for the
applicant in the
District Court: [
(2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
[2017] NSWCCA 221
As to the parity ground
The degree of disparity between the sentences indicated for the large
commercial supply offence and for the aggregate sentences are
explained by the differences in objective gravity of the offences and the
co-offender’s more favourable subjective
Parente v R
(2017) 96 NSWLR 633
[2017] NSWCCA 284
[2024] NSWCCA 197
; (2024) 390 FLR 293;
Postiglione v The
(1997) 189 CLR 295
[1997] HCA 26
I agree with R A Hulme AJ.
I agree with R A Hulme AJ.
A HULME AJ:
Nathan Regattieri seeks leave to appeal against a sentence
imposed by his Honour Judge Anderson SC in the District Court at Gosford
August 2024.
sentence is an aggregate term of imprisonment for 7 years, 6 months with a
non-parole period of 5 years, 7 months. It was backdated
to 16 March 2023, the
date he was arrested and taken into custody.
sentence was in respect of eight offences (“the primary offences”).
One offence was charge certified and committed
for sentence in the Local Court
where the applicant pleaded guilty. The other seven “related”
offences were sent to the
District Court on a certificate under
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). By virtue of
of that Act,
the District Court is confined to the restrictions and procedures of the Local
Court, most pertinently as to the maximum
penalty that may be imposed when
exercising summary jurisdiction.
further 18 offences were taken into account pursuant to
Div 4 of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW). They were listed on four
Form 1 documents; each related to one of the primary offences.
following is a summary of the primary offences and the indicative sentences
nominated by the
Statutory provision, maximum penalty and standard non-parole period (if
Indicative sentence and non-parole period
Supply not less than a large commercial quantity (1915.6g) of
methylamphetamine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
Life imprisonment and/or 5000 penalty units
SNPP 15 years.
6 years, 9 months
NPP 5 years
Related offences on s 166 certificate
Fail to comply with digital access order
Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act
Summary: 2 years and/or 50 penalty units
Supply indictable quantity (22.5g) of methylamphetamine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Summary: 2 years and/or 100 penalty units
Supply small/traffickable quantity (4.06g) of cocaine
Supply indictable quantity (452.3g) of 1,4-butanediol
Supply indictable quantity (55.5g) of methylamphetamine
Recklessly deal with proceeds of crime ($8,845 cash)
Crimes Act 1900
Summary: 2 years and/or 100 penalty units
Supply small/traffickable quantity (4.21g) methylamphetamine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Summary: 2 years and/or 100 penalty units
25% discount for the applicant’s early pleas of guilty was applied before
arriving at each indicative sentence. Thus, for
example, the sentence indicated
for the Seq 6 offence would otherwise have been one of 9 years
imprisonment.
offences listed on the Form 1 documents for Seqs 6, 3, 34 and 36 were the
Possess prohibited drug contrary to
Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act
. The drugs were:
Seq 10: N,N-dimethylpentylone (0.05g)
Seq 11: methandienone (10.5g)
Seq 23: methylamphetamine (1.07g)
Seq 24: cocaine (0.9g)
Seq 25: buprenorphine (72mg – 9 x 8mg suboxone strips)
Seq 31: testosterone (47.7g)
Seq 12: possess prescribed restricted substance (2.37g in 14 tablets of
diazepam) contrary to
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Seq 27: goods in custody suspected of being stolen or otherwise unlawfully
obtained (13.32g of sildenafil powder) contrary to
s 527C(1)(c)
Possess prohibited drug:
Seq 16: methylamphetamine (0.34g)
Seq 17: cocaine (0.34g)
Seq 21: cocaine (0.7g)
Possess prohibited drug:
Seq 15: 1,4-butanediol (13.7g)
Seq 22: gamma-butyrolactone (13.4g)
Seq 26: 1,4-butanediol (25.4g)
Seq 30: 1,4-butanediol (21.1g)
Possess prohibited drug:
Seq 28: methylamphetamine (0.59g)
Seq 32: trenbolone (9.4g)
Seq 37: methylamphetamine (0.25g)
applicant proposed the following grounds of appeal:
(1) The aggregate sentence is manifestly excessive.
(2) The applicant has a justifiable sense of grievance as a result of the
sentence imposed upon his co-offender Ms Ebony Bagnall.
The offending
to an agreed statement of facts, on 16 March 2023, police executed a search
warrant at the home of the applicant and his
partner, Ebony Bagnall, in
Terrigal. It was a unit in a complex of three and had a secure garage within the
common property car park.
digital evidence access order for the applicant’s mobile phone was issued
at the same time as the search warrant, and it was
served and explained to him
upon arrival. He was asked by police for the pin-code for his phone but
declined. He was then cautioned
and informed of his obligation to provide it but
again declined, saying he would prefer to be charged. This is the Seq 1
ensuing search of the unit and garage resulted in the finding and seizure of the
multitude of drugs and other items the subject
of the charges. These were found
in the lounge room, kitchen, main bedroom, garage and the applicant’s car.
large commercial quantity of methylamphetamine (Seq 6) comprised a vacuum sealed
bag of clear crystal weighing 992g with a purity
of 68.5% and a bottle
containing 923.6g of liquid with a purity of 74.5%, a total of 1915.6 grams.
They were found along with miscellaneous
personal belongings in a large plastic
tub on a shelf in the garage.
the time he was arrested, the applicant told police he used approximately 4-5g
of methylamphetamine per day. In a subsequent interview
he gave similar
responses as to his drug use; claimed that an ounce of methylamphetamine found
in the house was for his own use;
denied knowledge of the large commercial
quantity of methylamphetamine found in the garage; declined to comply with the
digital evidence
access order; and denied knowledge of multiple mobile phones
found in the premises and his car. He otherwise answered “no
to the majority of questions.
applicant’s background and personal circumstances
applicant was 39 years old at the time.
had a significant criminal history. It commenced in 2012 with dishonesty
offences for which he was placed on bonds and intensive
correction orders. He
breached the latter and served 3 months in prison after they were revoked in
2014. In 2017, he was sentenced
to imprisonment for a total of 3 years, 4 months
for multiple drug supply and related offences.
applicant did not give evidence at the sentence hearing. In a report by Ms
Caroline Hare, forensic psychologist, he was described
as presenting with a
persistent and long-standing substance use disorder from which he was unable to
recall a significant period
of abstinence in the previous 25 years. With
escalation of his substance misuse, he had developed a cycle of self-centred and
destructive
(including criminal) behaviour.
applicant had been diagnosed with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder when
at school but had not been medicated. He said
he had commenced using illicit
drugs during adolescence in the context of experiencing childhood sexual abuse.
This abuse, perpetrated
by a male teacher during his last year of primary
school, triggered distressing thoughts and feelings for which he was unable to
seek help to manage. He also described a history of disruptiveness and defiance
and being the source of parental disappointment.
He was exposed to gender
stereotypes that promoted traits such as self-sufficiency (perceiving talking to
others about your issues
is weak, and men should figure out their personal
problems without asking for help). He maintained such beliefs currently which Ms
Hare considered presented a formidable barrier to him seeking appropriate help
and support and confiding his issues and concerns
with others.
Hare opined that he had antisocial personality traits, including craving
excitement and a tendency to experience boredom which
predisposed him to
prioritising his needs above his commitments to others, including his children,
partner, and wider family. This
was reflected in his history of repeated rule
breaking, infidelity, drug use and general irresponsibility. While she thought
the capacity for guilt and remorse, he had developed a pattern of
reliance on avoidance-based coping (including drug use and gambling)
distracted him from unwanted negative emotions (including guilty feelings) and
prevented him from addressing his underlying
problems, thereby leaving issues to
Hare said the applicant provided brief glimpses of “his fragile sense of
self” which he quickly covered with statements
that suggested he is
indifferent to what others think. This method of over-compensating was deeply
entrenched and maintained by his
strong adherence to self-sufficiency. She
considered he oscillated between the pre-contemplation and contemplation stages
from where he has no intention of changing his behaviours to where he
is aware problems exist but is not committed to taking action
Hare described the type of support that would best be provided to the applicant
once he committed to work on his issues, particularly
his substance use.
However, he indicated to her that he was disinclined to engage in individual
therapy. As such, she suggested the
most appropriate course of treatment was
likely to involve medication to treat his substance dependence, with the
possibility of
him engaging in a long-term holistic rehabilitation program at
some point in the future when he was motivated to do so.
applicant gave a history to Ms Hare of having engaged in employment from when he
was released from gaol in 2018 until the time
of his arrest. He claimed there
were no negative impacts on his work performance despite using drugs daily
throughout that period.
He described himself as a “functional
addict”. Ms Hare considered this was questionable and should be confirmed
external sources. It was in fact confirmed. There was independent
evidence of the high regard in which he was held in his employment
building company. A supervisor gave evidence that there was no sign of the
applicant’s punctuality or work performance
being impacted by the use of
illicit substances. A position was available to him when he is released from
Findings by the sentencing judge
Objective Seriousness
judge assessed the objective seriousness of the Seq 6 (large commercial quantity
supply) offence as being “only just below
the mid-range, but certainly not
far below it”. Mr Rosser KC submitted on the applicant’s behalf that
says approaching middle, we say low. I would be prepared to say
low approaching middle”.
the course of explaining this assessment, the judge accepted that the applicant
was engaged in the business of supplying prohibited
drugs, although he noted
that many of the items usually considered part of the indicia of actual supply
were absent. He also said:
The liquid methylamphetamine is also not in a saleable form as at the time it
was seized. The presence of methylamphetamine at his
premises in several
locations, but without the indicia of supply, tends to suggest that he was
storing this in large quantity for
somebody else and was not necessarily dealing
with it for profit himself. I accept that submission.
to the liquid portion of the drug, the defence submission was that there was no
“evidence of any capacity on the offender’s
part or any equipment
necessary to convert the liquid portion of the drug to saleable form”.
That simply meant that the applicant
appeared not to have had the capacity to
convert the liquid into something capable of being ingested by an end user.
There was no
evidence as to the circumstances in which the applicant acquired
the liquid or whether he intended himself to convert it to ingestible
provide it to someone who could. The fact remained that the applicant pleaded
guilty to being in possession of the liquid
for the purpose of supply.
to the second part of this finding concerning storing and not dealing with the
methylamphetamine for personal profit, neither party
had made a submission in
those terms. The notion seems to have arisen from an exchange which commenced
with the judge observing that
the lack of indicia of supply activity, such as
plastic bags and cash counting machines, led him to “almost have the
he was almost warehousing some of the drugs in his garage”.
Although he had not suggested this himself, Mr Rosser KC
understandably
embraced it, responding, “That’s an impression your
Honour could well have”.
was no evidence the applicant was storing drugs for someone else and nor did he
claim he was not dealing drugs for profit for
himself. In fact, he was reported
to have given quite the contrary explanation to Ms Hare. She wrote:
In relation to his current offences, Mr Regattieri reported having been tempted
to relapse into selling illegal drugs due to the
“high pay off”. He
described working hard in his regular job as a carpenter; however, the financial
benefits of selling
drugs enabled him to live a life he was otherwise unable to
afford, including being able to “buy anything” for his sons,
he indicated “was a big factor” because of his self-perceived
failings as a father.
these reasons, it appears the applicant was the beneficiary of generous findings
that may have yielded an assessment of objective
seriousness that was less than
it might otherwise have been.
from noting some features of the other primary offences, there was no
specification of their objective seriousness by reference
Moral culpability
judge considered the applicant’s moral culpability was reduced “to a
small degree” on account of the childhood
Subjective matters
judge said:
Overall, my conclusion is that the offender has a relatively weak subjective
case. He has demonstrated no remorse, no willingness
to become rehabilitated and
sadly gives the Court no confidence that when he is finally released he will not
continue to offend,
given how lucrative he has found a drug supply business can
be, even in circumstances where he is someone who is clearly a gifted
who can work hard and with skills that are valued by the community.
Honour considered the question of whether there were special circumstances which
might justify a reduction in the proportion of
the sentence represented by the
non-parole period despite Senior Counsel for the applicant having candidly
declined to make such
a submission. His Honour agreed with the concession that
the statutory ratio would provide sufficient time for the applicant to be
assisted with reintegration into the community.
Purposes of
judge had regard to the purposes of sentencing in
(Sentencing Procedure) Act
, noting the “particular importance”
of specific and general deterrence and recognising the harm done to the
at large “for offences involving drug supply, particularly of
the high level that this offender is involved in”.
– the sentence is manifestly excessive
principles to be applied to a ground of appeal asserting a sentence is
manifestly excessive are well known and frequently cited
in judgments of this
Court. A summary was provided in
(2017) 96 NSWLR 155;
When it is contended that a sentence is manifestly excessive it is necessary to
have regard to the following principles [citation
of authorities omitted].
Appellate intervention is not justified simply because the result arrived at in
the court below is markedly different from sentences
imposed in other cases.
Intervention is only warranted where the difference is such that it may be
concluded that there must have been some misapplication
of principle, even
though where and how is not apparent from the reasons of the sentencing judge,
or where the sentence imposed is
so far outside the range of sentences available
that there must have been error.
It is not to the point that this Court might have exercised the sentencing
discretion differently.
There is no single correct sentence and judges at first instance are allowed as
much flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with
consistency of approach and
application of principle.
It is for the applicant to establish that the sentence was unreasonable or
plainly unjust.
submissions by counsel for the applicant were largely confined to the parity
ground; for this ground he relied upon his written
submissions. Those
submissions made various observations about pertinent features such as the
maximum penalty and standard non-parole
period for the Seq 6 (large commercial
supply) offence which have been set out above (at [
]). Reference was made
to the finding that the objective seriousness of this offence was just below the
mid-range and counsel made
clear at the hearing that he was not in any way
challenging that assessment.
was submitted, as it was in the District Court, that if the related offences of
supplying methylamphetamine (Seq 3 (22.5g), Seq
36 (55.5g), and Seq 41 (4.21g))
had been merged with the Seq 6 (large commercial supply) offence there would
have been no additional
criminality and therefore no increase in the indicative
sentence for Seq 6. Responding to this submission, the judge said that those
three offences “will not add much to the aggregate sentence I
aggregate sentence was only 9 months longer than the indicative sentence for the
Seq 6 offence and the non-parole period was 7
months longer. Accordingly, those
periods accounted for the judge’s assessment of the additional criminality
for seven related
offences, including the 10 offences taken into account in
respect of three of them. It is apparent that there was a significant degree
notional concurrency.
written submissions included an assertion that the Seq 38 (proceeds of crime)
offence did not require accumulation in the sentencing
exercise “given the
inherent nature of money to drug supply”. The judge had remarked that the
finding of cash at the
the amount found in the applicant’s wallet ($845) was “not
particularly large amount for an offence of that nature”. However, the
offence also included $8000 found in a drawer in the
main bedroom. That was not
the proceeds of the drugs in the applicant’s possession that he was yet to
supply and thus not incorporated
in the criminality of the drug supply offences.
It was open to the judge to notionally accumulate some of the 5 month indicative
sentence for this offence.
further point raised in the written submissions was that some of the offences
did not warrant a sentence of imprisonment; that is,
the threshold in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
had not been crossed. After it
was noted at the hearing that the case for the applicant had been conducted in
the District Court
upon an acceptance that the entirety of the offences
“requires a significant sentence of imprisonment” the point was
effectively abandoned. Counsel argued merely that it was an issue that might
arise for consideration if the Court was moved to resentence.
the end, there was very little put on behalf of the applicant in support of
Ground 1 beyond a broad assertion that “the aggregate
sentence has the
effect of being excessive having regard to the total criminality of the
applicant’s conduct and his underlying
circumstances”.
the most serious offence was one with:
penalty of life imprisonment and a standard non-parole period of 15 years as the
statutory guideposts for sentencing,
an unchallenged
assessment of objective seriousness of “just below the mid-range”,
a subjective
case that was found to be “relatively weak”,
starting point for the indicative sentence of 9 years with discounting yielding
a term of 6 years, 9 months is not unreasonable.
of the other offences for which the applicant was to be sentenced were
substantially less serious, but the sheer number of them
warranted at least a
modest additional reflection in the aggregate sentence.
conclusion is that the aggregate sentence of 7 years, 6 months and the
non-parole period of 5 years, 7 months is not manifestly
am fortified in that conclusion by the fact that this is very similar to the
sentence Senior Counsel for the applicant actually
sought to be imposed. He
provided the judge with the outcomes of 12 similar cases in the District Court
as well as sentencing statistics
compiled by the Judicial Commission of NSW. He
submitted that the present case was akin to those within the wide middle range
outcomes, with head sentences (following the application of 25% discounts for
pleas of guilty) from 5 to 9 years. He submitted, the
sentence should be
“no higher than the middle and perhaps a bit less than that ... five to
nine after discount is where an
appropriate sentence falls”.
short, the applicant received much the same sentence as he sought to persuade
the judge to impose. He has not raised anything persuasive
to allow him to
withdraw from that concession. Leave to appeal in relation to this ground should
be refused.
Ground 2 – excessive disparity with sentence
imposed upon Ebony Bagnall
Court permitted Ground 2 to be added in the week leading up to the hearing of
the application. The Crown is commended for its
urgent response which permitted
the hearing to proceed as scheduled.
applicant’s partner and co-offender, Ebony Bagnall, pleaded guilty to a
number of offences and was sentenced by her Honour
Judge Kumar in the District
Court at Parramatta on 25 September 2025. She was sentenced to an aggregate term
of imprisonment of 6
years with a non-parole period of 3 years
details of the offences and the indicative sentences are set out below. All the
offences were contrary to the
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
. References
to the maximum penalty by way of fine have been omitted. It will be readily seen
that the offences for which she was
sentenced do not correspond to all of those
for which the applicant was sentenced. The matters that do correspond are
emphasised.
Count / Seq
Particulars
Supply indictable quantity (213.5g) methylamphetamine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
15 supplies to Karen Eyre arranged by texts on Signal app between 21.7.22
and 4.2.23 (3.5g – 28g each). Payment by cash –
also $20,175 bank
transfers to accounts of EB or NR)
(NR not charged.)
Findings included: above level of KE but below level of NR. Below mid-range
of objective seriousness.
25% discount, therefore starting point of 40m
Supply large commercial quantity (1991.8g) methylamphetamine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Total 1991.8g comprised of:
Crystal (992g) and liquid (923.6g) methylamphetamine found in
tub in garage
(Seq 6 for NR – on Charge Certificate – Indicative 6
years, 9 months)
55.5g in hooded jumper in bedroom cupboard
(Seq 36 for NR on s 166 certificate – Indicative 18 months)
• 17.7g in “headwrap” in bathroom.
(NR not charged).
Findings included: role significant. Joint possession with NR. Same level
of the hierarchy but performed lesser role than NR in distribution
drugs. Below mid-range of objective seriousness.
SNPP 15 years
5 years, 6 months
NPP 2 years, 9 months
10% discount, therefore starting point of about 73 months
Form 1 - Count 3
Supply indictable quantity (498.8g) 1,4-butanediol
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Total: 498.8g comprised of:
Powerade bottle in ensuite to main bedroom 452.3g
(Seq 34 for NR on s 166 certificate – Indicative
Small glass bottle in kitchen 25.4g
(Seq 26 for NR – on Form 1 for Seq 34)
Form 1 - Count 3
Possess 4.96g cocaine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Knotted plastic bag in cupboard above rangehood 4.06g
(Seq 14 for NR – on s 166 certificate – Indicative
Form 1 - Count 3
Possess 0.43g methylamphetamine
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act
Plastic sandwich bag in bathroom – “personal use”.
(NR not charged).
Aggregate: 6y / 3y from 8.5.2025
reckoner” documents setting out pertinent details of the cases of Ms
Bagnall and the applicant were provided in
draft to the parties prior to the
hearing. The Court was advised they were accepted to be correct. The document
relating to the applicant
is annexed to this judgment. The document relating to
Ms Bagnall is included in the table above. It also included a table summarising
pertinent subjective matters and findings by the sentencing judges largely in
terms of that below (with some abbreviation
expansion).
Nathan Regattieri
Ebony Bagnall
Moral culpability – reduced to a
“small”/”some” degree – childhood sex abuse
Criminal history – disentitles to leniency
Criminal history – moderate – disentitles to leniency. The
judge described the applicant’s as “more significantly
NR had “fragile sense of self”. ADHD diagnosed as a child
Narcissistic personality style – includes “fragile
self-esteem”
Prospects “guarded”. “No willingness to become
rehabilitated”
Good prospects of rehabilitation
“No confidence that when he is finally released, he will not continue
Risk of re-offending is low
Insufficient to find offender remorseful per s 21A(3)(i)
Mental health issues – do not regard as making time in custody more
Conditions in custody more onerous because of Type 1 diabetes
Hardship to mother (but not exceptional circs – part of instinctive
Not considered - 1st to be sentenced.
Consideration of parity, including finding EB’s subjective case
“diametrically opposed to the male co-offender”
and for Count 3,
“less culpable and has a lesser role than Regattieri”
Conceded no basis – considered nonetheless – declined to find
Special circumstances found
referring to the ready reckoner documents, counsel for the applicant pointed to
the starting point of the indicated sentences for
the large commercial supply
offence which was almost completely on the same terms for each offender (the
only difference was the
quantity, being 1915.6g for the applicant and 1991.8g
for Ms Bagnall.) The starting point for the applicant was 9 years compared
distinction”.
accepted that his client’s subjective case was worse than Ms Bagnall. It
was nonetheless submitted that there was some
measure of similarity in their
personality types and Kumar DCJ accepted that Ms Bagnall had not engaged in any
during the two years she was on bail.
was accepted that the applicant had many more matters on Form 1 documents to be
taken into account, but he pointed to the fact
that many of them were summary
offences of possessing drugs or prescribed restricted substances and one of
having suspected stolen
goods in his custody.
was submitted that there was a “lack of relativity” between the
non-parole periods; 3 years for Ms Bagnall and 5 years,
7 months for the
DCJ had been provided with all the material relevant to the sentencing of the
applicant, including the remarks on sentence of
Anderson SC DCJ. She considered
the question of parity very carefully. In this context she said in relation to
the large commercial
supply offence that Ms Bagnall was “less culpable and
has a less role than Regattieri. Further, she has a much stronger subjective
Honour referred to the following matters submitted by the Crown, which she
accepted, as warranting a lesser indicative sentence
for Ms Bagnall for the
large commercial supply offence:
(1) Regattieri has a significantly worse criminal history with prior custodial
terms for supplying prohibited drugs.
(2) Telephone interception material placed before her (which was not tendered
against the applicant) made it clear he played a greater
role in the
distribution of the drugs. He was found to be engaged in the business of drugs,
although the Crown submitted, they were
running a joint drug business.
(3) The subjective case for Ms Bagnall was stronger.
(4) Her Honour also noted that Regattieri’s offending was aggravated
because it was motivated for financial gain.
significant feature differentiating Ms Bagnall’s case was that she had
been abstinent from drugs since her arrest in March
2023. This contributed to
the judge concluding she had good prospects of rehabilitation. Her Honour also
noted she also did not have
any underlying psychological conditions.
Crown referred to the significance of protection of the community in sentencing
in drug supply cases. In
Parente v R
(2017) 96 NSWLR 633
[2017] NSWCCA
it was said that in addition to general deterrence:
[H]aving regard to the social impact of drug use, particularly as an underlying
cause of other criminal offending, protection of
the community will usually be
of significance as well.
Crown submitted this was an important feature in the applicant’s case
whereas it was not in Ms Bagnall’s case because
of her good rehabilitation
prospects and low risk of reoffending.
Ms Bagnall was found to be less culpable and played a lesser role in relation to
the large commercial supply offence and had
a far more positive subjective case
than the applicant, it was appropriate for there to be a significant difference
between the sentence
indicated for her for that offence as compared to the
applicant. Beyond that, the aggregate sentence for each of them was greater
only a relatively modest extent, 9 months longer in the applicant’s case
and 6 months longer in Ms Bagnall’s case.
[2024] NSWCCA 197
; (2024) 390 FLR 293 at
, the Chief
Justice provided a thorough review of caselaw pertaining to the parity principle
of sentencing which is that “there
should not be a disparity between
sentences imposed on co-offenders which gives rise to a justifiable sense of
grievance”:
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
at 301, 309,
[1997] HCA 26.
The review included a quotation (with implicit approval) of
the following from
[2014] NSWCCA 267
The sense of grievance complained of when the sentence for one offender is
compared relative to that of a co-offender or co-offenders,
is to be assessed
objectively governed by considerations of substance rather than form. It is only
triggered where differences in
the sentences imposed on co-offenders is
disproportionate to relevant distinctions in the role each played in the
commission of the
offence (even if the roles might be differently described or
involve different conduct) and in an offender's subjective circumstances.
are necessarily degrees of both similarity and difference in the criminal
conduct of co-offenders and in their subjective circumstances.
In some cases
this requires that different sentences be imposed. However, it is only where the
discrepancy between sentences is not
reasonably explained by the degree of
difference between co-offenders and their offending that the disparity is such
that appellate
intervention is required.
my view, the degree of disparity between the sentences indicated for the large
commercial supply offence and aggregate sentences
are reasonably explained by
the differences referred to by Kumar DCJ (above at [
2 was arguable and leave to appeal should be granted. In the final analysis,
however, the ground should be rejected.
propose the following orders:
(1) Leave to appeal granted.
(2) Appeal against sentence dismissed.
READY RECKONER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter