URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/241.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AQO v AAMI (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 241 (5 November 2020)
AQO v AAMI (Claims
Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 241
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Claims Assessment
Damages assessment - non-economic loss – past and future economic
loss – appropriate award – physical limitations
evidence – loss of enjoyment of life – weekly earnings or loss of
income since the accident - future
impairment of earning capacity – legal
costs – overseas employment
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
Cases Cited
AQO – Claimant
AAMI – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
CLAIMS ASSESSMENT
AAMI Limited
Date of Accident:
28 March 2019
DRS Reference:
Insurer Claim Number:
Decision Maker:
Philip Watson
Date of Decision:
5 November 2020
CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(1)
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Assessment of Claim for Damages made in accordance with
section 7.36
the issue of liability for the claim, the Insurer's insured owed a duty of care
to the Claimant, breached that duty of care and
the Claimant sustained injury
loss and damage as a result of that breach of duty, as admitted by the
sub-sections 7.36 (3) and 7.36 (4) of the Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017 (the
Act), I specify the amount of damages for this
claim as $417,625.76.
amount of the Claimant's costs, taking into account the amount of damages
assessed in respect of this claim, assessed in accordance
with the Motor
Accidents Injuries Regulation 2017 is $38,223.04 of GST.
to this certificate is a brief statement of the reasons for my assessment
attached to this certificate. Under sub-section
7.36 (5) of the
Philip Watson
Assessor, Delegate of the Principal Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution
REASONS FOR DECISION -ASSESSMENT OF CLAIM
Issued in accordance with section
7.36(1) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
1 . The Claimant, AQO, was injured in a motor vehicle
accident at Pyrmont on 28 March 2019.
Claimant was riding his motor scooter when a vehicle in front of him attempted
to make a u-turn, without warning and sufficient
space and time, and there was a
resultant collision. That vehicle was insured for present purposes by the
Insurer, AAMI Limited.
Claimant sustained a number of injuries including a fracture of his right wrist.
He was taken by ambulance to hospital and his
wrist was placed in a cast.
Claimant had some time off work and then subsequently returned, but is currently
not working, for reasons that I will outline.
Claimant sought a concession from the Insurer as to an entitlement to
noneconomic loss. Following a medical assessment on its
behalf, the Insurer
conceded that entitlement. It goes without saying that the Claimant has more
than a minor injury.
Claimant lodged an application for common law benefits with the Insurer seeking
compensation for non-economic loss and past and
future economic loss, being the
extent of his entitlements under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
"). The parties have been unable to agree on the Claimant's entitlements
under these heads of damage.
7 The assessment conference took place
on 23 October 2020 by way of a video conference, due to the current COVID-19
restrictions.
The Claimant only was questioned at the assessment conference.
8. Having regard to the submissions from the parties, both written and oral,
the issues that I am to determine are:
(a) The nature and extent of the Claimant's injuries and disabilities.
(b) An appropriate award for non-economic loss.
(c) An appropriate award for past economic loss.
(d) Whether the Claimant has an entitlement to and, if so, an appropriate
award for future economic loss.
THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE CLAIMANT'S INJURIES AND
DISABILITIES
9. The Claimant is now 31 years of age. He was 29
years of age at the time of the accident last year.
1 0. The Claimant was born in Italy and first came to Australia in 2012. He
came on a working holiday, returned to Italy and then
returned to Australia
of this accident.
1 1 . The Claimant is only a young man, but clearly had some medical issues
before this accident. That was a matter of significance
in the claim and
occupied a good part of the assessment conference.
appears that since early 2016, the Claimant has been under the regular care of
Dr Tringali, a general practitioner. He had seen
Dr Tringali before this
accident concerning a number of medical problems, some of which are of
significance in this claim.
26 April 2016, the Claimant saw Dr Tringali complaining of having fractured his
left foot two weeks earlier. Dr Tringali's notes
indicate that there was a
fracture of the fourth toe and the Claimant said this arose from playing
barefoot soccer with friends.
following day the Claimant saw Dr Tringali again and also complained of left
ankle, knee and back pain which seemed to be associated
with the injury to his
foot. Three days later the Claimant again saw Dr Tringali when it was noted he
had pain in the left ankle,
which had been 'fractured". The Claimant said that
that last comment was incorrect and he has not had a fracture of his ankle and
there does not appear to be any radiology to confirm that he did.
5. In any event, I note that the Claimant then did not see his doctor again
regarding any similar problems until the end of 2017.
On 9 November 2017, the
Claimant consulted Dr Tringali complaining of back, neck and left ankle pain and
he was referred for chiropractic
treatment with a Mr James Gullotta. The
Claimant said that pain was not from any accident or injury but that he
sometimes got uncomfortable
in his work, to which I will refer.
16. Mr Gullotta, who provided a report of 18 December 2017, confirmed that he
saw the Claimant on five occasions and that the treatment
had been successful in
reducing his lumbar pain.
1 7. There is then no further mention of any relevant issues until a visit on
23 July 2018 when the Claimant reported he had been
involved in a motor vehicle
accident on 15 July 2018. The Claimant was again riding his scooter when he was
hit on his right side
by a motor vehicle. He was taken by ambulance to the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital and when he saw Dr Tringali he complained of
bilateral shoulder pain, pain in his upper and lower back, both knees and
left wrist.
18. It appears that that accident and the Claimant's injuries were the
subject of a separate claim for compensation but I have not
been provided with
details thereof.
Claimant continued to see Dr Tringali from time to time complaining of problems
in his neck, back, shoulders, right knee and left
wrist and these were
sufficient for the Claimant to be referred for MRI scans of his neck, left
shoulder and right knee in September
visits and complaints continued until 20 March 2018, only eight days before the
subject accident. At that last visit the Claimant
complained of pain in his
neck, both shoulders and upper back. The Claimant had undergone further
chiropractic treatment and Mr Gullotta
indicated that his right knee was of most
significance and suggested specialist referral. The Claimant was referred to Dr
but in fact did not see him until the end of 2019.
Claimant was questioned extensively about the extent of the problems he was
having with each of those injuries before the subject
accident. The Claimant
consistently said that he was improving and felt that he was "almost 100%" by
the time of this accident. He
said he continued to have medical treatment
because he felt this was necessary but his earlier accident had not been as
significant
as this one had been for him.
Insurer submitted that I would not accept the Claimant's statements in this
regard and that I would question the reliability of
his evidence given the
records of the GP and other material. The Insurer submitted that it was not
suggesting that the Claimant was
being dishonest but that his memory of his
pre-accident condition was, as I have indicated, not reliable.
submission about the Claimant's condition before this accident arose also from a
report of Dr Thomson dated 19 February 2019,
which concerned
Claimant's previous claim. That was only some five
weeks before this accident.
Thomson noted that the Claimant told him that he had sustained injuries to his
neck, upper back, right knee and both shoulders
and that his left shoulder had
recovered but not the other areas. He noted that the Claimant had had some time
off work then resumed
on light duties and eventual normal duties but with
variable pain. He recorded that the Claimant told him he had ongoing constant
pain in the neck and upper back radiating towards the right shoulder and he had
ongoing pain in the right knee.
Thomson noted that the Claimant told him the pain was worse on use or movement
and with various activities.
Thomson examined the Claimant and found a full range of painless movement of the
shoulders, some asymmetric reduction in range
of motion of the neck, some mild
tenderness without any reduction in range of motion in the thoracic spine and a
full range of motion
in the right knee.
Thomson diagnosed the Claimant as suffering from a chronic musculoligamentous
strain of the neck, a musculoligamentous strain of
the right trapezial/shoulder
area a musculoliagmentous strain of the thoracic spine and a right
chondromalacia patellae. He attributed
all of those to his accident in 2018 and
thought the prognosis was guarded. Dr Thomson felt that the Claimant was unfit
for heavier
activities and should avoid heavy or strenuous requirements. He felt
that the Claimant was restricted to sedentary or semi-sedentary
duties at work
but should be able to work for normal hours.
am satisfied that despite the Claimant's statements to the contrary, he was
continuing to have not insignificant problems with those
parts of the body that
he described to Dr Thomson. That is consistent with the complaints recorded by
Dr Tringali in his notes.
the subject accident, as I have already noted, the Claimant was riding his
scooter and collided with a vehicle that was attempting
to make a u-turn in
front of him. I have seen photos of both his motor scooter and the car involved,
taken at the scene of the accident.
Claimant was taken to St Vincent's Hospital complaining of problems with his
right arm and both knees and x-rays showed a fracture
of the right ulnar
styloid. The Claimant's right arm was placed in a cast.
Claimant saw Dr Tringali again on 1 April 2019 to advise about being jn this
accident and at that time complained of pain in
his neck, both shoulders, right
elbow and wrist, back and both knees. Clearly some of these are areas of the
body that were injured
in the previous accident.
Tringalj's records show that the Claimant has continued to consult him from time
to time with ongoing problems with his injuries.
The most recent recorded visit
provided to me was on 27 June 2020 when the Claimant continued to complain of
pain in his neck, right
shoulder, right knee and back and it was noted that he
continued to have chiropractic treatment.
Claimant told me at the assessment conference that indeed he continued to have
both physiotherapy and chiropractic treatment with
Mr Gullotta and continued to
see his GP.
also told me that his right wrist remained very sore particularly if he tried to
lift with it or to exercise. He got a tingling
sensation in the fourth and fifth
fingers at times. I note that the Claimant had no prior injury to his right
Claimant told me that he is left handed for writing but is otherwise right
handed, particularly for most physical activities and
for his previous sporting
activities.
Claimant said that his neck was still very sore and aggravated if he stood or
walked for long periods. He said it felt heavy.
He said he could not move his
right shoulder and arm fully and he avoided sleeping on the right side. He said
his left shoulder was
much better and was improving. He said his back was very
sore and felt heavy, particularly when he leant forward. He said his knees
weak and he couldn't squat nor run properly and he didn't feel like he had the
same strength in his legs that he had previously.
Claimant was referred after this accident by Dr Tringali to see Dr Herald, an
orthopaedic surgeon. I have been provided with this
report of 13 August
Herald did not note the history of the previous motor vehicle accident but said
the Claimant told him he had injuries in this accident
to his right wrist, right
shoulder, neck and left knee. He diagnosed a left knee lateral meniscal tear, a
right thumb ligamentous
strain, a right shoulder partial thickness rotator cuff
tear and impingement syndrome and a whiplash injury to the cervical spine
right sided radiculopathy.
the purpose of this claim, the Claimant was referred by his solicitors to Dr
Bodel who has provided a report of 28 January 2020.
It appears that Dr Bodel was
provided with the notes of Dr Tringali, as these are specifically referred to.
He recorded that in the
first accident the Claimant had "injured his right knee,
his neck and both shoulders in that accident. He had made quite a good recovery
and had retumed to all of his work and his study program before this second
accident". In my view that history must be considered
in light of the records of
Dr Tringali and the report of Dr Thomson that I have referred to.
Bodel diagnosed injuries to the back, both shoulders, neck, right hip, both
knees, a fracture of the right wrist and psychological
Bodel noted the Claimant's ongoing complaints, particularly in relation to his
right wrist and hand, neck and shoulder girdle and
his knees. Dr Bode' diagnosed
a whiplash associated disorder, bilateral rotator cuff pathology in both
shoulders, the fracture of
the right wrist and a direct blow to both knees
causing post-traumatic retropatellar chondritis and scarring of the knees. As he
accepted that the Claimant had almost completely recovered from his previous
accident, he assigned all of these complaints to the
subject accident.
Bodel assessed a total 21% whole person impairment.
Insurer referred the Claimant for medico-legal opinion to Dr Barrett, who has
provided reports dated 29 February 2020 and 9 March
Barrett took a history of both motor vehicle accidents and specifically had
regard to the report of Dr Thomson that I have referred
to. He noted that Dr
Thomson had assessed at that stage a 7% whole person impairment from the first
Barrett noted the history of complaints from both accidents and that, at that
time, the Claimant complained of ongoing pain and
weakness in his right wrist,
pain and stiffness in his neck, particularly affecting the right side, pain and
stiffness in his right
shoulder and pain in his right knee preventing him from
engaging in a number of sports.
Barrett accepted that as a result of the subject accident, the Claimant had
sustained soft tissue injuries to his neck and right
shoulder, possibly the left
shoulder, a fracture of the right wrist and a soft tissue injury to the right
knee with probable post-traumatic
chondromalacia patellae.
Barrett felt that the Claimant's ongoing symptoms were partly the result of the
subject accident and partly the result of the
first accident. He went on to
assess whole person impairment and made a reduction in assessments for the neck
only, arriving at a
total 12% whole person impairment. Hence the Insurer's
concession of the Claimant's entitlement to an award of non-economic loss.
regard to the matters to which I have already referred, particularly the records
of Dr Tringali and the report of Dr Thomson,
it is clear that
Claimant's symptoms now, other than for his right wrist and left
knee, are partly the result of both accidents. However I am satisfied
Claimant's symptoms in those areas that have been affected by both accidents,
have been worsened since the second accident.
I accept the Claimant's statement
in this regard and I note that Dr Barrett only saw fit to apportion the
Claimant's impairments
as to the cervical spine. It is trite law that the
Insurer must take the Claimant as it finds him.
am satisfied, therefore, that the Claimant has suffered a fracture of his right
wrist which has left him with ongoing pain and limitation
of movement and
weakness in his right hand, which is his dominant hand for most purposes, and
certainly for heavier activities. I
am also satisfied that he has suffered
injury to both knees, his left knee being as a result of this accident and I
note described
as Dr Herald as involving a lateral meniscal tear. Both Dr Bodel
and Dr Barrett diagnosed the Claimant as suffering a chondromalacia
patellae in
the right knee which I would accept. I am satisfied that he has suffered an
aggravation of his previous symptomatic cervical
spine and right shoulder
coming to this view, I have noted the much more significant severity of the
subject accident as compared to the Claimant's previous
motor vehicle accident.
I also note the statements from the Claimant's work associates as to the
Claimant's complaints of pain and
difficulties with his duties following this
accident. I have also noted the assessments of whole person impairment by Dr
Dr Bodel and Dr Barrett. It is clear that the Claimant's impairments
from the subject accident are more significant than after the
51 Accordingly, the Claimant is left with permanent
impairments from this accident in his neck, shoulders, right arm and knees, all
of which is significant in a man of only 31 years of age.
AN APPROPRIATE AWARD FOR NON-ECONOMIC LOSS
Claimant is entitled to damages for non-economic loss, which is a common law
assessment and not to exceed the maximum amount provided
4.13. The current maximum figure is $590,000.00.
Claimant's submissions seek an award of $350,000.00 and the Insurer submits that
an appropriate award is a figure of $125,000.00.
have already made reference to the nature and extent of the Claimant's injuries
and disabilities and will not repeat those again.
For reasons which I will set
out, I am satisfied that these injuries and disabilities have affected the
Claimant's employment and
will do so in the future. I accept that they have also
interfered with his recreational activities. The Claimant used to be a
professional
water polo player in Italy. Since coming to Australia he has also
enjoyed a number of sporting activities including soccer, attending
indoor climbing, tennis and sailing. The Claimant has not been able to return to
these activities because of the problems
that he experiences.
Claimant says his physical limitations depress him. For instance not being able
to run properly nor squat and not being able to
says and I accept that he has always enjoyed outdoor activities.
has pain, weakness and limitation of movement in his right dominant wrist and
hand. He has lost confidence in riding his scooter.
He no longer goes
31 years of age the Claimant has a 52 year life expectancy on the Medium Life
Expectancies Table. It has already been over eighteen
months since the
58. In my view, an appropriate amount to compensate the
Claimant for his past and future pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment
life, is an amount of $250,000.00.
AN APPROPRIATE AWARD FOR PAST ECONOMIC LOSS
I have already mentioned, the Claimant came to Australia originally in 2012 and
then completed two working holiday visas, of twelve
months each. He worked on a
full time basis in hospitality and farm work.
Claimant then obtained a student visa and told me that he had held two such
visas, of two and a half years each, and one of the
conditions of these was that
he could work up to 20 hours per week during term times, but full time during
holiday periods. The Claimant
commenced studies in project management, travel
and tourism and later a Diploma of Management. He did not, however, complete any
of those courses, partly because the first institution at which he studied went
into liquidation.
Claimant commenced employment as a customer service representative for the Dubai
National Air Transport Association (DNATA). He
commenced this employment in
September 2014 and remained there until March 2020. The Claimant explained that
this is a service owned
by the Emirates Airline that provides travel, cargo and
catering for passengers. He was employed on a permanent part time basis in
ground handling at the Sydney International Airport. He was jn that employment
at the time of his accident.
Claimant explained that his role was to check in passengers and this would often
involve lifting and moving luggage, particularly
when passengers had a number of
pieces of luggage, which he then had to arrange on the three scales at the
check-in desk so that
they could be weighted together.
Claimant explained that he would also have to, at times, move passengers in
wheelchairs and after check-in would then move to
the boarding gate to assist
with the boarding of passengers onto the aircraft. He explained that this
involved a lot of walking,
which is understandable given the size of the
Airport. He worked in this position the 20 hours per week that he was allowed.
He estimated
that he was earning between $550.00 and $700.00 per week on
64 The Claimant said that he also worked during
holiday periods for an events company called Simply Seated. This company
furniture for weddings, corporate events and the like and in effect the
Claimant's work was as a furniture removalist. It would involve
packing trucks
with the necessary furniture, taking these to venues, unloading and setting them
up and then doing the same in reverse.
He said this was a very physical job,
which clearly it would have been. It involved moving large tables, sofas,
couches etc.
well as doing that position in the holiday period, the Claimant would also work
more hours with DNATA.
Claimant took time off work after the accident because of his injuries and then
returned on light duties. He said he was still
working in the same position when
the work finished. It is clear that that work ceased both because he was stood
down due to the
COVID-19 pandemic and also because his visa, that allowed him to
work, came to an end.
Claimant said that he did not return to the work with Simply Seated after the
Claimant made a claim for statutory benefits under the
and it was agreed
that the Insurer paid weekly payments during the Claimant's absence of work in a
total amount of $16,122.06 gross.
his written submissions, the Claimant sought an award for past-economic loss in
an amount of $41 ,OOO.OO made up of a loss of income
from both of his forms of
employment. I should add that his 2019 tax return also disclosed an additional
small income, which the
Claimant said was from some part time work with a
catering company. However he has not made any claim in respect of any loss of
from that employment.
of the Claimant's claim was for loss of income from March 2020, however it was
conceded by the Claimant at the assessment conference
that he would not be
entitled to any award from that time. This is because his visa was transferred
to a tourist visa with a condition
that he was not allowed to be in employment.
That is a twelve month visa which will finish in April 2021.
Claimant's claim therefore was for one month's loss of earnings from DNATA which
he said was an amount of $2,500.00 and fifteen
weeks loss of earnings, during
holiday periods, from loss of earnings with Simply Seated which totaled
$22,500.00, a total of $25,000.00.
Insurer's first written submissions conceded an amount for past economic loss
but its subsequent written submissions said no award
should be made.
the assessment conference, the Insurer conceded that the Claimant would be
entitled to an award as set out in its first written
submissions. In those
submissions the Insurer conceded the loss of eamings at DNATA and a buffer of
$10,000.00 for the loss of income
from Simply Seated. It suggested that an
appropriate approach would be an allowance of $13,000.00 for past economic loss
and jn addition
thereto, a loss of superannuation and an allowance for the
taxation paid on the Claimant's weekly payments of statutory benefits
amount of $2,452.00. The allowance, excluding superannuation, was an amount of
$15,452.00.
the Insurer also seeks a credit for the weekly payments of statutory benefits it
has paid in the larger amount of $16,122.06.
It is entitled to such credit
pursuant to
section 3.40
is a difficulty in making a calculation of the Claimant's past economic loss.
This is because I have not been provided with
any material from either of the
Claimant's employers to confirm his weekly earnings nor the periods that he was
absent from work
or losing income following this accident. In addition, the
Claimant has not provided his 2020 tax return, if that has been completed,
show the total of his income up to March 2020 when he ceased employment, for the
reasons that I have set out above.
this was information within the Claimant's capacity to provide. His previous tax
returns that have been provided show an increasing
income each year, including
in the financial year in which the accident occurred.
those circumstances, I am satisfied that the appropriate allowance for past
economic loss should be the amount of the weekly statutory
benefits that the
Insurer previously paid. That would include an allowance for the taxation, paid
on those benefits, akin to a Fox
-v- Wood allowance.
raised this with the parties at the assessment conference and the Insurer
submitted that that was not an appropriate method by which
to assess the
Claimant's loss. It was submitted that the statutory benefits were paid under a
separate provision and the award for
past economic loss should be approached on
the basis that it had submitted including an allowance by way of a buffer. It
was submitted
that had those payments been by way of workers compensation, that
would not be the correct measure of loss for the purpose of a common
assessment.
accept that final submission but note that the Claimant's weekly statutory
benefits were paid by the Insurer for this claim and
pursuant to the
make those payments the Insurer would have calculated the Claimant's preaverage
weekly earnings and also made payments based
on the supply of Certificates of
Capacity. This would have been calculated at the time the loss was incurred. It
is, in my view,
the best evidence of the Claimant's absence from employment and
loss of earnings. I note also that pursuant to
sections 3.6
the payments made by the Insurer would not have been the full extent of the
Claimant's pre-accident weekly earnings.
Claimant maintained his claim for an award of $25,000.00, however in the absence
of the material that I have referred to above,
I am unable to make that
assessment.
81 Accordingly, the Claimant's award for past
economic loss will be an amount of $16,122.06. The Claimant is also entitled to
for loss of superannuation on the net value thereof, being an amount of
$13,670.06. I would allow a loss of superannuation on that
amount at the rate of
11%, which is an amount of $1 ,503.70. This will make a total award for past
economic loss of $17,625.76.
WHETHER THE CLAIMANT HAS AN ENTITLEMENT TO AND, IF SO, AN
APPROPRIATE AWARD FOR FUTURE ECONOMIC LOSS
Claimant claims a loss, based on an ongoing impairment of his earning capacity.
It is submitted that he has lost 50% of his residual
earning capacity and
estimates that he had an earning capacity, before the accident, of some
$70,000.00 per annum. He says his impairment
is therefore equivalent
$500.00 net per week and claims that until age 67. That amount on
the 5% Tables and after discount, produces a lump sum of just over
$376,000.00.
He seeks a loss of superannuation thereon in addition.
the assessment conference it was submitted on his behalf that if I was not
satisfied that a precise weekly loss could be identified,
then the Claimant's
impairment would still call for an award by way of a substantial buffer. It was
suggested a figure of about $300,000.00
would be appropriate. This is on the
basis that the Claimant was a young man with significant ongoing restrictions,
some of which
are solely the result of this accident.
Insurer submitted that the Claimant's work was largely sedentary and that the
majority medical opinion was that the Claimant could
have returned to this
employment and work on a full time basis. The Insurer highlighted that the
Claimant's inability to work now
was not related to his work capacity, as I have
already noted.
Insurer submitted that the medical records and the report of Dr Thomson, clearly
indicated that the Claimant had not made an almost
100% recovery from his
previous accident and that would need to be considered, as well as the fact that
the Claimant had not worked
on a full time basis in the past. The Insurer
submitted that no award should be made for any future economic loss or at best
should be by way of a modest buffer only.
have already set out the Claimant's work history and his studies.
Claimant told me that if he had not been injured he had planned
to return to Italy for a short period and then take another working
New Zealand, when his visa finished earlier this year. Neither was possible due
to the restrictions with COVID-19.
87 The Claimant was offered an employment position in Italy and I have been
provided with the letter of offer, which is in Italian,
and an English
translation thereof.
letter of offer of employment is from the Health Clinic Institute and dated 1
February 2020. The Plaintiff was offered a position
of Co-ordinator of Foreign
Markets commencing 1 March 2020. This was to be at a salary of €42,000.00
per year. The work was
to be in Rome.
Claimant told me at the assessment conference that the Clinic is actually
operated by his father and the position that he had
been offered was
predominantly administration but he understood there would be long hours and the
work would require prolonged periods
of standing. He was unsure that he could
manage that employment.
have noted that the Claimant continued to have not insignificant problems from
his motor vehicle accident in 2018 up to the time
of this accident. The Claimant
however said that he was making a good recovery and in part this was evidenced
by the fact that he
had returned to his former employments and only had a small
period off work after the first accident. This is confirmed by a Certificate
from Dr Tringali which indicated that the Claimant was unfit for three days
after the first accident and then had returned on suitable
duties. It is also
consistent with the Claimant's earnings increasing in that financial year, even
though the Claimant was absent
for employment following this accident. I also
note that whilst the Claimant consulted Dr Tingali regularly before this
there is no indication in those notes that the Claimant was not
working nor that Dr Tringali had recommended any periods off work
accordingly.
the Claimant saw Dr Thomson he told him that he had resumed normal duties and
performed these with variable pain. I have already
noted that Dr Thomson placed
some limitations on the Claimant's employment as a result of his injuries from
his first accident and
suggested that it would be better if he was restricted to
sedentary or semi-sedentary duties where he could sit or stand at will
heavier weights. He felt that subject to that he could undertake employment for
normal hours and days per week.
Bodel also noted that the Claimant had returned to his work before this accident
and that when he saw the Claimant in January 2020,
the Claimant was only
performing ten hours per week rather than the thirty hours per week that he used
to do at the Airport. He noted
that he had not been able to return to the
furniture removalist work.
Bode/ certified that the Claimant had a restricted capacity for employment from
the injuries sustained in this accident. He felt
he could work but needed to
avoid prolonged standing, bending, twisting or lifting and could not engage in
activities overhead. He
felt he could only work reduced hours. He said he would
not be fit for labouring type work but would be able to do customer service
that he was doing. He felt his ability to find work on the open labour market
had been compromised and that he would develop
post-traumatic osteoarthritis in
both knees and the right shoulder.
Barrett felt the Claimant was fit to continue his pre-accident employment as a
customer service officer on full hours without restriction.
He did not express a
view about other types of employment.
note that neither Dr Bode' nor Dr Barrett set out in their reports the full
duties that were required in the Claimant's employment
with DNATA. It does not
appear that either were aware of the full extent of the duties involved in that
role. I have already described
the Claimant's statement in this regard.
is supported by statements from some of the Claimant's co-workers, who were not
required for questioning at the assessment conference.
Blanca Tan has provided a statement dated 21 July 2020. She confirms that his
role, as was hers, involved pushing wheelchairs,
baggage handling, check-in and
processing of passengers. She said the Claimant was a fast worker and had a good
attitude to his work
but she noticed this changed after the subject accident.
She said this was because he had a lot of pain in his neck and right wrist.
said he couldn't carry bags when he was helping her, as she used to ask him to
do, when he previously worked next to her. She
said she had to ask for other
assistance. She said that she noticed he was in pain and that he complained of
pain in his knees and
shoulders as well.
Ms Nicola Grgic has provided a statement dated 17 July 2020. Ms Grgjc was the
Claimant's supervisor at DNATA and worked with him
for approximately three
described him as a valuable part of the work team and confirmed that part of his
duties involved handling baggage and pushing
wheelchairs.
said that after the accident the Claimant was placed on light duties because of
injuries to his wrist, knees and neck and he was
not able to fully perform his
duties in that he couldn't push wheelchairs nor help with baggage. She said that
uninjured the Claimant
would have been considered for a promotion, the next step
being a gate supervisor but that required a lot of closing and opening
aircraft doors and baggage handling and she felt his injuries prevented him from
pursuing that role.
said that without his visa restrictions she would have considered the Claimant
for full time work, uninjured.
Ms Amell Srour has provided a statement dated 20 July 2020. She worked with the
Claimant at DNATA for four and a half years and
is a service desk supervisor.
She also confirms that the Claimant had to assist with luggage and pushing
passengers in wheelchairs.
confirms the Claimant was a good worker but following his accident was unable to
pick up bags and this affected his work performance.
She also confirmed that he
would have been considered for the role of a gate supervisor.
am satisfied, therefore, that in expressing their views about the Claimant's
fitness for his pre-accident work with DNATA, neither
Dr Bodel nor Dr Barrett
fully understood the duties and the physical nature that that role
is also clear from the statements of the Claimant and his co-workers, which I
accept, that the Claimant had retumed to his normal
duties before this accident,
albeit with some pain, and his difficulties in performing the work principally
occurred following this
have already noted that the Claimant did not complete his studies and he told me
that he did not intend to undertake any further
studies in the future. He had
completed a degree in political science in Italy but he said he did that out of
interest and not with
a view to seeking employment in that area. That is
certainly confirmed as he has not undertaken any work in that area since
that degree. He told me, and I accept, that he has always preferred
employment that involved physical duties as he liked to exercise
and keep fit
and also be outdoors.
for the accident, I am satisfied that the Claimant would have continued both his
then occupations and had the opportunity to progress
with DNATA. It is said that
next role would have involved an increase in salary. I am also satisfied that
the Claimant would have
continued his travels, which he obviously enjoyed, and
in working holidays this would have been work of a more physical nature. The
Claimant himself had not made any firm view about where he would live and work
in the long term given that he had family in Italy
but also two brothers who
live in Sydney. That is not surprising in a young man of his age and with his
life experience to date.
the Claimant has not worked on a full time basis for much of the past, this has
been because of the restrictions on his visas.
I do not think that reflects on
his willingness or previous ability to undertake employment. I am satisfied that
but for the accident
and without a visa restriction, he could have obtained full
time employment and this was more likely to be of a physical type nature,
perhaps involving some clerical duties as well. Because of his injuries the
Claimant is now precluded from heavier physical
work and this will limit the
employment opportunities available to him. To some extent this is a residual
effect of his first accident
but predominantly the effect of this accident.
a result of this accident, I am satisfied therefore that the Claimant has an
impairment of his earning capacity which will be productive
of financial loss. I
do not think this can be calculated on a weekly basis and should be approached
by way of a cushion, as submitted
by the Insurer, but in my view a more than
modest cushion is appropriate.
Claimant is 31 years of age and has at least a 36 year working life expectancy.
He has permanent impairments from this accident
assessed by
Dr Barrett, sufficient for an award of non-economic loss, even after
consideration of his pre-accident impairments. In
the last financial year for
which I have a tax return (2019) I note the Claimant earned approximately
$50,000.00 gross even though
this was the financial year involving both of his
motor vehicle accidents. He clearly was capable of earning more than that,
and without the restrictions that his visa placed upon him.
all these matters into account, I am of the view that an appropriate amount to
compensate the Claimant for his future impairment
of earning capacity is a sum
of $150,000.00 which will include any allowance for loss of superannuation. In
saying that, I have not
considered a normal loss of superannuation as the
Claimant may not have continued to work in Australia and I am not aware of the
entitlements, if any, to such benefit that he may have had working in other
Assessment of Damages Summary
1 12. Under sub-section 7.36 (1) (b) of the
am required to make an assessment of the amount of damages that a court would be
likely to award.
1 13. I assess the claim as follows on the findings set out above:
Non-Economic Loss $250,000.00
Economic losses
loss of earnings (incl. superannuation and Fox v Wood) $17,625.76
loss of earnings (incl. superannuation) $150,000.00
TOTAL DAMAGES ASSESSED $417,625.76
114. The claimant's economic loss is to be reduced
by, and the insurer is to have credit for, the following payments in accordance
Section 3.6
payments $16,122.06
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
1 15. Pursuant to
section 7.37
, in making an
assessment and specifying damages in respect of a claim, I may include an
assessment of the Claimant's costs in the
1 16. The Claimant provided a schedule of disbursements and I discussed this
and the Claimant's costs with the parties at the assessment
conference.
1 17. I assess the Claimant's legal costs and disbursements in accordance
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
accordance with the attached sheet in the sum of $38,223.04.
1 18. The figures as shown represent the amounts agreed between the parties
or otherwise follow the event.
Philip Watson
Assessor, Delegate of the Principal Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Service
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (944 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter