URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2023/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Teo, Charles [2023] NSWMPSC 2 (12 July 2023)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation
MED0001058928
Date/s of Inquiry:
Monday 13 February 2023
Tuesday 14 February 2023
Wednesday 15
February 2023
Thursday 16 February 2023
Monday 20 February 2023
27 March 2023
Tuesday 28 March 2023
Wednesday 29 March 2023
written submissions dated 28 March 2023, 13 April 2023 and 28 April 2023
Committee members:
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
A/Prof Andrew Danks
A/Prof Michael
Ms Jennifer Houen
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Kate Richardson SC, with Ms M Caristo instructed by the Health Care
Complaints Commission.
Appearance for Dr Charles Teo:
Mr Matthew Hutchings, instructed by Makinson D’Apice
Date of decision:
12 July 2023
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to reprimand the practitioner and imposed conditions
registration as detailed in the decision.
Publication of decision:
A non-publication order was made on 13 February 2023 and the direction
continues as detailed in the decision.
Introduction
Charles Teo (the practitioner) is a neurosurgeon. In 2019 the Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC) received complaints about
two surgeries conducted
by the practitioner at Prince of Wales Private Hospital, Sydney on 24 October
2018 and 25 February 2019 respectively.
On 28 March 2022 the HCCC commenced
proceedings by way of a Complaint against the practitioner. The Complaint,
which has been amended,
and is now contained in a Second Amended Complaint dated
10 October 2022, and further amended in a minor manner during the hearing,
asserts that the practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
under s 139B (1) (a) and (l) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
(the National Law) in respect of those surgeries.
Complaint now asserts, in broad terms, that the practitioner inappropriately
carried out surgery on a 41-year -old woman, who
we will refer to as Patient A
in circumstances where the risks of the surgery outweighed the benefits.
Further, that he did not discuss
appropriately the risks of the proposed surgery
with the patient or obtain her proper consent to the surgery. Similar claims are
asserted in respect of a second patient (Patient B) as well as a claim of lack
of skill in carrying out surgery, and with an additional
complaint, that the
practitioner did not discuss his fees with the patient, or likely costs of
repatriation to her home state in
the event of an adverse outcome of the
surgery. It is also asserted the practitioner charged a fee of $35,000 to a
vulnerable patient
and used inappropriate language when speaking to Patient B
and her husband.
parties sought that these proceedings be conducted in a single hearing at which
we are required to make findings on the particulars
of the Complaint and to
determine what, if any, protective orders should be made.
HCCC sought that we reprimand the practitioner and impose conditions on his
registration. The practitioner sought that we should
conclude the proceedings
by not making any orders. This would result in the removal the existing
conditions on his registration,
or if we found the complaint established, that
we impose a caution.
the reasons which follow, we have found the practitioner guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. We have determined that
the practitioner
should be reprimanded and that some conditions should be placed on his
registration.
practitioner obtained the degrees of MB.BS from the University of New South
Wales in 1981 and he was first registered in New South
Wales in that
practitioner has been a fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
since 1993.
2015 the practitioner was appointed Conjoint Professor at the University of New
South Wales. In the same year he was appointed
as Consulting Professor, Duke
University Medical Center, USA. The practitioner no longer holds an appointment
at the University of
New South Wales.
2016 the practitioner was appointed Professor Honoris Causa, Hanoi Medical
University, Vietnam.
practitioner’s curriculum vitae discloses that he holds memberships in
professional and scientific societies in Australia
internationally.
the time of the surgeries the practitioner had operating rights at Prince of
Wales Private Hospital (the Hospital). He was
director of the Centre of
Minimally Invasive Surgery.
proceedings
conducted under s 150 of the National Law by the Medical
Council of New South Wales (the Council) on 24 August 2021 conditions were
placed on the practitioner’s registration. The conditions were amended by
the Council on 6 September 2021. The conditions require
the practitioner, prior
to performing recurrent malignant intracranial tumour and brain stem tumour
surgery, to first obtain a signed
statement from a Council approved neurosurgeon
of not less than 20 years’ experience which supports the proposed surgery
secondly to practise under Level C supervision in accordance with the
Council’s Compliance Policy.
The relevant law
allegations of unsatisfactory professional conduct in the Complaint rely on s
139B (1) (a) and s 139B (1) (l). Section 139B (1)
(a) and (l) provide as
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following —
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner's profession.
3B of the National Law (formerly s 3A) sets out the objective and guiding
principle of the legislation. It provides:
In the exercise of functions under a NSW provision, the protection of the
health and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration.
relevant is s 3A (2) (c). The latter guiding principle of the legislation states
that restrictions are only to be imposed on
a health profession if it is
necessary to ensure health services are provided safely and are of an
appropriate quality. A health
service is defined in s 5 to include a service
provided by a health practitioner.
reaching our decision we had regard to evidence given by all witnesses, both lay
and expert, as well as that of the practitioner,
and to the documents listed in
Annexure “A” of these reasons.
the rules of evidence do not apply to the admission of evidence in these
proceedings, we determined the complaints on the
civil standard of proof having
regard to the serious nature of the complaints before us and the consequences
for the practitioner
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Neat Holdings Pty Lt v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd.
the hearing, and in written submissions subsequently provided, the parties
raised issues relating to the rules of evidence
including the application of the
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67 in these type of proceedings and
issues relating to credit.
observe that these are disciplinary proceedings under the National Law. Clause 2
of Schedule 5D provides:
In proceedings before it, a Committee or the Tribunal is not bound to observe
the rules of law governing the admission of evidence,
but may inform itself of
any matter in the way it thinks fit.
accept as relevant to our factual findings the rule in
Browne v Dunn
the rule is essentially directed to procedural fairness and we adopt with
respect Brereton JA’s explanation of the rule in
Ghosh v Medical
Council of New South Wales
[2020] NSWCA 122
[2023] NSWCA 68
We have, where appropriate, made credit findings with an emphasis on
contemporaneous documents. When dealing with asserted analogies
to criminal
proceedings, the manner of conducting a case and a practitioner’s insight,
we have had careful regard to Leeming
JA’s discussion on this topic in
Gautam v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2021] NSWCA 85
Issues in dispute
discern the following broad issues are in dispute in these proceedings:
a) Was the practitioner’s judgment flawed in recommending surgery to
Patient A and in the case of Patient B in performing the
b) Did Patient A and B (or either of them) understand the nature and risks of
the proposed surgery and give a proper consent to it?
c) Did the practitioner breach the privacy of another patient?
d) Did Patient B understand the financial costs involved in the surgery?
e) Was the sum of $35,000 charged to Patient B proper in the circumstances?
f) Were Patients A and B told at the time they consented to surgery that if it
resulted in an adverse surgical outcome, they would
be required to incur
additional expenses (repatriation to Western Australia and Victoria
respectively) and additional hospital and
medical expenses?
g) If unsatisfactory professional conduct is established, what, if any,
conditions should be placed on the practitioner’s registration.
The complaints
complete copy of the Complaint (as amended) is annexed to these reasons and
marked as Annexure “B”. We also annex,
as Annexure “C”
a copy of the practitioner’s Reply to the Complaint dated 25 November
the time Patient A consulted the practitioner she was a 41year-old married woman
and the mother of three children the youngest
of whom was then aged 6 years (or
as noted in some hospital records aged 5 years).
A was diagnosed with a brainstem tumour in October 2018 by Professor Christopher
Lind (Professor Lind) at St John of God Hospital,
Subiaco, WA following CT scans
and MRI of her brain. These investigations disclosed a 19 x 18 x 22mm dorsal
mid-brain mass involving
the tectum and cerebral peduncle, most likely a tectal
plate glioma. An MRI performed on 2 October 2018 is reported as showing an
infiltrating tumour involving the tectum, inferiorly abutting the superior
margin of the vermis and superiorly indenting the posterior
margin of the third
ventricle totally occluding the aqueduct and extending into the thalami
bilaterally. A biopsy performed by Professor
Lind on 3 October 2018 confirmed a
tectal mid-brain tumour H3K27M-mutant diffuse glioma, WHO Grade IV, putative
ATRX mutation present,
MGMT hypermethylation not detected.
Lind’s records disclose that he did not recommend surgical resection of
the tumour at that stage on the basis such
surgery would be “high risk for
causing neurological deficits without significantly improving her long-term
Patient A was referred by Professor Lind to a radiation
oncologist and a medical oncologist.
A, and her husband obtained a second opinion from Mr Stephen Lewis, Neurosurgeon
at Perth Neurology on 22 October 2018. Mr
Lewis did not recommend
A and her husband travelled to Sydney where they consulted the practitioner on
23 October 2018.
A underwent surgery at the Hospital on the following day (24 October 2018). The
practitioner was assisted by his Fellow,
Dr Amit Goyal (Dr Goyal). Following
the surgery, the patient was transferred to ICU and was unresponsive to any
A remained as an inpatient at the Hospital for approximately 3 weeks. Her
condition did not improve, and arrangements were
made by her husband for
transfer to Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth where she remained in a substantially
unconscious state until her
death on 5 April 2019.
1 November 2018 the practitioner and Dr Goyal left Sydney to travel to India.
Dr Goyal returned to Sydney on 7 November 2018 and
the practitioner returned
late in the evening of 18 November 2018. Patient A and Patient A’s
husband (who we will describe
as Person C) were informed by the practitioner of
his planned Indian visit at the consultation on 23 October
25 March 2019 Dr Michael Levitt, Chief Medical Officer of WA Health System
lodged a complaint with the HCCC in which he asserted
that the practitioner
“offered and provided surgery to a patient that is not in accordance with
contemporary evidence for best
care for the patient’s presenting
condition”.
Lay evidence
27 November 2019, Person C provided a statement to the HCCC. Person C gave oral
evidence via audio visual link (AVL) from Perth.
his statement, after setting out the chronology of events relevant to his wife
up to their consultation with Mr Lewis, Person C
explained that this specialist
said he could operate, but surgery would be risky and was likely to have an
impact on Patient A’s
quality of life.
C recorded that, following this consultation, Patient A, who had read about the
practitioner, decided to travel to Sydney to
consult him. Person C sent Patient
A’s scans to the practitioner prior to the consultation.
C reports that when he and his wife consulted the practitioner shortly before
lunch on 23 October 2018 that the practitioner
told them the tumour was a
“bad cancer in a bad area” and that “he emphasised how
aggressive the cancer was”.
Person C also reports that the practitioner
told him “other surgeons would not operate, but it’s not for me or
doctor to decide what’s an acceptable quality of life for
someone else post-surgery”.
the representations Person C says the practitioner made, in summary, were:
a) removal of the tumour may buy Person A more time possibly up to two years,
and in that time, there may be more research into brain
cancer and that Patient
A might make it a goal to be at their 6 year old son’s 18
b) that he (the practitioner) had performed more than 10,000 brain surgeries and
12 had “gone wrong”;
c) that there was a very low risk of death;
d) that he would need to remove 95% of the tumour;
e) there was a 50 per cent chance that Patient A would end up with wonky eyes or
double vision, but this possibly would get better
f) that there was a risk (estimated at 5%) of death, paralysis, or locked in
g) there was no need to make a decision “on the spot” but he was
going to India at the end of the week for a couple of
weeks and he could
postpone one of his other cases and operate the next morning;
h) in response to a request by Patient A and Person C for time to think about
the surgery the practitioner said “yes”
but told them if the surgery
was to occur the following day scans and paperwork could need to be completed
that afternoon.
leaving the consultation the practitioner introduced Patient A and Person C to a
teenage girl in the waiting room. The girl was
wearing glasses for double
vision. Person C says that the practitioner said, “here’s a good
example of successful brain
stem surgery”.
C made a contemporaneous note of the practitioner’s advice during the
consultation. He recorded “95% removal of
the tumour”.
“Complications -wonky eyes, double vision, one eye closed, tingling
down(low) side 50%.” “in
time will get better”. On separate
lines, but grouped together with brackets, he recorded “death, paralyzed,
in – paralasise (sic) low 5%. Immediately after this entry Person
C recorded 100.
C was extensively cross-examined by counsel for the practitioner. He was not
shaken in his evidence about matters recorded
in his contemporaneous file note.
He did concede other matters were discussed at the consultation, but said his
note covered the
main points.
we later discuss when considering the particulars of the Complaint relevant to
Patient A, we accept Person C accurately recorded
the practitioner’s
explanation risks of paralysis, locked in syndrome and death at 5%. We do not
find that his entry of 100
related to a risk of paralysis as asserted by the
practitioner. We find Person C’s explanation of 100 meaning a complete
of risks discussed to be credible.
found Person C’s evidence that his wife was desperate, rather than highly
motivated, to seek any treatment she could for
her condition [transcript 13
February 2023 p 62-63] provides an accurate reflection of this patient’s
emotional state at the
time of the consultation. While we find that Person
C’s record of 5% of risks is accurate, it is likely that he and Patient
misunderstood that these risk factors enunciated by the practitioner were
qualified as risk factors associated with all brain surgery.
We note in his
cross-examination he responded to a question about 5% risk of death
Yes, which I think most surgeries do have an element, whether its knee
surgery, brain surgery. I think most surgeries have an element
of risk. But
brain surgery obviously more so we considered that to be quite low [transcript
13 February 2023 p 64].
accept and prefer Person C’s explanation of the recording of 100 to that
of the practitioner, who we find did not have a
specific recollection of this
topic, but rather sought to offer an alternate explanation for the entry.
also accept and prefer Person C’s evidence to that of the practitioner of
the circumstances in which a return to Western
Australia was discussed. We are
fortified in our conclusion because we are satisfied that the
practitioner’s recollection
is unlikely in the context of his advice to
Patient A and Person C that he and Dr Goyal were shortly to travel to India. We
note the discrepancies in the practitioner’s statements (which we
summarise below) about a return being discussed with family
members, or to see
her children. We also note, as also discussed below, the unreliability of Dr
Goyal’s recollections of discussions
occurring before and post-surgery. We
find the advice of the proposed Indian visit must have increased the pressure on
to make a decision about the surgery on the day of the consultation.
We do not find that the practitioner told Patient A she could
Australia to see her children on the basis that if the surgery was unsuccessful,
she may never see them again.
Rather, we accept Person C’s evidence that
he and his wife were told by the practitioner that they “could go home and
return later, but we are going to India next at [the] end of the week and
we’ll be there for some time. And time is of the
[transcript 13 February 2023 p 81].
The evidence of Dr Goyal
Amit Goyal was a neurosurgeon working with the practitioner as a Fellow in 2018.
He is presently a neurosurgeon at a facility in
Goyal provided a witness statement for the HCCC dated 11 February 2020.
Following a telephone interview on 6 December 2019 with
a HCCC investigator, a
draft statement was forwarded to Dr Goyal. This draft statement was extensively
amended by Dr Goyal and returned
to the HCCC (the initial
statement).
Goyal provided a “Supplementary statement” to the
practitioner’s lawyers dated 24 August 2022.
Goyal met Patient A and her husband at the end of their consultation with the
practitioner who called him into the room. He states
he was probably in the room
for 2-3 minutes. He recollects that the practitioner did not go into a lot of
detail about risk of the
surgery while he was in the room. However, he says he
recollects the practitioner emphasising how risky the surgery was, “and
him telling them that the operation could leave [Patient A] in a vegetative
Goyal says he recollects the practitioner gave Patient A and Person C the option
of going back to Western Australia to see their
children before proceeding with
the surgery. He refers to a conversation using words the following
If you’re going to have surgery, it needs to happen sooner rather than
later. But is ok if you want to go back home for a week
or two first, just in
case the operation doesn’t allow you to do that”.
Goyal said he discussed the nature of the surgery to be performed with the
practitioner later that afternoon.
his supplementary statement Dr Goyal refers to quite extensive conversations
between the practitioner and Patient A and her husband.
However, when cross
examined on his supplementary statement, Dr Goyal conceded, first, that he was
unable to separate out conversations
between the practitioner and Patient A and
Person C which occurred in his presence and secondly conversations he had when
the practitioner
explained to him what he had said to Patient A and her husband.
Thirdly, he went on to say, “I think it also includes conversations
had with the family after surgery and I can’t tell you which was what
now”. When pressed to distinguish between
the time frame of the
conversations. Dr Goyal candidly admitted he would be guessing. Ultimately, Dr
Goyal conceded that his first
statement was likely to be the most accurate
version of events. We accept that to be the case.
is relevant when we come to discuss Particular 1 of Complaint One (which relates
to benefits/risks of the surgery) that we record
Dr Goyal’s statement
Charlie and I discussed [Patient A’s] case in more detail later that
day, after the consultation. The big thing we discussed
was the fact that her
tumour was predominantly on one side of the midbrain. As such, the goal of the
surgery was to remove as much
of the tumour from only one side (the right side
in this case) in order to achieve as close to 95% resection as possible because
this is believed to be the extent of resection that can improve patient
prognosis. The rationale for the surgery was that by being
aggressive on one
side (right) of the midbrain in order to remove as much of the tumour as
possible and in the process not touching
the other (left) side, it is likely and
hopeful that the other side (left) would be able to compensate for any deficits
was injury to the affected (right) side. Charlie explained that
it’s better to leave some of the tumour behind if necessary,
in order to
avoid compromising the less-affected side of the midbrain.
Expert evidence
parties relied on expert evidence in these proceedings. In respect of the
“technical” or medical evidence, the HCCC
relied on its expert,
A/Professor Andrew Morokoff and the practitioner relied on evidence of Professor
Bryant Stokes. The practitioner
relied on an additional expert in respect of
Patient B, namely, Professor Paul D’Urso. In respect of ethical issues the
relied, in the case of the HCCC, on the evidence of Professor Paul
Komesaroff and the practitioner relied on reports of Dr Glen Farrow
Christopher Ryan. Unfortunately, Dr Farrow was unable to attend the hearing due
to illness. His report was received into
evidence subject to the caveat that we
would have regard to the fact that the matters in the report were not challenged
in cross-examination.
experts did not meet in conclave prior to the hearing or provide a report of
matters on which they agreed and matters on which
they disagreed. Each expert
provided a report/s based on assumed facts and questions posed by their
respective lawyers.
further note that while some challenges as to expertise were raised at early
directions hearings, by the date of the hearing no
expert’s qualifications
or expertise was subject to challenge.
is unnecessary that we extensively summarise the content of each expert report,
rather we highlight matters which assumed relevance
at the hearing and are
relevant to the particulars of the Complaint.
A/Professor Morokoff
A/Professor
Morokoff provided a report about Patient A dated 26 March 2020 (and a report
concerning Patient B of the same date).
He provided supplementary reports dated
3 October 2022 and 19 January 2023. During the course of the hearing
A/Professor Morokoff
was provided with post-operative MRI slides of Patient A
and he provided an additional report which was received into evidence on
March 2023, and he gave further oral evidence on that day. A/Professor Morokoff
also provided a report dated 22 March 2023 on
a bundle of literature provided by
the practitioner’s lawyers. He also gave oral evidence about the
literature on 27 March
his initial report, A/Professor Morokoff referred to the specific risks
associated with a brainstem glioma and noted general risks
including a risk of
prolonged coma, vegetative state or death. He stated, “whilst normally
very low risk, is particularly
high risk with any surgery involving the
brainstem”. A/Professor Morokoff went on to explain that “In
general, the risks
with operating on the brainstem are very high, which is why
it is rarely done”.
asked to comment on the appropriateness of Patient A’s surgery,
A/Professor Morokoff explained that, in his opinion, the
surgery with the aim of
achieving a radical resection of Patient A’s tumour should not have been
done at all.
A/Professor
Morokoff opined that although it would be very commendable to discuss
significant logistical, financial and emotional
challenges with a patient in the
event of an adverse outcome that he did not believe that these factors
“should absolutely
be part of the consent process for brain
responding to the question of whether it was appropriate for the practitioner to
have operated on Patient A’s brain tumour,
A/Professor Morokoff opined
that he did not believe it was appropriate to operate with the aim of achieving
a clinical resection
on Patient A’s tumour.
A/Professor
Morokoff provides a critique of published articles referred to by the
practitioner in his response. He also opines:
Considering [Patient A’s] particular case, there are imaging features
that also argue against radical resection. In fact the
tumour was not
‘focal’ because there were T2 signal changes on MRI extending well
beyond the midbrain tectum, into the
cerebral peduncies and thalamus on both
sides. Therefore a > 95% reduction would certainly not even be possible, let
alone beneficial.
asserts that tumour was not focal even by the practitioner’s own published
definition.
gravamen of A/Professor Morokoff’s opinion of Patient A’s surgery is
found at page 9 of his report. Having referred
to the “international
consensus” for treating these type of brainstem tumours is by the
obtaining of a biopsy and then
treatment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, he
concludes that the
of the surgery by the practitioner on
Patient A was below (but not significantly below) the standard expected of a
practitioner with
an equivalent level of training or experience. He opines
“Instead, Dr Teo should not have operated”. In other words,
conclude that A/Professor Morokoff’s opines the practitioner’s skill
in performing the surgery was below standard,
but not significantly below.
However, he opines the practitioner’s
in carrying out the
surgery miscarried because he should not have operated at all. This is
consistent with his answer to the question
posed by the HCCC to provide his
opinion as to whether it was appropriate to operate on [Patient A] tumour, and
his response that
“I do not believe it was appropriate to operate
the aim of achieving a radical resection
on [Patient A’s]
tumour.[original emphasis].
dealing with the issue of “informed consent”, based on Person
C’s version of events, A/Professor Morokoff opines
that describing the
risk of death, paralysis or locked in syndrome at 5% would be “falsely
low”. However, he opines
“from all the statements it is likely this risk was explained but not
enough as to how high a risk was, and the practitioner’s
conduct fell below the standard expected [but not substantially
his initial report, A/Professor Morokoff is not unduly critical of the
practitioner’s reporting letter noting it is not inconsistent
standard neurological practice.
A/Professor
Morokoff is extremely critical of the practitioner’s action in introducing
Patient A to another young patient in
the waiting room and the practitioner
describing the other patient as “a good example of successful brain stem
He refers the practitioner’s conduct in this regard as
significantly below the requisite standard.
A/Professor
Morokoff did not express any criticism for the practitioner delegating Patient
A’s post operative care to Dr Goyal.
page 13 of his report, A/Professor Morokoff captured, in many ways, the essence
or underlying philosophical debate in these proceedings
surgery. He first refers to what he describes as the “more traditional
‘paternalistic’ view”
that surgeons are trusted professionals
who should advise the best treatment options that are likely to have the most
benefits with
the least risks and later refers to the
Royal Australasian
College of Surgeons Code of Conduct
(2016) which provides:
A surgeon will ...not directly or indirectly perform or encourage
indiscriminate or unnecessary medical interventions.
A/Professor
Morokoff goes on to describe the second view or approach (which he notes the
practitioner appears to take) is that the
surgeon “is merely a service
provider who should offer what
be done (rather than guide what
be done) and the patient is free and willing to decide what they
want” [original emphasis]. He points out that patients with
brain cancer
are often desperate to try any therapy offered to them.
A/Professor
Morokoff sums up his view about the surgery on Patient A, and her consent to it
as follows:
If treatment options such as the radical surgery in this case are offered,
with over emphasised benefits of prolonged survival and
under-emphasised risks,
especially when the risks include a high chance of death or prolonged coma, then
I don’t believe real
informed consent has been obtained. In my opinion,
surgeons should not offer and should not perform surgery that is futile and high
risk, just because the patient ‘willingly’ consented to it.
A/Professor
Morokoff opines, in the case of Patient A, that the practitioner had encouraged
an unnecessary medical intervention and
therefore was conduct which fell below
the standard reasonably expected.
his report dated 22 March 2022 Professor Morokoff responded to two questions
posed to him regarding the additional bundle literature
relied on by the
practitioner. He was first asked to comment on whether the literature supported
the view that radiological characteristics
are first, often unreliable markers
of malignancy and secondly, are often insufficient to enable definitive
classification of a tumour
as focal or diffuse. He was also asked whether there
was growing evidence that there is a prolonged survival and quality of life
benefits in patients following radical resection of brain stem
A/Professor
Morokoff explained that he agreed with “the (rather vague) statement that
radiological characteristics (based on
CT or MRI imaging or similar) of brain
tumours are often unreliable markers of malignancy”. He explained a proper
determination
of malignancy requires surgical biopsy and histopathological
examination of tissue for definitive diagnosis.
A/Professor
Morokoff disagrees with the statement “radiological characteristics are
often insufficient to enable definitive
classification of a tumour as focal or
diffuse and opines “I think this is a much easier question to determine on
imaging than
‘malignancy’ as in question (i) and much more amenable
to imaging diagnosis”. He notes that “Focal tumour
usually implies
a low grade or benign lesion and implies that it is more amenable to surgical
complete resection, with better long-term
survival and lower risk of
recurrence”.
A/Professor
Morokoff opines that there is very little good evidence for the benefit of
surgery for BSG [brain stem gliomas]. He notes
no randomised control study
exists to answer this question. A/Professor Morokoff points out that while
there is a fairly strong
growing body of evidence that complete surgical
resection for
supratentorial
glioblastoma in adults is beneficial in
terms of survival, but then explains there are two main reasons why it is not
appropriate
to apply supratentorial glioblastoma evidence to BSG. He reports
that BSG surgical resection is in a much higher risk area compared
supratentorial lobes, and that “it is known that if a patient sustains
major neurological deficits or complications,
their survival will be severely
compromised, even if the tumour itself is treated successfully”. The
second reason proffered
by A/Professor Morokoff is because BSG are a different
A/Professor
Morokoff comments on a paper by the practitioner in 2008 (
Review of 34
paediatric cases of BSG who underwent attempt at radical resection with survival
– Teo and Siu 2008
) noting that the authors analysed 33 BSG patients
and showed that the extent of resection did not influence survival and 21% of
high grade BSG patients had worse outcomes postoperatively.
is also made on the practitioner’s study (
Review of 77 BSG cases
operated by Teo with survival and complication outcomes – Faulker, Teo et
). It is noted that these patients were mostly paediatric and that
survival was better with near total or GTR resection compared
to biopsy or
subtotal resection. A/Professor Morokoff notes the small number of biopsy
patients only (3) and states “Again,
the grade/histopathology was the
major factor predicting survival”. He notes this study too was not
randomised.
A/Professor
Morokoff concludes his report on the literature noting “In summary there
is very weak evidence that radical resection
of brainstem glioma benefits
survival”. He goes on to opine:
The evidence for radical resection of high grade (diffuse) brainstem glioma
in adults is extremely limited and suggests that GTR/radical
resection is rarely
attempted or achievable, likely associated with high risk of neurological
morbidity and has an unclear survival
his supplementary report dated 19 February 2023 A/Professor Morokoff comments on
Patient A’s post-operative MRI scans which
were only produced midway
through the hearing. He states that “all of the enhancing part of the
tumour in the tectum was resected
and also a margin around that”. Slides
produced by A/Professor Morokoff showed the areas of tumour resected in yellow
A/Professor Morokoff also explains that tissue from both sides of the
mid-brain was resected.
Professor Bryant Stokes
Stokes was asked to respond to specific questions concerning the surgery
conducted by the practitioner on Patient A including
whether the proposition
that “[t]he risk of neurological morbidity associated with radical (>
95%) resection of high grade
brainstem gliomas in adults far outweighs any
potential benefits was correct”. He provided a report dated 3 August 2020.
the course of the hearing Professor Stokes was also asked to comment on
Patient A’s post-operative MRI scans. He provided
a supplementary report
dated 27 March 2023 and gave further oral evidence about that report on 28 March
second question posed to Professor Stokes in his initial report
Is the proposition that “The radiological imaging demonstrates T2
signal changes existing well beyond the midbrain tectum into
the cerebral
peduncies and thalamus on both sides, meaning that a >95% reduction would not
even have been possible in this case”
Stokes noted the information given by the practitioner in support his decision
to operate was “to reduce the bulk
of the tumour in order that there may
be further improvement with radiotherapy”. Professor Stokes explained
did not gain the impression that he was going to attempt to
totally remove the tumour in view of its invasion into the basal ganglia”.
He goes on to explain, by reference to the operation report, the practitioner
“stayed within the tumour itself and did not
come across normal brain
tissue”. He opines this fact was important and that he considered it was
appropriate for a practitioner
of the experience of the practitioner to
“consider this procedure”.
commenting on the proposition of risk associated with a >95% reduction of a
tumour in the brainstem, Professor Stokes opined
“95% reduction of this
tumour would have carried a very high risk of mortality as well as
morbidity”. He explains “it
can be very difficult to differentiate
between oedema and tumour”. He again goes on to refer to the operation
report explaining,
based on that report, that the practitioner had stayed within
the tumour, and that this fact was important.
discussing “informed consent”, and by reference a statement of
assumed facts provided to him, he opined that the practitioner
reasonable steps to obtain Patient A’s informed consent. He also agreed
with A/Professor Morokoff’s opinion
reporting letter (being the letter dated 25 October 2018).
Stokes in his report dated 27 March 2023 deals with Patient A’s
post-surgery MRI scans. He responds to questions
posed by the
practitioner’s lawyers as to first, what parts of the tumour were
resected, secondly whether tissue from both
sides of the midbrain was resected,
or not, and whether he would describe the resection as a radical resection of
the enhancing part
of the tumour.
Stokes opines that the parts of the tumour which were resected were in the
tectum “and there is no evidence that the
tegmentum was entered into on
either side of the midbrain”. Professor Stokes also states that
“[t]he resection of the
tectal mass was quite radical and complete and
there is no sign of bleeding or haemorrhage in the cavity”. He does not
the second question posed about whether or not tumour from both sides of
the brain was resected.
Stokes did not provide any expert evidence on the literature selected by the
practitioner.
Medical Expert first conclave at the hearing concerning Patient A.
A/Professor
Morokoff and Professor Stokes gave oral evidence concurrently and answered
questions posed by each party’s counsel.
Their evidence was given
either expert had the opportunity to view Patient A’s
post-operative MRI scans as these had not been located at the time of
conclave. As a consequence, we note their evidence, which was limited to
pre-operative scans, only provides a “course”
assessment of Patient
A’s tumour.
experts agreed that the diagnosis of Patient A’s tumour was that of a
high-grade brainstem glioma (BSG) and that it was
a tectal glioma. Both experts
agreed the tumour extended into both thalami.
Stokes, on viewing Patient A’s pre-operative slides, and when asked if 95%
of the tumour was on the right-hand side
of the brain, said it was impossible to
give a percentage “but certainly a significant component is in the tectum
just 80%. But I couldn’t say 95% because the ganglia may well
contain tumour cells”. [transcript 15 February 2023 p 16]
A/Professor
Morokoff did not agree that 95% of the tumour was in the right side and opined
that it was more of a midline tumour (60/40
right compared to left or 70/30 but
definitely not 95) and that the tumour was outside the tectum. Professor Stokes
agreed that the
tumour was mainly midline, but certainly not 94% confined to the
questioned by counsel for the practitioner, Professor Stokes confirmed that the
tumour was centred in, but not limited to the
tectum, and into the thalami and
explained “there is hardly any tumour in the tegmentum”. He later
confirmed the tumour
“looks to be creeping into the tegmentum as
well” but said that the vast majority of the tumour was centred in the
asked to comment on scans taken approximately one month after the initial scans,
both experts agreed that the tumour was then
crossing the mid-line of the
experts agreed with the opinion in A/Professor Morokoff’s report that the
pre-operative T2 scans revealed the tumour extended
well beyond the mid brain
tectum into the cerebral peduncies and thalamus on both sides.
Stokes opined that the pre-operative scans demonstrated that the tumour was no
longer focal in the mid-brain. He explained
that the tumour had started off as
a focal tumour “but it’s no longer a focal tumour in these
scans”. He agreed
with the description of the tumour as a diffuse tumour.
Both experts agreed that the tumour had gone well beyond being a focal
experts explained that an MRI could not definitively distinguish between oedema
and tumour.
experts agreed that Patient A’s tumour was not focal and did not meet the
definition of a focal BSG (as defined in a published
paper authored by the
practitioner) and that a description of the tumour to a patient as focal would
not be accurate.
important matters agreed on by the experts in their oral evidence
a) that the only prudent assumption to make about the region of abnormal signal
on the MRI scans (dark on T1 weighted scans and white
on T2 weighted scans) that
lies beyond the enhancing region of a high-grade glioma is that this region
contains tumour, not just
b) the enhancing area of the tumour was focal, but the enhancing area was only a
small part of the overall tumour, and that the tumour
as a whole was diffuse;
c) that biopsy of Patient A’s tumour, being a WHO grade four tumour (high
grade glioma) indicated a highly malignant aggressive
tumour with poor
d) It is accepted the H3K27M mutation now associated with high grade diffuse
midline gliomas (biomarker) does not necessarily determine
that a tumour is
diffuse. However, the biomarker in this case, did not detract from the
experts’ opinion that Patient A’s
tumour was diffuse;
e) that there had been a radical resection of the tumour (based only on
post-operative CT imaging);
f) that a radical resection of Patient A’s tumour (being a diffuse
infiltrating tumour which had crossed the mid-line of the
brain) would have
carried a very high risk of mortality as well as morbidity;
g) that there is no high-quality level one or two literature to guide decision
making in BSG in adults and that literature (referred
to in A/Professor
Morokoff’s report) was not apposite to the facts in this case;
if a surgeon described the risk of profound neurological deficit from Patient
A’s proposed surgery at 5% that would be
“extremely underestimating
actual risk” and a 15% risk would also be falsely low;
j) that describing the risk for craniotomies in general as a risk of 5%
morbidity would be accurate;
k) that staying within the margin of a tumour depended on the skill of the
the risk of neurological morbidity associated with a radical resection of a
high-grade brainstem glioma in an adult far outweighs
any potential
m) that having regard to Patient A’s tumour, and assuming what was done
was a radical resection, to tell a patient that there
were potential benefits of
the surgery would not be supported by statistical data, medical literature or
clinical guidelines;
n) that Dr Goyal’s statement describing the goal of the surgery was not
supportable (the statement was “nonsense”
according to Professor
Stokes); and
o) that a risk of the surgery (given the biology and location of the tumour) of
neurological deficit actually reduces survival itself.
Medical evidence – second tranche of medical evidence
Unfortunately,
A/Professor Morokoff and Professor Stokes were unavailable to give evidence in
conclave about what Patient A’s
post MRI scans revealed because, as noted
above, the post-operative MRI scans were not produced until midway through the
A/Professor
Morokoff was recalled on 27 February 2023. He explained that on one
post-operative slide he had outlined in yellow the
right side of the tectum and
the green outline was on the left side. This, he said, showed there had been a
resection of both sides
of the brain. The outline in yellow showed a small part
of the posterior thalamus was removed.
response to a question from A /Professor Murphy about whether the practitioner
went into normal brain, A/Professor Morokoff explained:
I would not, I wouldn’t say it’s normal brain, but he’s
gone into the area of the T2 or flair abnormality that is
part of the diffuse
extension of the tumour up into the thalami on both sides ...
response to another question from A/Professor Murphy about whether he (Professor
Morokoff) would consider this surgery reasonable,
A/Professor Morokoff
I would think in this area it would be highly risky and probably unreasonable
to go beyond the enhancing part of the tumour, especially
in this location, yes,
I think the strategy is more acceptable in the super tentorial brain when
we’re talking about globus
pallidus in the upper brain in non-health
areas. But in this area, going beyond the enhancing part of the tumour, I would
highly risky [transcript 27 March 2023 p 15],
response to a question from counsel for the practitioner, A/Professor Morokoff
agreed it was possible to unintentionally stray
beyond the boundary of the
enhancing part of the tumour.
questioned by senior counsel for the HCCC about whether the slides showed that
the practitioner did not stay on one side of the
midline, A/Professor Morokoff
He did not stay on one side of the midline, yes. Yeah, so I mean, there is no
clear anatomical midline in that region. There’s
nothing that tells you
this is the midline. It’s just all brain tissue. But in his resection
he’s definitely included
both right and left side, yes [transcript 27
March 2023 p 17].
asked to comment on Professor Stokes’ opinion that the practitioner had
only operated on the tectal component of the tumour
and did not appear to have
operated on the tegmentum and there was no evidence of surgery in the basal
ganglia, A/Professor Morokoff
said he “disagreed slightly” and went
on to explain: “I agree he’s removed the tectal component of the
I agree he hasn’t operated on the tegmentum, that’s the
anterior part of the brain, but as I showed on the scan, I think
he has strayed
slightly into the posterior thalamus, which is technically part of the basal
ganglia but only to a small degree”.
Expert evidence – ethical consent
Professor Paul A Komesaroff
Komesaroff provided expert reports dated 15 and 19 June 2020 and a supplementary
report dated 30 August 2022. The supplementary
report is essentially a critique
of Dr Christopher Ryan’s report (Dr Ryan’s report is summarised
his report dated 19 June 2020 Professor Komesaroff provides generalised
information about ethical and practical considerations
involved in the consent
process and later addresses specific questions relevant to Patient
Komesaroff responds to a generalised question posed by the HCCC in its
instructions to him namely “What action/s should
be taken by a
neurosurgeon in order to obtain informed consent from a patient prior to
undertaking significant brain tumour surgery?”
Komesaroff refers to consent being a process and he summarises key points as
a) that consent is a process; rather than a single momentary event;
b) that it is context specific;
c) that it can vary with time and place;
d) that the quality, mode of presentation and context of the information
provided may be critical for determining its outcomes;
e) that it may be subject to cultural, affective, religious or other variables;
f) that competence or capacity to decide exists on a continuum and, in a
particular setting, can be complete, partial or limited.
Komesaroff later opines that, because of “the complexity of the entire
process, especially where the issues are serious
ones, an extended period of
time may be required for a valid consent process to be
completed”.
page 8 of this report, Professor Komesaroff lists “the obligations of the
surgeon” as including, in summary, the following:
a) conduct of an assessment of the patient’s ability to understand and
remember relevant facts and weigh up relevant matters;
b) provide all relevant information about the patient’s condition;
c) the available surgical options (including avoiding or withholding
d) the likely consequences of each option with a degree of probability
associated with the consequences and other relevant factors
(which may be
material to the patient such as physical consequences of the proposed surgery,
effects on or implications for relationships
financial costs and other matters).
Komesaroff stresses that factual information must be provided in a manner that
is not unduly coloured by the surgeon’s
personal beliefs, biases or
personality “but rather facilitates a reflective conversation with the
patient about the decisions
that may need to be made”. At pages 8 and 9
of his report, Professor Komesaroff sets out, in bullet point form, a more
non exhaustive list of considerations that must be taken into account
in the consent process. He opines that, if all the criteria
have been taken
into account, and then a decision is made to go ahead with surgery, that there
will have been an “ethically
valid consent process”.
Komesaroff refers to the role of a surgeon who is contemplating performing
surgery, in circumstances where a patient has
obtained a prior opinion against
surgery, as a “refutable proposition” that needs to be carefully
weighed and evaluated.
He opines this is because medical practitioners
“are obliged to conduct themselves in accordance with existing standards,
established by their peers, professional associations, regulatory agencies
and other relevant institutions and individuals”.
page 10 of his report Professor Komesaroff sets out what may be regarded as core
principles binding on the medical profession generally.
Doctors are representatives and practitioners of a profession, which is a
community of individuals who profess skills and observe
norms of conduct that
are mutually agreed, subject to oversight and control, and offered to the
public, which in turn accepts them
with trust and good faith. The medical
profession is not a domain with which individuals are given licence to act
however they chose,
in opposition to or in conflict with accepted standards.
Medical practitioners practice as representatives of a discipline and a
knowledge that is publicly defined, recognised and regulated. The standards
they are obliged to follow relate to both their
ethical conduct and therapeutic
Professor Komesaroff notes that innovation is not to be discouraged but explains
that unconventional approaches to treatment
“must be subject to careful
justification and scrutiny”. He goes on to note that where a
surgeon’s practice “falls
outside accepted standards”
(including Codes of Conduct) “the surgeon is obliged to take special care
to justify his
or her conduct by reference to extant evidence or a coherent
rationale”. He opines that where there is “significant
or disagreement” it would normally be prudent to seek the advice of an
institutional ethics committee or similar
Komesaroff opines that “it is rarely, if ever, appropriate for a patient
to be called upon to make a decision with
major life-threatening consequences
without providing for a cooling off period”. He also, by reference to the
AMA Code of
Conduct (2.7 Fees), opines that financial issues should be discussed
with a patient and that fees must be fair and reasonable.
Komesaroff expresses the opinion that, where the potential risks of the surgery
outweigh any potential benefits but the
patient wishes to proceed with the
surgery (described in the question posed to the expert as a patient with a level
of desperation
to try anything), that the surgeon does not have a
“licence” to undertake “any conceivable procedure under any
circumstance in his or her discretion, even with the agreement or acquiescence
of the patient”.
answering specific questions about the “informed consent” process
for Patient A, Professor Komesaroff opines:
a) that the practitioner failed to “undertake any process” to
explain why his proposed course of action should be preferred
Professor Lind and Mr Lewis;
b) the advice, if given, that Patient A could return to WA before making a
decision was not properly communicated;
c) in light of the practitioner’s advice he was shortly to travel overseas
there was a failure by him in not explaining various
matters including the need
for another neurosurgeon to take over Patient A’s care, and implications
for the family of feeling
unsupported;
d) there should have been a cooling off period, and failure to provide such a
period was significantly below the expected standard;
e) the practitioner’s reporting letter failed to specify the actual risks
of the surgery disclosed to Patient A;
f) there is no evidence that the likely highly stressed state of Patient A was
taken into account;
g) that taking into account the statements of the practitioner referred to in
Person C’s statement, these statements were likely
to have misled Patient
A about the risks (the practitioner’s statement of very low risk with
adverse effects);
h) matters of material importance to Patient A should have been explained even
if she did not explicitly “nominate those questions”.
A substantial
resection of Patient A’s brain raised questions of the extent of
disability a patient is likely to suffer;
of whether Person C’s version of events or that of the practitioner is
accepted “there remains insufficient
evidence to conclude the multiple
conditions of valid consent were met”;
j) if the operation proceeded without a valid consent the practitioner’s
conduct would be significantly below the relevant
standard; and
k) that the practitioner’s conduct in introducing Patient A and Person C
to another patient in the waiting room was a breach
of the latter
patient’s confidentiality and fell below the standard expected.
Dr Glenn Farrow
noted above, unfortunately because of a medical condition, Dr Farrow was not
available to give evidence in person or to participate
in the conclave. His
report was based on assumed facts provided to him by the practitioner’s
the commencement of his report Dr Farrow makes a number of observations about
ethical decision making. He observes “The
primacy of patient autonomy is
the lynchpin of modern informed ethical decisions making”. He notes that
decisions must be made
by fully informed and competent patients without undue
influence from their doctors and others. He notes:
‘Undue” can include using personal preference to change a
patient’s decision to fit a doctor’s own viewpoint
information provided should include the risks and benefits of the treatment and
include information that would be expected
by a reasonable person to be
significant in the same situation.
page 2 of his report (Exhibit 1 Tab 2 p 34) Dr Farrow explains that treatment
should not be offered that is burdensome and futile.
He notes that
“futility” should not be confused with failing to prevent death but
rather in terminal conditions, relief
of symptoms, improvement of quality of
life and possible extensions of life are worthwhile goals.
Farrow notes the important role of evidence in decision making and opines
“It is worth noting that without challenging evidence
many advances in
medicine would not have been made”. He also importantly emphasised that
the ethics of decision making must
be judged in the circumstances in which they
occurred at the time and not by the outcome “unless the outcome was
clearly known
and expected at the time”.
Unsurprisingly,
Dr Farrow opines, as have all medical and ethical experts involved in this
matter, that the reasonable steps to be
taken by surgeon to obtain informed
consent include “a full and frank discussion about the risks and benefits
of the procedure
including small but significant risks that a reasonable person
would think relevant”.
Farrow also notes that elective surgery can be delayed while a patient seeks
another opinion but adds the caveat that a “cooling
off” period in
urgent situations is potentially dangerous.
Farrow opines, based on the consent documentation he had viewed, that the
practitioner did take reasonable steps to obtain Patient
A’s informed
Dr Christopher Ryan
Ryan prepared a comprehensive report dated 8 August 2022 on instructions from
the practitioner’s solicitors. In his report,
Dr Ryan also comments, in
some areas, on aspects of Professor Komesaroff’s report (summarised
Ryan, in a similar manner to Dr Farrow, breaks down steps in a principled
approach to ethical considerations relevant for a surgeon
to offer surgery. He
lists these factors as:
a) respect for autonomy (of the patient);
b) beneficence – improving the patient’s life in ways that matter to
the patient;
c) non malfeasance – avoiding the causation of harm; and
d) fidelity – loyalty, fairness, truthfulness, dedication to patients and
especially advocacy for them.
Dr Ryan notes the importance of patient autonomy he states “I would be
reluctant to cast autonomy as always the prime
consideration in ethical
matters” while explaining it is often regarded as the most important of
the four principles.
Ryan opines that when a surgeon is providing a second opinion she/he is not
bound to accept the initial opinion but rather, on
the information available, to
make their own judgment.
Ryan also refers to the ethical consideration of cost borne by the society of
any surgical intervention embarked upon and notes
in practice this is rarely
addressed by a surgeon.
page 20 of his report, Dr Ryan records the following:
While patient-centred care rightly in my view, prioritises the views of the
patient in any surgeon’s decision to operate, this
is not to imply that
surgeons must blindly bow to a patient’s will. As Venderand Desphpande,
emphasise “It is the professional
duty of the doctor to only offer or
provide those operations that can achieve the goals of the
intervention”.
page 25 of his report, Dr Ryan explains a surgeon must, so far as he is able, to
be satisfied a patient is neither being manipulated
or coerced and refers to the
vulnerability of critically ill patients to “subtler forms of unwarranted
persuasion”.
commenting on Professor Komesaroff’s discussion of a necessary
“cooling off” period, Dr Ryan notes he has found
nothing in the
literature to support this requirement.
the principles discussed generally in the first section of his report, Dr Ryan
opines, subject to the validity of [Patient
A’s] consent, “there was
a reasonable ethical basis, based on autonomy for the decision of [the
practitioner] to operate
on [Patient A]”.
appropriately, Dr Ryan notes it is outside his expertise to offer an opinion
Although he then provides a
qualified opinion relying on the reports of Dr Goyal and Professor
Ryan disagrees with Professor Komesaroff’s opinions in two respects.
First, he does not agree that the practitioner was obliged
to provide clear
justification of why the opinions of Professor Lind and Dr Lewis should be
disregarded and his view prevail. Nor
does he agree with the proposition that,
for proper informed consent to have been given, that Patient A and her husband
should have
been told of logistical and additional costs (both financial and
emotional) of repatriation to Western Australia in the event of
Ryan concludes, at page 38 of his report, that the practitioner did take
reasonable steps to obtain informed consent from Patient
A. He goes on to cite
the matters the practitioner says were disclosed to Patient A as the basis for
his conclusion, albeit noting
there is some dispute in the evidence about the
magnitude of the risk of adverse outcomes on the version of Person C and that of
the practitioner.
Ethical consent - Conclave of experts – Dr Ryan and Professor
Komesaroff at the hearing
was general agreement between the experts on the following matters:
a) that a patient must be given sufficient time to provide their consent;
b) that it is important for a medical practitioner to tell the patient about the
most common risks of proposed treatment;
c) that the patient should be informed of specific risks associated with
proposed surgery. Professor Komesaroff placed weight on
whether the risk is a
significant one and the need to communicate the magnitude of the risk;
d) that describing surgery as “high risk” in a situation where risks
involve death or profound neurological deficits
was insufficient;
e) there is controversy in the profession about whether surgeons should disclose
their complication rates;
f) if a practitioner’s proposed treatment deviates from the majority of
the profession more information is required to be disclosed
to the patient;
g) both experts agreed a “cooling off” period was not required in
urgent cases;
h) both experts agreed the practitioner breached the privacy of a patient by
introducing Patient A to that patient in the waiting
experts differed subtly in their views about an obligation for a practitioner,
when giving a second opinion, to discuss why her/his
opinion differed from the
first opinion. The tenor of Professor Komesaroff’s evidence was to more
definitively advocate for
an obligation to discuss the first
practitioner’s opinion and why the second opinion
both experts agreed a patient should be afforded sufficient time to make an
informed decision about proposed treatment, Professor
Komesaroff advocated
strongly for the position that for an ethical informed consent to be given a
“cooling off “period
of unspecified duration was essential. He
referred to cooling off periods in consumer legislation, assisted dying
legislation and
ethical literature. Dr Ryan did not advocate for a defined or
cooling off period in all cases.
Komesaroff maintained, based, in part, on the AMA Code of Conduct, it was a
necessary part of ethical informed consent for
a patient to be informed about
fees and likely repatriation and other costs and emotional impact on the patient
and family in the
event of an adverse outcome. Dr Ryan said that this
information should be addressed if the practitioner came to believe the issue
was going to be very salient for the patient.
Komesaroff touched on the inter-relationship of informed consent and patient
autonomy explaining:
But there’s no simple rule here. You need to take as much time as you
need to take to ensure the consent process, the consent
conversation has been
properly conducted. And that the patient has had sufficient opportunity to
consider all the issues that are
important to them in an unpressured uncoerced
way, and to come to a decision. That’s what autonomy is. And in our role
is now a starting point. Autonomy is the end point. It’s our job
to create the circumstances in which a patient can make an
autonomous choice.
And the only way they can do that is to have the information provided to them in
circumstances that are safe,
and ones in which they can place their trust, so
that ultimately, they can make that free uncoerced decision.
Other unchallenged evidence
practitioner relied on a number of letters of support from neurosurgeon
colleagues and the relative of a former patient. Each
of the letters refers to
the practitioner’s international reputation, and his high level of
surgical skills. He also relied
on a number of patient testimonials. In
accordance with a ruling made prior to the hearing, and subsequently confirmed
by the Chairperson,
all of the unchallenged evidence was admitted on the basis
it was relied on only in respect of protective orders if the complaints
established.
particular interest is the letter of Associate Professor Yeo Tseng Tsai,
National University Hospital, Singapore, dated 15 August
2021. He describes
knowing of the practitioner’s reputation “as being a bit of a
maverick and a showman” when
he first met him. However, after seeing the
practitioner’s operative success for very difficult case he had
facilitated the
practitioner’s appointment as visiting professor at the
university hospital. He states that “This has proven to be very
beneficial for us and I must say his great teaching both inside and outside the
operating room during these visits has greatly elevated
the standard of
technical neurosurgery amongst us university neurosurgeons, for which we are
very grateful”.
his letter of reference, the Professor candidly explains:
I am not saying he was right all the time though, and there were a few cases
where the outcomes were not really great, and one could
wonder (in retrospect)
whether surgery should have been offered in the first place. My experience with
him, even in these cases
with less than a stellar outcome, was that he was
always very upfront and honest with the patients and relatives pre-op.
professor explains the “negative cases were honestly few and far
between” and that the vast majority of cases had
superlative
Giovanni Broggi in his letter addressed “To whom it may concern”
dated 15 August 2021 also refers to the practitioner’s
international
reputation and surgical skills. He explains that because of “his
excellent clinical results and great surgical
skill” that the practitioner
often agrees to operate on very complex cases. Professor Broggi
Obviously, the willingness to operate on very complex cases and/or patients
previously rejected by other colleagues, exposes Professor
Teo to the accusation
of performing surgery on ‘inoperable’ cases, who have no chance of
surviving brain tumour anyway.
Although he could not save the life of patients
affected by malignant brain tumors, such as Gliobastomas (GBM), the truth is
in most of the cases he was able to significantly prolong patients’
survival and to provide a good postoperative quality of
Broggi states that it would be a great loss for both patients and the
neurosurgical profession if the practitioner’s
surgical activity was
suspended or cancelled for any reason. We observe that the protective orders
sought in these proceedings do
not include suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration albeit we do take into account the limitations
on his practice by reason of the current conditions.
Nikolai J Hopt, Professor of Neurosurgery provides a testimonial, undated, but
with reference to Council proceedings, in
similar terms to that of Professor
Broggi. Similar themes are echoed in the testimonial of Professor Paul Gardner,
University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center dated 14 August 2021.
have read and taken into account all the letters of support provided on behalf
of the practitioner particularly those of his neurosurgical
peers. However, as
noted above, we did not take these letters into our consideration of the
complaints, but rather had regard to
them when considering the question of
protective orders.
The practitioner’s evidence – Patient A
practitioner relied on his statement dated 25 November 2022, a Reply to the
Second Amended Complaint also dated 25 November 2022
and the transcript of the
proceedings at a hearing convened under s 150 of the National Law. The
practitioner was extensively cross-examined
during the hearing by senior counsel
for the HCCC, Ms Richardson.
the s 150 proceedings the practitioner explained how he commenced operating on
initially low grade focal brain stem tumours with
good results ultimately moving
to operate on focal malignant tumours as well. He told the delegates at the s
150 hearing that he
had his “fair share of bad outcomes” and a
“fair share of good outcomes”.
practitioner went on to explain that, for many years, the prevailing view was
that a tumour with a biomarker (H3K27M mutation)
was, by definition, diffuse and
should never have surgery, but he said about three years ago a WHO senior author
had expressed the
opinion that it was not appropriate to rely on the H3K27M
marker. He also explained that Patient A had T2 changes extending well
the enhancing area and those T2 changes were interpreted as being possibly
oedema, possibly tumour, but more likely to be
tumour, given the H3K27M
practitioner then explained his rationale for conducting surgery on patients
“with a focal brain stem glioma, even if it’s
malignant and even if
it has H3K27M mutation” ... “because the general principle of brain
cancer surgery is that you
will get a better result, better response to chemo
and radiotherapy and hopefully extend survival with surgical
resection”.
practitioner also explained “Even if you don’t get a survival
advantage, it is still worthwhile taking out a focal
malignant brain stem
dealing with the issue of consent to the surgery, the practitioner described
Patient A as “cognitively very sharp who was
sound in mind and could make
decisions of her own”. He reported that Patient A was “absolutely
informed about the seriousness
of her condition”. The practitioner also
asserted he had mentioned four potential outcomes and palliation as
practitioner described to the delegates the information provided to Patient A as
I went through the risk and benefits of surgery. I can actually remember
saying the place where she has her brain stem glioma is safer
than most other
places in the brain stem. Why is that? Because it’s in a place called the
tectal plate. If you can operate
on the tectal plate then you can hopefully
keep away from another part of the brain stem called the midbrain or the
tegmentum of
the midbrain which is where things are really bad and really risky,
and hers looked like it was a tectal plate glioma.
practitioner told the delegates that he had told Patient A the surgery was
risky, but he was “pretty optimistic that we
can get this tumour out, get
all of the advantages and potentially you could be home in three days”.
He also explained that
“conversely .. there is a risk of dying, of being
locked in”. He reported also telling Patient A that his aim would
stick to one side of the brain stem.
questioned by the delegates about the risk of death or adverse outcome, the
practitioner explained for Patient A’s case
that “death or
persistent vegetative state, you’re looking at probably only a five to 15
per cent chance of a terrible
in response to a question from the delegates about Person C’s handwritten
note, the practitioner explained that the 5%
figure was what he had said in
terms of standard craniotomy “but in your case because the tumour is in
the brain stem it’s
practitioner said that Patient A was “very definitive in her
decision” and he had said to her that she might want
to go back to Perth
discuss with children” He then corrected this statement saying “No,
not children, but anyway discuss
with other people but she said “No, I
practitioner also described his practise of “glooming”
challenged by the delegates about Person C’s contemporaneous note of risk
of death etc at 5%, he described Person C as
distressed and crying and conceded
he may have written down 5% when he said 5% risk associated with all brain
asked by the delegates to comment on his introduction of Patient A and Person C
to a teenage patient, who had undergone brain
stem surgery, as they were leaving
the waiting room following the consultation the practitioner
So I thought that would be a great way of saying to her “Listen,
don’t worry about the decision you made. I know a lot
of people are
saying it’s a stupid decision and people in Perth told you not to come
over here and stuff, but listen, here
is an example of a good outcome”. So
I wanted to make her feel a little bit better about her decision.
following significant exchange occurred at the s 150 hearing about the
practitioner’s attitude to conducting surgery.
DR McNEILL: I’m sorry. I’m slightly confused. I just need to
get that. So what you are saying is that even if you think
it’s the wrong
thing to do you will do it if they ask you to do it?
DR TEO: Absolutely, Peter.
in the s 150 hearing, the practitioner qualified the above statement and
explained that he had refused surgery in a case where
a patient was essentially
in a coma and surgery was requested by the patient’s
delegates also questioned the practitioner about “financial consent”
and repatriation of patients following an adverse
surgical outcome. The
practitioner explained that repatriation of patients was a longstanding issue
although not a frequent one.
He referred to repatriation issues occurring once
or twice a year when he was busy pre COVID 19.
earlier noted, the practitioner provided a statement for the purposes of these
proceedings dated 25 November 2022. In the introductory
material in his
statement, at para 20, the practitioner refers to the major controversy being
“the value and possibility of
successful surgical resection of
glioblastomas situated in the brain stem”. He notes the paucity of
reporting in the literature
of any large-scale studies and that “surgical
intervention (in relative terms) is infrequent”.
practitioner, at para 23, refers to the high value he places on patient autonomy
and goes on to record, at para 25, that he usually
sees prospective patients
nearing or at the final stages of the disease and towards the end of their
expected lives.
practitioner reports at, para 61, that he “has operated on gliomas
(including gliomas in the brainstem) that were declared
inoperable”.
dealing specifically with Patient A, the practitioner sets out similar evidence
to that given at the s 150 hearing as to the
circumstances in which Patient A
came to consult him. He refers to the biopsy conducted by Professor Lind noting
at paras 43 and
44 that the T2 changes extended beyond the enhancing area and
were identified as possibly oedema, possible tumour. He states: “there
was a real question as to whether the tumour was diffuse or had a focal
enhancing area”.
practitioner records he that felt the chances of successful surgery were greater
than 50 per cent but that he did not think they
were extremely high and that he
made it clear to Patient A and Person C that this was high risk surgery that
could have a “devastating
outcome if the changes on the other side of the
brain stem were tumour infiltration and not just
at the s150 hearing, the practitioner repeated his assertion that he had
referred to a standard craniotomy carrying a 5% risk of
a bad outcome but that
resection of a tumour involving the brainstem carried a much higher risk
although better at the level of the
tectal plate.
practitioner asserts at, para 58, that he told Patient A that he predicted her
life expectancy without surgery to be three to
six months, and that if surgery
was successful, she might expect to survive for 18 months and “if she made
a full recovery
and our scientists made novel discoveries, she might even
survive to see her 6 year old son’s eighteenth birthday”.
reports telling Patient A that it was her decision if she wished to undertake
the risk of the surgery with the risk of a
poor outcome including being left in
a vegetative state (para 62).
practitioner also records that he told Patient A that, due to the aggressive
nature of her tumour, if surgical intervention was
to be attempted, it had to be
sooner rather than later (within weeks of the consultation). The practitioner
also states that he suggested
the patient and her husband might return to
Western Australia to see her family “for a week or two” before
surgery. He said he advised Patient A to consider this option
because, if the surgery was unsuccessful, she might never again see
practitioner states (as he did at the s 150 hearing) that he introduced Patient
A and Person C to another patient in the waiting
room following their
consultation. He also states that Patient A contacted his rooms shortly after
the consultation and confirmed
she wished to proceed with the
practitioner notes that his Fellow at the time, Dr Amit Goyal, participated in
the last part of the consultation. Annexed to the
practitioner’s statement
is a letter he dictated concerning his interaction with Patient
practitioner also reports, at para 85, the tumour had both a focal and diffuse
component. Given the context of this paragraph
we infer the practitioner is
speaking about his knowledge of the tumour post-surgery.
Person C referred to there being no referral to the practitioner, it is clear
that Patient A was introduced to the practitioner
by a Sydney neurosurgeon who
described having “a call about her through emergency switch board over the
weekend from a doctor
practitioner’s records disclose that he dictated, but did not sign, a
letter (without addressee) dated 25 October 2019 with
a copy to Professor Lind.
The letter refers to Patient A understanding that her tumour was in “an
extremely high risk area
and that unless one gets a radical or greater than 95%
reduction then it will be unlikely to affect her long term survival”.
risks of the surgery are described by the practitioner to “include but are
not confined to death, locked in syndrome,
dysconjugate eye movements, thalamic
syndrome, degrees of dysaesthesia, paralysis, permanent coma
reporting letter concludes:
No guarantees were given or implied but she strongly requested we give her
the best possible chance of long-term survival and that
she wants the tumour
removed. I would be happy to attempt this. I did tell her unless there is a
clear demarcation between tumour
and normal brain, then I will not attempt a
radical resection. She understands this and is appreciative of me tempering my
resection if I feel the risk is just too great.
practitioner records that, post surgery, when Patient A did not regain
consciousness that “I started to think that maybe
the abnormal changes on
the other side of the brain stem weren’t just swelling but in fact tumour
infiltration and that she
had no capacity to send messages through her brain
stem because both sides of the brain stem were affected, one by obvious focal
tumours that I had just resected but the other side by less obvious tumours that
was affecting the functionality of the brain stem
which is to act as a conduit
between the brain proper and the spinal cord”.
his oral evidence in response to questions posed in cross-examination, the
practitioner disagreed with his own expert, Professor
Stokes’ description
of Patient A’s tumour as a Stage 4 tectal mid-brain glioma explaining he
would not say “its
definitively a tectal glioma”. He went on to
explain this was because the tumour “is sort of at the junction between
the tegmentum and the tectum”.
practitioner also disagreed with his expert’s opinion that the
pre-operative MRI T2 image revealed the tumour was on both
sides of the brain
stem. However, he qualified his response by explaining the T2 image showed
white changes both sides of the brain
which could be either oedema or tumour,
but he did not agree it was necessarily tumour.
asked whether it concerned him that he disagreed with his own expert, the
practitioner explained “It’s not just reading
the brain scan.
It’s the nuances of a sub-speciality such as brainstem surgery and
brainstem tumours”. He went on to
explain that he did not expect
Professor Stokes and A/Professor Morokoff “to know as much as I know about
brainstem tumours
because they don’t specialise in it”. [transcript
16 February 2023 p 59]. He went on to explain:
...I have more experience with brainstem tumours and surgery thereof than
almost everyone in the world, including Professor Stokes.
practitioner, by reference to the third image on slide 3, of Patient A’s
pre-operative MRI, explained that “part of
the focal tumour extends across
the midline to the left side, but the majority of T2 changes on the left side
were not tumour but
oedema”. He went to on say that it was inappropriate
to look at the T2 image without the T1 image with gadolinium and that
necessary to superimpose them on top of each other “and if they are
exactly the same, then that’s more likely to
be a focal tumour and more
likely to be resected”.
practitioner did not dispute that pre-operatively the T2 signal changes on the
MRI extended well beyond the midbrain tectum into
the cerebral pedundies and the
thamalus on both sides. However, the practitioner disagreed with the opinion of
the experts that,
pre-operatively because the tumour had invaded the basal
ganglia and other aspects of it, that made it a diffuse infiltrating tumour.
later referred to the “basal ganglia stuff” as T2 oedema and that,
based on the third scan, “which is bulging
across the mid-line.
It’s not actually diffusing, infiltrating the other side. It’s
actually just bulging across”.
practitioner referred to Slide 3 from the left in the exhibit as the basis on
which he founded hope that he was right and that
“it was a focal tumour
that could be resected without getting into too much normal brain”
[transcript 16 February 2023
resumption of the practitioner’s cross-examination on 20 February 2023,
the practitioner was questioned about his earlier
evidence that Patient A had
not made up her mind to have the surgery at the end of the consultation, and the
subsequent introduction
of the patient in the waiting room. It was put to the
practitioner he had changed his evidence about when Patient A decided to have
surgery and that we could draw the inference the practitioner had changed his
evidence about the timing of Patient A’s decision
because the
practitioner’s action in introducing the patient in the waiting room was
likely to have influenced Patient A’s
consent to the
challenged about his evidence that he had explained to Patient A and Person C
the risk of paralysis was 5% the practitioner replied:
No, I’ve said that’s incorrect. I said the risk of paralysis was
I made that assertion based
on his notes where he had paralysis a hundred. So I assume that I told them it
was a hundred per cent.
[transcript 20 February 2023 p 45].
practitioner candidly admitted he could not remember every consultation over the
last five years. He then explained:
But I do remember, sorry, I know what I say to patients and it’s a sort
of standard narrative that if I have a patient with
a brain stem glioma, I tell
them its high risk surgery. That high risk means that it’s a risk of
either paralysis or these
other specific symptoms. I always tell patients there
is a risk of death. If you are saying to me, can you remember exactly mentioning
the word death during that interview? Sorry, I can’t, but I can say
normally do.
in his evidence the practitioner again explained that his evidence was based on
reading Person C’s note about 100. He
said “But if you’re
asking me can you remember definitively you said it, I’d have to say, no,
I can’t remember
that exact interview” [transcript 20 February 2023
cross-examination the practitioner re-affirmed his view that the potential
benefits of the surgery outweighed the risk of neurological
asked if he would do the same operation today the practitioner responded as
It may not be the indications. It may be that I may have misread the MRI
scans there. All of us may have. It may be the actual surgical
technique. It may
have been the approach to the tumour. You certainly have to reflect on any case
where there’s a bad outcome
and you’ve got to try and figure out why
there was a bad outcome. But no surgical indications. No, I stand by them
[transcript
20 February 2023 p 61],
practitioner’s evidence about why he would do the same type of surgery
It’s because there’s all different types of evidence.
There’s class one, two, three level that and until there is
level one evidence, then it’s very reasonable to continue doing things
that eventually might be proven to be wrong.
So time and enough cases, maybe 10
years’ time I might have to reflect on this and say, gee, I’ll never
operate on one
of these tumours again. But at this stage that level one
evidence is not available.
asked about evidence “that you should do the operation?” the
practitioner responded:
Yeah, or shouldn’t do the operation. Absolutely. So at this stage,
there’s no level one evidence. I’m going on
a lot of anecdotes, a
few series in the literature, and currently I think it’s very reasonable
to offer surgery to someone
like [Patient A] but to learn from your
mistakes.[transcript 20 February 2023 p 62].
practitioner acknowledged his own expert did not support the benefits of the
surgery outweighing the risk of neurological morbidity
and commented: “I
will certainly put that into my computer banks”.
in his cross-examination, when asked if he had discussed with Patient A and
Person C Professor Lind’s and Mr Lewis’
opinions, he denied he had
criticised Professor’s Lind and Mr Lewis’s decisions explaining that
he could not criticise
a colleague’s decision when he had “no idea
what his line of thought is”. The practitioner did not accept the
proposition that he should have discussed the other practitioners’ opinion
or explained how his views differed from those practitioners.
questioned about the timing of Patient A’s surgery, the practitioner
acknowledged he had gone to India for four weeks the
Thursday following Patient
A’ surgery so that, if Patient A did not have her surgery the following
day, she could not have
had surgery performed by the practitioner for four
cross examination of the practitioner occurred on 27 February 2023 after receipt
of the additional expert reports in particular
the report of A/Professor
Morokoff commenting on Patient A’s post MRI scans.
practitioner agreed with A/Professor Morokoff’s opinion that the MRI scan
disclosed that all of the enhancing part of the
tumour in the tectum posterior
mid-brain was resected and also a margin around that. He also agreed that he had
gone across the midline
of the brain in his surgery and explained that this was
because the enhancing portion [of the tumour] had crossed the mid-line. The
practitioner further agreed with A/Professor Morokoff’s description of the
surgery as “a radical resection of the tumour,
being the enhancing part of
the tumour”. He further acknowledged that A/Professor Morokoff “was
probably right”
that he had resected a margin beyond the whole enhancing
area (part of the right posterior thalamus and beyond the enhancing
practitioner did not accept that what he had done would have been apparent to
him the day after the surgery. Rather, he explained
that A/Professor Morokoff
had identified something he had not identified before, namely, that the
posterior part of the thalamus
had been partly resected [transcript 27 March
2023 p 36].
practitioner made a frank admission that “I was talking about tumour, the
tumour and I clearly went across the midline to
take out the tumour. And I
didn’t respect the midline of the tumour. That doesn’t mean I
didn’t respect the midline
of the brain stem”. He acknowledged that
he had damaged Patient A. He went on to say:
I take full responsibility for the fact that it was my hand, my technique, my
doing, that she didn’t wake up. And whether it’s
because I crossed a
midline, whether it’s a limited and posterior thalamus, whether there was
functional tissue within the
enhancing portion, I don’t know. But
that’s not the point. The point is I made an error, a surgical error, and
too far and I’ve damaged this lady. I’m not disputing
that”.[transcript 27 March 2023 page 44].
practitioner denied his evidence was misleading because he did not refer to the
fact he had reviewed the post-operative MRI scans,
the day after the surgery,
and the fact he had crossed the midline was apparent from the
Complaint One
– Patient A
The parties’ submissions Patient A
parties provided detailed written and oral submissions. Given the length of the
written submissions we have only replicated matters
which we consider to be
issues requiring determination of a substantially articulated complaint (see
Health Care Complaints Commission v Robinson
[2022] NSWCA
have considered earlier in these reasons some of the submissions on evidentiary
HCCC submit overall that we should not find the practitioner to be a witness of
credit in relation to his evidence concerning
Patient A. The submissions
highlight areas of the evidence supporting the HCCC’s claims, including
the type of Patient A’s
tumour, and how we should evaluate the expert
evidence on the risks and benefits of the surgery.
HCCC’s submissions advocate for a finding on one or more than one of the
sub-particulars in Particular 2 that Patient A
did not give “informed
consent” to the surgery, and that we should find the practitioner failed
to discuss the logistics
and costs in the event of an adverse outcome with
HCCC’s submissions lastly address the issue of the asserted breach of
waiting room.
submissions on behalf of the practitioner advocate that overall we should find
the practitioner acted appropriately, noting that
he has conceded Patient A (and
Patient B) had bad surgical outcomes for which he takes responsibility, while
drawing attention to
the risk associated with any surgery.
refer to the parties’ submissions in greater detail when dealing with the
specific particulars.
Complaint One, particular
The practitioner’s decision to operate on Patient A on 24
October 2018 was inappropriate in circumstances where the risk of
neurological
morbidity, including vegetative state associated with radical (>95 %)
resection of Patient A’s high-grade BSG
outweighed any potential benefits
of the surgery.
The parties’ submissions
HCCC’s written submissions state that we should give little weight to
Professor Stokes’ report dated 3 August 2020
when assessing the evidence
on Complaint 1 particular 1. This submission is made on the basis that
Professor Stokes’ opinion
was that the practitioner’s plan was to
reduce the bulk of the tumour, rather than the actual radical resection of the
performed by the practitioner.
practitioner’s counsel submitted that we should not find the
practitioner’s decision to offer surgery to Patient A
amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. At para 32, the submissions refer to the
literature and the unchallenged expert
opinion adduced from Professor Stokes
(and Professor D’Urso) that some neurosurgeons “would have responded
to [Patient
A’s] and [Patient B’s] circumstances by offering surgery
and consenting a patient”.
1 particulars 1 and 2 (a) are also addressed in the practitioner’s
submissions at paras 104 to 137 It is submitted
that “it was not
unacceptable for [the practitioner] to offer [Patient A] surgery. It is
submitted this was because of his
belief he “could buy her more
time”. It is submitted that the offered surgery was based on the
practitioner’s
experience and the literature. It is also submitted that
Professor Stokes’ evidence that it was appropriate because of the
practitioner’s experience for him “to consider” the surgery
“and that evidence was not challenged”.
Reference is made to
A/Professor Morokoff’s evidence that there was evidence in the literature
to support the surgery (which
we note he characterised as very
submissions refer, at para 126, to the practitioner’s experience which it
is submitted placed him in a unique position to
advise Patient A of the benefits
of the surgery and “[the practitioner’s] unchallenged evidence
(adduced in cross-examination)
that his personal risk of death or otherwise of a
terrible outcome was very low: in the vicinity of less than 0.01 or
submissions point out that “the decision to intervene, to offer surgery to
[Patient A] is presently being assessed through
the prism of hindsight with
knowledge of the outcome. The influence of hindsight bias ought to be resisted.
Thus, it is argued,
that the offer of intervention, the risks and benefits
“as he saw them – was very different to the task of the expert
engaged to perform a retrospective analysis of a course of action based on
submissions in reply reject as inaccurate the submission that Professor
D’Urso gave evidence that some neurosurgeons would
have operated on
Patient A, his evidence being confined to Patient B.
is further submitted that no weight can be given to Professor Stokes’
evidence of similarities to a girl he operated on 18
years ago and is not the
evidence that a minority of neurosurgeons would have offered a radical resection
of Patient A’s high
commence our discussion of this topic noting that all particulars of the
Complaint concerning Patient A are agitated under s 139B
(1) (a) and/or s 139B
(1) (l) of the National Law. However, it appears that each of the experts have
generally addressed the topics
raised in the particulars as falling under s 139B
(1) (a). But it is our role to consider both limbs of s139B (1) relied on by the
also note that in the practitioner’s response he admits the proposed
surgery for Patient A was associated with a risk of
neurological morbidity. He
says that he explained the risks to Patient A, including permanent coma,
paralysis and death, that the
tumour was in an extremely high-risk area, and
that, unless an extensive resection could be achieved during surgery, she would
obtain a survival advantage. The practitioner states that Patient A
requested he “remove the tumour” notwithstanding
that he identified
the risk of an adverse outcome of the surgery. The practitioner otherwise
denies Particular 1.
practitioner refers to the need, in light of research of the last three years,
for caution and not to automatically assume a H3K27M
WHO Grade IV with a
putative ATRX mutation to be diffuse (and generally not thought to be suitable
for surgery). We do not find
that explanation to be relevant in Patient
A’s case. We accept the experts’ evidence given in conclave that
this mutation
indicated a diffuse tumour with associated high risk
contraindicating surgery. We accept and prefer the evidence of both A/Professor
Morokoff and Professor Stokes that Patient’s A’s tumour was a
diffuse tumour. In this regard we note they relied on
pre-operative scans.
Their views in this regard are not affected by hindsight.
practitioner pointed to one of the pre-operative MRI slides to support his
pre-operative assessment that the tumour was focal
and therefore appropriate for
resection. However, his view was not supported by the other experts, including
his own expert, Professor
Stokes. The experts described the tumour as diffuse.
Having viewed the pre-operative MRI images during the expert conclave and the
practitioner’s evidence and heard their explanations, we accept the
experts’ view was soundly based and we agree with
also accept the evidence of Professor Stokes that the risk of mortality and
morbidity of a radical resection of Patient A’s
tumour was close to 60 per
cent. We also accept the evidence of both experts that to describe the risk of
profound neurological
deficit from the proposed operation as 5% would be falsely
senior counsel for the HCCC advanced the proposition that the practitioner at
the hearing before us had given inconsistent
evidence at the s 150 hearing at
which he had described the tumour as diffuse, we find this submission must be
dealt with cautiously.
It appears to us that the practitioner’s comments
at the s 150 hearing were made in the context of his knowledge post-operatively.
This conclusion, if correct, however, raises an issue of the
practitioner’s credit. In saying the tumour was diffuse, he
given this answer to the delegates by reason of his knowledge of the
post-operative MRI. This position is inconsistent
with the stance the
practitioner maintained at the hearing.
was clear from the practitioner’s answers to questions posed in
cross-examination that he justified his decision to operate
on at least two
bases. First, because he thought the tumour was focal permitting a resection of
greater than 95% and potentially
extending Patient A’s life expectancy.
Secondly, because although Patient A knew the surgery was high risk, she
independent autonomy in requesting the practitioner to operate. We
reject the submission made on behalf of the practitioner that
he relied on the
literature to support his decision to operate. That submission is inconsistent
with the practitioner’s own
evidence given at the s 150 hearing.
also accept and adopt as relevant to this particular that both medical experts
agreed that Dr Goyal’s stated rationale for
the surgery, based on his
discussions with the practitioner, was not supportable.
have recorded in some detail the matters referred to by A/Professor Morokoff and
Professor Stokes in their respective reports on
this aspect of the complaint,
and in particular to their oral evidence given “in conclave”. We
found both experts made
appropriate concessions and were impartial witnesses on
issues relative to this particular of Complaint One.
discern this particular is directed to the practitioner’s judgment, (or
lack thereof) if the evidence supports a finding
that the risks of the surgery
outweighed the benefits.
can be no doubt that the operation undertaken was not one which the majority of
neurosurgeons in Australia would have supported.
In reaching this conclusion we
have taken into account the views of Professor Lind, Mr Lewis, (as reported by
Person C) and A/Professor
also take into account and accept as accurate that a radical resection of
Patient A’s tumour would have carried a very high
risk of mortality as
well as morbidity. We note both A/Professor Morokoff and Professor Stokes
expressed this opinion. We accept
their evidence.
have also given significant weight to the agreed position of A/Professor
Morokoff and Professor Stokes that risks of neurological
morbidity associated
with a radical resection of a high-grade brainstem glioma in an adult far
outweighs any potential benefit.
reject the practitioner’s evidence given in cross-examination that he told
Patient A and Person C that there was 100% chance
of paralysis, and that this
was an opportunistic statement to endeavour to explain or give a more favourable
slant to Person C’s
recording of 100.
also accept as accurate and relevant the practitioner’s evidence that he
could not exactly recall what he or Patient A said
during the consultation but
rather relied on his “usual” practice. This means it would be unsafe
for us to accept the
conversation as reported by the practitioner in para 70 of
his statement.
note however that Professor Stokes, while acknowledging that he personally would
not have operated on Patient A, opines that, if
the aim of the surgery was
resection of 95% of the tumour, it was reasonable to undertake the surgery. We
note in expressing this
opinion Professor Stokes assumed that the resection
undertaken stayed within the tumour. This assumption is not supported by the
post-operative MRI scans and the practitioner’s acknowledgment that in his
margin he strayed into the basal ganglia. We have
also had regard to
A/Professor Morokoff’s view that the
of the surgery was
below standard, but not
significantly
below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience. But
his opinion is the
practitioner should not have operated at all. As earlier
noted, we discern this criticism is not directed to the surgeon’s
but rather his exercise, or more correctly, lack thereof, of
his decision to offer surgery to Patient A
find, based on the evidence of Person C which we accept on this topic as
accurate and truthful, that the benefits of the surgery
as related to his wife
and him by the practitioner were that it would give Patient A more time (to
live), possibly up to two years,
and that there might be research into brain
cancer so that Patient A might make it her goal to be at her 6 year old
also give some limited weight to the hearsay evidence that, according to Person
C, Mr Lewis told Patient A he could operate, but
declined to do so because the
risks outweighed the benefits.
law does not require that a surgeon may only operate if her/his views accord
with the majority of surgeons about a proposed operation.
Rather, if a procedure
is considered appropriate by a reputable minority of the profession, it cannot
be regarded as “significantly”
below the expected standard. We have
regard to the discussion, albeit in the context of a claim of professional
misconduct in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Grygiel
[2021] NSWCATOD
– [118] as follows:
Health Care Complaints Commission
Basten JA at [83] refers to the situation where a different
standard of care is adopted by a respectable minority of the profession
standard generally accepted by reputable and experienced practitioners. His
Honour noted however that the practitioner in
that case did not seek to justify
her treatment on the basis it was acceptable clinical judgment that would be
adopted by a reputable
minority of the profession. Nor we note is it suggested
in this case that the practitioner was acting in accordance with a reputable
minority of the profession.
We note that in
Don Nai His Huang v Walton
(Court of Appeal
(NSW) 30 April 1993) Kirby P as his Honour then was said:
The conduct of a medical practitioner does not, within s27(1)(a) of the Act,
demonstrate a lack of adequate knowledge, experience,
skill, judgment or care in
the practice of medicine, simply because a course of therapy is embarked upon
which does not conform to
a given professional norm. So long as the practitioner
is acting lawfully and conscientiously and is pursuing, in the treatment of
or her patient, a “respectable, though minority, view” in such
treatment, no misconduct exists as will attract discipline
under the law
[citations omitted] In
Childs v Walton
, as the Tribunal itself noted,
Samuels JA said at 10):
A departure from a generally accepted procedure does not necessarily
constitute professional misconduct. There may be different schools
of medicine
and disputes between them. Adherence to the practice of a minority group does
not alone entail professional misconduct
‘Every innovation has to be
performed for a first time. That something has not been done is not proof that
it ought not to
be done’ (per
Hutley in Qidwai
this case we are not being asked to consider the practitioner’s skill in
carrying out the surgery, but rather his decision
so in a situation where the expert evidence is unanimous that the risks
outweighed the potential benefits. The practitioner
was forthright in his
evidence about his approach to providing surgery to a patient suffering BSG
namely, that if the patient decided
that she or he wanted the surgery (patient
autonomy) that he would offer the surgery. He did not retreat from the position
he was correct in his judgment in determining to operate on Patient A.
Rather, he explained he had reflected, as he always did, if
surgery resulted in
a bad outcome, on what he had done.
find the question of the practitioner’s decision to operate is
intrinsically linked to the weight to be given to patient
autonomy in the
circumstances of a particular case, and in this particular case, Patient
A’s autonomy. It is to be remembered
Patient A was a relatively young
woman with three young children who had been given a devastating diagnosis of
impending death.
It is not surprising that the practitioner offering her
surgery was likely have had an effect on her decision-making. But we are
cognizant that there is, and could not be, any evidence of Patient A’
subjective views.
considerations are multi-layered. First, the practitioner is a member of a
profession and is bound by its ethical rules and codes
of conduct applicable to
a profession. We give particular weight to the Code of Conduct of the Royal
Australasian College of Surgeons
(2016) as highlighted by A/Professor Morokoff
in this report at page 13 (set out earlier in these reasons). We are satisfied,
on the expert report of A/Professor Morokoff, that the general body of
neurosurgeons operating in Australia would regard the surgery
performed on
Patient A as an unnecessary medical intervention. Thus, a breach of the Code may
be regarded as constituting unethical
conduct (see s 139B (1)(l) and as
discussed below in respect of Particular 3).
we are mindful of the role (and limits) on patient autonomy.
think it useful to repeat what both Professor Komesaroff and Dr Ryan opined on
this topic namely that where the potential risks
of the surgery outweigh any
potential benefits, but the patient wishes to proceed, that the surgeon does not
have a licence to undertake
any conceivable procedure even with the agreement or
acquiescence of the patient (see also Dr Ryan at page 20 of his report).
found the practitioner’s answer to a question posed by A/Professor Murphy
and what would he do to
change that gives insight into the practitioner’s approach both to the
surgery in the case of Patient
A and generally. He replied:
Pull my punches, try and leave a little more tumour behind, maybe a different
approach. I don't know.
It's a very good question because I've tried to ask myself that question.
When I asked the first author of our paper on brainstem
tumours to write the
paper. I said, "Listen, I would like to stop getting bad outcomes and is there
any way we can come up with some
scale or way of looking at our past patients
and seeing if there's some sort of score income. Or whether they've got a
score that's greater than a certain number, we shouldn't do the
operation because the risk is too great." Midbrain, this and that.
And they came back and said, "Look, you just don't have enough patients to
come up with a score like that." So it could be that it
turns out that any
patient at all with an H3 K27M mutation should not have surgery. I mean, I don't
Having said that, I've done patients with that mutation with good results. So
I mean, that is the 6 million dollar question. What
did you do wrong? How are
you going to learn from it? Is it the surgical indications? Is it the surgical
technique? What is it? And
I can't answer that yet [transcript 20 February 2023
the submissions filed on behalf of the practitioner reference is made to the
decision of the High Court in
Queensland v Masson
[2020] HCA 28
. We note that this case deals with asserted negligence by a
paramedic, not disciplinary proceedings and its relevance is eschewed
basis in the HCCC submissions in reply. However, we consider the general
principles relating to weight to be afforded to
the general body of medical
opinion is apposite to matters in issue in this case. The High Court
Following this Court's decision in
Rogers v Whitaker
, and at all
relevant times for the purposes of determination of the present appeal, the
standard of care to be observed by a person
possessing special skills is that of
"the ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have that special
skill". Although
that standard is not to be determined solely, or even
primarily, by reference to the practice followed or supported by a responsible
body of opinion in the relevant profession or trade – in the sense that a
court is not required to defer to the opinions of
experts rather than determine
for itself the applicable standard of care –
evidence of
responsible professional opinion may nonetheless "have an influential, often a
decisive, role to play". And where, as
here, a body of professional opinion is
relied upon as evidence that a particular course of treatment fell within the
standard of
care expected of a reasonable and competent practitioner, the body
of opinion will generally be thought "reasonable", "responsible"
"respectable" provided it has a logical basis.
In particular, in cases
involving, as the present case does, the weighing of risks and benefits, a body
of opinion may be treated
as responsible or respectable if it can be shown that
the experts said to constitute that body of opinion have "directed their minds
to the question of comparative risks and benefits and have reached a defensible
conclusion on the matter".
Ex hypothesi, a body of professional opinion does not need to align to
majority opinion in order to be regarded a responsible body
of professional
opinion; and, for the same reasons, a body of opinion does not need to be
premised on the same assumptions as underscore
the majority opinion in order to
be regarded a responsible body of opinion. [our emphasis].
we discuss below, our independent assessment of the risks and benefits of the
surgery and whether it was appropriate to offer surgery
is in accord with the
expert evidence about the views of the responsible body of medical
Conclusions
have ultimately concluded that the practitioner’s judgment in deciding to
operate on Patient A was inappropriate for the
following reasons. First, it was
high risk and inappropriate surgery by reason of the nature and location of the
tumour, its genetic
A/Professor Morokoff’s view that the possible detriments of the surgery
far outweighed any potential benefits. Thirdly, surgery in this situation is
not surgery recommended or carried out by a majority
of the practitioner’s
peers, nor a responsible minority of surgeons. Fourthly, the procedure was not
supported by the literature.
In reaching this finding we accept Professor
Morokoff’s view that the literature relied on by the practitioner for the
of the hearing provided only very weak support for the operation.
Fifthly, even if Patient A had given informed consent to the surgery,
practitioner in his professional capacity had an overriding ethical duty to
refuse surgery as required by the Code of Conduct
for surgeons. Finally, we
find the practitioner’s attitude to and rationale for conducting this type
of surgery is substantially
experimental and is the type of surgery which should
be conducted in a clinical trial setting or subject to other ethical scrutiny.
We find these factors outweigh the practitioner’s decision that surgery
could extend the patient’s life and that it
was Patient A’s wish for
him to conduct the surgery. We find Particular 1 is established both under s
139B (1) (a) and (l).
Complaint One, particular 2
On 24 October 2018, the practitioner operated on Patient A without
informed consent, in circumstances where:
information provided to Patient A regarding the potential benefits of surgery in
her case was not supported by statistical data,
medical literature and/or
clinical guidelines;
practitioner failed to properly communicate to Patient A the specific nature and
magnitude of the risks associated with the surgery
in Patient A’s clinical
presentation;
practitioner failed to sufficient explanation Patient A how his opinion about
the proposed treatment for her should be favoured
practitioners;
practitioner failed to ensure that Patient A had sufficient time between his
initial consultation with her and her husband on
23 October 2018 and carrying
out the surgery on the morning of 24 October 2018 to allow the patient to make
an informed decision
as to whether or not to proceed with the proposed surgery
practitioner failed to discuss the logistics and additional costs to Patient
A’s family (both financial and emotional) associated
post-operative rehabilitation in the event of an adverse surgical outcome,
including her repatriation to Western Australia.
The parties’ submissions
HCCC, in its written submissions, submit that we should find particular 2 (a)
proven because there is no high-level literature
to guide decision making with
respect to resection of brain stem gliomas in adults, and that there is no
evidence to support the
benefit of such surgery. We note that this submission
was prepared and dated 27 March 2023 before Professor Morokoff was recalled
cross-examination on his supplementary report on the literature which was
tendered on 29 March 2023.
HCCC’s submissions advance the position that we should give little weight
to the evidence of Professor Stokes and Dr Ryan
on this particular because their
respective opinions were based on assumed facts. The HCCC submit we should not
find the assumed
facts provided to these experts were accurate. The submissions
also suggest that the practitioner failed to inform Patient A about
the specific
of the risks and the
of the risk. The submissions
also address the circumstance of the single consultation.
thrust of the submissions on behalf of the practitioner is that there is
literature supporting the conduct of the surgery. It
is also submitted that
Patient A, by reason, in part, of the advice received by her from Professor Lind
and Mr Lewis, “plainly
understood the very significant risk of surgical
intervention” and that Dr Goyal in his statement to Carol Cook,
Investigator,
HCCC, said “the more specific risks – in this [...] it
would be the likelihood that the op would leave you in a vegetative
practitioner’s position is that we should prefer his contemporaneous
reporting letter to the recollection of Person C.
The submissions also posit
the position that it was incumbent on the HCCC to lead evidence that the patient
in the waiting room did
not consent to the practitioner’s communication
because the code is plainly subordinate to any relevant legislation and there is
no particular of any legislative provision relied
on in the Complaint.
reply, the HCCC note that although Person C’s statement was signed 13
months after the relevant consultation, his contemporaneous
notes were made
during the consultation. It is also submitted that it is not open to infer
Patient A’s understanding based
on notes and letters drafted by other
medical practitioners. It is further submitted we should find the risks
discussed with Patient
A and Person C did not reflect the actual nature and
magnitude of the risks involved in the surgery.
now address each of the sub-particulars. Prior to doing so we record the
practitioner denies Particular 2 and lists risks he asserts
were discussed with
Patient A (that the surgery was high risk being a midbrain tumour, that the
surgery would not cure the glioma,
that there could be no guarantee that the
outcome would be beneficial, there was a risk of neurological deficit as a
result of the
envisaged surgery, there was a risk of death or increased
disability as a result of the envisaged surgery, and there were alternatives
the envisaged surgery).
of the experts, both medical and ethical, have expressed views about the consent
process. It is useful that we commence by referring
to the law on this topic as
expounded by the High Court of Australia in
Rogers v Whittaker
(1992) 175 CLR 479.
and applied in subsequent Australian courts. We note
there is currently a divergence in the law on this topic between the ultimate
Australian court and the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in respect of duty
to explain alternative treatments.
Rogers v Whittaker
the plurality, after discussing the general
obligations of a medical practitioner, explained what is required to ensure a
consent is a valid one as follows:
The law should recognize that a doctor has a duty to warn a patient of a
material risk inherent in the proposed treatment; a risk
is material if, in the
circumstances of the particular case, a reasonable person in the patient's
position, if warned of the risk,
would be likely to attach significance to it or
if the medical practitioner is or should reasonably be aware that the particular
patient, if warned of the risk, would be likely to attach significance to it.
This duty is subject to the therapeutic privilege.
evidence of the experts is unanimous. They agreed in their oral evidence that
there is no high-quality level one or two literature
to guide decision making in
BSG in adults (and the literature referred to in Professor Morokoff’s
report was not apposite to
the facts in this case). In short, there is no
directly relevant statistical data, medical literature and/or clinical
to support the type of surgery proposed to Patient A. We note that
the practitioner himself referred to no Level One evidence in
his answers to
questions posed in cross-examination.
At its highest, A/Professor
Morokoff in his supplementary report referred to the evidence in the literature
provided by the practitioner
as weak. Of significance is A/Professor
Morokoff’s evidence is that the literature first provides “very weak
that radical resection of brainstem glioma benefits survival” and
that “the evidence for radical resection of high grade
(diffuse) brainstem
glioma in adults is extremely limited and suggests that GTR/radical resection is
rarely attempted or achievable,
likely associated with high risk of neurological
morbidity and has an unclear survival benefit”. We accept that to be the
finding this sub- particular established, we take into account that both experts
agreed that the type of Patient A’s tumour
did not meet the definition of
a focal BSG in a paper published and authored by the practitioner and relied on
by him in these proceedings.
Further, that paper related to children all under
the age of 16 and tumours in children differ significantly from those in adults.
We accept A/Professor Morokoff’s opinion that, by reason of the very low
numbers, the limited published papers concerning tectal
gliomas contraindicate
surgery. We are satisfied that Particular 2 (a) is
established.
considering sub-particular (b) we are conscious that Professor Komesaroff
expressed the view that there is insufficient evidence
to find either the
practitioner’s version of information provided to Patient A or Person
C’s version was sufficient for
a proper ethical informed consent.
is however noteworthy that in his Reply the practitioner asserts that Patient A
and Person C were advised to return home to visit
family before the surgery
because of the risks. The Reply also asserts the practitioner discussed
repatriation with Patient A in
the event of an adverse outcome.
have already noted that we found Person C to be a witness of truth and we accept
that his notes of the advice given at the consultation
were contemporaneous. We
find that the practitioner did not have a precise recollection of consultation,
or the information provided
to Patient A. That fact is hardly surprising given
the time since the consultation in 2018, and the number of patients who have
consulted the practitioner. Further, we note contrary to what is asserted in
the practitioner’s Reply, nothing in his reporting
letter refers to
discussion of alternatives to the envisaged surgery, nor does Person C record
any such discussion. The practitioner’s
answers given in cross
examination convinced us that he had no specific recollection of the
consultation, and his answers were based
on his “usual practice”
supplemented by reference to Patient C’s file note and his reporting
agree with A/Professor Morokoff that it is likely that the practitioner advised
the 5% risk was for all brain cancer surgery, not
the surgery being contemplated
for Patient A and this qualification was not appreciated by Patient A and Person
C. We find the
practitioner was, unsurprisingly, unable to recollect with any
degree of precision precisely what was conveyed to (and understood
by Patient A)
Dr Goyal’s supplementary statement was of no assistance in determining the
particulars of this Complaint, we accept
the evidence in his initial statement
that he heard the practitioner refer to the risk of a vegetative state
post-surgery. We have
also had regard to the practitioner’s letter
dictated shortly after the consultation and note that both A/Professor Morokoff
and Professor Stokes found the letter to be adequate.
if the practitioner was referring to 5% as the risk associated with
craniotomies, we agree with the experts that “high
risk” was not
adequately explained. if, as the practitioner reported at the 150 hearing he
described risk of an adverse outcome
as 5-15%, that was, as noted by both
experts, falsely low.
we find this sub-particular established to the requisite standard.
considering sub-particular (c), we note that Professor Komesaroff strongly
advocates for the position that where a surgeon is contemplating
surgery where
the patient has obtained a prior opinion as a “refutable
proposition” that needs to be carefully weighed
and evaluated. Professor
Komesaroff is critical of the practitioner for failing to “undertake any
process” to explain
why his proposed course of action should be preferred
to that of Professor Lind and Mr Lewis. Dr Ryan did not agree with Professor
Komesaroff on this topic.
accept that if Patient A considered it a material matter to know why the
practitioner’s view about proposed surgery differed
from that of Professor
Lind and Mr Lewis and raised the issue with him, the practitioner would have
been obliged to provide an explanation.
However, there is no evidence before us
that Patient A considered this to be a material matter and to infer she did so
speculative.
we note that there was no evidence before us by way of literature, or relevant
Code of Conduct that there is a presumption,
which is rebuttable, that a
practitioner must explain why her/his proposed surgery or treatment, or refusal
thereof, is to be preferred
to that of another practitioner. We found the
practitioner’s evidence that he did not know what either Professor Lind or
Lewis thought has weight. It is relevant that neither of these professionals
referred Patient A for a second opinion. We are not
satisfied this particular
is established.
Sub-particular
(d) relates to what Professor Komesaroff describes as a “cooling
off” period. In considering this particular,
it is important that we note
the following matters:
a) Patient A’s age, and the fact she had three young children;
b) that Patient A had been advised not long before she travelled from WA that
her tumour diagnosis meant her death in a relatively
short time was
inevitable;
c) Patient A’s husband was distressed at the consultation;
d) that Patient A was advised the practitioner and Dr Goyal were shortly to
leave to travel to India; and that the practitioner could
re-arrange his
schedule and operate the following morning with the consequence that scans would
need to be done that afternoon;
e) the consequence of the practitioner’s Indian trip was, unless the
surgery occurred the following day, that the practitioner
was not available to
conduct the surgery for four weeks;
f) that the practitioner advised Patient A that the surgery could extend her
life by two years, and with new research discoveries
she might survive to see
her youngest child attain 18 years;
g) Patient A was introduced to the patient in the waiting room as an example of
successful surgery
deciding later that afternoon to have surgery
the following day.
short, by reason of the factors listed above it must have been clear to this
highly skilled, experienced practitioner that Patient
A was an extremely
vulnerable woman notwithstanding he noted her to be cognitively sharp
his s150 evidence. Cognitively sharp does not mean Patient A was not
emotionally vulnerable and likely to be subject to influence
given the factors
listed above.
expert evidence before us, while not mandating a cooling off period of any fixed
duration, supports a patient having sufficient
time to digest information
provided, to be able assess that information and frequently for the consent
process to occur, as Professor
D’Urso notes (albeit when giving evidence
relevant to Patient B) with two consultations.
have taken into account Person C’s evidence about the consultation
process, and that his wife was “desperate rather
than highly
motivated” to seek any treatment she could for her condition. This fact
should have been apparent to the practitioner,
and we are satisfied,
notwithstanding he may have considered he was assisting the patient by offering
surgery the following day,
that he failed to provide sufficient time for her to
make an informed decision whether to proceed with the surgery. The pressure
Patient A was exacerbated by the practitioner informing the patient she would
need to have scans that afternoon and complete paperwork
if the surgery was to
proceed the following morning. We accept and prefer Person C’s evidence on
the topic of the discussion,
if any, of a return to Western Australia before
surgery and note the inconsistencies in the practitioner’s evidence on
topic (to see her family, to see her children and his evidence of no
precise recollection of the consultation).
note this particular is “pleaded” as an “and/or” with
particular (e). For the reasons enunciated above,
we are satisfied that
particular (d) is satisfied.
considering particular (e) we note that A/Professor Morokoff and the other
experts, both medical and ethical, other than Professor
Komesaroff, refer to the
providing information about logistics and post-operative rehabilitation as
commendable but not mandatory.
We note that Professor Kosemoroff does not refer
to any Code of Conduct in support of his opinion, but rather we discern his
is based on general principles relevant to an ethical informed consent.
are satisfied that, if this was a material matter for a patient, then some
discussion of the issue by the practitioner would be
appropriate. We also agree
with A/Professor Morokoff such a discussion would be commendable. However, we
are not satisfied on the
evidence before us that it is mandatory or perhaps even
practical, for a practitioner to advise a patient of costs of repatriation.
discuss below the practitioner’s changed practice that he now requires a
patient to obtain a signed consent, prior to surgery,
from a practitioner in a
patient’s home state agreeing to assume care in the event of an adverse
outcome. While this process
now no doubt ameliorates some of the concerns
expressed in relation to the complaints relative to Patient A and Patient B, and
commendable, it is not directly relevant to the establishment of this
particular. In summary, we are not satisfied that this particular
established.
Conclusions
summary, we are satisfied to the appropriate standard that Particulars 2(a) (b)
and (d) are established.
Complaint One, particular 3
On 23 October 2018, the practitioner inappropriately introduced Patient A
to a former patient, describing the former patient as “a
good example of
successful brain stem surgery” in circumstances where he did not have the
former patient’s consent to
his Reply the practitioner denies this particular.
particular may be disposed of shortly. The practitioner does not dispute that he
introduced Patient A and Person C to the patient
in his waiting room or the
words of his introduction. Rather, the practitioner relies on what he described
as “implied consent”
because of the teenage patient’s posts on
social media and attendance at functions. He explained his purpose for the
introduction
was to give Patient A “hope”. The practitioner has
acknowledged that as he has been told conduct of this type is inappropriate,
that he will not repeat it.
experts, including Dr Ryan, agree the practitioner’s conduct breached the
patient’s privacy. Professor Kosemaroff
opines the conduct was below the
standard reasonably expected (s 139B (1) (a) but does not opine that it was
significantly below
the standard expected.
for the practitioner referred to the lack of specificity in respect of this
particular, that is, is it asserted the practitioner
was in breach of privacy
legislation and if so which particular Act? We were not referred to any Code of
Conduct applicable to the
medical profession concerning patient privacy but
accept the general principle of patient confidentiality is well
established.
submissions in reply, the HCCC assert it is sufficient to establish this
particular that we rely on the expert evidence of A/Professor
Morokoff and
Professor Stokes and that the Code of Conduct (
Good Medical Practice: A Code
of Conduct for Doctors in
Australia) may be relevant to an understanding of
what is expected of a doctor in this context.
note the words “improper” and “unethical” are not
defined in the National Law but in many decisions courts
and Tribunals have been
applied their respective dictionary definitions when interpreting the words (see
Health Care Complaints Commission v Liu
[2015] NSWCATOD
Conclusions
find that the practitioner’s conduct was improper in the sense that it
involved a breach of the teenage patient’s privacy
without her consent.
We rely on and adopt as correct the opinion of A/Professor Morokoff. We are
satisfied this particular is established.
B, a 61-year-old married woman lived in Victoria. She had 2 children and 5
grandchildren. In August 2018 she was diagnosed
with a diffuse Stage II
astrocytoma, IDH wild-type and was referred for adjuvant
19 February 2019 Patient B and her husband (who we will refer to as Person D)
attended a consultation with the practitioner. At
this time Patient B was
partly paralysed down her left-hand side and was in a wheelchair. It is
asserted that at the consultation
the practitioner advised he could undertake a
radical resection of the tumour with the aim of prolonging her life.
practitioner operated on Person B on 25 February 2019. The fee for the surgery
of $35,000 was paid in advance by Patient B. A
fee of $880 was paid on the day
of Person B’s initial consultation.
B did not regain full consciousness after the operation, and she was repatriated
to Victoria on 20 March 2019. She died on
30 March 2019.
29 April 2019 Person D forwarded a complaint to the HCCC.
25 September 2020 a further complaint was addressed to the HCCC about Patient
B’s surgery from Associate Professor Lius Prado,
Chief Medical Officer,
Epworth following Mortality and Morbidity review by the Epworth Hospital,
Geelong and subsequently by the
Epworth Group Neurosciences Clinical
Lay evidence
D provided a statement dated 18 October 2019 and gave oral evidence before us
D reports that, after his wife’s diagnosis, and biopsy of her tumour, she
underwent six weeks of radiation at Andrew
Love Cancer Centre, Geelong which was
followed by chemotherapy.
his grandson alerted him and Patient A to a cannabis trial being conducted in
Sydney, they attended the practitioner’s
rooms in Sydney in about early
February 2019. While in the practitioner’s rooms Person D reports they
spoke to a doctor “Michael”
who looked at Patient A’s MRI
results and told her that he could operate and take out some of the tumour and
give her some
time. However, the doctor explained he was not yet accredited to
operate in Australia. This doctor returned to Canada and Patient
B and Person D
did not see him again.
D records that, in February 2019, Patient A had no feeling in her left side, and
as a consequence had to use a wheelchair but
was otherwise well enough to go on
D records, on the day of the consultation with the practitioner. he and Patient
B had a brief initial consultation with “his
registrar” (Dr Christos
the consultation with Dr Profyris, Patient B was advised that a recent MRI taken
at the Andrew Love Cancer Centre revealed the
tumour was a bit larger than on
the previous scan. Patient B is reported to have been distressed by this news
and was crying when
she went into the consultation with the practitioner.
Person D reports that the practitioner said “What are you fucking crying
D said that the practitioner talked about the operation and what was involved.
He asserts the practitioner only described
two specific risks – paralysis
down the left-hand side and partial memory loss. He also asserts the
practitioner said words
to the effect “I’m not going to bullshit
anything. If you don’t have this operation by Tuesday, you’ll be
fucking dead by Friday”.
D also records that the practitioner told Patient B not to worry if she did not
want to have the operation because “brain
tumours are the best fucking way
to die” and words to the effect “You’ll just slip into a coma.
No fucking pain.
You’ll just gradually fall
D said when he and Patient B enquired about recovery time, the practitioner said
that Patient B would be awake the next day
and possibly home within three days.
D asserts that the practitioner told them that he had other patients die in
surgery, but “that he never said there was
a chance that [Patient B] would
never recover from the operation. If we had known this, we would not have gone
ahead with it”.
D reported that Patient B had watched many videos of the practitioner on
You-Tube before seeing him, and in his oral evidence
explained that Patient B
“thought he [the practitioner] was God”.
D records, at the end of the consultation with Patient B, his wife said,
“OK let’s do it” to which the practitioner
responded words to
the effect “that’s a woman I like – a fighter”.
D reports, when he went to pay for the consultation, the receptionist refused
his debit card and said that payment in cash
was required. Person D went to an
ATM as advised by the receptionist and paid $880 for the consultation. Person D
also relates the
receptionist explained the fee for the surgery was $35,000 and
had to be paid by cash or bank cheque prior to the operation. She
also explained
payment of $7,500 would be required for the anaesthetist, also by cash or bank
cheque, and also prior to the operation.
D records that at a post-operative consultation, the practitioner told him the
tumour was really bad “When we opened
her up, it popped out”.
D reports that the practitioner tried to get a response from Patient B, which he
witnessed, describing the practitioner’s
action as “he basically
shook the living daylights out of her”. The practitioner’s actions
were witnessed by Patient
B’s daughter (Person E).
D also records that post-surgery he was advised that the practitioner was going
to India and Patient B’s care was assumed
by Dr James Fairhall.
D asserts that, on the practitioner’s return from India, he used Person
D’s phone to speak to Person E. Person
D records hearing the practitioner
say words to the effect “OK I was a bit negligent; I probably took out a
bit too much”.
D was extensively cross-examined by counsel for the practitioner in two
tranches. We accept that he was an honest witness
who provided his best
recollection of the events surrounding his wife’s consultation with the
practitioner and events after
her surgery. He conceded that it was a
possibility that he might have forgotten some of the things the practitioner
said during
the consultation. He also conceded that the risk of the surgery
going badly was discussed, but that it “wasn’t discussed
D confirmed that he did not have a referral to the practitioner, but that the
consultation was arranged through the staff organising
the cannabis trial. He
also explained that he did not know how the practitioner had obtained his
wife’s MRI results used by
Dr Profyris at the
consultation.
his oral evidence Person D emphasised the practitioner’s statement that,
if Patient B did not have the operation by Tuesday
that she could be dead on
Friday, was the determinative factor for Patient B agreeing to the
D acknowledged that the practitioner had not suggested the proposed surgery
would be curative, nor did he specify the length
of time Patient A could expect
to live if she had the surgery, rather he just said, “I will buy you
time” and “It
could be a month, two months could be 18”.
E, Patient B’s daughter, also provided a statement. Person E has relevant
experience and qualifications as an accredited
manager working in aged care.
She described her mother’s condition at the time of the consultation with
the practitioner as
being confined to wheelchair, that she was unable to use her
left side at all, that she could use her right arm and leg but they
weak. She also reports that “we had to feed her and it took two people to
transfer her in and out of her wheelchair
at home. Her speech had also
declined. You could still understand what she was saying but she had difficulty
in pronouncing words”.
E reports, when visiting her mother post-surgery in the ICU, the practitioner
was yelling and that he slapped her mother, who
was propped upright in bed,
across the face and that he then grabbed her by the shoulders and started
shaking her forcefully while
calling out “Wake up [Patient B’s first
name]”. She also records the practitioner saying to a nurse “Put
her in a bloody chair and tie her to the chair with sheets if you have
E also records that Dr Profyris explained to her post-operatively that during
the operation “When we opened it up it
was like a massive hernia had just
popped”. In a later telephone conversation with the practitioner, Person
E asserts the
practitioner said words to the effect “This is my fault, I
take complete responsibility. I was neglectful and I went too far.
shouldn’t have gone that far”.
E states that her mother’s transfer back to Victoria was arranged by Dr
Profyris and the transfer cost $10,190.
E reports speaking to the practitioner after her mother’s transfer to
Victoria during which conversation the practitioner
said words to the effect:
Would I do it all over again? Fucking oath I would. You should be grateful.
I’ve given you and the family extra fucking time
– that’s what
this was all about.
Person E admits that she was rude to the practitioner during this telephone
conversation and that she used derogatory and offensive
language about the
practitioner.
E was not shaken in her evidence. She made appropriate concessions. Although
she was clearly upset by the practitioner’s
decision to operate on her
mother and aspects of his conduct, she acknowledged in a conversation with him
that her mother had wanted
to have the surgery in the hope it would buy her more
time with the family. We found Person E was a credible witness and we had no
hesitation in accepting her evidence in its entirety.
Medical evidence
Mr James King MBBS PhD FRACS
HCCC relied on correspondence from Mr King, Consultant Neurosurgeon, Royal
Melbourne Hospital dated 11 November 2020. Patient
B was referred to Mr King by
her general practitioner and he first saw her on 31 July 2018. He was not
required for cross-examination.
We received his unchallenged report into
evidence before us.
B originally had an MRI of her lumbar spine, but when she reported other
symptoms, Mr King arranged for an MRI of her cervical
and thoracic regions and
the brain. The MRI was performed on 2 August 2018 and on the basis of the scan,
Mr King arranged for Patient
B to undergo a varioguide stereotatic needle biopsy
of the tumour. The biopsy revealed a diffuse astrocytoma 1HDH-1 wild type, WHO
Grade II, with a Topoisomerase Index of 2-3%. Patient B was referred by Mr
King to an oncologist. He records that, in his referring
emphasised that I felt that despite the tumour being of WHO Grade II
histopathology, the diffuse nature of the lesion
and the fact the tumour was
IDH-1 wild type made me concerned that its biological behaviour would be
aggressive and that [Patient
B] should be considered for adjuvant
chemotherapy”.
King responded to a question asking about his opinion [for treatment] at the
time of his post biopsy consultation as follows:
The particular characteristics of the tumour that I took into account were
its diffuse nature on imaging, involving both hemispheres
extensively. The
pathology which revealed a diffuse lesion including IDH-I wild type, which
portends a poor prognosis. I considered
this patient’s relatively young
age and her pre-existing high level of function, and on that basis, I
recommended aggressive
treatment with radiation and chemotherapy, but I did not
feel that surgical debulking would provide any substantial advantage to
lady and would likely result in increasing her neurological morbidity.
the final paragraph of his letter, Mr King refers to his examination of Patient
B’s post operative scans on 25 March 2019.
He records:
This showed evidence of a right frontal mini craniotomy and resection of the
right frontal lobe, which what appeared to be a resection
of the entire corpus
callosum. The resection also extended down into the thalamus and posterior limb
of the internal capsule, and
to some degree into the left parietal white matter.
The bulk of the tumour in the right parietal and left parietal areas remains
situ. There was no evidence of hydrocephalus.
The resection was performed through a right frontal approach, to a tumour
that was primarily in the right parietal, interhemispheric
and left parietal
regions. The surgery resulted in removal of a large part of this
patient’s normal brain in addition to tumour
and left her with severe
disability and no quality of life. In summary, the surgery reduced the quality
and duration of her life.
Dr George Brazenor
Brazenor is a neurosurgeon who has been in specialist practice in Victoria since
1981. He participated in the quarterly meeting
of neurologists, neurosurgeons
and spinal orthopaedic surgeons who are accredited at the Epworth Hospital,
Richmond Vic. He was
not required for cross-examination.
Brazenor explained that at the meeting a verbal history was obtained from the
neurosurgeon who took over the care of Patient B
when she returned to Victoria.
Dr Bazenor in response to a question from the HCCC’s investigator
I was truly shocked at the amount of one cerebral hemisphere which had been
resected. My memory is that approximately 40-50% of one
hemisphere had been
resected. The human brain will not tolerate that degree of excision without
devastating deficit.
Equally important, the pre-operative scan showed diffuse glioma, unresectable
because of its position. In my opinion no responsible
surgeon would have
offered any operation other than needle biopsy, and possibly not even that.
Mr Christopher Thein MB BS (Hon) FRCAS
Thein is also a neurosurgeon practising in Victoria. He is employed at St
Vincent’s Hospital, Melbourne and practices at
the Epworth Hospital,
Richmond, Victoria and the Epworth Medical Centre. He participated in the
Neuroscience Mordibity and Mortality
meeting at the Epworth Hospital on 5 June
2019 when Patient B’s case was presented. He notes the meeting had a
briefing on
behalf of Mr James King and viewed pre and post operative imaging.
He was not required for cross-examination.
Thein opines that further surgical excision would not have provided an
oncological benefit to Patient B.
Dr Elizabeth Ann Lewis AM
Lewis chaired the meeting on 5 June 2019. She opines, on the material available
to her, that the patient and her relatives “did
not appear to have been
provided (by the practitioner) the option of palliation for the short time she
Dr Lewis stated:
It is wrong to offer patients and families major surgery which will not help
the patient and then just send the patient back to a
local hospital when things
do not go well. It shows a complete lack of compassion and responsibility for
appropriate care of people.
Dr Lewis concludes her statement as follows:
This is not a single incident. There have been a number of complaints re this
doctor’s management of patients, his lack of communication
original treating doctor and his “I am the best attitude”.
we give some weight to the opinions of the attendees at the meeting, we take
into account that none of them had the benefit
of the totality of the evidence
before us in this case, including the lay and expert evidence and the evidence
of the practitioner
and Dr Profyris.
Dr Christos Profyris
Profyris provided a statement dated 20 November 2019 relied on by the HCCC and a
supplementary statement dated 2 September 2022
relied on by the practitioner. Dr
Profyris gave oral evidence by AVL and was questioned by both parties’
counsel. Dr Profyris
is currently Head of Department of Neurosurgery at the
third largest public hospital in Johannesburg, South Africa.
is important that we note before our recording of Dr Profyris’ evidence
that both Person D and Person E are very complimentary
of the diligent care and
attention that they and Patient B received from Dr Profyris both while Patient B
was a patient at the Hospital
and after her repatriation to
the time of Patient B’s consultation and surgery, Dr Profyris was
undertaking a fellowship in brain surgery with the practitioner.
Dr Profyris
explains in his first statement that, as part of his training, he would take a
full history from a patient, perform
a clinical examination, and review scans
before taking the patient to see the practitioner. He records following this
process with
his statement, Dr Profyris explains that, in his opinion, after reviewing
Patient A’s MRI scan taken a few days before the
consultation, her
prognosis was very poor and that before working with the practitioner he would
have said surgery was not an option.
He recollects telling Patient B and her
husband that “it wasn’t bread and butter surgery and it
wouldn’t be straightforward”
and that Patient B was upset and
Profyris explains that he was present throughout the whole consultation and
recalls the practitioner telling Patient B that, without
surgery, she very
likely only had weeks to live. He also recollects the practitioner saying a
“big resection was possible,
but risky, that it may extend her life by
taking away some of the pressure on her brain, but there were no
guarantees”.
Profyris denies hearing the practitioner saying, “if you don’t have
the operation by Tuesday you’ll be fucking
dead by Friday”. He
concedes the practitioner may occasionally use a swear word, and that he does
not remember the practitioner
saying “What are you fucking crying
Profyris relates the practitioner going through all the risks of surgery with
Patient B and Person D and that he gave them the
opportunity to ask questions.
He also recollects that the practitioner told Patient B that if things went well
she could expect
to go home within a few days “but if not, it would be a
different story”. He says the possibility of Patient B not
waking up was
discussed as being one of the risks involved with all brain
Profyris explains that it was his practise to dictate a report of the
consultation usually on the day of the consultation from
memory although he
might jot some notes down to refresh his memory. He also explains, if he was
very busy on the day, he may dictate
his report of the consultation on the
following day. The letter annexed to Dr Profyris’ statement is dated 20
February 2019
and does not have an addressee. We pause to note that Person D
denied ever having seen this letter. Amongst matters recorded in
that letter
are the following:
A review of her imaging today demonstrated a very diffuse lesion centred
around the right central lobule; however there is evidence
of contralatrial
hemispheric spread.
We had a very frank conversation with [Patient B] today and explained the
extent of her tumour meant she has a very limited life span
and her life was in
imminent threat.
We explained to [Patient B] that a resection of this tumour around her
central lobule would guarantee that she would lose all movement
on her left hand
side and be completely paralysed. This was explained categorically. The aim of
the resection of the tumour would
be to increase the span of her life, however,
again this cannot be guaranteed.
She understands risks include but are not confined to death, paralysis,
infection, stroke etc.
para 27 of his statement Dr Profyris states:
The operation (right frontal lobectomy + right corona radiata + corpus
callosum resection) was performed by Charlie with me assisting.
uneventful, routine surgery.
Profyris refers to steps taken to assess Patient B’s Glasgow Coma Scale
post-surgery and refers to a sternal rub but nothing
more. He also confirms
witnessing the practitioner telling the nurses he wanted Patient B kept in a
more upright position.
Profyris corroborates Person D’s evidence that he and Patient B were not
told the practitioner was going to India until after
Patient B’s surgery
and that arrangements were made for Dr James Fairhall to cover for them while
they were away. He reports
giving his telephone number to Patient B’s
family so they could contact him while they were away.
his supplementary statement, Dr Profyris relates that Patient B was very
emotional during the consultation on 20 February 2019
and that she said she was
very motivated to undergo treatment that could potentially have the effect of
extending her lifespan.
paras 12, 13 and 14 Dr Profyris again acknowledges that the practitioner does
sometime swear when interacting with patients and
their families but that he
never heard the practitioner swear in the manner alleged by Person D.
the end of Dr Profyris’s cross-examination and re-examination by counsel,
A/Professor Danks asked whether the practitioner
was planning to help Patient B
by resecting some of the tumour. Dr Profyris replied as
Dr Profyris : Correct. So from recollection, she had midline shift, which is
causing pressure. So the purpose was to debulk and create
more space.
A/Professor Danks: So it would not have been your belief that he was
discussing the option of taking a normal brain in the right frontal
order to decompress the patient’s ICP, intracranial pressure?
Dr Profyris: No. It would’ve been diseased or tumour tissue appearing
tissue on the scan. [transcript 14 February 2022 page
111 as verified by the
relevant audio recording].
Expert Medical evidence
with Patient A, it is unnecessary that we record the whole of the content of the
expert reports. Rather, we summarise those parts
of the expert reports which led
to agreement in the conclave of experts or remained significant areas of
disagreement.
unusually, for issues in the Complaint about Patient B, the practitioner relied
on two experts, namely Professor Stokes and
Professor Paul D’Urso. The
three experts gave evidence at the same time at the hearing with Professor
Stokes and Professor
D’Urso appearing by AVL and A/Professor Morokoff in
A/Professor Morokoff
A/Professor
Morokoff provided an expert report about Patient B dated 25 March 2020. As in
his earlier reports concerning Patient
A, A/Professor Morokoff responded to
questions posed to him by the HCCC and relied on a Statement of Assumed Facts.
describing the differences between a Grade II diffuse astrocytoma and a
glioblastoma and their differing prognosis, A/Professor
Morokoff referred to the
risks associated with the surgical removal of each of these types of tumours.
Risks noted included “prolonged
coma, vegetative state or death in very
rare cases”. He goes on to note that “’Radical
resection’ of these
brain cancers is generally not possible and not
attempted”. He does however note:
In the case of glioblastoma, if possible and safe, a standard goal “to
resect completely the contrast enhancing areas visible
on MRI. There is
substantial evidence that resection of > 95% of the contrast-enhancing tumour
does lead to improved outcomes.
There are a few studies looking at extremely
aggressive resection of glioblastoma which implies removing the
contrast-enhancing tumour
and also an extra margin
around that known as
the FLAIR abnormality (MRI). There is no current strong evidence that this makes
a significant difference to
outcome whereas it does increase risks [original
A/Professor
Morokoff goes on to explain that the key feature of brain cancer, unlike other
cancers of the body, is that it infiltrates
widely through the brain. Thus,
A/Professor Morokoff opines that “a ‘curative’ surgical
resection is essentially
not possible”.
A/Professor
Morokoff is critical of the practitioner’s decision to operate on Patient
B because, at the time of the surgery,
there were no likely benefits from the
surgery as she had already had a biopsy and tissue diagnosis, there were no
immediate symptoms
from mass effect, and surgery would have no significant role
in reducing the mass of the diffuse tumour which was widespread throughout
patient’s brain. However, A/Professor Morokoff (after noting that Mr King
declined twice to operate, and that Dr Profysis
explained his initial view
before working with the practitioner was that he would not operate)
In summary, ...although the decision to perform the surgery was probably not
what most neurosurgeons would advise, there is no clear
reasonably expected
standard against which one can say that Dr Teo’s decision to operate fell
A/Professor
Morokoff refers to the surgery actually performed and notes that the
“resection cavity would be by far the largest
amount of brain I have ever
seen removed for a gliobastoma”. He further explains, that despite the
large resection, a lot
of tumour was left behind. He opines that the extensive
resection had clearly caused the neurological outcome.
A/Professor
Morokoff comments that the practitioner’s expressed intention for the
surgery (to remove a large portion of non-eloquent
section of the brain to
provide space for continued swelling) is not a standard approach. He goes on to
further observe the inconsistency
in the practitioner’s stated intention
and the pre-operative plan found in Dr Profyris’ letter that the aim was
resection of the tumour”. A/Professor Morokoff is highly
critical of the surgery performed finding it to be significantly
expected standard noting the “usual standard practice would have been
either not to operate at all, or to perform
a debulking of the actual tumour in
the right parieto-occipital region”.
the assumption that Person D’s version of events is correct, A/Professor
Morokoff opines (assuming the correctness of the
allegations) that the use of
swear words and asserted phrases used by the practitioner meant his behaviour
was inappropriate and
below professional standards. He is also critical of the
practitioner’s action in slapping Patient’s B’s face
attempt to arouse her.
A/Professor
Morokoff opines that some of the billing numbers used by the practitioner to
bill Medicare were inappropriate. He did
not express any concerns about the
practitioner’s requirement for “up front” payment and noted
that one cannot
say a particular fee is inappropriate but $35,000 would be
regarded as at the extremely high end of the range.
A/Professor
Morokoff provided a supplementary report dated 3 October 2022, again in response
to questions posed by the HCCC. A/Professor
Morokoff agreed with the
practitioner’s description of Patient B’s surgery as being
“mostly accurate” but
also noted that, based on the MRI imaging,
“It appears that the whole of the anterior corpus callosum has been
resected including
both right and left sides (not just right) as well as a small
part of the left front lobe”.
A/Professor
Morokoff confirmed his earlier opinion that the practitioner had removed a large
amount of non-tumour brain tissue and
referred to the pathology report (2 out of
38 pieces of biopsy only contained tumour).
A/Professor
Morokoff explains that a radical excision of the majority of the tumour was not
performed. He also confirms his earlier
view that the surgery performed was not
appropriate and that he did not think there was any potential benefit from the
surgery performed
by the practitioner on Patient B. He confirms that, in his
opinion, the surgery performed was significantly below the relevant
a third report dated 19 January 2023 A/Professor Morokoff responds to questions
posed by the HCCC arising from the expert report
of Professor D’Urso
(which report we summarise below).
A/Professor
Morokoff generally agrees with Professor D’Urso’s description of
medical matters with the exception that he
does not agree the causation of
Patient B’s hemiparesis was attributable to her radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, but rather from
the tumour itself.
A/Professor Morokoff does not agree with Professor D’Urso’s
description of the surgery “as a radical excision
was made of a lot of
tumour but not all of it”. Rather, A/Professor Morokoff opines that not
much of the tumour was removed
but the resection consisted of mostly non-tumour
brain. He also disagrees with Professor D’Urso’ statement that
corpus callosum was also removed in the hope that any seizures that
Patient B may have after surgery would not be extended to the
other side of the
brain” opining that this contradicts an earlier statement, at para 30,
that the surgery was not directed
at a resection of 95% of the tumour.
A/Professor
Morokoff highlights a subtle difference between the practitioner’s
statement about the surgery, and his (A/Professor
Morokoff’s view of it)
(that Patient B’s outcome was not a matter of negligence or poor surgical
technique) opining
that the resection itself was not poor technique “but
rather poor planning of the surgical aims of the resection and poor
comprehension
of the risks of such a large resection that involved deep and
midline structures”.
A/Professor
Morokoff notes that he agrees with the vast majority of Professor
D’Urso’s report, and in particular, that
the extent of the resection
was excessive.
Professor Stokes
Stokes prepared a report responding to questions posed by the
practitioner’s former lawyers dated 3 August 2020.
Professor Stokes
opines that it was appropriate for the practitioner to operate on Patient B in
circumstances where she had a very
large intracranial tumour and whose raised
pressure was almost certainly significantly high, and the patient was “on
cusp of coning”. He explains that “Basically the decision
was to reduce the bulk of the tumour to give more room within
the cranial
Stokes disagrees with the proposition that the risks of the surgery outweighed
any potential benefit, but he does opine
it was not necessary to operate
immediately.
Stokes also opines in his report that the extent of the resection was large,
but he did not necessarily consider it was
excessive. He does however state
that the main bulk of the tumour was in the parieto-occipital lobe and “it
would appear from
the scans that [the practitioner] did not operate on that
his report Professor Stokes is not critical of the manner in which the
practitioner attempted to rouse Patient B (including slapping
her face) noting
that facial stimulation does occur, however it is a technique he would not
personally use. We note Professor Stokes
qualified or changed his view on this
topic in the conclave where he agreed slapping a patient’s face was not
appropriate.
Professor Paul D’Urso
D’Urso provided an expert report dated 9 December 2022. As with the other
experts, he was provided with a Statement
of Assumptions and responded to
questions posed by the practitioner’s lawyers.
D’Urso opined that Patient B’s condition appeared to be
deteriorating when she was offered surgery by the practitioner.
He opined it
was likely that Patient B’s condition would have continued to deteriorate
and become fatal. He opined that the
surgery for Patient B’s condition
would be considered controversial but explained “there would be a minority
of neurosurgical
peers that would view debulking of the tumour as a reasonable
option which would prolong Patient B’s life”.
D’Urso opined that to debulk a low-grade astrocytoma does have a potential
benefit by extending a patient’s
survival and by reducing intracranial
pressure. He therefore did not agree that the risks of the operation undertaken
any potential benefits. He again opined that such a procedure would
only be considered reasonable by a minority of surgical peers.
We pause here to
note A/Professor Morokoff’s comments about the nature of Patient B’s
D’Urso explained that the practitioner performed an extensive resection of
the right frontal lobe, and that in his
opinion the extent of the resection was
excessive being greater than that needed to reduce intracranial pressure. He
opines that
this “would not be considered reasonable by a majority of
neurosurgical peers”.
asked to comment whether a “resection of the tumour” is
“equivalent to or might otherwise be described as a
surgery involving a
right frontal lobectomy, resection of corona radiata and right corpus
callosum”, Professor D’Urso
explained that the tumour was partially
resected. He goes on to note:
As there was a significant proportion of the right frontal lobe that was
removed that was not involved by tumour, there would appear
to have been a
resection of normal brain tissues that occurred. This is not uncommon and is an
acceptable strategy in debulking
tumours to reduce intracranial pressure.
Professor D’Urso refers to the conduct engaged in by the practitioner in
his endeavouring to rouse Patient B which
might appear to be rough or uncaring.
He states such conduct is an accepted standard of practice in assessment of a
semi-conscious
or unconscious patient and therefore would be considered as being
reasonable by a body of neurosurgical peers. We pause to note
it was not clear
on the material before us whether Professor D’Urso was advised that the
practitioner is asserted to have slapped
Patient B across the face in an attempt
to rouse her or used other arousing techniques.
Evidence at First Conclave of A/Professor Morokoff, Professor Stokes and
Professor D’Urso.
experts agreed on the following matters:
a) that Patient B’s tumour was diffuse and widespread throughout the brain
including into areas of the brain which are not
normally resectable such as the
thalamus, brain stem and corpus callosum;
b) on the state of the knowledge in 2018 Patient B’s tumour could be
described as a WHO grade II low-grade tumour but the Wild
gene probably conferred a worse diagnosis;
c) there was definitely some tumour in the right frontal lobe;
d) that the tumour did not have one focal area rather it was mostly T2 tumour on
both sides of the brain and the tumour was mostly
in the right parietal lobe;
e) that A/Professor Morokoff’s explanation of what the T2 imaging revealed
was correct;
f) that the MRI report at slide 9 revealed very extensive colossal and
bio-hemispheric infiltrating glioma extending down into the
right cortico spinal
tract in the brainstem;
g) given the state of Patient B’s tumour at the date of the proposed
surgery a debulking of the right parietal area of the
tumour would be a
reasonable normal approach;
h) that the surgery which was carried out was a right frontal lobectomy
resection of the corona radiata and corpus collosum as well
as a resection of a
small part of the left frontal lobe;
the resection of Patient B’s tumour was one of the largest resections they
each had seen and that the practitioner had
removed both non-eloquent right
frontal lobe and some deep eloquent matter;
j) that if the surgery involved the corpus callosum and damage to both frontal
lobes there is a much higher risk of the patient suffering
akinetic mutism or
vegetative type syndrome;
k) that the surgical procedure appeared to be to give Patient B more space
rather than a primary resection of the tumour;
after surgery a significant amount of tumour was left behind;
m) that the surgery involved the removal of a lot of non-tumour brain tissue;
n) that the majority of neurosurgeons would say that the way the operation was
carried out (as distinct from the skill in performing
it) was not sound;
o) that the information provided to Patient B in order for her to give a
properly informed consent was probably not adequate (Professor
D’Urso with
whom Professor Stokes agreed that he would probably have seen the patient twice
to give her an opportunity to digest
what was said);
p) that the majority of neurosurgeons would not have offered surgery in this
q) that slapping a patient across the face to arouse her/him was totally
unacceptable.
The practitioner’s evidence – Patient B
noted in respect of Patient A, the practitioner has given evidence on oath in
these proceedings and proceedings under s 150 of
the National Law. Submissions
were provided to the HCCC on his behalf by his former lawyers, and answers were
provided pursuant
to a notice under
Health Care Complaints Act
(NSW) during the investigation stage of the complaint.
with Patient A, the practitioner relies on his statement dated 25 November 2023
and his Reply of the same date.
practitioner, at para 104 and 105, of his statement explains:
My opinion at the time was that this was an end stage of a highly malignant
glioma progressing despite best standard treatment and
despite a clinical trial
of cannabis that [Patient B’s first name] quality of life was extremely
poor given that she was wheelchair
bound and essentially paralysed left side and
that death from progression of the tumour (due to the pressure effect of the
within the cranium) was imminent.
My opinion was if she did want any surgery to prolong her life it would have
to be a very radical resection in order to reduce the
intra-cranial pressure and
hopefully also maintain quality of life.
practitioner goes on to explain that “I was reasonably optimistic that I
would be able to achieve a radical resection and
maintain her quality of life
and in doing so prolong her life”.
practitioner then relates the conversation he asserts took place with Patient B
and Person D concerning the risks of the surgery
including that the potential
complications of the surgery “could be as bad as, or worse than,
para 109 the practitioner states:
I categorically refute the fact that Person D was not told that the resection
had to be radical.
practitioner also denies the statements attributed to him by Person D (
are you fucking crying about’ you’ll be fucking dead by Friday,
if you don’t want to proceed with the operation brain tumours
are the best fucking way to die
practitioner also asserts that “in accordance with his usual
practice” that he advised Patient B and Person D of his
prearranged visit
to India, and that Patient B would be left in the care of another very capable
neurosurgeon. We pause to note
that Dr Profyris was clear that this information
was only provided to Person D after Patient B’s surgery.
practitioner notes that, after his consultation with Patient B and her husband,
a letter was dictated by Dr Profyris.
practitioner describes the surgery undertaken and later at para126 and
The resection was one of the largest I have ever undertaken. It was not
directed at a resection of 95% of the tumour. That was not
possible in the
circumstances. It was directed at debulking and providing Patient B with an
improved quality of life in the time
she had remaining.
para 141 the practitioner concedes the following about Patient B’s
There is no disputing that if there is a poor neurological outcome, as
occurred here, that was from being too aggressive with the
resection of normal
brain and possibly even of the tumour.
the practitioner goes on state:
However, it was and remains my view that [Patient B’s] poor
neurological outcome was not a matter of negligence or poor surgical
It was a result of the fact that some patients experience an undesirable outcome
even if the surgical resection is performed
correctly and consistent with best
standard practice. This is because everyone’s brain is unique and what
results in a desirable
outcome in terms of radical resection with the majority
of patients is not necessarily what will happen for all patients.
In his evidence to the delegates at the s 150 hearing the practitioner was a
little more forthright about Patient B’s position
and her poor
practitioner made a number of concessions about the consultation with Patient B
and the surgery performed in his cross-examination.
He agreed that the material
set out in his statement related to what was discussed in the consultation was
essentially a recitation
of his usual practice and that he could not remember
exactly what he said. He also conceded it was unlikely that he told Patient
and Person D that he would remove a large part of her right frontal lobe but
noted that by telling Patient B that her paralysis
would be worse, the
implication was that he would be taking out functional brain [transcript 20
September 2023 p 139].
questioned about discussing the surgical plan with Dr Profyris, the practitioner
explained that he may not have told him the
surgical plan “that day”
but rather discussion occurred “before the operation as we’re
planning it with the
frameless guidance system. It’s all sorts of times
that I tell him my plan”.
reference to Slide 11 of Exhibit E the practitioner sought to explain that he
had not removed the whole of the right frontal lobe.
But later in his
cross-examination the practitioner agreed the right frontal lobectomy was
excessive because of the poor outcome.
He further explained that removal of
part of the right frontal lobe had caused the patient’s
practitioner explained that during the last three years he was joined by a
person with expertise in connectomics and networks
of the brain and that Patient
B’s deficits were probably caused by damage to the default mode network.
He later explained that
software had been developed to show where the default
mode network is “so that I don’t make a mistake like this ever
again” [transcript 20 February 2023 page 159].
practitioner agreed that he had not said in writing that it was part of his plan
at the time of consent to do a right frontal
lobectomy, but rather when he
commenced the surgery, he used the frameless guidance system to give him the
best access to the tumour.
concessions made by the practitioner included a concession that he “did
not resect brain tissues that was the least eloquent
and the least likely to
affect a pre-operative neurological status”.
One, particular 4
The decision to operate on Patient B on 25
February 2019 was inappropriate in the circumstances where the risk of
neurological morbidity
associated with the operation undertaken outweighed any
potential benefits from the surgery.
The Parties submissions
HCCC submit that we should not place weight on the evidence of Professor Stokes
and Professor D’Urso because each had relied
on factual assumptions they
were directed to make. It is asserted that the practitioner did not perform the
operation which Professor
Stokes was asked to assume had been performed, namely,
that the practitioner did not radically excise the majority of the tumour
that he did more than remove most of the corpus callosum and corona
submissions provided on behalf of the practitioner, at para 214, submit that the
practitioner offered surgery “based on
his belief that there was a
reasonable chance he could effect an improvement in her [Patient B’s]
immediate (and perilous)
circumstances, and “buy her some time”. It
is submitted that it was never put to the practitioner in cross-examination
“that he did not believe that the surgery in [Patient B’s case]
could [not] yield a benefit”.
submissions on this particular again highlight that the “regrettable
outcome of the surgery” is now being assessed
through the prism of
his Reply to this particular the practitioner denies particular 4, and says that
the proposed surgery, being a right frontal lobectomy,
resection of corona
radiata and right corpus callosum was associated with a risk of neurological
morbidity. The Reply also states
that the practitioner explained the risks of
the surgery to Patient B including that the surgery was in a high risk area and
an extensive resection could be achieved, her prognosis would remain
poor. Further, that Patient B requested that he remove the
notwithstanding the risk of an adverse outcome.
note that A/Professor Morokoff in his first report opined that the surgery
should not have been undertaken because no immediate
benefits were likely, but
as we have earlier noted, Professor Morokoff also explained that surgery was not
what most neurosurgeons
would probably advise, but there was no clear standard
below which it could be said the practitioner’s decision
note that Professor D’Urso also referred to the benefit of surgery given
Patient B’s status would be considered controversial
but that a minority
of surgeons would view the debulking of the tumour as a reasonable step to
prolong Patient B’s life. Professor
Stokes provided a similar view. In
the conclave all experts opined that the majority of neurosurgeons would not
have offered surgery
in this case.
the practitioner stated in his Reply that he had resected brain tissue that was
the least eloquent and the least likely to
affect Patient B’s
pre-operative neurological state he retreated from that position and
I did the wrong thing. I obviously did the wrong thing by the patient.
I’ve damaged part of her brain to make her as bad as
post-operatively. Was that my intention? Absolutely not. I didn’t try
and hurt her. Was it through negligence? Absolutely
Conclusions
find that the majority of neurosurgeons would not have operated on Patient B
given her neurological presentation and this factor
gives some support to the
particular as pleaded. However, we accept the expert evidence of all experts is
that a small minority
of surgeons may have offered surgery to debulk the tumour.
note that this particular is framed on the basis of risks of the surgery
actually performed
, rather than the pre-operative plan discussed with
Patient B and to which she gave her consent. We are cognizant that the expert
opinions expressed focused on the
to offer surgery in Patient
B’s circumstances and revealed that a minority of surgeons may have
offered surgery to debulk Patient
B’s tumour. However, the surgery
actually performed involved excessive removal tissue from Patient B’s
right frontal
lobe with significant tumour left behind. We accept the HCCC
submission that neither Professor Stokes nor Professor D’Urso
evidence about the actual surgery performed being different to that to which the
patient gave her consent. We note the practitioner’s
concessions about
“doing the wrong thing” and damaging Person B’s brain appear
to support the establishment of
this particular.
more significance to our determination of this particular is our finding, based
on the practitioner’s own evidence, that
the decision to carry out the
surgery actually performed was a decision only made during the surgery. We
accept A/Professor Morokoff’s
evidence that this decision was
inappropriate because the surgery involved excessive removal of tissue the
consequence of which
was a devasting neurological outcome. We find that the
risks of the actual operation performed outweighed any potential benefits.
Accordingly, we are satisfied this particular is
established.
Complaint One, particular 5
On 25 February 2019, the practitioner failed to exercise proper skill in
operating on Patient B, in circumstances where
(a) standard neurosurgical practice would have been to carry out debulking of
the right parieto-occipital lobe;
(b) the extent of the resection was excessive, including a portion of tissue
in the right frontal lobe, the corpus callosum, the thalamus
and the right
posterior frontal white matter; and/or
(c) the tumour remained in the right parietal lobe, right occipital lobe,
brainstem, pons and left fronto-parietal lobe following
the surgery.
The parties’ submissions
HCCC provided comprehensive submissions in support of this particular and
referred to the evidence of each of the experts to the
effect that standard
neurological practice would have been the debulking of the right
parieto-occipital lobe and specifically to
Professor D’Urso’s
opinion that it was unsound to carry out a radical resection.
practitioner’s submissions on this topic also include submissions on
Particular 6 dealing with consent. Doing the best
we can, we discern, his
submissions seek to advance the position that the fact the practitioner removed
non-tumour brain tumour is
a common and apparently universal practice for
neurosurgeons and the practitioner exercised proper skill in carrying out the
practitioner denies Particular 5 in his Reply and says Patient B’s
pre-operative imaging demonstrated a lesion centred around
the right central
lobule and contralateral hemispheric spread and mid-line shift and that her
tumour affected the splenium and corona
radiata on the contralateral side. He
submits the approach taken was “for the purpose of best resecting Patient
tumour” and ‘the object of the surgery was principally to
decompress/remove pressure in the cranium caused by the tumour”.
of the Reply, the practitioner states “the resected brain tissue was the
least eloquent and the least likely to affect
Patient B’s pre-operative
neurological status”.
Discussion and conclusions
have earlier in these reasons summarised the expert evidence on this topic. We
are satisfied, based on the evidence of all experts,
that the material set out
in Particular 5 (a) is not a matter of dispute. We agree with the experts that
standard practice would
be the debulking of the right occipital
respect of Particular 5 (b) all experts agree the resection was excessive and
that tumour remained in the right parietal lobe,
right occipital lobe, brainstem
pons and left fronto-parietal lobe following surgery. We find Particular 5 (b)
is established. In
reaching this conclusion we have also taken into account the
practitioner’s ultimate concession that the resection was
also accept the evidence of all experts in respect of Particular 5 (c). We note
that the practitioner, while not completely accepting
the experts’
evidence on this topic, said they could be right, and he could be wrong. He
endeavoured to explain the operative
result, not on a lack of skill, but rather
a lack of knowledge at the relevant time. We accept that the operation was a
one, but we find that the established particulars (a) (b) and (c)
which are each supported by all experts, inevitably leads to a
finding of that
the practitioner failed to exercise proper skill in the execution of the surgery
on Patient B. In making this finding
we are conscious that the criticisms
levelled at the practitioner about the surgery on Patient B were directed to the
appropriateness
or otherwise of his surgery (which may be equated as judgment
rather than skill) but the established particulars and significantly
practitioner’s frank concessions made in cross-examination that he
“had done the wrong thing“ and damaged Patient
convinces us that the particular is established.
One, particular 6
On 25 February 2019, the practitioner operated on Patient B without
informed consent, in circumstances where the practitioner:
(a1) informed Patient B that the proposed operation was a resection of
tumour, when in fact the operation that the practitioner carried
was a right frontal lobectomy, resection of corona radiata and
t corpus callosum as well a
s a resecti
n of a small part
e left front lobe;
involved a lot of the tumour being left behind (as to which see
Particular 5(c) above);
involved the removal of a large amount of non-tumour brain
to properly communicate to Patient B the specific nature and magnitude of the
risks associated with the surgery in Patient
B’s clinical
presentation;
to sufficiently explain to Patient B how his opinion about the proposed
treatment for Patient B should be favoured over other
practitioners;
inappropriate language towards Patient B as part of the process of obtaining
consent to proceed with surgery, namely words to
the effect of:
not going to bullshit anything. If you don’t have this operation by
Tuesday, you’ll be fucking dead by
the fuck are you crying about? I’m here to fix you, you should be
happy”; and/or
tumours are the best fucking way to die. You’ll just slip into a coma. No
fucking pain. You’ll just gradually
fall asleep”;
to discuss the logistics and additional costs to Patient B’s family (both
financial and emotional) associated with her
post-operative rehabilitation in
the event of an adverse surgical outcome, including her repatriation to
The parties’ submissions
HCCC’s submissions on this particular focus firstly on the actual
operation carried out. It is also submitted that it was
necessary for Patient B
to understand the risk and meaning of hemiplegia and akinetic mutism and for the
practitioner to have explained
the functions of the frontal lobe. It is
submitted that we should find that the practitioner failed to communicate to
the specific nature and magnitude of the risks of surgery he was
respect of the language referred to in Particular 6 (c) it is submitted that we
should accept the evidence of Person D, noting
that on this topic Dr Profyris
said he did not recall the practitioner using the words spoken but acknowledged
the practitioner sometimes
swore when interacting with patients.
practitioner’s submissions on this particular note the evidence of
A/Professor Morokoff that almost all neurosurgeons would
consent a patient
without telling the patient they would remove healthy tissue and in fact do
remove healthy tissue.
respect of Particular 6 (c) it is submitted that even if this particular could
be sustained it would neither warrant the imposition
of conditions nor the issue
of a reprimand.
Discussion and conclusions
Particular which is directed to “informed consent” is multifaceted.
In considering Particular 1 (a1) we observe first,
the practitioner’s
evidence in cross-examination clearly disclosed that he had no particular memory
of the consultation with
Patient B and Person D. We find the most reliable
evidence of what Patient B was informed about the surgery is the near
contemporaneous
record made by Dr Profyris in his letter which notes “We
explained to [Patient B’s first name] “that a resection
tumour would be around her central lobe would guarantee she would lose all
movement on her left-hand side and be completely
paralysed”.
further take into account the practitioner’s evidence in cross-examination
to the effect that he did not explicitly tell
Patient B that he would remove
partial or significant portions of her right frontal lobe including eloquent
brain tissue.
we note the agreement of all experts that the operation involved a large amount
of non-tumour brain tissue. For the reasons
enunciated above, we are satisfied
Particular 6 (a1) is established.
to sub-particular (a) we have already noted that we find the most reliable
record of the consent discussion is contained in
Dr Profyris’s reporting
letter. That letter is near contemporaneous with the consultation. We are
satisfied that Patient B
was told that she would be paralysed down the left hand
side and could have some memory loss. We are also satisfied that Dr Profyris
accurately recorded other risks of what he understood at that point the proposed
surgery would entail
In reaching this finding, we accept that Person D
was an honest witness who gave evidence to the best of his recollection. It is
highly likely that he and Patient B gave greater weight to the more specific
risks emphasised by the practitioner (paralysis and
memory loss) and that Person
D did not recall the overall more compelling risks associated with the surgery.
We note that Person
D agreed that the consultation was of 30 to 40 minutes
duration and that he may not have recollected all that was discussed.
we accept Dr Profyris’ evidence of what was discussed at the consultation
was accurate we do not find the practitioner
adequately explained the risks to
Patient B given the surgery
actually performed.
considering sub-particular (b) we repeat our earlier findings on a similar
particular in respect of Patient A. We do not find
this particular
established.
we have generally preferred the evidence of Dr Profyris on the topic of what was
discussed at the consultation in respect of
risk, we find it likely that the
three statements reported by Person D as being made by the practitioner were
made. First, Dr Profyris
acknowledged that the practitioner used swear words
from time to time. Secondly, the tenor of the statement about death by Friday
consistent with the practitioner’s statements in his
response and at
the s 150 hearing that Patient B was at imminent risk of death. We have regard
to Person D’s evidence that
he was struck by the practitioner’s
language and his statement that Patient B could be dead by Friday which had an
him and his wife. We accept that this aspect of his evidence is
credible. Regardless of whether or not the practitioner swore,
his statement of
“dead by Friday”, has minimal support in the expert evidence,
grossly exaggerates the position and
no doubt influenced Patient A to consent to
the surgery. We are satisfied sub-particular (c) is established.
particular (sub-particular (d) is identical to the Particular in respect of
Patient A. We rely on and repeat our earlier conclusions
and do not find it is established.
Complaint One, particular
The practitioner failed to make an adequate record of the consent
discussion he had with Patient B on 19 February 2019, in circumstances
made no direct record himself of the preoperative consent discussion;
did not sign or “settle” the record of the preoperative consent
discussion made by his fellow, Dr Christos Profyris;
record of the preoperative consent discussion made by Dr Profyris was incomplete
and inaccurate
The parties’
submissions
HCCC note that in his Reply the practitioner admits he made no direct record
himself of the pre-operative discussion and made
the same admission in
cross-examination.
thrust of the submissions of the practitioner on this topic are sparse and
asserts that the HCCC has given no content to the particular.
process the practitioner conducted was, probably as part of Dr Profyris’
fellowship training, for the fellow to first see
the patient and
“present” the patient’s case to the practitioner in the
presence of the patient.
It appears that the practitioner did not
personally make any written record of advice provided to a patient including
Patient B. Dr
Profyris did not make a written record but might jot down a few
points and then dictated a reporting letter the day of the consultation.
Reply the practitioner admits this sub-particular. We are independently
satisfied the particular is established.
practitioner also admits Particular 7 (b). It is clear from Dr Profyris’
statement and the consent form itself that the
practitioner did not sign or
settle the form. We are satisfied that this sub-particular is
established.
note that the consent for surgery signed by Patient B on 25 February 2019
recorded the agreed procedure is “craniotomy for
tumour” [Exhibit B
Tab 61]. It does not describe the proposed surgery in any detail and the back
page is incomplete and was
not signed by Patient B. We are satisfied that the
consent process was patently inadequate. We are satisfied Particular 7 (c) is
established.
criticism in this particular is directed to the lack of appropriate record
keeping by the practitioner. It is not pleaded under
the relevant record
keeping regulations but is a generalised complaint of lack of personal record
keeping by the practitioner. In
this case, we find that the practitioner did
not sign Dr Profyris’s reporting letter and he did not sign or countersign
Operation Consent form.
Conclusions
our findings about each sub-particular, and the practitioner’s
concessions, we are satisfied this particular is established.
Complaint One, particular 8
On 26 February 2019, the
practitioner inappropriately slapped Patient B across her face, in the presence
of her family in circumstances
where Patient B was unconscious and had been
since 25 February 2019.
The parties’ submissions
HCCC submissions refer to the practitioner’s concessions made at the s 150
hearing on this topic and submit that we should
accept the evidence of all three
experts on this topic.
practitioner’s submissions simply note the complaint neither warrants the
imposition of conditions nor the issue of a reprimand.
Discussion and conclusions
particular needs little discussion. The practitioner admits he slapped Patient
B on the face, albeit he says “lightly”.
During the hearing he
demonstrated a light slapping motion to his own face. He distinguished his
action from a “Will Smith
inappropriate to attempt to arouse a patient in the presence of
is not in dispute that it may often be necessary to assess a patient who is
unconscious by eliciting a pain response, and there
are accepted clinical
practices of how to do so. However, all experts, including the
practitioner’s two experts, were strongly
critical of a doctor seeking to
arouse a patient by slapping her/his face. We pause to note that Professor
Stokes conceded in the
conclave that slapping a patient’s face was
unacceptable thus departing from the opinion in his expert report. The
view is that “slapping” is a practice is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected. We accept however that
the action demonstrated by the practitioner was not violent slapping. The
action demonstrated by the practitioner is one which
has been widely used by the
profession. However, as acknowledged by the practitioner, it was inappropriate
to do so in the presence
of family members. We are not satisfied that this
particular is established to the requisite standard.
Complaint Two, particular 2
The practitioner charged a fee of $35,000 for performing a radical resection
of Patient B’s tumour on 25 February 2019, which
was inappropriate in the
circumstances where:
(a) the practitioner failed to discuss with the patient the $35,000 fee to be
charged for the operation;
(b) the practitioner was required to be paid prior to surgery, contrary to
normal billing practice for medical services; and/or
(c) Patient B was in a state of vulnerability
The parties’ submissions
HCCC practitioner’s submissions note the admissions of the practitioner in
respect of Particulars (a) and (b). It is asserted
we should find Patient B was
in a state of vulnerability having regard to the evidence of both her husband
and Dr Profyris at the
commencement of the consultation with the practitioner
and having regard to her physical disability requiring a wheelchair and her
knowledge of her terminal diagnosis.
practitioner’s submissions note that the quantum of surgical fees is not
regulated in New South Wales. Further, it is submitted
that Person B’s
state of vulnerability could not be mitigated, “it cannot be said that
[the practitioner] created the
vulnerability”.
commence by noting in his Reply the practitioner acknowledges the factual
correctness of sub-particulars (a) and (b) but denies
sub-particular
were not directed to any legislative provision or Code which mandates a doctor
must discuss with the patient a fee to be charged
for an operation. We accept
some practitioners may discuss their fees with a patient, but it is common
practice for information about
charges to be delegated, as was the case for
Person B, to a practice manager or other administrative staff. Nor were we
to any authoritative source which precludes a doctor requiring to be
paid prior to surgery, or that to do so is contrary “normal
practice”. We refer to and accept A/Professor Morokoff’s view on
this topic. We accept, as highlighted by Professor
Komesaroff, that the Code of
Conduct provides that fees should be reasonable, and that A/Professor Morokoff
explained that $35,000
is at the highest end of the range. But the particulars
(a) and (b) are not framed on basis the charge for the surgery was excessive.
considering sub-para (c) we have taken the following matters into account.
First, Patient B was distressed and crying at the commencement
consultation having been told by Dr Profyris that her tumour had increased.
Secondly, Patient B had a very high regard for
the practitioner having watched
his You Tube videos and as her husband said she “thought he was
God”. Thirdly, she was
anxious to extend her life. In these circumstances
we accept she was vulnerable and therefore unable to make a rational decision
of charging. In reaching this finding, we have taken
into account that the
practitioner has performed surgery for other patients on a “no gap”
basis (that is, accepting Medicare
and private health fund payment in full
satisfaction of his fees).
Conclusions
we are satisfied it was inappropriate for the practitioner to have charged
$35,000 for the surgical procedure where Patient
B was in a position of unequal
bargaining power due to her state of vulnerability. We find the charging of the
sum of $35,000 was
inappropriate and constitutes improper conduct under s 139B
Complaint Two, particular 3
On or around 23 March 2019, the practitioner used inappropriate language
during a telephone conversation with Person E, Patient B’s
namely words to the effect of:
asking the wrong fucking question”;
I do it all over again? Fucking oath I would. You should be grateful. I’ve
given the family extra fucking time”
practitioner in his Reply denies this particular.
Discussion and conclusions
earlier noted, we found Person E to be a credible witness whose evidence was not
impeached in cross-examination. She candidly
explained that she had used
abusive and derogatory language directed to the practitioner in her telephone
conversation. We find
it both likely and credible that the practitioner
responded in words attributed to him given Person E’s hostile introduction
to their conversation. We accept and prefer Person E’s evidence on this
topic. The practitioner’s reported words are
consistent with his
explanation about offering surgery. We have also taken into account Dr
Profyris’ evidence that the practitioner
does swear from time to time. We
find this particular is established.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct
respect of Complaint One, we have found Particulars 1,2
3,4,5,6, and
established under s 139B (1) (a) or (l) of the National Law. In
respect of Complaint Two we have found Particulars 2 and 3 established
139B (1) (l) of the National Law. Thus, we are satisfied the
practitioner’s conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional
defined in the National Law.
Should protective orders be
purpose of protective orders made in disciplinary proceedings is well
established and uncontroversial. The relevant principles
are succinctly
explained by Meagher JA in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
at 35 as follows:
The objective of protecting the health
and safety of the public is not confined to protecting the patients or potential
patients of
a particular practitioner from the continuing risk of his or her
malpractice or incompetence. It includes protecting the public from
the similar
misconduct or incompetence of other practitioners and upholding public
confidence in the standards of the profession.
That objective is achieved by
setting and maintaining those standards and, where appropriate, by cancelling
the registration of practitioners
who are not competent or otherwise not fit to
practise, including those who have been guilty of serious misconduct. Denouncing
misconduct operates both as a deterrent to the individual concerned, as
well as to the general body of practitioners. It also maintains
confidence by signalling that those whose conduct does not meet the required
standards will not be permitted to practise.
Committee’s powers to make protective orders do not include powers of
cancellation or suspension for proven professional
misconduct. The Committee
may, if it finds a complaint proved, or the practitioner admits the complaint,
exercise any power under
Subdivision 3 of Division 3 of
of the National
Law. The powers which may be exercised by the Committee are set out in s 146B of
the National Law, a copy of which
is annexed to these reasons. The powers
include the power to caution or reprimand a practitioner, and to impose
conditions on a
practitioner’s registration.
support for the practitioner
have earlier referred to the letters of support from overseas neurosurgical
colleagues. We have taken into account the considerable
number of letters of
support from the practitioner’s patients and their families as well as
copies of Facebook posts. The letters
and posts are unanimous in their support
for the practitioner. We note that Conjoint Professor Michael Friedlander AM, a
oncologist, who has a professional relationship with the practitioner
for over twenty years, reports that the practitioner “is
committed to the
wellbeing of his patients and he has always been available to discuss [sic]
patient with me and has seen patients
in hospital promptly when
requested”.
of the patients or practitioners were required for cross-examination and we
accept their evidence.
again note the comments of Professor Associate Professor Yeo Tseng Tsai, and his
view that on reflection some surgeries should
not have been undertaken by the
practitioner. That comment is consistent with our findings in respect of
the parties had not completed their submissions at the conclusions of the
hearing and the conditions sought by the HCCC, if we
found the particulars of
the complaints or part of them established, were only provided to the
practitioner and his lawyers on the
second last day of the hearing, we provided
an opportunity for the parties to make written submissions on the topic. For
understanding of our discussion of the conditions proposed we have
annexed a copy of the proposed conditions which we have marked
as Annexure
“D”. As discussed below, proposed condition 2 was amended following
comments on it by A/Professor Murphy.
Did the practitioner
suffer procedural unfairness by reason of late articulation of the conditions
sought if unsatisfactory professional
conduct established?
and at the conclusion of the hearing, it was asserted that the HCCC’s
conduct in not providing a copy of the conditions
it seeks should be imposed
until the penultimate hearing day was procedurally unfair and not in accordance
with authority (
Gautam v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2021] NSWCA
per Leeming JA at 13).
HCCC argued no prejudice was caused to the practitioner because on day one of
the hearing senior counsel for the HCCC indicated
that if the complaints were
established the HCCC would seek the imposition of a reprimand and conditions on
the practitioner’s
registration. Further, and of some significance, the
HCCC conceded at the conclusion of the hearing that the practitioner should
afforded a period of time (which did occur) to respond in writing to the
conditions sought by the HCCC. The HCCC submit the conditions
sought are not
much more extensive than those currently imposed on the practitioner’s
registration and that it was the practitioner’s
wish for a single stage
have noted Leeming JA’s comments on this topic which are directed to
ensuring procedural fairness to a practitioner involved
in disciplinary
proceedings. While it would have been preferable for the actual conditions
sought to be have been provided to the
practitioner’s lawyers at the
commencement of the hearing, we find the time afforded to the
practitioner’s lawyers to
respond in writing to the actual proposed
conditions obviates any procedural unfairness.
HCCC provided written submissions on 28 April 2023 which provide a detailed
response to the practitioner’s critique of the
conditions.
The parties’ submissions on proposed
is convenient that we refer to each of the parties’ submissions on each
proposed condition by first referring to the practitioner’s
submissions
and then recording the HCCC’s response.
Condition 1
practitioner submits that the proposed condition 1 “is inutile”
being unnecessary to protect the public and is an
“unwarranted and
unnecessary intrusion into [the practitioner’s] right to practice”.
HCCC note the basis this condition is sought is to provide effective monitoring
of the other conditions sought to be imposed.
Condition 2
proposed condition 2 (which is a modification of the existing condition imposed
on the practitioner’s registration) requires,
in summary that before the
practitioner conducts any surgical procedure involving recurring malignant
tumours in any part of the
brain or brain stem surgery, he must obtain a
statement from a neurosurgeon which supports the proposed procedures. We note
this was not the wording of the condition initially proposed by the HCCC
but was modified to take into account observations of A/Professor
Additionally, the practitioner must keep a log of all patients about whom he has
obtained a statement in support of the proposed
practitioner objects to the imposition of this condition on the basis that:
(a) This proposed condition is a de facto “suspension” of the
practitioner’s right to practice and
ultra vires
Committee’s powers.
(b) The condition is incapable of performance because, as highlighted by
A/Professor Murphy during the hearing, whether a tumour
is malignant or not may
not be able to be ascertained prior to surgery.
(c) Such a condition is unnecessary and disproportionate having regard to the
instances of unsatisfactory professional conduct asserted
in the Complaint
compared to the very long period of the practitioner’s practice.
(d) Even if the condition could be modified to make the pre-operative assessment
of the nature of surgery to be performed clearer,
there is always a risk once
commenced a surgical plan may need to be modified.
(e) It is questionable whether the Medical Council is qualified to approve an
appropriate surgeon and a query is raised about why
the qualification is limited
to a surgeon who is a fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons and
does not include an overseas
fellowship.
(f) That the practitioner, being a pioneer in the field, should not be
restricted from performing surgery which may not yet be recognised
supported literature as being beneficial. Performance of such surgery is noted
to be the benefit the profession and the
(g) The question of how the benefits of the surgery/risks of surgery are to be
assessed is unclear.
(h) That it is questionable that it is within the power of the Committee to
require identification of procedures undertaken overseas.
(i) If a condition is considered necessary and appropriate, the condition should
require the practitioner to ensure that a patient
has been referred to seek at
least one second opinion. However, it is submitted that the condition could not
actually require the
patient obtain that opinion; ultimately though patient
choice should be paramount.
HCCC submit the potential problem raised by A/Professor Murphy has been overcome
by amending the wording of the proposed condition
to be “When proposing
and before performing recurrent malignant intracranial tumour and brain stem
tumour surgical procedures”.
HCCC further dispute that the proposed condition inappropriately fetters the
practitioner’s ability to practice medicine,
nor does it amount in its
practical effect to a suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration. It is submitted
the proposed conditions may be distinguished from
the type of conditions discussed in
Lucire v Health Care Complaints
[2011] NSWCA 99
is further submitted that the condition does not apply to surgical procedures
that do not involve recurrent malignant intracranial
tumours or brain stem
tumours and that the practitioner is permitted to treat those patients without
obtaining consent and further
the practitioner is not limited in treating
patients with malignant intracranial tumours and brain stem tumours if he meets
the requirements
to perform those surgeries.
is further submitted:
(a) That the proposed condition does not abrogate the practitioner’s
responsibilities to a third party
(b) That if an issue arises in surgery, that can be overcome by the scope of
consent given by the patient
(c) That the expertise of the Medical Council is not relevant because the
relevant judgment is that of the Council approved neurosurgeon
(d) The condition does not prevent the practitioner from operating overseas but
only refers to local patients electing to have surgery
overseas with whom, in
accordance with a written statement, the practitioner has discussed the issue of
repatriation.
Condition 3
practitioner submits there is nothing in the evidence to support the need for
the practitioner to have a supervisor. It is submitted
that the practitioner
practices and teaches around the world and that “his skills and
supervision are in demand”. It
is further submitted there is no evidence
of any defect in his practice that would be cured by a
supervisor.
HCCC submit this condition should be made because:
(a) Such a condition will protect the public having regard to the
practitioner’s failure to properly weigh the risks and benefits
surgery, his understanding of obtaining informed consent, his understanding of
patients’ right to privacy, bodily integrity
and his use of inappropriate
(b) The condition will facilitate the practitioner gaining insight into his
Conditions 4 and 5
two proposed conditions relate to the practitioner completing an ethics course
and a Clinical Communication program. While the
practitioner’s
submissions note the practitioner does not have any trouble undertaking the
proposed courses, it is submitted
that it is unclear that the proposed courses
would add to the practitioner’s knowledge in a way that would improve
Condition 6
condition, which relates to an audit of the practitioner’s records, is not
in principle opposed by the practitioner, but
it is submitted he should not have
to pay for the audit. It is submitted that if he does have to pay for the
audit, he should be
able to choose the auditor.
HCCC reject the practitioner’s submissions and maintain an audit is
appropriate given the practitioner’s conduct and
that he should be
required to pay for the audit by a Council nominated
Consideration – should conditions as proposed
by the HCCC be made?
Is proposed Condition 2 beyond power
noted in the submissions above, the practitioner’s submissions are that
the proposed order is
ultra vires
amounting to a de facto suspension or
cancellation of his registration. In support of this submission the
practitioner relies on
the decision in
at [70] Basten JA explained in the absence of a finding of
professional misconduct, the imposition of a condition which limited the
psychiatrist to providing only medico-legal reports was not an appropriate order
as it operated in a practical sense to preclude
the practitioner practising and
thus was beyond power.
note the following. First, while the practitioner submits that the proposed
condition, which is in a practical sense, broadly
akin to the present condition
on his registration, precludes him from carrying on practice, he has adduced no
admissible evidence
to support that proposition. Secondly, the proposed
condition is not as draconian or limiting as the condition referred to in
which precluded the psychiatrist from treating, managing or
advising patients and limited her practice to the provision of medio-legal
reports. Thirdly, while the condition sought is highly prescriptive it does not
preclude the practitioner conducting specific categories
of surgeries provided
he complies with the pre-requisites of obtaining support for his proposed
surgery. Thus, we conclude the proposed
condition is not beyond our power to
The guiding principle of the National Law
submissions of the practitioner at paras 20-22 direct our attention to the
National Law. Reference is made to
The submissions of the practitioner
place significant weight on
(2) (c) and in particular to the word
“necessary” in that sub-section and argue by reference to authority
State of New South Wales v Robinson
[2016] NSWCA 334
and the dictionary
definition of “necessary” as essential) that the conditions sought
by the HCCC cannot be demonstrated
to be necessary or appropriate.
aids understanding of this submission that we set out
in full. It provides
as follows:
(1) The main guiding principle of the national
registration and accreditation scheme is that the protection of the health and
of the public must be the paramount consideration.
(2) The other guiding principles of the national registration and
accreditation scheme are as follows--
(a) the scheme is to operate in a transparent, accountable, efficient,
effective and fair way;
(a1) the scheme is to ensure the development of a culturally safe an
respectful health workforce that--
(i) is responsive to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and their
health; and
(ii) contributes to the elimination of racism in the provision of health
Codes and guidelines developed and approved by
National Boards under
may provide guidance to health practitioners about the provision of
culturally safe and respectful health care.
(b) fees required to be paid under the scheme are to be reasonable having
regard to the efficient and effective operation of the scheme;
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health profession are to be imposed
under the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided
safely and are of an appropriate quality.
This section is a substituted New South Wales
is also relevant for the purpose of the parties’ contentions on the
interpretation of the National Law that we set out
It is in the following
An entity that has functions under this Law is to exercise its functions
having regard to the objectives and guiding principles of
the national
registration and accreditation scheme set out in
The HCCC’s submissions
HCCC submissions at paras 70 to 73 refer to matters including the following,
namely, that on correct reading of
of the National Law that section and
must be read together. In particular, emphasis is placed on the
guiding principle in
(1) namely the protection of the public. We
accept as correct the submissions of the HCCC on the interpretation to be given
of the National Law. Thus, in considering the imposition of any
conditions on the registration of the practitioner, we give paramount
consideration to the health and safety of the public having regard to our
findings on the complaints.
Discussion and conclusions
have had careful regard to matters implemented by the practitioner following
these complaints. First, we accept his evidence that,
on the advice of his
professional indemnity insurers, he now records all consenting consultations and
invites patients to record
his advice on their mobile phones in order that they
can replay the advice or seek counsel from family or others before making a
decision about surgery. Therefore, provided both general and particular risks of
proposed surgery are explained, the recording process
provides a good procedure
to ensure a proper opportunity is afforded to the patient to review the advice,
other than in emergency
or urgent situations, before consenting to surgery.
have also had regard to the practitioner’s evidence, which we accept, that
he has, again with input from his insurers, adopted
a practice that interstate
patients must, prior to surgery, obtain a signed authority from a local
practitioner agreeing in the event
of an adverse outcome that the local
practitioner will accept the patient’s care. This policy must act as a
brake on surgery
where the risks of the surgery potentially outweigh the
benefits and obviate the very difficult circumstances faced by Person B and
Persons D and E when their relatives’ surgeries had disastrous
leaves the very difficult question of whether it is necessary in the interests
of the health and safety of the public to place
any condition on the
practitioner’s registration in respect of offering surgery to patients
suffering brain stem gliomas and/or
any other brain cancer surgery including
surgery on minors.
accept the submissions of the HCCC is respect of proposed condition 1 are well
founded and appropriate. This provision enables
either the Council or if the
practitioner moves interstate, the Medical Board of Australia to monitor
implementation of the conditions.
condition 2, if made, will place quite onerous obligations on the practitioner.
If the practitioner had demonstrated before
us that he had “taken
onboard” the views of his peers and appropriately reflected on his
practices, we may have found
a condition such as proposed condition 2
unnecessary. However, we note that the practitioner maintained at the hearing
his superior
knowledge to that of A/Professor Morokoff and his own expert
Professor Stokes when he said “I just said I have more experience
brainstem tumours and surgery thereof than almost everyone in the world,
including Professor Stokes [transcript 16 February
the practitioner’s robust views expressed in cross-examination about
offering surgery essentially based on his interpretation
of patient autonomy,
and his isolation from his peers, we have concluded that the condition as
proposed by the HCCC is necessary
to protect the health and safety of the
reject the alternate condition proposed by the practitioner as we do not find
such a condition would adequately protect the health
and safety of the public.
This is because the practitioner proposes that the obtaining of a second opinion
before any surgery would
not be mandatory, and given the cohort of patients who
consult the practitioner, it is likely they will have already consulted other
practitioners and/or be desperate for any procedure given their diagnosis. We
are fortified in our conclusion having regard to the
circumstances where both
Patient A and Patient B had already obtained opinions from
neurosurgeons.
do however find it is appropriate to amend the qualification of the neurosurgeon
in proposed condition 2 (ii) to a period of 15
years’ experience rather
than 20 years’ experience .
do not find it necessary or appropriate to make a supervision condition. Such
a condition is unlikely to have any significant
practical effect in ensuring the
health and safety of the public. In reaching this finding, we think these
reasons and the outcome
of these proceedings should cause the practitioner to
reflect on his practices and attitudes. A change of attitude is likely to
highly relevant factor on any review application. We also take into account the
supervisory elements in Condition 2.
note the practitioner does not object to undertaking the courses proposed in
proposed conditions 4 and 5. While we could make
the proposed conditions we
think it is more appropriate for the practitioner to undertake courses as
suggested if available on a
voluntary basis. Actions such as voluntary
attendance would be very relevant for any application for review of the
conditions by
the Council in the future. We will not make proposed conditions
condition 6 relates to the random audit of the practitioner’s records and
to meet the costs of the audit. We accept
and prefer the submissions of the
HCCC to those of the practitioner in respect of this condition which we will
balance of the proposed conditions are essentially “machinery” or
“standard” provisions and are not controversial.
They are designed
to ensure the implementation and monitoring of conditions and are appropriate to
Conclusions
A and B were both vulnerable women facing the prospect of death from their
respective brain tumours. Their understandable
wish to extent their life
expectancy placed a great responsibility on the practitioner, whose referees
note that he is gifted surgeon
of renowned international standing, to ensure
that each patient truly understood the magnitude of the risk she would undertake
having surgery, but more significantly, to refuse surgery in circumstances
where the risks outweighed benefits. This latter requirement
placed and places
ethical constraints on any surgeon in accordance with the RACS Code of Conduct
and the general professional standards
of the medical profession.
surgical advances in difficult areas such as brain tumours are not to be stymied
in all circumstances, surgery should be evidence
based and not purely
experimental or a learning exercise because of a lack of tier one evidence
contradicting such surgery. Ideally,
new surgical techniques should be
conducted in a clinical trial setting or after other ethical and/or peer review
which ensures appropriate
protocols of safety are observed and a patient is
fully informed of potential risks and benefits.
have concluded, in the case of Patient A, that the practitioner did not exercise
appropriate judgment in proceeding to surgical
resection. In the case of
Patient B, the practitioner carried out surgery which was different to that
proposed to the patient, and
the surgical strategy led to unwarranted and
excessive removal of normal functional brain. We have also found a number of
relative to informed consent were lacking. Thus, we have concluded that
the unsatisfactory professional conduct we have found proved
Reprimand being recorded on the practitioner’s registration.
discussed above, we have endeavoured to appropriately balance the health and
safety of the public while ensuring that the practitioner
can continue to
provide his surgical services to patients.
are finely balanced. Factors favouring the practitioner’s registration
being unrestricted include the changes he has
made to his practice of obtaining
consent and making appropriate repatriation arrangements pre-surgery. We also
take into account
that the practitioner’s current conditions are likely to
have placed significant constraints on his ability to conduct surgery.
means, unless the conditions are lifted now, or in the future, he is effectively
restricted in how he must practice as a surgeon
in respect of some
have also placed significant weight on the highly commendable teaching in which
the practitioner has engaged, including his overseas
appointments, and the
benefit this has afforded other neurosurgeons and patients. We have also given
careful weight to his patient
testimonials. Notwithstanding these matters, we
find the practitioner has, for the most part, become isolated from the majority
of his peers, and does not conform to a number of relevant accepted professional
have found his judgment was flawed in offering surgery to Patient A. His
answers in both his written material and his oral evidence,
while disclosing a
willingness to examine and take responsibility for bad outcomes, demonstrated a
lack of nuanced appreciation of
the vulnerability of his patients and likely
flaws in their consent or patient autonomy.
greater significance is his lack of reflection on his judgment in offering
surgery without supporting statistical data or peer
support which, in his own
experience, may or may not be proved to have been in error in ten years’
time. While the practitioner
expresses sorrow and takes responsibility for bad
surgical outcomes, he does not express any remorse for offering surgery to
A or Patient B. This lack of insight into his judgment causes us
is for these reasons we have found it both necessary and appropriate to record a
Reprimand on the practitioner’s registration
and to make the conditions
set out at below. We are mindful that the practitioner can seek a review of the
conditions under s 163A
of the National Law. A review would seem to us to be
appropriate if the practitioner takes steps, as he has done in his consenting
process and with repatriation processes, to demonstrate how he has complied
with condition 2 and any proposals going forward to
implement some review
process before offering surgery in those cases where the majority of his peers
would not offer surgery as well
as completion of courses of the type sought by
the HCCC it its proposed conditions.
Professional Standards Committee having found Dr Charles Teo (the practitioner)
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
determines that:
(a) The practitioner is reprimanded.
(b)The following conditions are imposed on the practitioner’s
registration:
advise the Medical Council of NSW in writing at least seven days prior to
changing the nature or place of his
proposing and before performing any recurrent malignant intracranial tumour and
brain stem tumour surgical procedures, the practitioner
must obtain from a
Council-approved Neurosurgeon a written statement which supports the
practitioner performing the procedure(s)
in accordance with condition 2(b). If
the written statement does not support the practitioner performing the
procedure(s) the practitioner
cannot perform the surgery.
(a) The Council-approved Neurosurgeon must:
(i) be nominated by the practitioner and approved by the Council prior to the
practitioner proposing any recurrent malignant intracranial
tumour and brain
stem tumour surgical procedures
(ii) be a fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, hold current
specialist registration as a Neurosurgeon with the Medical
Board of Australia,
and have at least 15 years’ experience as a registered specialist in
Neurosurgery;
(iii) not be employed by the practitioner, have a business/financial
relationship with him or be supervised by him
(b) The written statement is to advise whether the Council-approved Neurosurgeon
is satisfied prior to the procedure:
(i) The practitioner has explained to the patient all material risks associated
with the procedure(s) and obtain informed consent;
(ii) The proposed procedure is supported by peer reviewed evidence and that the
benefits from surgery outweigh the risks associated
with surgery.
(c) The practitioner must maintain a log listing all patients for whom he has
obtained the written statement referred to in this
condition. The log is to
(i) The patient’s full name, date of birth and the state they reside in;
(ii) Whether the patient travelled interstate or overseas for the procedure(s)
and the details of this travel;
(iii) The nature of the surgical procedure(s);
(iv) The name of the Council-approved Neurosurgeon who provided the written
(v) A copy of all written statements obtained as an appendix to the log,
regardless of whether the Council-approved Neurosurgeon
supported or did not
support the procedure(s);
(vi) If the Council-approved Neurosurgeon supported the procedure(s) the log is
to also include the date and time of the procedure(s);
the address of where the
procedure(s) was performed, all MBS item number(s) billed for the procedure(s);
and any complications arising
as a result of the procedure(s).
(d) The practitioner must forward to the Council a copy of the log within seven
days of the end of each calendar month. Before forwarding
the log to the
Council, the practitioner must forward the log to the Council-approved
Neurosurgeon to verify the contents of the
(e) To authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide the Council-approved
Neurosurgeon a copy of the decision which imposed this
condition, and any other
decision or report as determined by the Council.
3. To submit to an audit of the practitioner’s medical practice, by
random selection of his medical records, by a person(s)
nominated by the Medical
Council of NSW.
(a) The audit is to be held within 6 months from the date of decision and as
subsequently required by the Council;
(b) Prior to the audit the practitioner is to provide to the Council with the
full name and date of birth of all interstate patients
who have undergone
surgery by the practitioner from the date of decision and from any date as
determined by the Council;
(c) The auditor(s) is to assess his management of patients, compliance with good
medical record keeping standards, legislative requirements
and compliance with
conditions.
(d) To authorise the auditor(s) to provide the Council with a report on their
(e) To meet all costs associated with the audit(s) and any subsequent reports.
authorise and consent to any exchange of information between the Medical Council
of NSW and Medicare Australia for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with
these conditions.
Medical Council is the appropriate review body for the purposes of Part 8,
Division 8 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law are to apply
whilst the practitioner’s principal place
of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so that a review of these conditions
can be conducted by the
Medical Board of Australia.
AND REVIEW RIGHTS
Dr Charles Teo has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days after receipt of
these written reasons.
Dr Charles Teo also has the right to seek a review by the Medical Council of
NSW of the Committee’s order to impose conditions.
Should Dr Charles
Teo’s principal place of practice be anywhere other than NSW at the time
of seeking a review of conditions,
Dr Charles Teo may make an application for
review to the National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
The non-publication order made on 13
February 2023 in respect of the five persons named in the Schedule to the Second
Further Amended
Complaint continues so that any person who contravenes this
direction is guilty of an offence under clause 7 (5) of Schedule 5D to
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
We will provide a copy of
this written statement of our decision to Dr Charles Teo, the Commission, the
National Board, and the
complainants.
_________________________
The Hon Jennifer
Chairperson
12 July 2023
146B General powers to caution, reprimand, counsel etc
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following in relation
to a relevant health practitioner the subject of a complaint referred
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice
at the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction
may still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order
or directs that any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the Committee may order that a contravention of the order or
condition will result in the health practitioner’s
registration in the
health profession being cancelled.
(4) The order or condition concerned
"critical compliance order or condition"
Annexure “A”
Exhibits List
HCCC evidence
Volume 1 of the HCCC material
Volume 2 of the HCCC material
Volume 3 of the HCCC material
Tabs 1-4 in volume labelled “Additional Material” provided by
the HCCC inclusive of:
“HCCC letter re application to Dr Goyal dated 7 Feb 2023”
“Letter from MakDap to HCCC requesting details of the forensic purpose of
the application to Dr Goyal - dated 7 February 2023”
“HCCC letter attaching forensic decision to Dr Goyal” dated 8
February 2023 attaching:
“Aide memoire” undated
“Statement of Carol Cook dated 8 February 2023”
“HCCC letter re application to XXN application” dated 9 February
12-page PowerPoint of scans of Patient A and Patient B
Bundle of material regarding patient A Post Operative MRI Scans:
Response of
A/Prof Morokoff dated 19 February 2023
instruction to A/Prof Morokoff dated 17 February 2023
post-operative MRI slides and MRI report dated 25 October 2018;
pre-operative MRI slides.
Bundle of material related to additional literature
Response of
A/Prof Morokoff dated 22 March 2023
instruction to A/Prof Morokoff from HCCC dated 16 March 2023
literature provided by Prof Teo
Full set of patient A’s post-operative scans from Prince of Wales
Public Hospital (electronic copy only)
Conditions proposed by the Heath Care Complaints Commission
Professor Teo’s evidence
Volume 1 of Prof Teo material
Volume 2 of Prof Teo material
Volume 3 of Prof Teo material
Tab 9 in volume labelled “Additional Material” provided by the
HCCC titled “Statement of Assumptions sent to Professor
regarding patient B”
Tabs 6 in volume labelled titled “Additional Material” provided
by the HCCC – “Submissions of Professor Teo”
dated 17 August
Tabs 7 in volume labelled “Additional Material” provided by the
HCCC – “Notes made by Professor Teo regarding
cases of Patient A and
Patient B (s 30A Response)” undated
Tabs 8 in volume labelled “Additional Material” provided by the
HCCC – “Letter of Instruction to Dr Chris
Ryan (medical
ethicist)” dated 14 July 2022
Please note that there was no exhibit 8 for these proceedings
Correspondence between Prof Stokes and Prof Teo’s legal
Report of Prof
Stokes dated 21 February 2023
2 email trails
between Professor Stokes and Prof Teo’ legal advisors in relation to the
post-operative MRIs of patient A
Report of Prof Stokes in relation to the post-operative MRIs of Patient A
dated 27 March 2023
Selection of MRI scans for Patient A including the radiology report dated
25 October 2018
Selection of MRI scans for Patient B including the radiology report dated
19 February 2019
Annexure “B”
SECOND FURTHER
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
Executive Officer
Medical Council of NSW
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
The Health Care Complaints
Commission of Level 12, 323 Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted
with the Medical Council of
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) (“the
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Professor Charles Teo (“the practitioner”) of Prince of Wales
Hospital, Room 19, Level 7 Barker Street, RANDWICK NSW 2031
being a medical
practitioner registered under the
National Law
COMPLAINT ONE
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a)
and/or (l) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of medicine is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience;
in improper and / or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of medicine.
Each of the particulars of Complaint One
justify a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct individually. In the
alternative,
when two or more of the particulars of Complaint One are taken
together, a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct is justified.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT ONE
The Practitioner
The practitioner obtained his MBBS in 1980
and works as an Honorary Medical Officer / staff specialist at Prince of Wales
Hospital and the Sydney Children’s Hospital, and as a director of
the Centre for Minimally Invasive Neurosurgery.
He was first
registered as a medical practitioner in New South Wales on 4 March 1981. The
practitioner became a Fellow of the Royal
Australasian College of Surgeons in
At all relevant times, the practitioner had operating rights
at Prince of Wales Private Hospital (the
Patient A was born on 14 March 1977 and at all material times was a resident
of Western Australia.
On around 12 October 2018, Patient A was diagnosed with diffuse Stage IV
tectal midbrain glioma, also referred to as a brainstem glioma
BSG’) or a glioblastoma multiforme (‘GBM’).
On 23 October 2018, Patient A and her husband, Person C, attended a
consultation with the practitioner at the hospital in Sydney.
The practitioner
indicated that he was willing to attempt a radical (>95%) resection of
Patient A’s tumour.
The proposed operation was attempted at the hospital the following morning,
on 24 October 2018.
The fee for the practitioner to carry out the operation was $35,000, with
Patient A being treated as a “no-gap” patient.
Patient A did not regain full consciousness after the operation.
On 15 November 2018, Patient A was repatriated to Fiona Stanley Hospital,
Murdoch, Western Australia. Subsequent scans revealed Patient
A had residual
tumour in her midbrain and extending up into both thalami.
Patient A’s condition deteriorated and she died on 5 April 2019.
Patient B was born on 13 April 1957 and at all material times was a resident
of Victoria.
Patient B was diagnosed with a diffuse Stage II astrocytoma, IDH wild-type in
August 2018, following which Patient B was referred
for adjuvant therapy.
On 19 February 2019, Patient B and her husband, Person D, attended a
consultation with the practitioner at the hospital. The practitioner
that he was willing to attempt a radical resection of Patient B’s tumour,
with the aim of prolonging her life.
The proposed operation was attempted on 25 February 2019 at the hospital. The
operation report for the operation records an “
” of glioblastoma.
The fee for the practitioner to carry out the operation was $35,000, paid in
advance by Patient B.
Patient B did not regain full consciousness following the surgery and was
repatriated to Victoria on 20 March 2019.
Patient B died on 30 March 2019.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
practitioner’s decision to operate on Patient A on 24 October 2018 was
inappropriate in circumstances where the risk of
neurological morbidity,
including vegetative state, associated with radical (>95%) resection of
Patient A’s high-grade BSG
outweighed any potential benefits from the
24 October 2018, the practitioner operated on Patient A without informed
consent, in circumstances where:
information provided to Patient A regarding the potential benefits of surgery in
her case was not supported by statistical data,
medical literature and/or
clinical guidelines;
practitioner failed to properly communicate to Patient A the specific nature and
magnitude of the risks associated with the surgery
in Patient A’s clinical
presentation;
practitioner failed to sufficiently explain to Patient A how his opinion about
the proposed treatment for her should be favoured
over other practitioners;
practitioner failed to ensure that Patient A had sufficient time between his
initial consultation with her and her husband on
23 October 2018 and carrying
out the surgery on the morning of 24 October 2018 to allow the patient to make
an informed decision
as to whether or not to proceed with the proposed surgery;
practitioner failed to discuss the logistics and additional costs to Patient
A’s family (both financial and emotional) associated
post-operative rehabilitation in the event of an adverse surgical outcome,
including her repatriation to Western Australia.
October 2018, the practitioner inappropriately introduced Patient A
to a former patient, describing the former patient as "
a good example of
successful brain stem surgery
in circumstances where he did
not have the former patient’s consent to do so.
decision to operate on Patient B on 25 February 2019 was inappropriate in
circumstances where the risks of neurological morbidity
associated with
radical (>95%)
resection of Patient B’s
the operation undertaken
outweighed any potential
benefits from the surgery.
25 February 2019, the practitioner failed to exercise proper skill in operating
on Patient B, in circumstances where:
neurosurgical practice would have been to carry out a debulking of the right
parieto-occipital lobe
without extending the resection more deeply into
the midline structures;
extent of the resection was excessive, including a portion of tissue in the
right frontal lobe, the corpus callosum, the thalamus
and the right posterior
frontal white matter; and/or
tumour remained in the right parietal lobe, right occipital lobe, brainstem,
pons and left fronto-parietal lobe following the
25 February 2019, the practitioner operated on Patient B without informed
consent, in circumstances where the practitioner:
(a1) informed
Patient B that the proposed operation was a resection of the tumour, when in
fact the operation that the practitioner
carried out:
was a right frontal lobectomy, resection of corona radiata and
corpus callosum
as well as a resection of a small
part of the left front lobe;
involved a lot of the tumour being left behind (as to which see
Particular 5(c) above);
involved the removal of a large amount of non-tumour brain tissue;
to properly communicate to Patient B the specific nature and magnitude of the
risks associated with the surgery in Patient
B’s clinical presentation;
to sufficiently explain to Patient B how his opinion about the proposed
treatment for Patient B should be favoured over other
practitioners;
inappropriate language towards Patient B as part of the process of obtaining
consent to proceed with surgery, namely words to
the effect of:
not going to bullshit anything. If you don’t have this operation by
Tuesday, you’ll be fucking dead by
the fuck are you crying about? I’m here to fix you, you should be
tumours are the best fucking way to die. You’ll just slip into a coma. No
fucking pain. You’ll just gradually
fall asleep”
to discuss the logistics and additional costs to Patient B’s family (both
financial and emotional) associated with her
post-operative rehabilitation in
the event of an adverse surgical outcome, including her repatriation to
practitioner failed to make an adequate record of the consent discussion he had
with Patient B on 19 February 2019, in circumstances
made no direct record himself of the preoperative consent discussion;
did not sign or “settle” the record of the preoperative consent
discussion made by his fellow, Dr Christos Profyris;
record of the preoperative consent discussion made by Dr Profyris was incomplete
and inaccurate.
26 February 2019, the practitioner inappropriately slapped Patient B across her
face, in the presence of her family in circumstances
where Patient B was
unconscious and had been since 25 February 2019.
COMPLAINT TWO
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(l) of
National Law
in that the practitioner has engaged in improper or
unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of
Each of the particulars of Complaint Two justify an
individual finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct. In the alternative,
when the two particulars of Complaint Two are taken together, a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct is justified.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT TWO
The background to Complaint One is repeated.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
practitioner charged a fee of $35,000 for performing a radical resection of
Patient A’s BSG on 24 October 2018, which was
inappropriate in
circumstances where:
(a) the practitioner failed to discuss with Patient A the $35,000 fee to
be charged for the operation;
(b) the practitioner was required to be paid prior to surgery, contrary
to normal billing practice for medical services; and/or
(c) Patient A was in a state of vulnerability.
practitioner charged a fee of $35,000 for performing a radical resection of
Patient B’s tumour on 25 February 2019, which
was inappropriate in
circumstances where:
(a) the practitioner failed to discuss with the patient the $35,000 fee to be
charged for the operation;
(b) the practitioner was required to be paid prior to surgery, contrary to
normal billing practice for medical services; and/or
(c) Patient B was in a state of vulnerability.
or around 23 March 2019, the practitioner used inappropriate language during a
telephone conversation with Person E, Patient B’s
daughter, namely words
to the effect of:
“You’re asking the wrong fucking question”;
“Would I do it all over again? Fucking oath I would. You should be
grateful. I’ve given the family extra fucking
Dated: 10 October
_______________________________
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints
SCHEDULE TO COMPLAINT OF THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
Reference in Complaint
Identity of person
Annexure “C”
REPLY TO SECOND FURTHER AMENDED COMPLAINT
DATED 10 OCTOBER
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
Health Care Complaints Commission v Professor Charles Teo
Executive Officer Medical Council of NSW Punt Road
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
I reply to each of the grounds set out in the complaint as follows:
Professor Charles Teo
("The Practitioner")
of 151 Barker Street, Randwick, being a Medical Practitioner registered under
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSVV)
the National Law
refers to the Complaint served 28 March 2022 ("Complaint") by the Health Care
Complaints Commission (
) of Level 12, 323 Castlereagh Street, Sydney,
HEREBY RESPONDS AS TO COMPLAINT ONE
The Practitioner denies that he is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct as alleged.
AS TO THE BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT ONE
The Practitioner admits generally the background to
complaint one, comprising of subheadings entitled “
Practitioner”, “Patient A”
In relation to the background under “
The Practitioner”,
further says that:
(a) he obtained his MBBS in 1981, not 1980 as set out in the Complaint; and
(b) he no longer works as an Honorary Medial Officer or Staff Specialist at the
Prince of Wales Private Hospital and the Sydney Children’s
Hospital, which
occurred at or around the time conditions were imposed on his registration.
AS TO THE PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
answer to Particular 1, the Practitioner:
(a) admits that the proposed surgery for Patient A was associated with a risk of
neurological morbidity;
(b) says that he explained the risks to Patient A, including permanent coma,
paralysis and death, and that the tumour was in an extremely
high-risk area and
that unless an extensive resection could be achieved during surgery, she would
not obtain a survival advantage;
(c) says that Patient A requested that he remove the tumour, notwithstanding the
identified risks of an adverse outcome of the surgery;
(d) otherwise, denies Particular 1.
Practitioner denies Particular 2 and further says that:
(a) he discussed the risks of surgery and the consequences of an adverse outcome
of the surgery, including but not limited to;
(i) that the envisaged surgery was high risk, in the context of Patient
A’s midbrain tumour;
(ii) the envisaged surgery would not cure the glioma;
(iii) there could be no guarantee that the outcome of the envisaged surgery
would be beneficial;
(iv) there was a risk neurological deficit as a result of the envisaged
(v) There was a risk of death or increased disability as a result of the
envisaged surgery;
(i) there were alternatives to the envisaged surgery.
(b) Patient A and Person C were advised by the Practitioner to return home to
visit family before undergoing the envisaged surgery
(because of the risks);
(c) Patient A said that she wished to immediately proceed with the envisaged
(d) he discussed repatriation with Patient A and Person C in the event of an
adverse outcome;
(e) Patient A expressed to him that she wanted to proceed with the surgery in
hope of increasing her lifespan and the quality of that lifespan (and
notwithstanding the risks of an adverse outcome).
Practitioner does not admit Particular 3.
Practitioner denies Particular 4 and further says that:
(a) the proposed operation on Patient B, being a right frontal lobectomy,
resection of corona radiata and right corpus callosum,
was associated with a
risk of neurological morbidity;
(b) he explained the risks of such surgery to Patient B, including permanent
coma, paralysis and death, and that the tumour was in
an extremely high-risk
area and that unless an extensive resection could be achieved, her prognosis
would remain poor;
(c) Patient B requested that he remove the tumour, notwithstanding the
identified risks of an adverse outcome of the surgery.
Practitioner denies Particular 5 and further says that:
(a) Patient B’s pre-operative imaging demonstrated a lesion centred around
the right central lobule with contralateral hemispheric
spread and mid-line
(b) Patient B’s tumour affected the splenium and the corona radiata on the
contralateral side;
(c) the approach taken was for the purposes of best resecting Patient B’s
(d) the object of the surgery was principally to decompress/remove the pressure
in the cranium caused by the tumour;
(e) the resected brain tissue was the least eloquent and the least likely to
affect Patient B’s pre-operative neurological
Practitioner denies Particular 6 and further says that:
(a) he discussed the risks of surgery and the consequences of an adverse outcome
of the surgery, including but not limited to;
(i) the envisaged surgery was high risk, particularly by reference to the
extensive tumour which had caused midline shift in Patient
(ii) the envisaged surgery would not cure the glioma;
(iii) there could be no guarantee that the outcome of the envisaged surgery
would be beneficial;
(iv) there was a risk neurological deficit as a result of the envisaged
(v) There was a risk of death or increased disability as a result of the
envisaged surgery;
(vi) the object of the envisaged surgery was to reduce inter-cranial pressure
and to maximise Patient B’s quality of life;
(vii) there were alternatives to the envisaged surgery.
(b) he discussed repatriation with Patient B and Person D in the event of an
adverse outcome;
(c) Patient B and Person D expressed to him that they wished to try and extend
Patient B’s lifespan (and quality of life) even
if only for a modest
answer to Particular 7, the Practitioner:
(a) admits that he did not make a separate record of the preoperative consent
discussion with Patient B;
(b) did not sign or “settle” the record of pre-operative consent
discussion made by his fellow;
(c) otherwise, denies Particular 7.
answer to Particular 8, the Practitioner:
(a) says that his contact with Patient B’s face was in an endeavour to
elicit a response;
(b) otherwise, denies Particular 8.
AS TO COMPLAINT TWO
The Practitioner denies that he is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct as alleged, whether the conduct is
considered cumulatively
or otherwise.
AS TO THE BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT TWO
The Practitioner admits the general background to
Complaint Two, comprising of subheadings entitled “
Practitioner”, “Patient A”
The Practitioner repeats the matters set out as to the Background of Complaint
AS TO THE PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1 of Complaint Two in relation to Patient A has been deleted from the Further
Amended Complaint filed 10 October 2022 by
the Health Care Complaints Commission
and is not traversed in this Reply.
Practitioner denies Particular 2 and further says that:
(a) admits that he charged $35,000.00 for performing Patient B’s
(a) admits that he did not discuss his fee for the operation (as he understood
that his office had already done so);
(b) says that payment is typically required upfront.
Practitioner denies Particular 3.
Nicholas Scott Regener
, for Professor Charles Teo 25 November 2022
Annexure “D”
HCCC v PROFESSOR CHARLES TEO
PSC HEARING
Proposed Conditions
advise the Medical Council of NSW in writing at least seven days prior to
changing the nature or place of
proposing and before performing any surgical procedure involving malignant
tumours in any part of the brain, the practitioner
must obtain from a
Council-approved Neurosurgeon a written statement which supports the
practitioner performing the procedure(s)
in accordance with condition 2(b). If
the written statement does not support the practitioner performing the
procedure(s) the practitioner
cannot perform the surgery:
(a) The Council-approved Neurosurgeon must:
(i) be nominated by the practitioner and approved by the Council prior to the
practitioner proposing any surgical procedures involving
malignant tumours in
any part of the brain
(ii) be a fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, hold current
specialist registration as a Neurosurgeon with the Medical
Board of Australia,
and have at least 20 years’ experience as a registered specialist in
Neurosurgery;
(iii) not be employed by the practitioner, have a business/financial
relationship with him or be supervised by him.
(b) The written statement is to advise whether the Council-approved Neurosurgeon
is satisfied prior to the procedure:
(i) The practitioner has explained to the patient all material risks associated
with the procedure(s) and obtain informed consent;
(ii) The proposed procedure is supported by peer reviewed evidence and that the
benefits from surgery outweighs the risks associated
with surgery.
(c) The practitioner must maintain a log listing all patients for whom he has
obtained the written statement referred to in this
condition. The log is to
(i) The patient’s full name, date of birth and the state they reside
(ii) Whether the patient travelled interstate or overseas for the procedure(s)
and the details of this travel;
(iii) The nature of the surgical procedure(s);
(iv) The name of the Council-approved Neurosurgeon who provided the written
(v) A copy of all written statements obtained as an appendix to the log,
regardless of whether the Council-approved Neurosurgeon
supported or did not
support the procedure(s);
(vi) If the Council-approved Neurosurgeon supported the procedure(s) the log is
to also include the date and time of the procedure(s);
the address of where the
procedure(s) was performed, all MBS item number(s) billed for the procedure(s);
and any complications arising
as a result of the procedure(s).
(d) The practitioner must forward to the Council a copy of the log within seven
days of the end of each calendar month. Before forwarding
the log to the
Council, the practitioner must forward the log to the Council-approved
Neurosurgeon to verify the contents of the
(e) To authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide the Council-approved
Neurosurgeon a copy of the decision which imposed this
condition, and any other
decision or report as determined by the Council.
practice under category C supervision in accordance with the Medial Council of
NSW’s Compliance Policy – Supervision
(as varied from time to time)
and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review body.
(a) The Council-approved supervisor must:
(i) be a fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, hold current
specialist registration as a Neurosurgeon with the Medical
Board of Australia,
and have at least 20 years’ experience as a registered speciality in
Neurosurgery;
(ii) not be employed by the practitioner, have a business/financial relationship
with him or be supervised by him.
(b) At each supervision meeting, the practitioner is to review and discuss his
practice with his approved supervisor with particular
(i) Patient selection and advice;
(ii) Care following discharge including handover
(iii) Professional behaviour, including but not limited to communication with
patients, patient family members, colleagues, and appropriate
delegations to
(iv) New developments in the area of neurosurgery and peer reviewed literature
and accepted standards in the area of neurosurgery;
(v) Informed consent process, compliance and development of systems and plans
implemented into his practice in relation to obtaining
financial consent;
(vi) Compliance and development of systems and plans implemented into his
practice in relation to managing interstate patients and
patients travelling
overseas for surgery, pre and post-surgery.
(c) Prior to each supervision meeting, the practitioner is to provide to the
supervisor a self-reflection document which the practitioner
self-reflects on
his practice during the preceding month, including areas of improvement and
areas of success.
(i) The reflective document is to be discussed at supervision meetings and the
details of the discussion and feedback provided is
to be included in supervision
(ii) A copy of each monthly reflective statement must be included as an
attachment to supervision reports.
(d) To authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide the approved
supervisor(s) with a copy of the decision which imposed this
condition and any
other decision or report as determined by the Council.
12 months of this decision, the practitioner must complete the ‘Ethics
Counsel Program for Health Professionals’
organised by the Ethics
(a) Within 2 months of the date of this decision, the practitioner must provide
evidence to the Medical Council of NSW of his enrolment
in the abovementioned
(b) Within 1 month of completing the abovementioned course, the practitioner is
to provide documentary evidence to the Medical Council
of NSW that he has
satisfactorily completed the course;
(c) To bear responsibility for any costs incurred in meeting this condition.
In the event that the ‘Ethics Counsel Program for Health
Professionals’ organised by the Ethics Centre is unavailable,
must propose to the Council for approval a similar course to be undertaken
in accordance with the requirements of this condition no
from date of decision.
12 months of this decision, the practitioner must complete the ‘Clinical
Communication Programme’ organised by
the Cognitive Institute.
(a) Within 2 months of the date of this decision, the practitioner must provide
evidence to the Medical Council of NSW of his enrolment
in the abovementioned
(b) Within 1 month of completing the abovementioned course, the practitioner is
to provide documentary evidence to the Medical Council
of NSW that he has
satisfactorily completed the course;
(c) To bear responsibility for any costs incurred in meeting this condition.
In the event that the Clinical Communication Programme’ organised by the
Cognitive Institute is unavailable,
must propose to the Council for
approval a similar course to be undertaken in accordance with the requirements
of this condition no
2 months from date of decision.
submit to an audit of the practitioner’s medical practice, by random
selection of his medical records, by a person(s) nominated
by the Medical
Council of NSW.
(a) The audit is to be held within 6 months from the date of decision and as
subsequently required by the Council;
(b) Prior to the audit the practitioner is to provide to the Council with the
full name and date of birth of all interstate patients
who have undergone
surgery by the practitioner from the date of decision and from any date as
determined by the Council;
(c) The auditor(s) is to assess his management of patients, compliance with good
medical record keeping standards, legislative requirements
and compliance with
conditions.
(d) To authorise the auditor(s) to provide the Council with a report on their
(e) To meet all costs associated with the audit(s) and any subsequent reports.
authorise and consent to any exchange of information between the Medical Council
of NSW and Medicare Australia for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with
these conditions.
Medical Council is the appropriate review body for the purposes of Part 8,
Division 8 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
125 to 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
apply whilst the practitioner’s principal place of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, so
that a review of these conditions
can be conducted by the Medical Board of Australia.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter