URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CDI [2013] NSWGT 9 (14 June 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 9
(14 JUNE 2013)
APPLICATION TO REVIEW THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ENDURING GUARDIAN; APPLICATION
TO REVIEW THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY;
APPLICATIONS FOR
GUARDIANSHIP AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDERS
Applications Concerning:
Applicants:
Mr HAI, Mr IAI
Date and place of hearing:
14 June 2013 at Regional NSW
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr Shaun McCarthy
Professional Member:
Ms Roslyn Curran
Community Member:
Ms Jane Fraser
Guardianship and financial
management – 92 year old woman with dementia –no need for an order
– applications dismissed.
Enduring Guardianship and enduring
power of attorney – standing – enduring guardians and attorneys
appointed jointly or
severally – whether they must act jointly or whether
vacancy terminates instrument – whether instruments revoked orally
original instruments lost – certified copy – declaratory orders
sought – no jurisdiction to make declaratory
orders of the type sought
– application dismissed
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
14 June 2013
Reasons for Decision are for the orders of the Tribunal made on 14 June 2013
concerning Mrs CDI.
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal dismissed the application for a guardianship order made by Mr IAI and
Mr HAI concerning Mrs CDI.
Tribunal dismissed the application for a financial management order made by Mr
IAI and Mr HAI concerning Mrs CDI.
Tribunal dismissed the application to review an enduring guardianship
appointment made by Mrs CDI on 14 April 2008 where she appointed
as her enduring
guardians Mr SAI (deceased) and Ms LAE jointly or severally. The application to
review the enduring guardianship
appointment was made by Mr IAI and Mr HAI.
Tribunal dismissed the application to review an enduring power of attorney made
by Mrs CDI on 14 April 2008 where she appointed
as her attorneys Mr SAI
(deceased) and Ms LAE jointly or severally. The application to review the
enduring power of attorney was
made by Mr IAI and Mr HAI.
must be proved
reviewing an Enduring Guardianship appointment the Tribunal may revoke the
appointment or confirm the appointment with or without
varying the functions of
the appointed enduring guardian.
Tribunal must not revoke the appointment of an enduring guardian
enduring guardian requests the revocation; or
Tribunal is satisfied it is in the best interests of Mrs CDI that the
appointment be revoked.
Tribunal may on the application of a person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal,
has a genuine concern for the welfare of an appointor,
appoint a person to
replace an appointee as an enduring guardian of the appointor if the appointee
has died, resigned or become incapacitated.
The Tribunal may appoint a person to
replace an appointee only if the person is eligible to be appointed as an
enduring guardian
and the Tribunal is satisfied that:
appointor is in need of an enduring guardian, and
(ii) the person
has a close personal relationship with the appointor, and
person is capable of carrying out the functions of an enduring guardian.
make an order relating to the making of the enduring power of attorney made by
Mrs CDI, the Tribunal must be satisfied that:
applicant is an interested person within the terms of the
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
CDI did not have the mental capacity necessary to make a valid enduring power of
attorney, or
CDI did not understand the nature and effect of the enduring power of attorney
when it was explained to her, or
power of attorney did not comply with the other requirements of the
Attorney Act
or is invalid for any other reason.
make an order relating to the operation and effect of the enduring power of
attorney made by Mrs CDI, the Tribunal must be satisfied
(a) It would be
in the best interests of Mrs CDI to make the order; and/or
(b) It would
better reflect the wishes of Mrs CDI to make the order.
questions that the Tribunal had to decide concerning the application for a
guardianship order were:
(a) Is Mrs CDI
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she has a disability
which prevents her from being able to
make important life decisions?
(b) Should the
Tribunal make a guardianship order and, if so, what order should be made?
(c) Who should
be the guardian?
(d) How long
should the order last?
questions that the Tribunal had to decide concerning the application for a
financial management order were:
(a) Is Mrs CDI
incapable of managing her affairs?
(b) Is there a
need for another person to manage Mrs CDI’s affairs and is it in her best
interests for a financial management
order to be made?
(c) If so, who
should be appointed financial manager?
Conciliation
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. The parties
attending the hearing
participated in extensive conciliation discussions on 8 March 2013. The
discussions did not generally resolve
the dispute.
THE EVIDENCE
AND THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONING
CDI is aged 92 years who resides in Regional NSW. She resides with her former
daughter in law and carer Ms LAS. Mrs CDI’s
husband, Mr SAI, died on 12
December 2011. Mrs CDI has two sons, Mr IAI and Mr HAI. Her family includes her
granddaughter, Ms LAE.
Mrs CDI is a self-funded
Enduring guardianship and enduring power of attorney
appointments
CDI made an enduring guardianship appointment on 14 April 2008 where she
appointed Ms LAE and Mr SAI (deceased) jointly or severally
to be her enduring
guardians. The enduring guardianship appointment provides that if Mrs CDI is
partially or totally incapable of
managing her person then the enduring
guardians, jointly or severally, can make decisions concerning her
accommodation, health care,
medical and dental consents and services. On 14
April 2008 Mrs CDI made an enduring power of attorney where she appointed Ms LAE
and Mr SAI (deceased) jointly or severally to be her attorneys.
Legal representation
Tribunal granted leave for Mr IAI and Mr HAI to be legally represented by a
legal practitioner, Mr TAC, solicitor. The Tribunal
granted leave for Ms LAE to
be legally represented by a legal practitioner, Mr PIM, solicitor. The Tribunal
granted leave for Ms
LAS to be legally represented by a legal practitioner, Mr
AWF, solicitor.
Adjournment of proceedings
8 March 2013 the Tribunal adjourned the hearing of the applications for a
guardianship and financial management order and applications
to review an
enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power of attorney both made by
Mrs CDI on 14 April 2008 for a period
of three months part heard to a date to be
fixed by the Registrar.
The views of Mrs CDI
Tribunal spoke to Mrs CDI in the absence of the other persons attending the
hearing. The Tribunal decided that this was in the
best interests of Mrs CDI so
that she could express her views freely and fully. Mrs CDI said that she is
happy with the care she
receives from Ms LAS and wishes for this to continue.
She said that if she needs assistance with her affairs then she will seek
from Ms LAE and trusts her but she does not need such assistance at the moment.
She said that she is not aware of her financial
assets and is not interested in
them and is not financially well-off. Mrs CDI said that she is happy with the
three square meals
that she receives at home. She does not remember signing a
power of attorney or enduring guardianship appointment.
CDI’s health condition and her living and financial arrangements
CDI consults Dr Z GP concerning her health condition and has been referred to Dr
Y, geriatrician. Dr Y stated in a report dated
14 August 2012 that Mrs CDI has
moderate dementia of the Alzheimer’s type which would very likely impair
her capacity to take
legal responsibility or have an understanding of decisions
relating to her financial and other affairs. Mrs CDI was diagnosed with
cognitive impairment in March 2009. Dr Z GP stated in a report dated 26
February 2013 that Mrs CDI has a number of medical conditions
hypertension, reflux disease, ischaemic attacks and osteoarthritis. Mrs CDI has
been prescribed Aricept for her dementia.
In her last mini mental assessment she
scored 22/30. The doctor noted that Mrs CDI’s cognitive ability is
failing and she
needs someone to be appointed as her legal guardian.
IAI and Mr HAI seek to be appointed as Mrs CDI’s joint guardians and
attorneys or as her financial managers.
LAS provides care to Mrs CDI in her home on a full time basis. Mrs CDI also
receives the support of services at home. Although
Mr HAI and Mr IAI have had a
strained relationship with Ms LAS, they are both supportive of Mrs CDI residing
in her own home and
with the ongoing care that is being provided to their mother
by Ms LAS. There has been an ongoing dispute between Mr IAI and Mr HAI
LAS regarding her employment pay arrangements for the care being provided to Mrs
CDI. The dispute has recently been resolved.
Mr HAI has previously been given
authority by Mrs CDI to deal with her Bank Account 1 to pay for the day to day
household bills,
insurances and rates.
CDI has a share portfolio and property assets in her own name. Mr X of an
accounting firm manages Mrs CDI’s share portfolio
and the firm has a
unilateral custodial appointment to deal with her portfolio. Financial
statements and reports are prepared by
the accountancy firm. Mrs CDI’s
late husband’s estate is considerable. The wealth consists of sizeable
assets and savings
in his own name together with assets in the family company,
IAI and Mr HAI claim that they have not been left sufficient benefits under
their late father’s estate and have lodged family
provision proceedings in
the Supreme Court of NSW against the estate of the late Mr SAI. Mrs CDI is a
defendant in the proceedings
and a tutor has been appointed to act for her as
Mrs CDI lacks the capacity to act in the proceedings.
Mr HAI, sons
IAI and Mr HAI were not aware that their mother had made an enduring
guardianship appointment and enduring power of attorney appointing
Ms LAE until
around October 2012. Mr TAC submitted on behalf of Mr HAI and Mr IAI that they
feel excluded from their mother’s
care and consider that they have been
usurped from assisting her. They stated that the original enduring guardianship
appointment
and enduring power of attorney dated 14 April 2008 have not been
produced which leads to a presumption that both of these instruments
revoked and they dispute the validity of these legal documents. They contend
that Mr SAI had a change of opinion about
Ms LAE before he died and he did not
wish for her to be involved in his affairs. They rely upon conversations that
their father had
with a number of persons concerning this. There is no evidence
that Mrs CDI held the same views as Mr SAI concerning Ms LAE. Mr
TAC agreed that
the copies of the enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power of
attorney have been certified and agreed
that copies can be ordinarily relied
upon when dealing with someone’s affairs.
HAI and Mr IAI stated that they are concerned that Mrs CDI has experienced
bleeding but they have not been kept informed about
her health care condition.
They are concerned about the lack of communication from Ms LAS concerning their
mother’s care and
health care needs.
TAC submitted that the Tribunal should review the operation and effect of the
power of attorney. He sought that the power of attorney
be revoked or deemed not
to be in the best interests of Mrs CDI or that the applicants be appointed as
her attorneys or financial
TAC submitted that the enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power of
attorney cannot be used in their current form as
they provide that the guardians
and attorneys are to act jointly or severally. He stated that upon the passing
of Mr SAI the documents
cannot be used by Ms LAE as the appointments are
specified to be used by the guardians and attorneys jointly or severally but not
jointly and severally. He contends that this means that both guardians and
attorneys must be able to act jointly or severally but
this cannot happen when
one of the guardians and attorneys has vacated their office upon death. In
particular, Mr TAC referred to
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
which provides that if a power of attorney appoints two persons as attorneys
then they are to be appointed either severally
or jointly and severally. Mr X
supported the view of Mr TAC.
LAE told the Tribunal that she has not generally been provided with financial
information concerning Mrs CDI’s financial
affairs. Mrs CDI has not been
receiving such information and reports directly from her accountants. Ms LAE
said that she has not
received any notification of revocation by Mrs CDI of her
power of attorney or enduring guardianship appointment and Ms LAE wishes
exercise those appointments. She has not used the legal documents to date.
X advised the Tribunal that Mrs CDI’s financial documentation has been
forwarded to Mr HAI and Mr IAI care of Mrs CDI.
SAN, solicitor for Ms LAE, stated in a letter dated 26 October 2012 that Mrs
CDI’s original power of attorney and enduring
guardianship appointment
were collected by Mr SAI from his office on 11 February 2011.
PIM submitted that the applications for guardianship, financial management,
review of the enduring guardianship appointment and
review of enduring power of
attorney should all be dismissed as there is no need for the making of any
orders. He submitted that
the enduring power of attorney and enduring
guardianship appointment made by Mrs CDI are valid and can be operated by Ms LAE
LAS and Mr AWF supported the views of Ms LAE.
Tribunal determined that Mr IAI and Mr HAI are persons who have standing to make
applications to the Tribunal as they have a genuine
concern for the welfare of
CDI has cognitive impairment which results in her having difficulty in making
important life decisions and managing her affairs.
This is accordance with the
health care assessments of Dr Z and Dr Y.
Tribunal reviewed the enduring guardianship appointment and the enduring power
of attorney both made by Mrs CDI on 14 April 2008
in view of the concerns raised
by Mr IAI and Mr HAI as to whether the documents are valid. Both of the
documents were properly signed,
witnessed and dated. The certificate under
Powers of Attorney Act
has been completed by the solicitor who witnessed the
enduring power of attorney. A copy of the original enduring power of attorney
document has been certified in accordance with
Powers of Attorney Act
copy of the enduring guardianship appointment has been certified.
IAI and Mr HAI submit that there is a presumption that the enduring guardianship
appointment and enduring power of attorney have
both been revoked as the
originals cannot be located and Mr SAI had stated that he no longer wished for
Ms LAE to have any involvement
in his affairs. However, there is no evidence
that Mrs CDI had expressed the same views and no revocation of the legal
has been made by Mrs CDI. No prescribed form of revocation instrument
to revoke an enduring guardianship appointment under the
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship Regulation 2010
(NSW) has been made by Mrs CDI. No notice
of revocation of the enduring power of attorney has been made by Mrs CDI and
given to Ms
LAE. At the hearing Mrs CDI expressed a wish that if she needed
assistance with her affairs then she would seek the assistance of
that she trusts Ms LAE. The enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power
of attorney both reflect the wishes of
Mrs CDI regarding her affairs. The
Tribunal noted that there is no evidence that Mrs CDI lacked the mental capacity
to make both
legal documents.
HAI and Mr IAI submit that the power of attorney and enduring guardianship
appointment cannot be used by Ms LAE as the documents
do not provide for a
surviving guardian and attorney to act jointly and severally when the other
guardian and attorney has vacated
the office of guardian and attorney upon their
Tribunal’s powers in summary are to confirm or revoke an enduring
guardianship appointment or dismiss the application to
review the enduring
guardianship appointment or substitute an enduring guardian. The
Tribunal’s powers in summary are either
to not make orders regarding the
application for review of an enduring power of attorney and dismiss the
application or make orders
Powers of Attorney Act
of Attorney Act
concerns the effect of a vacation in the office of an attorney
where the principal has appointed more than one attorney. The section
expressly provide that when two or more attorneys are appointed under an
enduring power of attorney that they must be appointed
jointly or jointly and
severally. It provides as to what the legal effect is in the vacation of an
office where attorneys are appointed
severally or jointly and severally. G E Dal
Pont in Powers of Attorney (2011) LexisNexis Butterworths at p110 stated that
general law, whether an appointment is joint or joint and several
depends on the intention of the principal as evidenced chiefly
by the terms in
which the appointment is expressed.’
Section 20(2)
Powers of Attorney Act
provides that more than one attorney can be appointed but does not specify how
they are to be appointed. The Tribunal further notes
the effect of s6D (2)
Guardianship Act
regarding the vacation in the office of a joint enduring
guardianship appointment.
Tribunal finds that it does not have jurisdiction to make declaratory orders
regarding the intention of Mrs CDI when making the
appointment of her attorneys
jointly or severally. The Tribunal does not have general jurisdiction to make
declaratory orders regarding
the meaning and interpretation of the terms of the
enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power of attorney.
Tribunal decided that it is in the best interests of Mrs CDI to dismiss the
application to review the enduring guardianship appointment
and the application
to review the enduring power of attorney. There is no need to interfere with
these legal documents as they were
made by Mrs CDI when she had the mental
capacity to do so and reflected her wishes as to who she wished to manage her
the event that she was not able to do so. The enduring guardianship
appointment and enduring power of attorney continue to reflect
wishes as to who she seeks to manage her affairs and make important life
decisions for her. The documents have been
properly certified as true copies of
the original documents. The enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power
of attorney
documents have not been revoked. The Tribunal decided that it is in
the best interests of Mrs CDI to not interfere with the operation
and effect of
the enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power of attorney. The
Tribunal decided that there is no need for
the Tribunal to make any orders
regarding the enduring guardianship appointment and enduring power of attorney
and both applications
to review these two legal documents were dismissed.
are no important life decisions that currently need to be made for Mrs CDI
concerning her accommodation, health care, medical
and dental consents and
services. Mrs CDI has made an enduring guardianship appointment reflecting her
wishes that Ms LAE is to act
as her enduring guardian. While there is strained
communication between Mr IAI and Mr HAI on the one hand and Ms LAS on the other
hand, the primary role of a guardian is to make substitute decisions for Mrs
CDI. The Tribunal encourages the parties to endeavour
to find ways to open the
communication channels, such as through Mrs CDI’s GP or by email or a
third person, but noted that
Mrs CDI may not wish for her private health care
information to be discussed. The Tribunal also suggests that Mrs CDI’s
accountants
and her sons provide financial information to Mrs CDI so that she
can be kept informed as to her financial situation and she can
seek guidance and
assistance from Ms LAE.
have been no current major decisions regarding Mrs CDI’s financial affairs
requiring consideration of the appointment
of a financial manager and Mrs CDI
has made an enduring power of attorney. The Tribunal does not therefore need to
consider the suitability
of a financial manager but does note that Mr HAI and Mr
IAI currently have a financial conflict of interest in being considered for
appointment as they have brought litigation against their late father’s
estate, where Mrs CDI is a defendant to the proceedings,
and any such
appointment could potentially impact on Mrs CDI’s access to funds during
the course of the litigation.
Tribunal decided that there is no need for the making of a guardianship or
financial management order as it is not in the best
interests of Mrs CDI to do
so and dismissed the applications for guardianship and financial management.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter