URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2011/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v EATHER (No:2) [2011] NSWCHT 2 (12 August 2011)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
CHIROPRACTIC TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
PAUL MATTHEW EATHER
MATTER NUMBER: CH01/2010
REGISTRATION NUMBER: CH1000117579
(NSW)/CHI0001175794
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Eather (No 2)
[2011] NSWCHT 2
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms E Brus of Counsel instructed by Ms Monica Richmond,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Paul Eather
(Respondent) initially represented by Ms Nicole Paul
of Counsel instructed by Mr Eric Oates Solicitor, of Oates Legal.
FILE NUMBER: CH01/2010
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Sue-Ellen McKelvey (Chiropractic
Dr Roger Engel (Chiropractic Member)
Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 1 – 3 August 2011 (re Particulars and
Complaints)
9 August 2011 (re Orders)
DATE OF DECISION: 12 August 2011 (re Orders)
FINDINGS (in summary): Having made findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct re Particulars 2, 3 and 7 and professional misconduct
re Particulars 1,
4, 5, 8 and 9 the Tribunal would have cancelled the Respondent’s
registration. The Respondent is not to re-apply
for registration for three
years. A Prohibition Order and a Costs Order were also made.
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
by four female patients and/or staff.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – s149C,
Chiropractors Act
section 53(3A)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
section 10AK
CASES CITED:
HCCC v Eather (No 1)
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630,
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
New South Wales
Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSWNMT 12
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Re: Orders)
Introduction
Chiropractic Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional
Councils Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney
on 1 – 3 August
2011 to conduct ‘phase one’ of an Inquiry dealing with the
Particulars and Complaints made by Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC)
in a Complaint document dated 10 December 2010 in relation to a registered
chiropractor, Paul
Eather (the Respondent).
Reasons for Decision document dated 5 August 2011 was published by the Tribunal
wherein findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct with respect to
Particulars 2, 3 and 7 and professional misconduct with respect to Particulars
1, 4, 5, 8 and 9 was made.
Tribunal reconvened on 9 August 2011 to conduct ‘phase two’ of the
Inquiry. This Reasons document deals with ‘phase
two’ and deals with
the final Orders.
Two’ consisted of the Tribunal receiving the submissions of the HCCC. The
Respondent was represented by Mr Oates
on 9 August 2011 and he indicated that
the Respondent did not wish to be heard on the question of Protective Orders. Mr
Oates indicated
that the Respondent did wish to be heard on the question of
costs. He advised that Ms Paul was not available on 9 August 2011 and
that the Tribunal reconvene on 10 August 2011 to hear the submissions regarding
costs from Ms Paul. However, on the afternoon
of 9 August 2011 Mr Oates
wished to be heard on the question
Complaint and a summary of the history of the matter and much of the evidence
before the Tribunal are set out in the Reasons for
Decision published on 5
August 2011 (
HCCC v Eather (No 1)
That document should
be read in conjunction with this
Appearances
Oates attended the hand down of the Reasons for Decision with respect to
Particulars and Complaints on 5 August 2011. He confirmed
the written advice he
had forwarded to the Registry on 4 August 2011 that the Respondent wished to
relinquish his Registration as
a Chiropractor. Mr Oates appeared on behalf of
the Respondent on 9 August 2011. The HCCC was represented as per the
Relevant Law
trust placed in chiropractors is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the patient to
come into close
physical contact with the practitioner and frequently to disclose highly
personal information to the chiropractor
in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their doctors may
vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
the doctor. Even in
regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a patient places in a
doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present seems to be an
example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost absolute. The
power in regard to the patient in such cases is also very great.
I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of fact;
the extent of
the power will vary according to the temperament of the patient, but the doctor
with some patients and for limited
periods, because of the relationship in which
they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do whatever the doctor wants
the body of the patient. This is one of the reasons why doctors are
subject to correspondingly great obligations and are expected
to maintain high
standards; all this being very much in the public
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 149C(5)
National Law (NSW).
This sub-section states:
If the Tribunal suspends or cancels a registered health practitioner’s or
student’s registration and it is satisfied
the person poses a
substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by
order (a "prohibition order") do any one or more of the following-
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently;
(b) place specified conditions on the provision of health services or
specified health services by the person for the period specified
in the order or
permanently.
[Emphasis added by the Tribunal]
Section 10AK(1)
provides that it is an offence for a person to provide a health service in
contravention of a prohibition order.
service is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
including the following services, whether provided as public or private
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in its
meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
subject matter in
relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions v Losurdo
[1998] NSWSC 16
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v Australasian
Meat Industry Employees’ Union
(1979) 42 FLR 331
at 348, Deane J observed
that the word “substantial” was not only susceptible of ambiguity,
but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of precision. In O’Brien Glass
Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty Limited
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447
referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and observed that, in selecting the word
“substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
‘substantial’ is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of section 149C(5) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare
risk but is less
stringent than special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the penalty imposed
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a maximum fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months
imprisonment or both.
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
deregistered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is
to be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a fine of up
to $5,500.00.
Suppression Orders
‘phase one’ of the Inquiry the Chairperson of the Tribunal made a
Suppression Order in accordance with Schedule
5D Clause 7 of the Act in relation
to the name of the patients as indicated in the schedule annexed hereto and
marked ‘C’.
Any information beyond that contained in this Reasons
document which may identify them is also not to be published. Annexure C will
only be attached to the original Reasons for Decision held by the Registry and
must not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter were set out in Annexure
HCCC v Eather (No 1)
evidence was provided during ‘Phase two’.
Witnesses in ‘phase two’
witnesses were called in ‘Phase two’.
Evidence before the Tribunal relevant to Orders
Tribunal has not reproduced all of the evidence relevant to the consideration of
Orders that has been set out in
HCCC v Eather (No 1)
Evidence of Melanie Eather (now Unsworth)
M Eather stated she was aware that the Respondent was involved in the multilevel
marketing of Goji juice (exhibit 7).
A gave the following oral evidence (T29.24-28):
Q. How did you find that treatment with Mr Wigg in that period of
time after you saw Mr Eather?
A. I was a bit nervous about seeing a chiropractor again but because I
had seen him so many times I trusted him and I was familiar
with him so I was
kind of assured that everything would be okay if I saw him again.
A gave the following oral evidence (T41.17-22):
Q. How would you feel about seeing another chiropractor apart from
A. I'm unlikely to do that. If I was going to, I would seek a female,
definitely but as long as Mr Wigg is practising, if I ever
wanted to get
treatment I would definitely go to him first and then if I wanted to go
somewhere else I would try and get a female
for sure, definitely. But I am a
bit apprehensive about seeing someone else.
A gave the following oral evidence (T41.27-47):
Q. And in your statement, the one, one of your statements, you say that
on the occasion when the incident occurred he'd worked on
you, what you thought
was more, more vigorously?
A. Yes, yep.
Q. When you presented on that occasion to, for the consultation, were
your did you report to him, do you recall whether you reported
your symptoms were worse or better or any different or did you just present to
Q. as you had presented on the previous occasion?
A. Yes. Because when I used to see Mr Wigg I didn't go quite as
regularly as I was with Mr Eather because Mr Eather would kind of
imply or say that I would need to go every week to be adjusted. I didn't feel
that I really needed to be adjusted that often so
every week when I went there
it was more out of routine and him instigating it than me feeling that I was
needing to be adjusted
so I definitely did not have any extra symptoms that time
when I saw him.
Q. So as far as you were concerned there was no obvious reason to you why
it should have been a more vigorous adjustment?
A. No. No way.
Evidence of Annica Larsdotter
Larsdotter gave a statement to the HCCC dated 30 November 2009 (exhibit 11). In
this statement Dr Larsdotter stated:
8. From my experience, Paul did not listen to people. If he could remove
his own ego and listen to what people were saying, he could
work together with
the patient based on their needs. It seemed to me that he would often work out
care plans not necessarily discussed
with patients but more along his personal
desires to work.
12. In the three years I have been here I have had to pull him up on three
occasions for really unprofessional behaviour.
respect to the contents of paragraph 8 Dr Larsdotter was asked to elaborate on
paragraph 8 of her statement to the HCCC dated
30 November 2009 (exhibit 11).
She gave the following evidence (T47.13-40):
Q. Can you expand a little more on paragraph 8. "It seemed to me
that he would often work out care plans not necessarily discussed
with patients
but more on his personal desires to work." Can you just expand on that a bit
A. Yes, okay. I would see patients shall I give you
contexture or an example?
Q. Give us both?
A. Okay, a good example is I have a very close working relationship with
a naturopath in the area and she refers lots of people to
me. She referred her
mum and her son to see me and they got booked in with Paul and they were seeing
Paul because of a very straightforward
spinal mechanical situation and Paul
prescribed some supplements for him and for and worked cranially or something
like that, I can't
remember now but that was the situation. So this patient
goes back to the naturopath and says, "We came with X and we got recommendations
and treatment for Y which is a bit confusing." Then the naturopath said, "Who
did you see, did you see Annica" "No, we saw this
Paul person." So
then they came back and we could address what they were actually there for.
That is what I thought was a little
bit odd and it really makes you feel very
awful as a practitioner because you obviously don't want to undermine and say
colleague is useless because he was probably acting in the best
absolute possible way, based on his way of viewing things. But you
also have a
responsibility to meet people where they are at and address the issues. There
was quite a lot of that happening, that
people would come in with back pain and
then be addressed for all sorts of other things and be given supplements et
cetera. I think
that it is a relevant thing to do as a practitioner if there is
something else going on but I don't think it was explained to the
person why he
was choosing to do something that might seem a little bit odd for what they were
coming in for, if that makes sense.
first incident related to the care he provided to a female patient. The second
incident was the witnessing of the inappropriate
and Patient D. The third incident related to comments made by the Respondent in
front of patients
regarding a senior colleague.
Larsdotter also had concerns regarding the frequency at which the Respondent
scheduled his patients to attend for treatment and
in her evidence she
questioned his clinical judgment.
Larsdotter also had concerns regarding his communication skills with patients
(see for example paragraph 22 and 23 of exhibit 11).
Larsdotter detailed other concerns in her evidence. These included the fact that
a patient had been left unattended for an inappropriate
length of time while the
Respondent was engaging in sexual contact with Patient D. She was also critical
that Patient D was being
charged for treatment by the Respondent at a time she
was an employee and engaging in a sexual relationship with the Respondent.
Larsdotter gave the following evidence (T42.35 – 44.8):
Q. What was the reason that you didn't like to receive care from
A. I didn't respond particularly well physically, I reacted quite badly
and I just didn't feel that he listened to what I was saying
and that he was
actually adjusting me almost contrary indicated to what I had shared information
Q. You had quite a lot of experience in the SOT technique
A. I have readjusted SOT lots, yes.
Q. Yes, so you know what a lot of practitioner's might do when they are
performing an SOT?
A. Yes, absolutely.
Q. Was he different in any particular way that you could recall?
A. With me as a patient or a colleague.
Q. Just you?
A. I would say that my perception was that he wasn't following the entire
protocol. Are you a chiropractor?
A. Okay, well I have a grade 1 spondy at L5/S1 so that contra indicates
any prone blocking to start with and I made that very clear
but he still was
saying, "Oh, well, you discy(?), we'll block a category 3" and I said okay, I
have to trust the clinical call but
I would come away and I would use the use of
my leg, not good, and I wanted to give him the benefit of the doubt so it was
adjusted a couple of times and then I just didn't want to be adjusted
by him. It is not particularly reassuring when you are not
sure how you are
going to come off the table.
Q. How long have you been
in practice?
A. I have just had my 12 year anniversary last month.
Q. So in some ways did you find as a colleague he was open to your peer
comment or review?
Q. Have you ever worked with someone who wasn't open to peer colleague
comment about how you are feeling about their work?
Q. So did you find that was possibly were there more incidents
that would occur with him in terms of not being able to talk about
how he would
approach a certain problem?
A. Yes, I found him quite arrogant to be honest and I know I got very
friendly with Allan Wigg and I was talking after he had come
back from his tour
of Australia, just about sharing clinical experience and he said, "I can never
have conversations like this with
Paul where you are just batting ideas and
thoughts" and I said "Yes that's correct, my impression was it's always his way
highway." I would leave post it notes specifically, because obviously I
saw a lot of people with spondy issues, and because I knew
how he treated me I
wrote big fluorescent post it notes on the files of people he was looking after
when I was on holiday and looking
at his shorthand he wouldn't have addressed
them in the way that would have been clinically appropriate, in my book, and I
have asked that they shouldn't. But no no, he just did something
completely different and I didn't feel too
Q. Did he confer with you that he felt he had more knowledge in the area
he might have been researching himself or looking at and
he was doing things
differently for a reason?
A. No, I would say, "Did you address Mrs so and so's spondy?" "Was I
supposed to?" I said, "Well it was a post it note on the file".
"I never saw
Q. And it would always be at your instigation that conversation would
evidence of Dr Larsdotter with respect to the Respondent not addressing issues
raised in the clinical notes is found on page 437
of volume 1 of the HCCC
Larsdotter stated that she would have supported Patient E in making a complaint
regarding the Respondent but the patient did not
wish to follow through with a
complaint. Dr Larsdotter did raise the matter with the Respondent and provided
the following details
in her oral evidence (T45.38 –
Q. You mention in your statement, you talk about Patient E?
Q. You talk about how she complained to you I think?
Q. And you discussed it with Mr Eather?
Q. His reply to your raising the matter was that you cannot tell him her
name, the patient's name and it doesn't mean anything and
it is totally
irrelevant?
A. Absolutely, that's correct yes.
Q. When he said that to you?
A. What do you do?
Q. So there was no further conversation after that, the next day?
A. That's the summary of quite an extensive conversation that we had at
the time and that's how it ended and I had to revisit it
numerous times as I
said. What I was trying to explain to him was that "I am acting in the best
interest of a patient and I cannot
breach confidentiality with her. So I cannot
tell you who she is but she has raised the concern" and that was to be
supportive and
protective of a patient and also I was trying to be supportive of
him so he could raise his standard in notating and interaction
with his patients
to avoid these sort of things happening.
Q. Did you outline to him what she had said without using her name, did
Q. She said, "He did XYZ" and you explained to him this is what the
patient said?
Q. Apart from him saying, "If you can't tell me the name" did he give any
other possible
A. He was referring to "Well I do the armfossa test on everybody all day
long" and I said, "Yes, but this is a patient who said to
me that you had got
her dressed into a gown and checked her for appendicitis." "No I wouldn't do
that." I said, "Yes, Paul I understand
that however if this is her perception
of what you were doing then it is my duty to pull you up on it so you can get
clearer when
you ask for consent." That is when he got into, "Who was this, I
need to know." I said, "I can't tell you because she was very
concerned." That
is obviously when you are who do you believe when you are in the
middle, you just have to be protective of your
patients and obviously she was
never ever scheduled to see him again. Whenever I had time off I would
recommend people see someone
The Respondent’s
Respondent did not provide the Tribunal with any evidence specifically for the
purpose of ‘phase two’ of the Inquiry.
The Tribunal notes that his
statement (R1) and other documents filed with the Tribunal are summarised in
HCCC v Eather (No 1).
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
written submissions of the HCCC are annexed hereto and marked with the letter
HCCC supplemented these written submissions orally.
HCCC submitted that the Prohibition Order could be extended to cover all
patients, not just female patients.
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent made no submissions with respect to Orders.
Factors relevant to Orders
found Complaint Two established with respect to Particulars 1, 4, 5, 8 and 9 and
Complaint One with respect to Particulars
2, 3 and 7 the Tribunal considers what
Orders should be made in light of these findings.
noted above the Tribunal makes Orders that are protective not punitive. Orders
are for the purpose of protecting the public, of
maintaining the reputation of
the profession, of maintaining the confidence that the public is entitled to
repose in members of the
chiropractic profession. It may also act as a deterrent
for other health care practitioners from engaging in similar conduct.
detailed in
HCCC v Eather (No 1)
the Respondent acted in,
what would be commonly referred to as, an indecent fashion towards Patient A.
Patient A was a young woman
who was entitled to attend the practice of the
Respondent with an expectation of a ‘safe’ environment. The
abused the trust placed in him as a registered chiropractor. Although
it is the potential for harm rather than the actual harm that
flows from a
practitioner’s misconduct that is determinative of Orders, the Tribunal
notes that a form of harm expected from
the Respondent’s misconduct has in
fact occurred. Patient A is now reluctant to seek treatment from male health
care providers
and has only sought chiropractic treatment from Mr Wigg after the
incident with the Respondent. The Tribunal is also concerned about
the potential
for harm created by the request of the Respondent to write the
‘like/dislike lists’. In circumstances where
a concern was already
held by a practitioner about a patient’s mental health, making a request
for an open ended exercise to
be undertaken by the patient unsupervised is
without clinical foundation. It is also potentially detrimental to the patient
for her to undertake such an exercise. Having formed the opinion to refer
Patient A on for her mental health issues, the Respondent’s
provide an effective referral was professionally irresponsible.
Practitioners
should be mindful to work within their scope of practice at all times.
flawed clinical judgment of the Respondent was compounded by his failure to
resolve the referral process.
failure of the Respondent to document the whole scenario of his concerns
regarding Patient A and his subsequent actions is inexcusable
circumstance of this matter. Not only did the Respondent breach his duty to keep
appropriate records, he placed a practitioner
that may have taken over the care
of Patient A in a difficult position with respect to the ongoing management of
respect to Patient B, the Tribunal refers back to the findings made in HCCC
Eather (No 1)
The development of a multi-faceted
relationship with Patient B while continuing to provide treatment is not
demonstrative of a momentary
lapse of self-control or judgment. The conduct
extended over a number of months and was in the consciousness of the Respondent
demonstrated by evidence such as ‘diary’ entries and the
notification to his insurer. The fact that the relationship
continues at the
time of the Inquiry does not lessen the criticism and concern of the Tribunal
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSWNMT 12
conduct of the Respondent towards Patient C was found by the Tribunal to be
professional misconduct. A shadow is cast on this
conduct by the
Respondent’s attempt to pass it off as a joke the following day and the
subsequent employment difficulties within
the practice faced by Patient C.
is no acceptance by the Tribunal that the conduct with respect to Patient D was
acceptable on the basis that she was an employee.
Once again a shadow is cast
upon this conduct by the fact that at least on one occasion a patient was left
unattended for an inappropriate
length of time while the Respondent engaged in
activity of a sexual nature with Patient D during business hours. The Respondent
demonstrated total disregard of the standards expected of a registered
health professional by engaging in this activity in a location
observable by another staff member and potentially by patients.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient B that the Respondent had provided her
with chiropractic treatment on the morning of the
second day of the Inquiry.
This is noted in the context of the undertaking of the Respondent not to provide
chiropractic treatment
until the conclusion of the Tribunal, made by Counsel on
his behalf on the first day of the Inquiry. The Tribunal finds this as one
the factors that allow a conclusion that trust cannot be reposed in the
Respondent to comply with conditions that may be imposed
by the Tribunal on his
Registration.
initial denial of matters relating to Patient B and Patient D by the Respondent
contribute to the Tribunal’s concern regarding
the Respondent’s lack
of integrity. Despite not attending before the Tribunal to answer the
allegations made by the HCCC, the
Tribunal notes that the Respondent
subsequently admitted that he did engage in sexual activity with both Patient B
and Patient D.
The Respondent maintained that his record keeping with respect to
Patient B and his referral of her was adequate.
was little in the evidence before the Tribunal that would allow any positive
conclusions to be drawn regarding the Respondent’s
remorse for the
consequences of his conduct nor insight into his behaviour.
predatory conduct of the Respondent towards vulnerable patients and employees
over a significant period of time contributes to
the Tribunal’s view that
the Respondent should not be allowed access to patients in any health service
capacity until he has
made significant progress with respect to remedying the
defects identified in this Reasons document. The Tribunal is satisfied that
Respondent poses a significant risk to the public safety, particularly having
regard to the nature of his conduct and his denials,
his lack of remorse and his
current level of insight. In a general sense the Respondent’s conduct
demonstrated he had scant
regard for the professional boundaries appropriate for
health care practitioners. The Tribunal therefore proceeds to make a Prohibition
Order. It is appropriate that this Order remain in place for a minimum period of
three years (12 August 2014) and then until such
time as the Respondent regains
registration and is practising in a regulated environment.
the circumstances the only appropriate Order for the Tribunal to make is to
cancel the Respondent’s registration (in accordance
with s149C(1) –
but see paragraph 59 below).
accordance with s149C(8) the Tribunal fixes a period of 3 years before which the
Respondent may not make an application for review
of the Order cancelling the
Registration of the Respondent (i.e. he is not to make an application for
re-registration until after
12 August 2014). The Tribunal is of the view that
even with full acceptance of the nature of his professional misconduct it will
be difficult for the Respondent to remedy the defects in his practice identified
in the two Reasons for Decision documents (
HCCC v Eather (No 1)
HCCC v Eather (No 2) –
being this document
in this matter
as they cover both practice matters (notes and referrals) as well as serious
boundary violations.
provisions of the
National Law (NSW)
relating to the award of costs are
what is commonly known as ‘costs follow the event’. There were no
submissions received
by the Tribunal regarding costs and there is nothing
identified by the Tribunal in the circumstances of this matter that would
the Tribunal that any other Order regarding costs was appropriate in the
circumstances. The Tribunal notes that by leaving advice
regarding his intention
not to attend and give evidence before the Tribunal until the last working day
prior to the commencement
of the Inquiry, additional costs may have been
incurred by the HCCC.
the circumstances of this matter, it is the view of this Tribunal that it would
be appropriate for any application for re-registration
the Respondent may make
(i.e. make an application for re-registration once the three year period has
expired) to be considered by
the Chiropractic Tribunal of NSW (or the equivalent
successor in time).
Tribunal is of this view for a number of reasons which include; the fact that
the Respondent chose not to attend before his professional
disciplinary body to
give an account of his conduct in person, the period of time over which the
conduct of the Respondent was unprofessional,
and the serious nature of the
conduct. Other aspects of the Respondent’s conduct may well be cause for
concern if the Respondent
returned to practice. These issues include allegations
that he provided advice outside his scope of practice, involved patients in
business of selling Goji juice and other inappropriate conduct with staff and
Tribunal is of the view that exercise physiology and other aspects of sports
science fall within the definition of ‘Health
service’ for the
purpose of section 4
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
HCCC raised in submissions the possibility that the Prohibition Order could be
made just with respect to female patients. Alternatively
the HCCC also submitted
that the Order could be extended to all patients. The Tribunal is mindful of the
following matters in reaching
the view that it is appropriate for the
Prohibition Order to extend to all patients:
The numerous
examples in the evidence of situations in which the Respondent’s
professional judgment fell to an unacceptable
The Tribunal has
found that conduct of the Respondent fell below acceptable standards not just in
relation to his sexual contact with
female patients.
The Tribunal
accepted the evidence of Dr Larsdotter that the Respondent had inappropriate
regard for patients’ welfare when
determining appropriate care plans.
The Tribunal
accepted the evidence of Dr Larsdotter that the Respondent left a patient
unattended for an inappropriate length of time
while he was engaging in sexual
conduct with Patient D.
The Respondent
failed to undertake referral of patients in an appropriate manner.
The Respondent
exploited his relationship with his patients by the promotion of the ‘Goji
juice’ business.
The decision in
HCCC v Litchfield (1997)
gives clear indication that if a practitioner is
not fit to provide care to a certain class of patients (i.e. women) then the
appropriate
Order to be made should be one of deregistration. If trust cannot be
reposed in the practitioner then in order to protect the public
interest they
should not be permitted to practice. It follows that if the Tribunal has formed
the view that the Respondent poses
a substantial risk to the health of members
of the public, be they male or female, then it may make a prohibition order.
in the construct of section 149C(5) suggests to the Tribunal that it is
appropriate to make a prohibition order that extends to one
‘members of the public’.
The Tribunal
also notes that the section 149C(5) of the
National Law (NSW)
section 53(3A)
Chiropractors Act 2001
. The Tribunal has had
regard to the Second Reading Speech (see above) for the introduction of
A Prohibition
Order that extends only to female members of the public would make the
application of the relevant provisions of the
Public Health Act 1991
difficult and is not contemplated by these provisions. An order extending to
only female members of the public does not
take into account persons who may be
transgender.
Any Orders made
by this Tribunal should be able to be implemented and monitored by the
Chiropractic Council of New South Wales, the
HCCC and any other relevant body.
if the Tribunal is wrong in making the interpretation of section 149C of the
National Law (NSW)
the Tribunal is of the view that the circumstances of
this matter warrant a Prohibition Order that extends to all members of the
not just female persons for the reasons set out above.
to the extensive nature of the misconduct, the Tribunal is also of the view that
the Reprimand issued in accordance with Order
1 below should not be removed from
the Respondent’s Registration record.
Tribunal notes that during the Inquiry indication was made on behalf of the
Respondent that he intended relinquishing his registration
as a chiropractor.
The Tribunal notes advice received from AHPRA via the HCCC that the Respondent
did request the removal of his
name from the register after the Inquiry
commenced but prior to the Tribunal handing down this Decision.
cannot be the intention of ‘protective’ legislation that such action
would result in a practitioner avoiding their
name being recorded on the list of
those with cancelled registration. The Tribunal requires the Chiropractic Board
of Australia to
record the fact that this Tribunal would have cancelled the
Respondent’s registration in the National Register kept by the
his name not been removed by AHPRA prior to the date hereof (refer to section
149C (4) (c)
National Law (NSW)
The Tribunal orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter as the
Practitioner):
Practitioner is hereby reprimanded in terms of Annexure B
that had the Practitioner still been registered the Tribunal would have
cancelled his registration, the Practitioner is disqualified
registered in the profession until after 12 August 2014.
National Board is required to record the fact that the Tribunal would have
cancelled the Practitioner’s registration on
the National Register kept by
the Board had the Practitioner not taken the step of removing his name
the Practitioner is prohibited from providing any health service as defined in
section 4 of the
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(including but not
limited to health education services) involving the physical examination,
physical treatment (including but not
limited to Sacro-Occipital Technique also
known as SOT) and/or provision of counselling services (including but not
limited to Neuro
Emotional Technique also known as NET) of patients for a period
of three years from 12 August 2011. After 12 August 2014, the Practitioner
permitted to provide these health services on the condition that he gains
registration as a health professional, at which time
the relevant registration
authority should consider the further continuation of the Prohibition Order
and/or conditions on registration.
Practitioner is not entitled to apply for review of the Order disqualifying him
from registration or the Prohibition Order until
after 12 August
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed. If the
parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted for
an application to apply to
have the matter re-listed before the Tribunal to determine
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for
Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
3) The Chiropractic Board
of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The Chiropractic
Council of New South Wales,
Dated: 12 August 2011
___________________
___________________
___________________
Roger Engel
___________________
Jacqueline Milne
Annexure A – Written submissions of the HCCC
Annexure B –
Annexure C - Schedule of Names Suppressed
HCCC v EATHER
OUTLINE OF SUBMISSIONS BY THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS
COMMISSION REGARDING APPROPRIATE PROTECTIVE ORDERS and COSTS.
1. Protective Orders
1.1 One of the principal functions of the Tribunal is to promote and maintain
the highest standards of professional conduct and ethics
in the chiropractic
profession. The paramount role of the Tribunal is to protect the public.
Protection of the public and maintenance
of high professional standards
necessitate the Tribunal ensuring that:
(i) the public will be protected from the risk of the chiropractor repeating the
misconduct;
(ii) its decision will have a general deterrent effect on others that may be
tempted to fall short of the high standards required
(iii) its decision will have the effect of encouraging the maintenance of high
standards in the chiropractic profession;
(iv) its decision will have the effect of maintaining the public confidence in
the profession.
1.2 The Commission submits that the very nature of chiropractic treatment is
intimate. This fact alone gives rise to the need for
a patient to be able to
repose a considerable degree of trust in practitioners and it requires
practitioners to maintain very high
standards to ensure that a patient’s
trust is not misplaced. The Commission refers the Tribunal to the following
comments from
the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, which, although concerning the obligations of
medical practitioners, are equally applicable to the practice
chiropractic:
Female patients entrust themselves to doctors, male and female, for
medical examinations and treatment which may require intimate
physical contact
which they would not otherwise accept from the doctor. The standards of the
profession oblige doctors to use the
opportunities afforded them for such
that the public
in general and female patients in particular expect from their
doctors, and which right thinking members of the profession observe,
their colleagues to observe. In this context we would adopt, with respect, the
following statement from the dissenting
judgment of Priestly JA in Richter v
Walton (Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported) at
“The degree of trust which patients
necessarily give to their doctors may vary according to the condition which
takes the patient
to the doctor. Even in regard to the most common place medical
matters the trust a patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases,
of which the present seems to me to be an example, the patient’s trust
cannot help but be almost absolute. The
doctor’s power in regard to the
patient in such cases is also very great. I do not mean power in an abstract way
but as a matter
of fact; the extent of the power will vary according to the
temperament of the patient, but the doctor with some patients and for
periods, because of the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in
a position to do whatever the doctor wants
with the body of the patient. This is
one of the reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations
and are expected
to maintain very high standards: all this being very much in
the public interest.”
1.3 The Commission submits that Mr Eather has clearly abused the trust
reposed in him by patients and has failed to maintain the standards
expected of
1.4 The Commission submits that the Tribunal could not be comfortably
satisfied that such conduct would not recur. The evidence before
the Tribunal
demonstrated a pattern of behaviour and a complete disregard by the respondent
to conduct himself within the boundaries
as set out in the Chiropractors Code of
Conduct. The respondent has provided no evidence to the Tribunal which would
indicate that
he has any insight into the gravity of his actions or that he now
recognizes that his conduct was unacceptable. The Tribunal
the side of caution and proceed to make an order or orders which provides the
public with protection and also serves to act
as a general and specific
deterrent to other members of the profession.
1.5 The Commission submits that the respondent’s conduct is
sufficiently serious to warrant the removal of Mr Eather’s
name from the
Register of Chiropractors and that it is in the public interest that this be
1.6 Recent correspondence from the respondent’s solicitor indicates
that he wishes to voluntarily surrender his resignation
from the register of
practitioners. It is unclear as to whether this has in fact occurred and as
such, any orders to be made by the
Tribunal should be framed in such a way so as
to ensure that the practitioner’s name is removed from the
1.7 The Commission notes that section 149C of the Act enables the Tribunal to
order, where the chiropractor has ceased to be registered,
that he/she not be
re-registered. The Commission submits that it would be appropriate for the
Tribunal to order that Mr Eather not
be re-registered for a period of at least 3
1.8 The Commission submits that should the Tribunal order that Mr Eather not
be re-registered for a specific period, it is also in
the public interest that
the Tribunal makes a "prohibition order" under pursuant to S. 149C(5) of the Act
for the same duration.
1.9 The Commission submits that the gravity of the misconduct and the risk of
recurrence requires that the prohibition order be made
in the following
The practitioner is prohibited from providing any health service or health
education service involving the physical examination, physical
treatment and/or
provision of counselling services (including but not limited to Neuro Emotional
Technique also known as NET) to
female patients for a period of no less than 3
years from the date of this order being made.
Clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law states:
(1) A Tribunal may order the complainant (if any), the registered health
practitioner or student concerned, or any other person entitled
(whether as of right or because leave to appear has been granted) at an inquiry
or appeal before the Tribunal to pay costs
to another person as decided by the
(2) When an order for costs has taken effect, the Tribunal is, on
application by the person to whom the costs have been awarded,
certificate setting out the terms of the order and stating that the order has
taken effect.
(3) The person in whose favour costs are awarded may file the certificate
in the District Court, together with an affidavit by the
person as to the amount
of the costs unpaid, and the Registrar of the District Court must enter judgment
for the amount unpaid together
with any fees paid for filing the
certificate.
2.2 The Complainant in these proceedings seeks an order for costs
against the Respondent.
2.3 The power of the Tribunal to determine costs
is unlimited, however, the power is discretionary.
2.4 A successful party
to litigation has a "reasonable expectation" of being awarded costs against the
unsuccessful party:
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
. Fairness dictates that the unsuccessful party typically bears the
liability for costs unless it is demonstrated that some other
appropriate:
Currabubula Holdings Ply Ltd v State Bank of NSW
The presumption is based on the principle that costs are
compensatory, and applies to the Chiropractors Tribunal.
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
Latoudis v Casey
(1990) 170 CLR
2.5 It is for the losing party to establish a basis for any departure from
the usual rule.
Waterman v Gerling Australia Insurance Co Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2005] NSWSC 1111
NSW v Stanley
[2007] NSWCA 330
However, the purpose of an order for costs is to compensate the person in whose
favour it is made and not to punish the person
against whom the order is made:
Allplastics Engineering Ply Ltd v Dornoch Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 33
Dr Douglass v Lawton Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 90
2.6 The discretion to depart from the usual rule is unfettered; however a
Tribunal ought not exercise its discretion against the successful
arbitrarily or capriciously, or on no grounds at all.
The discretion must be exercised judicially, and "according to rules of reason
and justice, not according to private opinion
... benevolence ... or sympathy".
Williams v Lever
at 95. Generally the presumption will
only be displaced where there has been some sort of disentitling conduct on the
part of the
successful party:
at [40] and [69];
Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
. The disentitling conduct does not necessarily need
to amount to misconduct, and may simply be any conduct 'calculated to occasion
unnecessary expense'.
Keddy v Foxall
[1955] VR 320
2.7 In this matter the proceedings have been conducted in a proper fashion by
the Complainant. The Respondent has had ample and appropriate
opportunity to put
forward his case but has elected not to participate in the proceedings before
the Tribunal on the basis that he
could not afford legal representation.
Notwithstanding that claim, the Complainant should not be prevented from seeking
compensation
for the costs associated with the conduct of the proceedings.
2.8 The Tribunal has made findings that the respondent has engaged in
conduct which amounts to professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
professional
conduct. There is nothing before the Tribunal to indicate why it should not make
an appropriate order for costs in favour
of the complainant
HCCC V EATHER
Paul Eather, the Chiropractic Tribunal of New South Wales has found you
guilty of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Your
actions constituted a serious breach of the standards expected of a registered
chiropractor and you exploited your
position of trust.
Your actions
demonstrated a total disregard for patients’ dignity and rights and you
exhibited serious errors of judgment, skill
and knowledge.
Your behaviour
was both unethical and improper.
You are reprimanded by this Tribunal for
your breach of professional boundaries which posed a high risk for patients in
You have repeatedly violated the trust inherent in the
practitioner/patient relationship.
In the profession of Chiropractic it
is critically important to act in a professional manner and within professional
guidelines. Honesty
is an essential trait of being a health care professional.
Your failure to appear and provide a full and frank account of your conduct
reprehensible.
This reprimand further emphasises your failure to take
heed of your colleagues’ concerns about your behaviour.
conduct has brought the Chiropractic profession into disrepute and your conduct
attracts serious criticism from your peers.
Conduct of this nature puts
at risk the high level of confidence that the public places in the Chiropractic
profession.
The Tribunal is also concerned about your disregard for the
level of distress you have caused Patient A and Patient C.
Your lack of
remorse demonstrates a continuing absence of insight.
The Tribunal
questions the potential for you to recognise and avoid unethical and improper
conduct in the future.
HCCC v Rezk
[2009] NSWPYT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (585 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter