URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Arthur (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 9; (7 April 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Arthur (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 9
Hearing Date(s):
07 April 2025
Date of Orders:
07 April 2025
Decision Date:
7 April 2025
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
Dr K J Banerjee, Senior Member
(Professional)
M Black, General Member (Community)
REVIEW OF ENDURING GUARDIANSHIP APPOINTMENT
In relation to the
enduring guardian appointment made by Arthur on 1 August 2018 appointing
Michelle the Tribunal orders, directs
or declares:
The functions of
the enduring guardian are varied to include an additional function as outlined
The guardian may authorise others including members of NSW Police and
the Ambulance Service of NSW to:
1. take Arthur to a place approved
by the guardian;
2. keep him at that place;
him to that place should he leave it.
The application for review is
treated as if it were an application under the
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) for a
guardianship order for Arthur.
The resignation of Michelle as an
enduring guardian is approved.
Leo is appointed to replace
1. A guardianship order is made for
2. Leo of [Address removed for publication.] is appointed
as the guardian.
3. This is a continuing guardianship order for a
period of 12 months from 7 April 2025.
4. This is a limited
guardianship order giving the guardian(s) custody of Arthur to the extent
necessary to carry out the functions
5. The guardian has the following
a) Accommodation
To decide where Arthur may
b) The guardian may authorise others including members of
NSW Police and the Ambulance Service of NSW to:
i) take Arthur to a
place approved by the guardian.
ii) keep him at that
iii) return him to that place should he leave
c) Health care
To decide what health care Arthur
may receive.
d) Medical/Dental consent
substitute decisions about proposed minor or major medical or dental treatment,
where Arthur is not capable of giving a valid
To make decisions about services to be provided to
6. The guardian has the following
a) Authority to override objections to medical
i) The guardian may override the objection of Arthur to
major or minor medical treatment.
condition of this order is:
a) Standard Condition
exercising this role, the guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring
Arthur to an understanding of the issues and to obtain
and consider his views
before making significant decisions.
REVIEW OF ENDURING
POWER OF ATTORNEY
In relation to the enduring power of attorney
made by Arthur on 1 August 2018 which appointed Michelle as attorney(s) the
determines, orders or declares:
to carry out a review of
the operation and effect of the enduring power of
Michelle is removed from office as an
Leo is appointed to replace Michelle.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – appointed enduring guardian seeking to resign as
enduring guardian – subject person has Huntington’s
subject person continues to be in need of a guardian – Tribunal approval
for resignation required – whether
proposed substitute enduring guardian
is eligible – where “authorise others” function sought –
where function
sought for authority to override subject person’s
objections to medical and dental treatment – whether such a function
validly be granted – not an authority the Tribunal can confer –
“authorise others” function granted –
substitute enduring
guardian appointed.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT – appointed
enduring attorney seeking to resign as enduring attorney – review of
enduring power of
attorney – whether substitute attorney ought to be
appointed – substitute attorney appointed.
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Guardianship Act 1987
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Cases Cited:
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public Guardian (Supreme
Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep
[2004] NSWADTAP
[2014] NSWCATGD 28
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
002: Review of an Enduring Guardianship Appointment
Arthur (the
Leo (applicant)
Michelle (enduring guardian)
NSW Trustee and
Public Guardian
003: Review of an Enduring Power of
Arthur (the person)
Leo (applicant)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2024/00374571
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a 68-year-old man who resides in supported accommodation in South-West
Sydney. Arthur is a participant of the National Disability
Insurance Scheme
is supported by his ex-wife, Michelle, and his son, Leo. Arthur has another son
who lives in Fiji and is reported to not be
actively involved in Arthur’s
having been divorced for many years, Arthur and Michelle are reported to
maintain a close friendship.
2008, Arthur was diagnosed with Huntington’s Disease. As Arthur’s
condition deteriorated, he identified the need to
appoint a substitute
decision-maker. On 1 August 2018, Arthur executed an Enduring Guardianship
Appointment (“EGA”) and
an Enduring Power of Attorney
(“EPOA”). Michelle was appointed under these instruments as
Arthur’s enduring guardian
and attorney, noting that the instruments
clearly identify that Michelle was Arthur’s former partner at the time the
appointments
Tribunal has been provided copies of each of these instruments.
Tribunal was informed that it had been the intention of Arthur and Michelle at
the time that the appointments were made that once
Arthur’s children (or
either of them) were at an age where they could take on responsibility for
management of Arthur’s
personal and financial affairs that Michelle would
relinquish her responsibilities in favour of one of Arthur’s
letter addressed to the Tribunal and dated 14 November 2024, Michelle advised of
her intention to resign as Arthur’s enduring
guardian and attorney,
subject to the Tribunal being satisfied that Leo is a suitable person to be
appointed to these roles in her
the same date, Michelle executed a “Notice of Resignation as Enduring
Guardian”. A copy of this instrument has been
provided to the
15 November 2024, the Tribunal received an application from Leo to review the
EGA. On 13 February 2025, the Tribunal received an
application from Leo to
review the EPOA.
applications were listed for Hearing on 7 April 2025. The Hearing was conducted
from the Tribunal’s Sydney Registry and
was attended in person by Leo,
Michelle and a friend and support person for Leo. The Hearing was attended
remotely by Arthur, a Supported
Independent Living (SIL) provider, and an NDIS
Support Coordinator.
Arthur participated in the Hearing, the extent of his participation was
significantly limited on account of the impacts of
his various disabilities.
Accordingly, the Tribunal was limited with respect to the ability to ascertain
Arthur’s views regarding
the applications.
Tribunal decided:
(1) In relation to the application to review the EPOA:
(a) To undertake a review of the operation and effect of the EPOA;
(b) To remove Michelle from office as attorney;
(c) To appoint Leo as Arthur’s attorney to replace Michelle.
(2) In relation to the review of the EGA:
(a) To approve the resignation of Michelle as Arthur’s enduring
(b) To appoint Leo as Arthur’s enduring guardian to replace Michelle;
(c) To vary the functions under the EGA to include an “authorise
others” function; and,
(d) To treat the application as if it were an application for a guardianship
order; and,
(e) To appoint Leo as Arthur’s guardian for an initial period of twelve
months with the functions of accommodation, authorise
others, services, health
care, and medical/dental consent, and with authority to override Arthur’s
objections to medical and
dental treatment.
REVIEW OF EGA
Legal Principles
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) (“the Act”) makes
provision for an enduring guardian to resign from their appointment. If the
appointer is not
a person in need of a guardian, such resignation may be in
writing (subject to compliance with various statutory requirements). If
appointer is a person in need of a guardian, such resignation may only occur
with the approval of the Tribunal.
Tribunal may, of its own motion or on application, appoint a person as a
substitute enduring guardian if the appointee has died,
resigned or become
incapacitated: the Act,
The Tribunal may only appoint a person under this
section if:
(1) The person is eligible to be appointed as an enduring guardian; and,
(2) The Tribunal is satisfied that:
(a) the appointor is in need of an enduring guardian;
(b) the person has a close personal relationship with the appointor; and,
(c) the person is capable of carrying out the functions of an enduring guardian.
reviewing the appointment of an enduring guardian, in accordance with
of the Act, the Tribunal may:
confirm the
appointment of an enduring guardian with or without varying the functions of the
appointed enduring guardian
proceed as if an
application for guardianship or an application for financial management (or
both) had been made or
appointment, with or without then proceeding as if an application for
guardianship or an application for financial management
(or both) had been
Tribunal may only proceed as if an application for guardianship or an
application for financial management (or both) had been
made if it considers it
is in the best interests of the appointor to do so.
of the Act identifies the functions that may be included in an EGA, which
includes at
any other function relating to the
appointor’s person that is specified in the instrument
of the Act, the Act does not provide express guidance about the
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion to vary, or not vary,
the functions
given to an enduring guardian.
our view, when considering whether or not to vary the functions given to an
enduring guardian under an EGA, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that the proposed
function is a function that the appointer could have validly given their
enduring guardian when making
such appointment. This gives rise to the question
of whether or not authority to override objections to medical and dental
in accordance with
of the Act, is a function that the Tribunal
could validly give an enduring guardian on review of an EGA. This is
discussed in more
detail below, as is the issue of whether the function of
“authorise others” may be added to an EGA on review by the
Can the Tribunal review an enduring guardian
appointment to include authority to override a patient’s objections to
and dental treatment?
Statutory Framework
of the Act relates to medical and dental treatment, and associated issues of
consent to treatment.
of the Act applies to a patient who is above the
age of 16 years and who is incapable of giving consent to the carrying out of
or dental treatment (save for any inconsistencies between the Act and
provisions of a number of other Acts, none of which are applicable
matter): the Act,
of the Act makes provision for identification of “the person
responsible”. Save for exceptions relating to children (as
defined by the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
persons under the care of the Secretary, s 33A of the Act provides that a
person’s guardian is their person responsible
but only if the
order or instrument appointing the guardian provides for the guardian to
exercise the function of giving consent to
the carrying out of medical or dental
treatment on the person
of the Act provides that in the
case of minor or major treatment, consent may be provided by the person
responsible, and in any case,
consent may be provided by the Tribunal.
of the Act provides the following:
33 Definitions
(3) For the purposes of this Part, a person shall be taken to
object to the carrying out of medical or dental treatment--
(a) if the person indicates (by whatever means) that he or she
does not want the treatment to be carried out, or
(b) if the person--
(i) has previously indicated, in similar circumstances, that
he or she did not then want the treatment to be carried out, and
(ii) has not subsequently indicated to the contrary.
of the Act relates to the effect of consent, and relevantly provides as
46 Effect of consent
(2) A consent given by a person responsible for, or the
guardian of, the patient has no effect--
(a) if the person carrying out or supervising the proposed
treatment is aware, or ought reasonably to be aware, that the patient
the carrying out of the treatment, or
(b) if the proposed treatment is to be carried out for any
purpose other than that of promoting or maintaining the health and
well-being of
the patient.
(3) A consent given by the guardian of the patient has effect
despite any objection made by a patient to the carrying out of the
treatment if
the guardian has consented to that treatment in accordance with the authority of
the Tribunal under section 46A.
46A of the Act empowers the Tribunal to authorise a guardian to override a
patient’s objection to treatment as follows:
46A Power of guardian to override patient’s objection to treatment when
authorised by the Tribunal
(1) The Tribunal may confer on the guardian of a patient to
whom this Part applies authority to override the patient's objection
carrying out on the patient of major or minor treatment.
(2) The Tribunal may confer such an authority only at the
request or with the consent of the guardian and only if it is satisfied
such objection will be made because of the patient's lack of understanding of
the nature of, or reason for, the treatment.
(3) The Tribunal may at any time--
(a) impose conditions or give directions as to the exercise of
such an authority, or
(b) revoke such an authority.
(4) The guardian may exercise such an authority only if
satisfied that the proposed treatment is manifestly in the best interests
Consideration
person may appoint an enduring guardian with authority to provide consent to
medical and dental treatment in the event that they
become incapable of giving
their own consent to such treatment. If such appointment is made, the enduring
guardian is appropriately
recognised as the person’s “person
responsible”.
statutory framework makes clear that there are limitations on the ability of a
person responsible to provide substitute consent
to medical and dental
treatment. In particular, such authority is limited to providing consent to
minor and major treatment
of the Act), and such consent has no effect if
provided in circumstances where the patient objects to treatment, unless the
has been authorised by the Tribunal in accordance with s 46A of the Act
of the Act).
express language of the legislation makes clear that
Tribunal may authorise a guardian to provide consent to medical and dental
treatment with authority to override a patient’s
objection to treatment.
Given this express limitation, the Tribunal finds that such authority
be validly granted by an appointor under an EGA in
accordance with s 6E(1)(e) of the Act.
leaves open, however, the issue of whether the Tribunal, when reviewing the
appointment of an EGA, may validly vary the functions
under the EGA to include
authority for an enduring guardian to override a patient’s objections to
medical and dental treatment.
in favour of this interpretation include:
(1) There is no
provision contained within s 46A of the
Act precluding such authority being provided by way of a variation of a function
of the Act defines a “guardian” to include an
“enduring guardian”; and,
(3) Although the provisions of s 46A of the Act adopt the term
“authority” rather than “function”,
provides that “
a reference to a function includes a reference to a
power, authority and duty
weighing against this interpretation include the following:
(1) Having regard to the intrusive and coercive nature of such authority, there
is clear legislative intention for the Tribunal’s
oversight of the use of
such authority;
(2) Such authority may only be granted at the request of, or with the consent
of, the guardian; and,
(3) An appointer may not validly grant such authority by way of an EGA under s
6E of the Act.
Tribunal is satisfied that as the authority is not an authority that could
validly be given by an appointer in accordance with
s 6E of the Act, it is not
an authority that the Tribunal may confer on an enduring guardian in the
exercise of the Tribunal’s
review powers. This interpretation is
consistent with the Tribunal’s duty to follow the general principles under
of the Act, ensuring that such authority is only granted on the basis of
compelling evidence as to the need for same, consistent
with the subject
person’s best interests, and ensuring appropriate and ongoing oversight by
the Tribunal when such authority
is granted.
a matter of statutory interpretation and having regard to the protective
that there is no
power at law for an EGA to be varied by the Tribunal to authorise an enduring
guardian to override a patient’s
objection to medical or dental treatment.
Can the Tribunal review an enduring guardian appointment to
include an “authorise others” function?
“authorise others” function, also commonly referred to as a coercive
function, is a function crafted by the Tribunal
which authorises a guardian
to enlist the assistance of others, including the NSW Police and the
NSW Ambulance service, to:
(1) take the person under guardianship to a place approved by the guardian;
(2) keep them at that place; and,
(3) return them to that place should they leave it.
circumstances where such a function may be granted commonly include situations
where assistance is required to implement an accommodation
decision (such as
discharge from hospital to an aged care facility in the context of opposition by
the person subject to guardianship)
or where such authority is required to
ensure that the person is transported to and/or remains at a specified location
(such as requiring
attendance upon a hospital for the purpose of receiving
medical treatment, or attempts by the person to discharge from hospital against
authorise others function, like the majority of functions imposed by the
Tribunal, is not a creature of statute. That is, the
Act (save for the issues
discussed above with respect to authority to override objections to medical and
dental treatment) does not
define the functions that may be granted to a
guardian, and the functions that may be imposed by the Tribunal have never been
exhaustively
[2014] NSWCATGD 28
, the Tribunal noted that such function should only
be granted in limited circumstances, where a person’s decision-making
would expose them to “neglect, abuse or
exploitation”:
“[51] Given their draconian nature, in the absence of
requisite evidence, the Tribunal is loath to authorise the use of
guardian to enforce a substitute decision which is made by the guardian but not
supported by the person themselves. Only
in circumstances whereby a person's
decision making incapacity is such that it results in them making decisions
which expose them
to neglect, abuse or exploitation (or they are incapable of
making important decisions and others make decisions on their behalf
which cause
neglect, abuse or exploitation) does the Tribunal contemplate the application of
coercive authority.”
contrast to the issues discussed above regarding authority to override
objections to medical and dental treatment, there are no
statutory restrictions
with respect to the imposition of an authorise others function. In the absence
of such restrictions, the Tribunal
is satisfied that an appointer may validly
grant an enduring guardian with an authorise others function under s 6E of the
any other function relating to the appointor’s
follows from this finding that, being a function that may validly be granted by
the appointor, it is also a function that may validly
be included by the
Tribunal when undertaking a review of an EGA.
principles outlined in
are relevant to the Tribunal’s decision
when considering whether such function ought to be granted, irrespective of
this is by way of variation of the functions under an EGA, or whether by
way of guardianship order. That is, such a function would
not be readily
conferred by the Tribunal without compelling evidence as to the necessity for
the Tribunal is satisfied that an authorise others function should be granted,
the Tribunal retains a discretion as to whether
this function should be
conferred by way of a variation of the functions under the EGA, or by the making
of a guardianship order,
with such discretion to be exercised in accordance with
the principles under
of the Act. A relevant consideration in the exercise of
this discretion includes whether the evidence supports an ongoing need for
use of such function, or otherwise whether the function should be conferred for
a limited period of time by way of a guardianship
order (thus enabling the
Tribunal to consider whether the function ought to be lapsed on subsequent
review by the Tribunal).
What did the Tribunal have to
issues requiring determination by the Tribunal, in relation to the review of the
Is Arthur a
person in need of a guardian?
If so, should
the Tribunal approve Michelle’s resignation as enduring guardian?
If so, should
the Tribunal appoint Leo to replace Michelle as Arthur’s enduring
Tribunal vary the functions under the EGA?
Tribunal treat the application as if it were an application for a guardianship
Is Arthur a person in need of a
person in need of a guardian is “a person who, because of a disability, is
totally or partially incapable of managing their
person”: the Act,
Tribunal was provided with a number of medical and allied health reports in
support of the current application, including the
(1) Health Professional Report Form prepared by Dr Z dated 6 March 2025;
(2) Report from a Behaviour Support Practitioner (undated, submitted to the
Tribunal on 13 February 2025);
(3) Letter from an Occupational Therapist, dated 3 December 2024;
(4) Discharge Referral from a public hospital (from an Attending Medical
Officer) dated 31 March 2025.
reports outline that Arthur lives with a number of complex diagnoses, including
Huntington’s Disease, major neurocognitive
disorder with significant
executive impairment, long-standing dysphagia, bilateral osteoarthritis,
depression, anxiety, primary biliary
cirrhosis, and Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Z also reports a diagnosis of schizophrenia. This diagnosis is not referred to
in other reports available to the Tribunal, however
there are consistent reports
of Arthur being diagnosed with a “
psychotic disorder secondary to
Huntington’s Disease
impacts of Arthur’s disabilities are reported to include the
(1) Arthur requires assistance with all Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) and
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs).
(2) Arthur has reduced expressive and receptive language skills. He is able to
follow simple 1-2 step verbal instructions, but has
difficulty recalling and
providing information about complex or abstract information. His speech is soft,
slow and has reduced clarity.
(3) Arthur’s ability to self-regulate is reduced by his psychotic
symptoms. He is treated by quarterly depot injections, but
as the dosage wears
off, he experiences an increase in delusional thoughts and displays aggressive
behaviours.
(4) Arthur has been assessed as having severely impaired global cognition with a
significant reduction in his executive functioning
skills to retain new
information, and process and understand information.
from the discrepancy between reporting of a diagnosis of schizophrenia and a
diagnosis of a psychotic disorder secondary to
Huntington’s Disease, the
professional evidence before the Tribunal was generally consistent.
Tribunal is satisfied that Arthur has a primary disability of Huntington’s
Disease and a number of secondary disabilities,
the impacts of which result in
significant functional and cognitive decline to the extent that Arthur is
incapable of managing his
person. Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that
Arthur is a person in need of a guardian.
Should the Tribunal
approve Michelle’s resignation as enduring guardian?
to the Tribunal’s finding that Arthur is a person in need of a guardian,
Michelle may only resign from her appointment
as enduring guardian with the
Tribunal’s approval.
expressed clearly her desire to resign from her appointment, and her apparent
prior agreement with Arthur that she would
act as his guardian until his
children (or either of them) were in a position to assume responsibility as
Arthur’s guardian
(noting that Leo was still a child when Michelle was
originally appointed as Arthur’s enduring guardian).
from service providers identify that they have had difficulties engaging with
Michelle in the exercise of her responsibilities
as enduring guardian owing to
her regular absences from Australia. This has apparently resulted in services
being terminated for
Arthur due to an inability to enter into new service
agreements, and difficulties ensuring ongoing medication compliance.
circumstances where Michelle is no longer willing and able to exercise the
functions under the EGA the Tribunal is satisfied that
her resignation should be
approved by the Tribunal.
Should the Tribunal appoint Leo to
replace Michelle as Arthur’s enduring guardian?
application was made by Leo based on his proposal that he be appointed to
replace Michelle as Arthur’s enduring guardian.
his young age (Leo is in his early 20s), Leo presented to the Tribunal as being
both willing and able to exercise the functions
of guardianship. He had a
sound understanding of his father’s current care needs and an appreciation
of the nature of the decisions
he may be tasked to make in his appointment as
enduring guardian.
provided to the Tribunal outline that Leo and Arthur have a strong and
continuing relationship, with Leo being a regular visitor
to Arthur’s home
and being actively engaged in all aspects of his care.
appointment was supported by Michelle.
identified that he, Arthur and Michelle have had lengthy discussions about Leo
replacing Michelle as Arthur’s guardian,
and that this was a proposal
supported by all three of them.
Tribunal was satisfied that Arthur’s best interests would be promoted by
the appointment of Leo as his enduring guardian
in light of the Tribunal’s
decision to approve Michelle’ resignation.
Tribunal vary the functions under the EGA?
Hearing the Tribunal considered the nature of the functions that should be
allocated to Arthur’s guardian. The EGA makes
provision for Arthur’s
guardian to make decisions with respect to where he lives, the personal services
he receives, the health
care he receives, and for substitute consent to
medical/dental treatment.
Tribunal was informed that despite displaying a number of behaviours of concern,
Arthur is not subject to any restrictive practices.
He is prescribed major
medications (psychotropic), including paliperidone (quarterly depot) and
risperidone (on a PRN basis), though
these medications are not considered a
restrictive practice as they are prescribed for the management of Arthur’s
psychotic illness.
Tribunal was informed that there are ongoing concerns about Arthur’s
medication non-compliance and his willingness to accept
health care generally.
Arthur is consistently oppositional to attending hospital and medical
appointments when the need arises, resulting
in significant risks to his
physical health. Due to Arthur’s executive dysfunction he is unable to
recognise when there is
a pressing need for medical treatment. It was asserted,
and the Tribunal accepts, that there is a need for a guardian to be appointed
with an authorise others function for the purpose of ensuring that Arthur can be
transported to hospital as the need arises. Whilst
intended to be used as a last
resort, the inclusion of this function ensures that Arthur is able to receive
timely and appropriate
medical treatment notwithstanding his resistance to
attending upon a medical practitioner to receive same. The need for Arthur
treatment is exacerbated by his immune deficiency
associated with his treatment for HIV.
Tribunal was also informed that Arthur consistently demonstrates medication
non-compliance. In the first instance behavioural
interventions are implemented
in an attempt to prompt Arthur’s compliance, however, he
doesn’t get persuaded often
” and accordingly he
regularly misses his medications. There has been an increasing need for
Arthur’s medications to be
hidden/dissolved in Arthur’s foods to
conceal administration of the medication. Whilst the Tribunal notes that Arthur,
consequence of his dysphagia, requires a pureed diet, the Tribunal was
informed that the basis for the medications being concealed
is to ensure his
medication compliance against his objection to treatment, rather than a
consequence of Arthur’s swallowing
difficulties.
Tribunal is satisfied that the functions under the EGA should be varied to
include an authorise others function so as to ensure
that Arthur can be
transported to hospital (or for attendance on a medical or allied health
practitioner) as the need arises to obtain
necessary and appropriate medical
Tribunal is also satisfied that there is a need for a guardian to be authorised
to override Arthur’s objections to medical
and dental treatment.
In light of the Tribunal’s findings above, such authority cannot be
conferred by way of review of the
Should the Tribunal treat
the application as if it were an application for a guardianship order?
determined that there is a need for a guardian to be authorised to override
Arthur’s objections to medical and dental
treatment, and in circumstances
where such authority cannot be conferred on an enduring guardian, the Tribunal
decided to treat the
application for review of the EGA as if it were an
application for a guardianship order.
Tribunal notes that in accordance with s 6I(1) of the Act, the making of a
guardianship order suspends the operation of the EGA
(in its entirety) for the
duration of the order.
review of the guardianship order, should Arthur no longer require a guardian
with authority to override his objections to medical
and dental treatment, the
Tribunal’s orders make provision for Leo to assume decision-making
responsibility under the EGA with
the necessary functions should the
guardianship order be lapsed/revoked.
APPLICATION FOR
GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian and how long should the order last?
14 of the Act provides that the Tribunal may make a guardianship order for a
person if we are satisfied that the person is
“a person in need of a
person in need of a guardian is "a person who, because of a disability, is
totally or partially incapable of managing their person":
the Act, s 3(1).
The disability must restrict them in one or more major life activities to
the extent that they require supervision
or social habilitation: the Act, s
a person is a person in need of a guardian, the Tribunal has a discretion as to
whether or not to make a guardianship order. Section
14(2) of the Act outlines a
number of equally important factors for the Tribunal to consider and balance in
the exercise of our discretion.
These matters have no hierarchy or weighting and
each is a mandatory consideration. However, the Tribunal must undertake a
exercise for its consideration of the matters in s 14(2) of the Act.
When undertaking this task, the Tribunal may be guided by the
principles that
are set out in s 4 of the Act (see
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements in accordance with
s 17(1) of the Act. He
or she must:
(a) have a personality generally compatible with the personality of the person
under guardianship;
(b) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of
the person; and
(c) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
set out in s 4 of the Act (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the
Public Guardian
(Supreme Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep)
[2011] NSWSC 1075
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
, the Supreme Court noted the importance
of a proposed guardian being able to demonstrate insight and explain plans for
as guardian objectively and without conflict of interest.
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed:
the Act, s 15(3).
to certain exceptions, none of which apply in the current circumstances, an
initial guardianship order can be made for a period
of up to one year from the
date on which it was made: the Act, s 18(1)(a).
nature of Arthur’s disabilities and the impacts on his ability to manage
his person are referred to above in relation to
the review of the EGA. On the
basis of such evidence the Tribunal is satisfied that Arthur is a person for
whom the Tribunal could
make a guardianship order.
need for a guardian to be appointed with an authorise others function and
authority to override objections to medical and dental
treatment is discussed
circumstances where the making of a guardianship order will suspend the
operation of the EGA the Tribunal decided that the functions
provided for in the
EGA, namely accommodation, services, health care and medical/dental consent,
should continue under a guardianship
order. The making of the EGA is prima facie
evidence that Arthur’s wishes were for his guardian to make decisions
Tribunal was unable to obtain clear views from Arthur about the making of a
guardianship order. The evidence provided to the Tribunal
by Michelle and Leo
was to the effect that it had always been Arthur’s intention that one of
his children would assume decision-making
responsibility for him when they were
able to do so, and that in discussions with Arthur he remained supportive of
this proposal.
Prior to the Hearing the Tribunal’s Case Officer was able
to discuss the applications with Arthur. It is reported that during
conversations Arthur was supportive of Leo’s appointment as a
decision-maker for him, but preferred that the responsibility
be shared between
Leo and Michelle.
explaining the basis of why a guardianship order would be required, namely the
necessity for a guardian to be able to authorise
medical and dental treatment
contrary to Arthur’s objections, Michelle and Leo each supported the
making of a guardianship
is no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that the making of a guardianship
order would have an impact on Arthur’s
existing family relationships. Leo
informed the Tribunal that he was confident that there would be no adverse
impacts on his relationship
with his father even if he were required to make
decisions contrary to Arthur’s stated wishes.
was no evidence before the Tribunal with respect to any cultural or linguistic
considerations relevant to the Tribunal’s
determination.
written material before the Tribunal outlines that there have been issues with
service provision for Arthur on account of difficulties
communicating with
Michelle to enter into new service agreements and Arthur’s inability to
enter into his own service agreements.
Having regard to these previous
difficulties, the Tribunal is satisfied that it would be impractical for
services to be provided
to Arthur in the absence of a guardian.
Tribunal was, accordingly, satisfied that a guardianship order should be made
for Arthur with the functions of accommodation,
authorise others, services,
health care, medical/dental consent, and authority to override Arthur’s
objections to medical/dental
suitability for appointment as Arthur’s guardian is addressed above with
respect to his appointment as Arthur’s
enduring guardian. The evidence
referred to above supports a finding that Arthur and Leo have personalities that
are generally compatible,
and that Leo is able and willing to exercise the
functions of guardianship. There is no evidence before the Tribunal with respect
to any conflict of interest that would preclude Leo’s appointment as
Tribunal is satisfied that Leo meets the requirements under the Act to be
appointed as Arthur’s guardian. Accordingly, the
Tribunal decided to
appoint Leo as Arthur’s guardian.
issue giving rise to the making of a guardianship order is the need for a
guardian to override Arthur’s objections to medical
and dental treatment.
At this stage it is unclear whether or not this will be an ongoing concern.
The Tribunal decided that an initial
guardianship order should be made for
a period of twelve months, at which time the order will be reviewed by the
Tribunal. On review,
the Tribunal would be assisted by further evidence as
to the nature of any decisions that have been made under the override
authority, and the frequency of any such decisions. This will assist
the Tribunal in determining whether there continues to be a
guardianship order, or otherwise whether the order could be lapsed/revoked (in
which case the operation of the EGA would
be revived).
ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
Tribunal may, on the application of an interested person, decide to review the
making or the operation and effect of a reviewable
power of attorney, or not to
carry out such a review:
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
consequence of reviewing the making or operation and effect of a reviewable
power of attorney, the Tribunal may decide whether
or not to make an order under
Powers of Attorney Act
Susan Elizabeth Parker v Margaret Catherine Higgins & Ors
, Slattery J stated at [80]:
“On an application for
review such as this the Court must first
exercise a discretion under
Powers of Attorney Act
whether or not to conduct a
review. In my view the Court does not have to
conduct a full review of all documents associated with the operation of the
power of attorney to do this. Something short of a full review must be
able to justify the exercise of the
discretion as to whether or not the
Court should conduct a full
review. In the circumstances of this case the
Court can glean sufficient information to exercise the
discretion by
undertaking a general survey of what... (a party)...has produced.”
Tribunal may make a number of orders relating to the operation and effect of a
power of attorney if it is satisfied:
that it would be
in the best interests of the principal to make the order
that it would
better reflect the wishes of the principal to make the order
orders include, but are not limited to:
removing a person from office as attorney
appointing a substitute attorney to replace an attorney who has been removed
from office or who otherwise vacates the office
revoking all or part of the power of attorney
on a review of the enduring power of attorney, the Tribunal decides not
to make an order under
Powers of Attorney Act
if it considers it appropriate in all of the circumstances to do so, decide to
treat the application for review as an application
for a financial management
order under
of the Act.
application was made to the Tribunal in circumstances where Michelle has
indicated her intention to resign from her appointment
and there is a proposal
for Leo to be substituted in her place. At Hearing, Michelle confirmed her
intention to resign from her appointment
in favour of Leo assuming
responsibility for Arthur’s financial affairs. It is her intention to
retire to Fiji, making it impractical
for her to continue to be responsible for
the management of Arthur’s financial affairs.
circumstances where Arthur’s appointed attorney is no longer willing to
continue in her appointment, the Tribunal is satisfied
that there is an
appropriate basis to undertake a review of the EPOA.
the same reasons, the Tribunal is satisfied that it would be in Arthur’s
best interests to remove Michelle from office as
Arthur’s attorney.
told the Tribunal that Arthur does not own any real estate and has just over one
million dollars in a savings account. Arthur
has received long term assistance
from a financial advisor, and it is Leo’s intention to continue to work
with Arthur’s
financial advisor in order to make appropriate decisions
regarding the management of Arthur’s financial affairs.
discussion with Leo the Tribunal was satisfied that:
(1) there would be no conflict of interest should Leo be appointed as
Arthur’s attorney;
(2) Leo has a sufficient understanding of his fiduciary duties as an attorney
and has insight and objectivity as to the nature of
any decisions that may need
to be made on Arthur’s behalf; and,
(3) there were no concerns identified with respect to Leo’s responses to
the Tribunal’s usual probity questions.
circumstances where the Tribunal has removed Michelle from office as
Arthur’s attorney, and where the evidence clearly supports
that Arthur
lacks the functional and cognitive abilities to manage his own finances, the
Tribunal decided that Leo should be appointed
as Arthur’s
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (319 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter