URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/186.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rangihuna v R [2025] NSWCCA 186 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Rangihuna v R
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 186
Hearing Date(s):
24 October 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Adamson JA at [1]
Chen J at [2]
Rigg J at [176]
(1) Extend the time for the applicant to file his Notice of Appeal to 7
August 2025.
(2) Grant leave to appeal.
(3) Dismiss
the appeal.
Catchwords:
SENTENCING — appeal against sentence — co-offenders —
disparity between sentences — whether the applicant
had a justifiable
sense of grievance having regard to the sentences imposed on five co-offenders
— where five co-offenders
received lesser sentences after the applicant
was sentenced — where co-offenders sentenced by different judges —
co-offenders found guilty of different offences — whether open to
applicant to impugn findings in co-offenders sentencing judgment
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Firearms Act 1996
Cases Cited:
(2022) 107 NSWLR 225
[2022] NSWCCA 17
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De
La Rosa (2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194
(2022) 108 NSWLR 1
[2022] NSWCCA 81
[2017] NSWCCA 124
Green v The Queen; Quinn v
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[2011] HCA 49
He v R (Cth)
[2022] NSWCCA
Ibbotson (a pseudonym) v R
[2020] NSWCCA 92
[2010] NSWCCA 60
Kadwell (a pseudonym) v R
[2021] NSWCCA
Kentwell v The Queen (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
Lonsdale v R
[2020] NSWCCA 267
Lowe v The Queen
(1984) 154 CLR 606
Martellotta v R
[2021] NSWCCA 168
[2024] NSWCCA 197
390 FLR 293
Narayan v R
[2022] NSWCCA 163
[2017] NSWCCA 179
268 A Crim R 61
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
[2011] NSWCCA 211
R v Wei Pan
[2005] NSWCCA 114
[2022] NSWCCA 265
; (2022) 374 FLR 201
Wong v The Queen
(2001) 207 CLR 584
[2001] HCA 64
Principal judgment
Duane Rangihuna (Applicant)
Crown (Respondent)
Representation:
G D Wendler (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Monica McKenzie Solicitors
(Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2021/00158630
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court of New South Wales
Date of Decision:
15 December 2022
Judge Baly SC
File Number(s):
2021/00158630
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
On 31 August 2022, Duane Rangihuna (‘the applicant’) pleaded
guilty to two offences in relation to a home invasion and
kidnapping that
occurred on 1 June 2021 at Revesby, NSW. Those offences were specially
aggravated kidnapping, contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
and specially aggravated break and enter, contrary to
. When sentenced, two further offences were placed on a Form 1 –
namely, possessing ammunition without a licence, contrary to
Firearms Act 1996
(NSW), and tampering with evidence by means of fire,
with intent to mislead a judicial tribunal, contrary to
The applicant was sentenced by her Honour Judge Baly SC on 15 December 2022
to an aggregate sentence of 8 years imprisonment, with
a non-parole period of 5
The applicant, who was part of a group of co-offenders, was sentenced first.
All five co-offenders received a lesser sentence than
the applicant.
By Notice of Appeal filed 6 August 2025, the applicant sought leave to appeal
against his sentence on a single ground, arguing that
he had a justifiable sense
of grievance having regard to the sentences imposed upon his co-offenders.
(Chen J, Adamson JA and Rigg J agreeing),
dismissing the
appeal, held that:
(1) The applicant failed to demonstrate that there was unjustifiable
disparity between the sentence imposed upon him and those imposed
on each of his
co-offenders:
(a) In relation to Mr Feilo, Mr Gillett and Mr Schaaf, there were significant
differences in the offending, namely, each were only
convicted of, and sentenced
for, the basic kidnapping offence. Further, unlike the applicant, none were
convicted of being an accessory
to the specially aggravated break and enter
offence. When sentenced their roles in the offending were found to be different
applicant’s role: Chen J at [126]-[127], [152], [159] (Adamson JA
agreeing at [1], Rigg J agreeing at [176]).
(b) In relation to Mr Saafi, although he pleaded guilty to the specially
aggravated form of kidnapping, there were significant differences
offending and the roles each were found to have: Chen J at [142]-[143] (Adamson
JA at [1], Rigg J agreeing at [176]). Unlike
the applicant, Mr Saafi was not
sentenced in relation to the specially aggravated break and enter offence: Chen
J at [144] (Adamson
JA at [1], Rigg J agreeing at [176]).
(c) In relation to Mr Finau, while he pleaded guilty to the same two offences as
the applicant, he was found, when sentenced, to
have an intellectual disability
and that he did not play a managerial role in the offending or assist in the
planning of it. Those
differences explain the differences between the sentences:
Chen J at [174] (Adamson JA agreeing at [1], Rigg J agreeing at [176]).
(2) The difference in sentencing outcomes with respect to each offender was
readily explained by differences in the offending, the
role each offender played
and subjective cases of each co-offender and in no way impermissible: Chen J at
[137], [147], [155], [161],
[174] (Adamson JA agreeing at [1], Rigg J agreeing
: I agree with Chen J.
Following pleas of guilty entered in the Campbelltown Local Court
on 31 August 2022, Duane Rangihuna (‘the applicant’)
was committed
to the District Court to be sentenced for two offences arising out of his
involvement in a violent home invasion –
and kidnapping – that
occurred in the early hours of 1 June 2021.
15 December 2022, her Honour Judge Baly SC (‘the sentencing judge’)
sentenced the applicant to an aggregate sentence
of 8 years imprisonment, with a
non-parole period of 5 years for that offending.
Notice of Appeal filed 6 August 2025, containing a single ground of appeal, the
applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentence
imposed on him, arguing
that there is unjustifiable disparity between his sentence and those imposed
upon five of his co-offenders.
The extension of time
the applicant was sentenced on 15 December 2022, he was required to file a
notice of intention to apply for leave to appeal
within 28 days after he was
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW). As the
applicant did not file such a notice, the “applicable period” for
him to file a notice of appeal against
the sentence imposed was “the
period of 3 months after the ... sentence”: r 3.5(2)(b) of the
Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules 2021
Court has the power to extend the time to file a notice of intention to appeal:
Criminal Appeal Act
. The discretion conferred by this
power is “wide” and is “to be exercised by consideration of
what the interests
of justice require in the particular case”:
v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
. The Court has power
to extend the time to file a notice of appeal: r 3.5(5) of the
Court (Criminal Appeal) Rules
applicant emphasised, in support of an order extending time, the fact that the
various co-offenders were sentenced
him – the last of which
(Elijah Schaaf) was on 12 December 2024 – and the arguable merits of his
ground of appeal justified
an extension of time.
applicant relied upon the explanation given through his solicitor, Monica
McKenzie, in an affidavit sworn 26 February 2025.
Crown did not oppose an extension of time. Given that stance, the subject matter
of the appeal and the fact that the applicant’s
solicitor prosecuted the
appeal with reasonable promptitude following the sentencing of the last
co-offender, I consider it is appropriate
to grant the extension sought.
the applicant’s ultimate submission is that there is unjustifiable
disparity between his sentence and the sentences imposed
upon five of his
co-offenders, it is helpful to summarise the background facts relevant to that
complaint – which I will cover
across three parts: first, the offending
and charges against the applicant; secondly, the sentencing of the applicant;
and, thirdly,
the sentencing of the five co-offenders.
offending and charges against the applicant
applicant was sentenced in accordance with a statement of Agreed Facts on
Sentence (the ‘agreed facts’). What follows
is drawn from the agreed
facts and the sentencing judgment. Given the sentencing judgment does not have a
medium neutral citation
and is in transcript form, the references to the page
numbers in that judgment are expressed as J1 etc. The references to the agreed
facts are expressed as AF at [1] etc.
the early hours of 1 June 2021, the victim, and other family members, were
asleep inside a home in Bringelly, NSW (J2).
around 2:47am, a group of men arrived at the home, having driven there in two
stolen vehicles. Seven of them got out, forced the
front door open and went
inside. Two of the men were armed with pistols (J2).
inside the premises, the men searched for and located the victim. One of the men
assaulted the victim’s elderly father
by striking him in the head with a
pistol and a different man punched him. Two other family members barricaded
themselves inside
a bedroom (J2). When the victim was located, they dragged him
from his bed – where he was asleep with his five-year-old son
took him outside.
the course of the victim “being dragged to the car”, he “broke
free and ran off” but was pursued and recaptured,
during which he was
“struck to his body. He received many injuries. He was taken back into a
vehicle and driven off”
victim was taken to a warehouse in Marigold Street, Revesby, NSW (‘the
warehouse’). During the journey to the warehouse,
the victim’s head
was wrapped in duct tape. Later, that tape was replaced with some fabric
material and, during this process,
the victim observed at least 10 members of
the group (AF at [13]).
victim was detained for approximately nine hours during which time
“members of the group took turns sitting on top of [him]
in order to
restrain him” (J2-3). His mobile phone was taken and messages were sent to
different “contacts” saved
within his phone demanding sums of money
of up to $100 million. Photographs were taken of the victim with duct tape
around his eyes
and injuries to his face while also depicting him being bound by
his wrists or hands (J3). The images were sent in conjunction with
the messages
containing the ransom demands (J3). The messages included the statement that
“after night fall ‘he’s
going in the hole’”
before 9am, police attended the warehouse and commenced surveillance.
of the offenders, not including the applicant, left the warehouse to get food.
Following their return, police intercepted them,
and they were arrested (J3).
Subsequently,
the police tactical operations unit contained the scene and called upon the
occupants of the warehouse to exit. Ten
minutes later, the victim was sent out
the front door to police wearing only a pair of underpants.
remaining inside set three separate fires in a bid “to destroy critical
evidence” (J3). This conduct resulted in
the applicant being charged with
intent to mislead a judicial proceeding, destroy evidence by means of fire,
contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) (sequence 5) (J1).
the fires had taken hold, eight offenders (including the applicant) left the
premises and were arrested by police. Those other
offenders included
Vaeluagaomatagy Feilo, Johann Saafi (aka Johann Schaaf), Brandon Gillett, Elijah
Schaaf, Shannon Finau and a juvenile
(GF) (AF at [1], [18]). To signpost: the
juvenile offender is
relevant to the applicant’s appeal, but
the sentences that the five adult offenders received for their part in the
are argued to give rise to the justifiable sense of grievance that the
applicant has, given he received the
arrested, the applicant was found in possession of ammunition – six
Winchester .38 calibre ammunition (J3; AF at [19])
– resulting in him
being charged with possessing ammunition for a firearm without holding a licence
or permit, contrary to
Firearms Act 1996
(NSW) (sequence
his arrest, police located duct tape near the home where the victim had been
staying. DNA on the duct tape matched the victim
and the applicant (AF at
was an agreed fact that the Crown could not prove beyond reasonable doubt that
the applicant was a direct participant in the home
invasion (AF at [35]).
Further, the applicant (AF at [35]):
“... claims his role in the home invasion was to prepare the Rav4 vehicle
for the abduction. He says that prior to the home
invasion, he filled the car up
with petrol and sourced various items such as duct tape. He also maintains that
after the commission
of the home invasion at Bringelly, he attended the
warehouse in Revesby at approximately 6am and from then on, participated in the
commission of the specially aggravated detention of the victim. CCTV footage
shows two men arrive at the warehouse area at 6:08am.”
initially, the applicant was charged with a range of offences arising out of
these events, ultimately, he pleaded guilty to
two of them.
first offence was that he did, on 1 June 2021, while in the company of others,
detain the victim without his consent with intent
to hold him to ransom and
occasion actual bodily harm, contrary to
(sequence 2).
second offence was that he was, between 25 May and 1 June 2021, an accessory
before the fact to specially aggravated break and
enter and commit a serious
indictable offence being armed with a weapon, contrary to
(sequence 8).
Additionally,
in accordance with
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (‘CSP Act’), sequences 3 (see [
], above) and 5 (see
], above) were
placed on a Form 1 when sentencing the applicant for sequence 2 (J1).
The sentencing judgment: the applicant
sentencing judge noted that the applicant was to be sentenced for the two
offences, each of which had a maximum penalty of 25
years imprisonment, and
that, in relation to sequence 2, two further offences (sequences 3 and 5) were
to be taken into account on
a Form 1 (J1). The maximum penalty for the Form 1
offences were 50 penalty units (sequence 3) and 10 years imprisonment (sequence
set out the background facts summarised above, the sentencing judge made the
following further findings.
applicant had entered an early guilty plea to the principal offences and was
therefore “entitled to a 25% discount for each
... for the utilitarian
value of his pleas of guilty” (J1).
relation to the offending, after noting the agreement about what the Crown could
not prove (see [
above), the sentencing judge found that “both these offences were highly
planned and organised joint criminal enterprises”
(J4-5). Further, in
relation to the kidnapping offence, the sentencing judge found that the
“detention was committed for financial
gain. [The applicant] said he stood
to gain $10,000 ...” (J5).
sentencing judge found that “beyond accepting that the [applicant] arrived
at 6am at the warehouse” and, thus, some
hours after the other offenders,
“there is no precise evidence of what he did in the warehouse”, but
by his plea, the
applicant accepts “his joint involvement in not only the
substantial offence, but also the setting [of] fire to destroy evidence”
terms of the objective seriousness of the offending, the sentencing judge found
that the kidnapping offence (sequence 2) fell “above
the putative
mid-range in terms of seriousness” (J7). In making that finding and
accepting that she could not be “precise
applicant] did”, her Honour did
accept “that he was
asleep at any time”, as was submitted on his behalf (J7).
relation to the applicant being an accessory to the aggravated break and enter
offence (sequence 8), the sentencing judge accepted
that it was “possible
to be more precise as to the [applicant’s] role” given
“[c]learly, he did not enter
the home” but rather, his role was
preparing one of the vehicles “for the abduction whereby he filled the car
petrol”, as well as sourcing various items “such as duct
tape” (J7).
sentencing judge found that the “home invasion was a serious
example” of its kind and, whilst she was unable to find
beyond reasonable
doubt that the applicant had “any prior knowledge that the victim would be
injured”, the applicant
was aware “that the offence involved an
abduction and relocation of the victim, and it was committed for financial gain.
applicant’s] role was quite significant. Both items he supplied were
used in the commission of the offence” (J8).
relation to the Form 1 offences, the sentencing judge did not accept that
“the ammunition possessed by the [applicant] was
directly linked to the
firearms used in the detention offence” but did accept that, in relation
to the “tamper with evidence
offence” (sequence 5), it was a
“serious offence of its kind by virtue of the fact that it involved
lighting fires to
destroy evidence” and noted that “[i]t will add to
the length of the sentence that I impose for the detention offence”
sentencing judge accepted that there were two aggravating factors.
first aggravating factor was that the applicant was on parole at the time he
committed these offences (J8). As the sentencing
judge found, the applicant had
been released on parole after serving part of his sentence for “robbery
armed and in company
on 9 December 2020” and that his response to parole
was “unsatisfactory. It [was] noted in a breach report that he appeared
reluctant to engage in intervention” (J8). The sentencing judge later
noted, in the context of identifying the commencement
date for the sentence that
she imposed, that the applicant’s parole was revoked following his arrest
and detention on 1 June
2021, and that he was serving the balance of his term,
which expired on 30 April 2023 (J12).
second aggravating factor was the applicant’s “record of previous
personal violence offences” and that, as an
adult, he had “been
convicted of a number of serious and planned offences involving violence”
sentencing judge considered that those “aggravating factors ... attract
weight. The sentencing purpose of personal deterrence
is one which attracts
weight” (J9).
relation to the applicant’s moral culpability for the offences, the
sentencing judge accepted that it was “reduced”
“mental condition, including post-traumatic stress disorder, [which had]
been causal in terms of his drug use and
subsequent serious offending”,
with the consequence that his “sentences [would] be reduced”
sentencing judge considered that “both general and personal deterrence
[were] important sentencing purposes in this case”
applicant was found to be “remorseful”, but the sentencing judge was
unprepared to find that the applicant had “good
prospects of
rehabilitation”, nor that he was “unlikely to reoffend. [The
applicant’s] record [was] such that the
protection of the community [was]
an important sentencing consideration” (J11).
the sentencing judge accepted that there was “a very real risk of
institutionalisation”, her Honour considered
that the existence of that
fact “cannot operate to mean that an inadequate sentence is imposed for
this very serious offending”
but that it would “sound in a finding
of special circumstances, [although] the ratio [would] not be varied to any
great extent”
Honour considered that the principal offences were “very much
interrelated, and the criminality [was] also intertwined and
overlap[ped]”
and, given sequence 8 “proceeded and led directly to the detention”
(being sequence 2), the aggregate
sentence imposed was “one that
notionally reflect[ed] complete concurrence between the two sentences”
with her Honour’s earlier finding about the risk of institutionalisation,
a finding of special circumstances was
made “to enable [the applicant] to
receive treatment for his mental health and drug use. A longer period on parole
warranted to prevent, insofar as possible,
institutionalisation” (J12).
sentencing judge indicated the following sentences. For sequence 2, taking into
account the two matters on the Form 1, a sentence
of imprisonment for 8 years.
For sequence 3, a sentence of imprisonment for 5 years and 6 months (J12). The
aggregate sentence imposed
was imprisonment for 8 years, commencing 1 January
2022, with a non-parole period of 5 years (J13). The non-parole period expires
on 31 December 2026 and the overall term on 31 December 2029.
sentencing of the co-offenders
the applicant was sentenced, the co-offenders were sentenced in the following
order: Mr Finau on 25 August 2023 by her Honour
Judge Turner; Mr Feilo, Mr Saafi
and Mr Gillett on 6 December 2024 by his Honour Judge Grant; and Mr Schaaf on 12
December 2024 by
his Honour Judge Grant.
is presently sufficient to provide the following
procedural history for, and the sentences imposed upon, each co-offender –
albeit that it will be necessary, given the
nature of the parity arguments
raised, to later return to some of the findings made when each was
Shannon Finau
Finau, following early guilty pleas made in the Local Court on 31 August 2022,
was committed to the District Court for sentence
and sentenced by her Honour
Judge Turner on 25 August 2023. The relevant findings made by her Honour are
summarised below. Given
the sentencing judgment does not have a medium neutral
citation and is in transcript form, the references to the page numbers in
judgment are expressed as J1 etc.
Finau pleaded guilty to two offences – namely, taking and detaining in
company with intent to ransom and occasion actual
bodily harm, contrary to
and specially aggravated break and enter and
commit a serious indictable offence, namely, occasioning actual bodily harm
whilst armed
with an offensive weapon, contrary to
. Mr Finau was also charged with intent to mislead a judicial proceeding,
destroy evidence by means of fire, contrary to
, which was placed on a Form 1 when sentencing him for the kidnapping
relevant findings made by her Honour Judge Turner were as follows.
sentencing discount of 25% was applied to the sentence that otherwise would have
been imposed by reason of his early guilty pleas
relation to the objective seriousness of the offending, for the specially
aggravated break and enter offence, Judge Turner found
it was “a serious
example of this offence” and, in relation to the kidnapping offence, her
Honour agreed with the assessment
made by the sentencing judge – namely,
that “both these offences were highly planned and organised joint criminal
enterprises”
(J13). Later, Judge Turner found that they were “very
serious examples of both offences” and, in relation to the specially
aggravated break and enter offence, her Honour found that it was “within
the upper end of the middle range of seriousness for
that type of offence”
Honour found that the Form 1 offence was “a serious type of offence of
that nature” (J16).
dealing with the issue about Mr Finau’s role in the offending, given his
“intellectual disability”, her Honour
accepted that he “did
not play any managerial role in the offending or [assist] in the planning of
it” and, further,
that there was no evidence as to what he did “at
the house” or “at the warehouse” (J14-15). Her Honour was
prepared to accept that Mr Finau “was more likely a follower in the
offending than a leader” (J16).
Turner noted that the offending was committed whilst Mr Finau was on parole for
the following offending: “[f]ire firearm
in or near public place; [e]nter
building with firearm; and assault occasioning actual bodily harm in
company” – which
her Honour considered were themselves
“serious offences” (J17).
Honour also found that Mr Finau had a lengthy criminal record which “[did]
not entitle him to leniency” and also “increase[d]
the weight to be
given to retribution, personal deterrence ... and the protection of
society” (J19).
Turner noted that Mr Finau had been assessed as having a range of psychological
disorders, but also as having a “general
cognitive ability ... in the
extremely low range of intellectual functioning” and that he had been
diagnosed as having “a
mild Intellectual Developmental Disorder”
(J25). Her Honour found that Mr Finau had “an intellectual disability, and
mental health conditions of post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive
disorder” (J26). Further, she accepted that
“cognitive limitations have some connection, along with his mental health
issues, to his offending behaviour”
such that his moral culpability
“[was] reduced” (J26).
terms of Mr Finau’s upbringing, her Honour accepted that it was one of
disadvantage and “characterised by violence
in the home and by drug
use”, thereby attracting the principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
249 CLR 571;
[2013] HCA 37
’), and that he was
“sexually abused as a child” (J28). These matters were also found to
reduce his moral culpability
Turner accepted the expression of remorse by Mr Finau (J31). However, her Honour
was not satisfied that Mr Finau’s “prospects
of rehabilitation
[were] good” and noted that she was “guarded about his prospects of
rehabilitation” such that
she “certainly could not find ... that he
is unlikely to reoffend” (J32-33).
noted that the applicant had previously been sentenced, Judge Turner addressed,
in considerable detail, issues of parity. It
is presently sufficient to mention
only some of that analysis. Her Honour accepted that there were
similarities between the applicant and Mr Finau but, nevertheless, observed what
she considered to be a number of “significant
points of difference between
them” – including their ages (the applicant being, at that time, 38
years old whereas Mr
Finau was 26); that the offending was different, including
a further Form 1 offence in the case of the applicant; and, in relation
specially aggravated break and enter offence, their roles were different
finding of special circumstances was made “on the basis of the continuing
hardship that COVID-19 causes in people in custody
and how that will impact
upon” Mr Finau, and that he had a “clear need for ongoing treatment
and support given his intellectual
disability and the degree of mentoring,
supervision and assistance he requires in making life choices and managing his
everyday living”,
albeit that the variation from “the statutory
ratio [would] not be substantial” (J42-43).
Turner accepted that whilst there was some “overlap in terms of
criminality between the offences”, the offences
nevertheless
“involve[d] separate and distinct criminality and, more importantly, there
[was] a different victim for each offence”:
accordingly, her Honour
considered that the sentence “for one offence in this case could not
comprehend or reflect the criminality
for the other” (J40). The following
sentences were indicated: for the kidnapping offence (taking into account the
the Form 1), seven years imprisonment and, for the specially
aggravated break and enter offence, four years and six months (J39).
Honour sentenced Mr Finau to imprisonment for 7 years and 7 months, commencing 1
September 2021, with a non-parole period of 4
years and 7 months. The non-parole
period expires on 31 March 2026 and the overall term on 31 March 2029 (J43).
Vaeluagaomatagy Feilo
24 April 2024, Mr Feilo was tried (with, relevantly, three co-accused – Mr
Gillett, Mr Saafi and Mr Schaaf) before his Honour
Judge Grant and a jury in the
District Court at Sydney, on an indictment containing four charges (‘the
joint indictment’):
(1) count 1: that, on 1 June 2021, he did break and enter and commit a serious
indictable offence, namely assault occasioning actual
bodily harm in
circumstances of special aggravation while being armed with an offensive weapon,
contrary to
(2) count 2: that, on 1 June 2021, he did, while in the company of others detain
the victim, without his consent, with intent to
hold him to ransom and
occasioned actual bodily harm, contrary to
(3) count 3: that, on 1 June 2021, he did, with intent to mislead a judicial
proceeding, destroy evidence by means of fire, contrary
(the ‘tamper with evidence offence’); and
(4) count 4: that, on 1 June 2021, he did, while in the company of others,
intentionally damage the premises at Marigold Street,
Revesby, by means of fire,
contrary to
s 195(1A)(b)
(the ‘damage property
Feilo entered pleas of not guilty to counts 1-3 however, at the commencement of
the trial, he pleaded guilty to count 4.
28 May 2024, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty in relation to count 1.
In relation to count 2, the trial judge directed
the jury to return a verdict of
not guilty to the aggravated and specially aggravated kidnapping offences, but
the jury returned
a verdict of guilty to the basic offence under
. The jury returned a verdict of guilty to count 3.
6 December 2024, Mr Feilo was sentenced by Judge Grant. The relevant findings
made by his Honour are summarised below. Given the
sentencing judgment does not
have a medium neutral citation and is in transcript form, the references to the
page numbers in that
judgment are expressed as J1 etc.
there was a plea of guilty to count 4 on the first day of trial, Judge Grant
accepted that Mr Feilo was “entitled to a
discount of 5% on the
sentence” to be imposed upon him for this offence (J1).
Honour noted that, at the time of the offending, Mr Feilo was “19 years
and three months old” (J1).
relation to the kidnapping offence (count 2), Judge Grant found there was
“no evidence that any particular offender was responsible
to a greater or
lesser degree for any individual act that occurred in the warehouse” and
that the “offenders were found
guilty on the basis that there was a joint
criminal enterprise ...” (J3).
Honour then addressed the objective seriousness of the offending. In relation to
the kidnapping offence, his Honour was “unable
to discern any particular
role of the offenders, other than that they were present, and were present
pursuant to a joint criminal
enterprise” (J6). Further, when considering
the “period of detention”, whilst satisfied that Mr Feilo “was
present” at the warehouse, he was not “satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt when he arrived at the [warehouse]”
but still noted that “[i]t
was a serious offence” (J7). In relation to the tamper with evidence
offence (count 3), his
Honour found the offence to be “spontaneous”
and a “panicked response to the sudden and heavy police presence”
and that whilst the “intention to damage potential evidence” was
clear, nevertheless found the offending to be “below
the mid-range”
(J7). In relation to the damage property offence (count 4), his Honour found
that, whilst the structure of the
building was not damaged, the damage caused by
the fires (and the efforts by emergency services to extinguish it) was
“extensive”
but, nonetheless, his Honour found the offending to be
“below the mid-range” (J7-8).
Grant then addressed Mr Feilo’s subjective circumstances.
Honour noted that Mr Feilo had “no prior criminal record” and thus
was “entitled to leniency as a first-time
offender” (J8). He
accepted that Mr Feilo “suffered from a complex post-traumatic stress
disorder, and an antisocial
personality disorder” and that if “sent
to gaol, those conditions would make his time in custody more onerous”
(J11). His Honour accepted that Mr Feilo “had a disadvantaged
background”, considering that the “
principles [had]
been enlivened” with the consequence that his “moral culpability
[was] reduced, and there must be moderation
of specific and general deterrence
by reason of his deprived background and his mental health issues”
Grant accepted that Mr Feilo “to a substantial degree” facilitated
the administration of justice “by agreeing
facts, limiting witnesses, and
narrowing [the] issues” and that there should, pursuant to s 22A of the
CSP Act, be “a
lesser penalty than would otherwise be imposed”
relation to rehabilitation, his Honour was satisfied that Mr Feilo “has
some prospects” and that “he will not
be before a [c]ourt again, in
relation to this type of offending” (J17). Further, his Honour was
satisfied there was “some
evidence of genuine contrition and
remorse” (J17).
Mr Feilo’s age at the time of the offending, his Honour noted the Crown's
concession that Mr Feilo was “entitled
to some leniency on the basis of
his relative youth at the time of offending” and, accordingly,
considerations of “general
deterrence [and] principles of retribution
[were] of less significance” (J17-18). Further, in relation to Mr
relative youth, his Honour considered that emphasis should be
“placed upon the need to provide an opportunity for rehabilitation”
and that his “[i]mmaturity reduces his moral culpability. Rehabilitation
of young offenders is one of the great objectives
of the criminal law”
the applicant and Mr Finau had, by this time, been sentenced, his Honour
specifically considered issues of parity. In particular,
the following matters
were noted:
(1) The applicant and Mr Finau had Form 1 matters taken into account when their
sentences were imposed (J19).
(2) Their “offending involved [a] violent home invasion” with the
victim taken to a warehouse (J19).
(3) Mr Finau “featured prominently in the evidence in the trial” and
“was a central figure in both the home invasion
and the detention at
Revesby” (J19) and the Crown could not “say that any of the five
offenders to be sentenced were
more involved or more culpable” than Mr
Finau (J19).
(4) The Crown conceded that Mr Finau’s “moral culpability for the
offending ... was greater than that of any of the five
offenders to be
sentenced” and also conceded that “the punishments to be imposed
should reflect that concession”
(5) The “role played by each offender” in the trial before his
Honour “[was] different to that of Mr Finau”
and the applicant
Grant sentenced Mr Feilo to an aggregate sentence of 3 years imprisonment to be
served by way of an intensive correction order
(J22-23). The indicative
sentences were: 30 months for count 2 (the kidnapping offence); 12 months for
count 3 (the tamper with evidence
offence); and “with the 5%
discount” for the guilty plea, 18 months for count 4 (the damage property
offence) (J23).
Brandon Gillett
24 April 2024, Mr Gillett was also tried (with, relevantly, three co-accused
– Mr Feilo, Mr Saafi and Mr Schaaf) before Judge
Grant and a jury on the
joint indictment: see [
], above. He entered a plea of not guilty to each
28 May 2024, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty in relation to count 1.
In relation to count 2, the trial judge directed
the jury to return a verdict of
not guilty to the aggravated and specially aggravated kidnapping offences, but
the jury returned
a verdict of guilty to the basic kidnapping offence under
(count 2). The jury returned a verdict of
guilty to counts 3 and 4.
6 December 2024, Mr Gillett was sentenced by Judge Grant. The relevant findings
made by his Honour are summarised below. Given
the sentencing judgment is in
transcript form, the references to the page numbers in that judgment are
expressed as J1 etc.
Gillett “was on parole for a stalk/intimidate offence at the time of the
offending” – this was an aggravating
factor (J27).
Honour adopted “the facts” set out in Mr Feilo’s sentencing
judgment, as well as the “assessment of objective
seriousness”
(J27-28). That included the finding that he was “unable to discern any
particular role of the offenders,
other than that they were present, and were
present pursuant to a joint criminal enterprise” (J6 – Feilo).
relation to Mr Gillett's subjective circumstances:
(1) His Honour accepted that Mr Gillett’s childhood exposed him to
“domestic family violence and violence in the community
in his formative
years” and that these matters, and the fact he was subjected to sexual
abuse whilst in juvenile detention,
“further reduce[d] his moral
culpability, moderating the weight” to be given to general and specific
deterrence and protection
of the community (J28). His Honour later repeated his
finding – namely, that the “
principles have been
enlivened, moderating specific deterrence and general deterrence”
(2) Mr Gillett’s criminal history “disentitle[d] him to
leniency” (J28).
(3) His Honour considered that Mr Gillett “has prospects of
rehabilitation” but was “unable to say that he will
not be before a
court again” (J28).
Honour addressed parity given Mr Finau and the applicant had been sentenced and
repeated what he had said about that topic in
Mr Feilo’s sentencing
judgment: see [
above (J29). His Honour also addressed parity as between Mr Gillett and Mr
Feilo, finding that Mr Gillett's sentence “must
also be different ... due
to [his] criminal history and his commission of these offences while he was on
parole” (J29).
finding of special circumstances was made based upon the existence of “a
risk of institutionalisation”, the need for
“treatment and
supervision when released” and because Mr Gillett’s “mental
health conditions will make his
time in custody more onerous” (J29).
Grant sentenced Mr Gillett to an aggregate sentence of 4 years imprisonment,
commencing 31 October 2022, with a non-parole period
of 2 years and 8 months
(J30). The indicative sentences were: 30 months for count 2 (the kidnapping
offence); 12 months for count
3 (the tamper with evidence offence); and 19
months for count 4 (the damage property offence) (J30).
24 April 2024, Mr Saafi was also tried (with, relevantly, three co-accused
– Mr Feilo, Mr Gillett and Mr Schaaf), before
Judge Grant and a jury on
the joint indictment. Mr Saafi, however, entered pleas of guilty on the first
day of trial to counts 2-4
in full satisfaction of the indictment.
relation to count 2, and unlike Mr Feilo, Mr Gillett and Mr Schaaf, who were
found guilty of the
kidnapping offence within
, Mr Saafi pleaded guilty to the
6 December 2024, he was sentenced by Judge Grant. The relevant findings made by
his Honour are summarised below. Given the sentencing
judgment is in transcript
form, the references to the page numbers in that judgment are expressed as J1
Grant accepted that whilst Mr Saafi entered his plea “at a late
stage”, being the commencement of the trial, he
was entitled “to a
statutory discount of 5% due to the timing of the plea” (J34).
Additionally, his Honour found that
Mr Saafi was “entitled to a further
discount aside from the 5% discount previously stated”, given he had
“facilitated
the course of justice in the running of the trial”
Mr Saafi “was on an intensive correction order which commenced on 25 March
2021” when he committed these offences,
that was an aggravating factor
Honour adopted “the facts” set out in Mr Feilo’s sentencing
judgment, as well as the assessment of “objective
seriousness”
(J35). That included the finding that he was “unable to discern any
particular role of the offenders, other
than that they were present, and were
present pursuant to a joint criminal enterprise” (J6 – Feilo)
Grant considered that the sentencing of Mr Saafi presented “a particular
challenge”, as “the jury verdicts
in relation to each of the other
accused was for the basic offence (given the absence of evidence by the victim
were sustained)” (J35). Accordingly, his Honour
proceeded on the basis suggested by the Crown, namely, that the nature of the
injuries suffered should be taken to be “the least serious” which
included the bruising and swelling to the face of the
victim and a split lip
relation to Mr Saafi’s subjective circumstances, Judge Grant accepted the
following matters:
(1) Mr Saafi “had a disadvantaged upbringing, enlivening the
principles and reducing his moral culpability, necessitating moderation of
specific and general deterrence” (J38).
(2) Mr Saafi’s “mental health issues [would] make his time in prison
more onerous”, but they were “not causative
of the offending in a
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1;
[2010] NSWCCA 194]
sense” (J38).
(3) Mr Saafi “was sexually interfered with at school” and that
“[t]his is consistent with his diagnosis of post-traumatic
disorder” (J39).
(4) Mr Saafi had expressed and demonstrated “remorse and contrition”
(5) Mr Saafi had “prospects of rehabilitation” and, further, was
“able to conclude that he will not be before a
[c]ourt for this type of
offending” (J40).
Honour addressed parity, observing that Mr Saafi’s position was
“different to Mr Feilo, who was 19 at the time of
offending with no prior
convictions” and that it was also different to Mr Gillett and Mr Schaaf,
given that Mr Saafi “pleaded
guilty to an offence which carries a maximum
penalty of 25 years’ imprisonment”, whereas the maximum penalty for
and Mr Schaaf was “14 years’ imprisonment” (J40).
His Honour considered that the role played by Mr Saafi “[was]
different to
that” of Mr Finau and the applicant (J40-41).
finding of special circumstances was made based upon the need for “long
term supervision, detailed intervention and guided
rehabilitation” which
would assist with “protecting the community long-term by reinforcing [Mr
Saafi’s] abstinence”
Grant sentenced Mr Saafi to an aggregate sentence of 5 years imprisonment,
commencing on 2 March 2023, with a non-parole period
of 3 years. The indicative
sentences (allowing for a discount for the guilty pleas) were: 4 years for count
2 (the kidnapping offence);
12 months for count 3 (the tamper with evidence
offence); and 18 months for count 4 (the damage property
Elijah Schaaf
24 April 2024, Mr Schaaf was also tried (with, relevantly, three co-accused
– Mr Feilo, Mr Gillett and Mr Saafi) before Judge
Grant and a jury on the
joint indictment: see [
], above. He entered a plea of not guilty to each of
those counts.
28 May 2024, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty in relation to count 1.
In relation to count 2, the trial judge directed
the jury to return a verdict of
not guilty to the aggravated and specially aggravated kidnapping offences, but
the jury returned
a verdict of guilty to the basic offence under
(count 2). The jury returned a verdict of guilty to counts
12 December 2024, Mr Schaaf was sentenced by his Honour Judge Grant. The
relevant findings made by his Honour are summarised below.
Given the sentencing
judgment is in transcript form, the references to the page numbers in that
judgment are expressed as J1 etc.
Schaaf “was on parole at the time of offending” which was
subsequently revoked (J1).
Honour adopted “the facts” and “objective seriousness
summation” set out in Mr Feilo’s sentencing
judgment (J1-2). That
included the finding that he was “unable to discern any particular role of
the offenders, other than
that they were present, and were present pursuant to a
joint criminal enterprise” (J6 – Feilo).
relation to Mr Schaaf’s subjective circumstances, Judge Grant accepted the
following matters:
(1) Mr Schaaf “had a disadvantaged life as a young person” and that
this “deprivation enliven[ed] the
principles, reducing his
moral culpability. There must be moderation of general and specific
deterrence” (J5-6).
(2) Although Mr Schaaf did “not have an extensive criminal history”,
it nevertheless “disentitle[d] him to leniency”
(3) Mr Schaaf had “good prospects of rehabilitation” and his Honour
was also satisfied “that he [would] not be
before a court again for this
(4) In relation to remorse, although he had expressed this to a psychologist who
had prepared a report on his behalf for the purposes
of the sentence hearing,
his Honour gave “little, if any, weight to this expression” (J6-7).
finding of special circumstances was made based upon Mr Schaaf requiring
“supervision and support” to ensure he remained
clear of “the
cycle of drugs and crime” (J6-7).
Honour addressed parity and, in relation to the applicant, his Honour noted that
he had pleaded guilty “and was sentenced
on the basis of accessorial
liability for count 1” and the specially aggravated kidnapping offence and
that other offending
had been taken into account on a Form 1 (J7). Further, his
Honour accepted, in line with a concession made by the Crown, that none
co-offenders to be sentenced “were more involved or more culpable”
than Mr Finau; that his “moral culpability
[was] greater” than the
other offenders; and that the “role played by each offender in the trial
[was] different to that
of” Mr Finau and the applicant (J7-8).
Grant sentenced Mr Schaaf to an aggregate sentence of 4 years imprisonment,
commencing 30 October 2021, with a non-parole period
of 2 years and 8 months.
The indicative sentences were: 30 months for count 2 (the kidnapping offence);
12 months for count 3 (the
tamper with evidence offence); and 19 months for
count 4 (the damage property offence).
The ground of
applicant’s sole ground of appeal is:
“[T]he applicant has a justifiable sense of grievance or sense of
injustice having regard to the sentences imposed upon co-offenders
Vaeluagaomatagy Feilo, Brandon Gillett, Johann Saafi, Elijah Schaaf and Shannon
Finau in respect [of] the kidnapping and break and
enter with intent offences
compare[d] to that of the applicant[.]”
principles applicable to a consideration of a parity ground of appeal are
well-established. They may be summarised as follows.
although the applicant’s appeal is brought pursuant to
Criminal Appeal Act
the “exercise of the statutory
discretion is informed by the common law norm” of equal justice according
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 462
Lowe v The Queen
[1984] HCA 46
(1984) 154 CLR 606
[1984] HCA 46
’), Dawson J explained the parity principle in these
“... justice should be even-handed and it has come to be recognized ...
that any difference between the sentences imposed upon
co-offenders for the same
offence ought not be such as to give rise to a justifiable sense of grievance on
the part of the offender
with the heavier sentence or to give the appearance
that justice has not been [done].”
the parity principle “requires identity of outcome in cases that are
identical. It requires
outcomes in cases that
are different in some relevant respect”:
Wong v The Queen
207 CLR 584
[2001] HCA 64
(emphasis in original). In this respect, the
question is to be resolved as a matter “of substance rather than
Kadwell (a pseudonym) v R
[2021] NSWCCA 42
requiring consideration of the “different circumstances of the
co-offenders in question and their different degrees of criminality”:
Postiglione v The Queen
[1997] HCA 26
(1997) 189 CLR 295
[1997] HCA 26.
the test of unjustifiable disparity is an objective one; that is, assessed by
objective criteria:
at [31]. What must be shown is that “a
reasonable mind looking overall at what has happened would see that the
[applicant’s]
grievance is justified”:
R v Wei Pan
[2011] NSWCCA 211
an appeal court will not intervene where “disparity is justified by
differences between co-offenders such as age, background,
criminal history,
general character and the part each has played in the relevant criminal conduct
or enterprise”:
at [31], citing
identified those relevant background principles, I turn now to address the
ground of appeal and the applicant’s arguments
in support of
The applicant’s arguments: consideration
earlier noted, the applicant argues that unjustifiable disparity is apparent and
appealable error demonstrated once his sentence
is compared with those imposed
upon five of his co-offenders – Mr Feilo, Mr Saafi, Mr Gillett, Mr Schaaf
and Mr Finau.
addressing the various arguments raised by the applicant, and given the terms of
them, the following two matters presently
warrant emphasis.
as earlier noted (see [
], above), after the sentencing of the applicant, the
remaining (relevant) co-offenders were sentenced. When they were, each
specifically
considered parity issues. In those
circumstances, whilst there remains the “responsibility of analysing the
differences in
criminality and subjective circumstances to determine
whether” a “justifiable sense of grievance” arises (see
[2024] NSWCCA 197
; (2024) 390 FLR 293 at
is reason to exercise caution before finding that there is:
Lonsdale v R
[2020] NSWCCA 267
it is important to note that, as Mason J said in
(at 612) there is
“no principle of law that sentences must strictly compare” or, as
Dawson J said in that same case (at
623), there is “no rule of law which
requires co-offenders to be given the same sentence for the same offence even if
no distinction
can be drawn between them”.
turn now to address the applicant’s arguments in relation to each
co-offender.
Vaeluagaomatagy Feilo
relation to the sentence imposed upon Mr Feilo, the applicant identified a range
of matters that were argued to be demonstrative
of unjustifiable disparity
between his sentence and Mr Feilo’s – namely, “his plea of
guilty, his level of involvement
in the joint criminal enterprise compared to
that of [Mr Feilo], [that] [he] was not charged with arson, did not participate
subjective case (applicant’s submissions at [52]).
Given these matters,
the applicant submitted that Mr Feilo’s sentence, to be served by
intensive correction order, was “unfair
and so disparate that he has a
justifiable sense of grievance” (applicant’s submissions at [53]).
the outset, it is important to recognise there are
significant
differences between the offending and, thus, the offences for which the
applicant and Mr Feilo were sentenced. Three of them warrant
emphasis. First,
the applicant pleaded guilty to, and was sentenced for, the
kidnapping offence under
whereas Mr Feilo was found guilty of the
kidnapping offence under
. Secondly, the maximum penalty available for
each offence differed, reflecting their different levels of seriousness: for the
aggravated kidnapping offence, the applicant was liable to
imprisonment for 25 years, whereas for the basic kidnapping offence, Mr
was liable to imprisonment for 14 years. Thirdly, the applicant pleaded guilty
to, and was sentenced for, being an accessory
to the specially aggravated break
and enter offence under
(an offence with a
maximum penalty of imprisonment for 25 years), whereas Mr Feilo was found
of the specially aggravated break and enter offence under
it has been recognised that the fact a co-offender in the same criminal
enterprise has been charged with and sentenced for
different offences will not
prevent the parity principle applying, it has also been accepted that there are
“significant limitations”
and “[particular] difficulties in an
applicant succeeding in a disparity argument where the disparity is said to
arise by comparison
with the sentence imposed on a co-offender” who has
been charged with a less serious offence than the applicant:
(2010) 77 NSWLR 540
[2010] NSWCCA 60
at [30]. These
limitations apply to the broad comparative exercise that the applicant invited
this Court to undertake.
implicitly acknowledging the difficulties in broadly comparing his sentence with
Mr Feilo’s given the different offending,
the applicant argued that
unjustifiable disparity could be discerned from “his level of involvement
in the joint criminal enterprise
compared to that of [Mr Feilo]”. I am
unable to accept this submission simply because I do not accept its central
., that the role of the applicant in the kidnapping
offence was
than that of Mr Feilo. That, I consider, is readily
apparent when one compares the findings about the role of each in the kidnapping
offence, to which I will briefly refer.
relation to that offence, the findings of the sentencing judge about the
applicant’s “role” have earlier been
set out: see [
]ff, above. By way of
short summary: the sentencing judge found that each of the principal offences
“were highly planned and
organised joint criminal enterprises”
(J4-5); that the “detention was committed for financial gain. [The
applicant] said
he stood to gain $10,000 ...” (J5); that although the
applicant arrived some hours after the other offenders, “there
precise evidence of what he did in the warehouse” but, by his plea, the
applicant accepted “his joint involvement
...” (J6-7); and that the
applicant was aware the home invasion “involved an abduction and
relocation of the victim”
(J8). Further, when assessing the objective
seriousness of the offending, the sentencing judge found that the kidnapping
(sequence 2) fell “above the putative mid-range in terms of
seriousness” (J7). In making that finding and accepting that
she could not
be “precise about what exactly [the applicant] did”, her Honour did
not accept “that he was asleep
at any time”, as was submitted on his
behalf (J7).
findings of Judge Grant about Mr Feilo’s role in the kidnapping offence
have earlier been set out: see [
], above. By way of short summary: his Honour
essentially found that there was
evidence that any particular offender
was responsible for any individual act that occurred but that they were instead
found guilty
on the basis that there was a joint criminal enterprise; and,
importantly, whilst satisfied that Mr Feilo “was present”
warehouse, he was unable to make a finding about when he arrived there.
my view, once regard is had to the findings made by the sentencing judge about
the applicant’s role in the kidnapping offence,
and the findings made by
Judge Grant about Mr Feilo’s role, contrary to what the applicant argued,
there is no substance to
the submission that their roles were different and, in
consequence, that such a difference should have been, but was not, reflected
the sentences imposed.
applicant next argued that, in relation to the offence of being an accessory to
specially aggravated break and enter, he “did
not participate in the home
invasion and transport of the victim”. Each of those facts may be
accepted. But their significance
is, I consider, of no moment once it is
recognised that neither Mr Feilo – nor any of the co-offenders –
were found guilty
of, and thus sentenced for, any offence in relation to the
break and enter at Bringelly. Separately, I add the following. The fact
applicant did not participate in the transportation of the victim is, I
consider, very much offset by the fact that, as
the sentencing judge found, the
applicant was aware that the home invasion “involved an abduction and
relocation of the victim,
and it was committed for financial gain” and
that his role “was quite significant. Both items he supplied were used in
the commission of the offence”: see [
relation to the specially aggravated break and enter offence, it should (again)
be noted that the maximum penalty is imprisonment
for 25 years. Given the
sentencing judge’s finding about the applicant’s role in that
offending, substantial punishment
was warranted, as the Crown submitted.
may be accepted, as the applicant next submitted, that he was “not charged
with arson”, however, I do not regard that
matter, on its own or in
combination with the other arguments raised by the applicant, to be significant,
or to suggest any unjustifiable
discrepancy in the sentences. That is for the
following reasons. First, the applicant was charged with the offence under
that he did, with
intent to mislead a judicial proceeding, destroy evidence by means of fire
(sequence 5). To this end, the sentencing
judge made a finding that, by his
plea, the applicant accepted “his joint involvement in not only the
substantial offence,
but also the setting [of] fire to destroy evidence”
(J6-7). Secondly, the sentencing judge took into account the applicant’s
role in those events as sequence 5 was placed on a Form 1 to be considered when
sentencing the applicant for sequence 2: see [
the extent that the applicant emphasised his subjective case, it should be noted
that Mr Feilo presented, and was found to have,
a fairly compelling subjective
case that included the following (see [
], above): he was 19 years of age at the time of the
offending; his relative youth ameliorated his moral culpability and the need
general deterrence and retribution and emphasised the importance of
rehabilitation; he had no prior criminal record and thus
was entitled to
leniency; he had a number of mental health issues, as well as a disadvantaged
background, that reduced his moral
culpability; he had “to a substantial
degree” facilitated the administration of justice, entitling him to a
in his sentence; and that there was some evidence of genuine
contrition and remorse. These were matters of substance significantly
the different sentencing outcome.
and for completeness, it should be emphasised that Judge Grant specifically
addressed issues of parity in relation to Mr
Feilo and the applicant: see [
my view, for the above reasons, the matters relied upon by the applicant do not
demonstrate that there is unjustifiable disparity
between the applicant’s
sentence and the one imposed upon Mr Feilo. Further, the difference in the
sentencing outcomes is readily
explained by differences in the offending and the
subjective cases of each, and in no way impermissibly disparate:
Johann Saafi
relation to the sentence imposed upon Mr Saafi, the applicant’s parity
complaint was that, despite Mr Saafi’s “late
plea and actual
involvement in the transport and physical assault upon the victim at [the
warehouse]”, he received a
aggregate sentence and non-parole
period than the applicant (applicant’s submissions at [56]). The corollary
to the submission
appeared to be that, given those features, this Court should
conclude that there is unjustified disparity between the sentences.
it is correct to observe, as the applicant did, that Mr Saafi entered a late
plea to counts 2-4 of the joint indictment, that
fact does not, in my view,
suggest or demonstrate any relevant disparity between the sentences imposed.
That is because the extent
of the sentencing discount is a function of the
“mandatory and exclusive code” that operates in a
“mechanical”
manner (that is, with
element of discretion),
depending upon when that plea is entered: s 25D(2) of the CSP Act;
(2022) 107 NSWLR 225
[2022] NSWCCA 17
[2022] NSWCCA 81
given the timing of the pleas, the applicant received a greater sentencing
discount than Mr Saafi. However, contrary to what
the applicant’s
submission appeared to suggest, it does not follow from the limited sentencing
discount that Mr Saafi received
that, axiomatically, the applicant’s
sentence should have been lower than Mr Saafi’s sentence. Fundamentally,
because the sentencing discount does
inform the fixing of
that term but operates, once it is set, as a reduction to it – that is,
the reduction is applied to “any
sentence that would otherwise have been
imposed” (as an aggregate sentence was imposed, the discount would be
applied to the
indicative sentences: s 53A(2)(b) of the CSP Act;
[2017] NSWCCA 124
Ibbotson (a pseudonym) v R
, [138]). (To the extent the applicant’s reference to Mr
Saafi’s “late plea” should be taken to involve a
consideration
undiscounted
indicative sentence for the kidnapping offence, this
general argument is dealt with later as part of the overall complaint that the
applicant advances in relation to that offence).
applicant also argued that Mr Saafi had “actual involvement in the
transport and physical assault upon the victim at [the
warehouse]”
(applicant’s submissions at [56]). That submission should be rejected. As
the Crown submitted, Judge Grant
make a finding that Mr Saafi was
involved in the “transportation” and, further, in terms of any
“physical assault
upon the victim”, whilst Judge Grant found that
there was actual bodily harm inflicted at the warehouse, there were no
findings about Mr Saafi’s role in how they came about, beyond
being a participant in the joint criminal enterprise.
three of his co-offenders (Mr Feilo, Mr Gillett and Mr Schaaf), Mr Saafi pleaded
guilty to the same offence that the applicant
did – namely, the
specially aggravated
form of kidnapping under
. However, there were three
significant
differences between the
applicant and Mr Saafi in connection with this offence, and the offending more
generally. First, when Judge
Grant sentenced Mr Saafi, his Honour only took into
account the least serious of the injuries to the victim (see [
], above), in contrast
to the full range of injuries taken into account when sentencing the applicant.
Secondly, the common “objective
seriousness” finding made across the
four offenders sentenced by his Honour was that he was “unable to discern
any particular
role of the offenders, other than that they were present, and
were present pursuant to a joint criminal enterprise” (J6 –
J35 – Saafi). Thirdly, and importantly, Judge Grant considered the
respective roles of the applicant and Mr Saafi, finding
that the “role
played by [Mr Saafi] ... [was] different to that of” the applicant
whilst there is a difference between the undiscounted sentence imposed on the
applicant when compared to Mr Saafi, that difference
is not material, in my
view, but merely the product of differentiation that was reasonably open in the
exercise of the sentencing
discretion vested in Judge Grant and informed by the
particular findings made about the role Mr Saafi had in the criminal
enterprise.
is also important to note some further differences between the offending and the
resultant sentencing: first, Mr Saafi, unlike
the applicant, was not sentenced
in relation to the break and enter offence – an offence that carried a
maximum penalty of
25 years imprisonment; and, secondly, unlike the applicant,
no Form 1 offending was relevant to the sentence imposed upon Mr Saafi
kidnapping offence.
applicant also argued that, unlike his case, there was no finding of a causal
connection between Mr Saafi’s “mental
state and the commission of
his offences” (applicant’s submissions at [56]). Although not
explicitly stated, the applicant’s
argument was to the effect that he
secured a favourable finding about reduced moral culpability for the offending,
whereas no such
finding was made in connection with Mr Saafi.
it may be accepted, as the applicant submitted, that the sentencing judge made a
finding about reducing his moral culpability
and, in consequence, a reduction in
his sentence (see [
], above), I do not accept that these findings
indicate unjustifiable disparity between the respective sentences. That is
Mr Saafi himself advanced a relatively strong subjective case, as
earlier noted: see [
]ff, above. In particular, Judge Grant made a finding
that Mr Saafi’s moral culpability was reduced –
Saafi “had a disadvantaged upbringing, enlivening the
principles and reducing his moral culpability, necessitating moderation of
specific and general deterrence” (see [99](1), above).
my view, contrary to what the applicant argued, the matters relied upon by him
demonstrate that there is unjustifiable disparity between the
applicant’s sentence and the one imposed upon Mr Saafi. Further,
difference in the sentencing outcomes is readily explained by differences in the
offending and the subjective cases of each,
and in no way impermissibly
Brandon Gillett
relation to the sentence imposed upon Mr Gillett, the applicant raised four
matters that were argued to evidence unjustifiable
disparity, given Mr Gillett
received a lower head sentence and non-parole period (applicant’s
submissions at [58]-[59]).
applicant’s first argument was that, whilst he entered an early guilty
plea, Mr Gillett “went to trial and was found
guilty of 3 offences”
(applicant’s submissions at [58]). That course of events may be accepted.
But, contrary to what
the applicant argued, those events are not demonstrative
of unjustifiable disparity. Rather, for sentencing purposes, they evidence
unlike the applicant, Mr Gillett was
entitled to a sentencing
discount given his pleas; nevertheless, that he chose to contest his guilt is
a basis upon which to impose a longer sentence.
applicant’s second argument was that Mr Gillett “was on parole at
the time of his offending” (applicant’s
submissions at [58]). That
submission may be accepted. But so too was the applicant: see [
applicant’s third argument was that Mr Gillett “was involved in the
detention and assault upon the victim” (applicant’s
submissions at
[58]). I do not accept this submission. That is because, as the Crown submitted,
whilst Mr Gillett’s conviction
in relation to the basic kidnapping offence
involved the detention of the victim,
that offence did
involve an element of an assault and there was
finding made by Judge Grant that there was beyond being a participant
in the criminal enterprise.
as with the sentence imposed upon Mr Feilo, there are significant
differences
in the offending between the applicant and Mr Gillett and the
offences for which each was sentenced. Those differences were earlier
and discussed: see [
], above. That discussion applies equally here and
will not be repeated.
applicant’s submissions also pointed out features of Mr Gillett’s
subjective case, albeit did not extend to identifying
why those features were
demonstrative of unjustifiable disparity. This aspect of Mr Gillett’s
sentencing case was earlier summarised:
], above. In my view, they provide a further basis for
differentiating the sentences imposed, notably through Judge Grant’s
finding about the engagement of the principles in
and his history
of sexual abuse.
completeness, it should be noted that Judge Grant specifically addressed issues
of parity in relation to Mr Gillett and the applicant:
my view, contrary to what the applicant argued, the matters relied upon by him
demonstrate that there is unjustifiable disparity between the
applicant’s sentence and the one imposed upon Mr Gillett. Further,
difference in the sentencing outcomes is readily explained by differences in the
offending and the subjective cases of each,
and in no way impermissibly
Elijah Schaaf
relation to Mr Schaaf, the applicant’s complaint relates to “the
finding of parity between [Mr Gillett] and [Mr Schaaf]”
made by Judge
Grant (applicant’s submissions at [62]). Specifically, this argument,
which was not developed during the hearing,
focuses upon Judge Grant’s
finding that he saw “no differentiation between Mr Gillett and [Mr
Schaaf]” (J8).
my view, the following matters confront acceptance of this submission.
to the extent that the submission should be understood as advancing a challenge
to the above “parity” finding made
by Judge Grant, it should be
rejected in point of principle. That is because it is
parity appeal for the applicant to challenge that finding; rather, as explained
Martellotta v R
[2021] NSWCCA 168
Martellotta
’), he is bound to accept it:
“A parity ground does not afford an applicant an opportunity to impugn the
sentencing judgment of a co-offender by alleging
error in the sentencing
judgment for a co-offender. A parity ground is to be resolved by reference to a
comparison between the sentence
imposed on the applicant and the sentence
imposed on a co-offender to determine whether the applicant has a legitimate
grievance.”
Narayan v R
[2022] NSWCCA 163
He v R (Cth)
[2022] NSWCCA 205
putting the impermissibility of the challenge to one side, the materiality of
that finding to the applicant’s ground
of appeal is, I consider, doubtful.
Whether the sentencing cases of Mr Gillett and Mr Schaaf were relevantly
identical is not the
issue; rather, in the context of a parity appeal, the
substantive question is whether the sentencing cases of either or both are
relevantly identical to the
applicant’s
case so as to require an
“identity of outcome”:
there are a number of
substantive
differences between the
applicant’s offending and Mr Schaaf’s offending – that have
been noted in relation to Mr
Feilo (see [
], above) and Mr Gillett (see [
], above) – that
apply equally here.
my view, contrary to what the applicant argued, the matters relied upon by him
demonstrate that there is unjustifiable disparity between the
applicant’s sentence and the one imposed upon Mr Schaaf. Further,
difference in the sentencing outcomes is readily explained by differences in the
offending and the subjective cases of each,
and in no way impermissibly
Shannon Finau
relation to the sentence imposed upon Mr Finau, the applicant argued that there
were “significant differences between [their]
objective criminality”
– namely, that the applicant’s “objective criminality”
than Mr Finau’s and, despite that difference, Mr Finau
sentence than the applicant (applicant’s
submissions at [66]). The applicant’s
submission was that,
given that each pleaded guilty to the same two principal offences, stepping back
and assessing the circumstances
of their respective involvement, at a minimum,
they should have received the
recap: in relation to the applicant, the sentencing judge imposed, for the two
offences (including the further offences placed
on a Form 1), an aggregate
sentence of 8 years imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 5 years (see [
], above); in relation
to Mr Finau, Judge Turner imposed, for the two offences (including the further
offence placed on a Form 1),
an aggregate sentence of 7 years and 7 months
imprisonment, with a non-parole period of 4 years and 7 months imprisonment: see
applicant sought to make good his submission – that, in effect, his
objective criminality was
than Mr Finau’s – by
referencing and calling in aid the finding made by Judge Grant, when sentencing
, about Mr Finau’s role (applicant’s submissions at
[66]). In particular, the applicant relied upon the finding made by
that Mr Finau “featured prominently in the evidence in the trial. He was
the central figure in both the home invasion
and the detention at [the
warehouse]” (J7).
Self-evidently,
given the trial of the four offenders post-dated Mr Finau’s sentence,
Judge Grant’s remarks do not reflect
the facts upon which Mr Finau was
sentenced, nor do they reflect the factual findings made by Judge Turner when
she sentenced him.
During the submissions in this Court, Mr Wendler accepted
that the proper approach, given the ground of appeal, was to focus upon
findings made by Judge Turner about Mr Finau,
the findings made about
him by Judge Grant (T4.5-4.10).
findings made by Judge Turner about Mr Finau’s role in the offending were:
(1) That Mr Finau, given his “intellectual disability ... did not play any
managerial role in the offending or [assist] in
the planning of it”
(2) That there was no evidence as to what he did “at the house” or
“at the warehouse” (J14-15).
(3) That Mr Finau “did go into the house” (J14).
(4) That Mr Finau “was more likely a follower in the offending than a
leader” (J16).
considering issues of parity, and the kidnapping offence in particular, Judge
Turner accepted that “[o]ther than the period
of three hours difference
between [Mr Finau] and the [applicant] in terms of presence at the warehouse,
their roles could be said
to be similar” (J37).
recognising that the findings made by Judge Turner about Mr Finau’s role
in the offending sat inconsistently with his
argument, the applicant sought to
the finding referred to in [
], above (applicant’s submissions at [65]).
However, as I have noted, when addressing the similar argument advanced in
to the sentencing of Mr Schaaf (see [
], above), it is simply
open, in a parity
appeal, for him to challenge that finding:
Martellotta
applicant’s final parity submission was that his objective criminality was
lower than Mr Finau’s and, in consequence,
he ought to have received
– but did not – a lower sentence than Mr Finau. In my view, this
submission should be rejected.
There is no warrant for its premise –
namely, that his objective criminality was
than Mr Finau, as I will
next explain.
findings made by the sentencing judge about the applicant’s
“objective criminality” for both offences has earlier
addressed: see [
], above. By way of brief summary, in relation to the
kidnapping offence, the sentencing judge found: the offences “were highly
planned and organised joint criminal enterprises” (J4-5); that the
applicant committed the offence for financial gain (J5);
that, accepting the
applicant arrived some hours after the other offenders, “there is no
precise evidence of what he did in
the warehouse” but, by his plea, the
applicant accepted “his joint involvement ...” (J6-7); and, that the
was aware that the home invasion “involved an abduction and
relocation of the victim” (J8). In relation to the specially
break and enter offence, the sentencing judge noted that although she was unable
to find that the applicant had prior
knowledge that the victim would be injured,
found that he
the offence “involved an abduction and
relocation of the victim, and it was committed for financial gain” and his
was “quite significant. Both items he supplied were used in the
commission of the offence” (J8).
findings made by Judge Turner about Mr Finau’s role in the offending have
also been earlier set out: see [
], above. Given these findings, there is simply
basis to conclude, as the applicant argued, that his criminality was
lower than Mr Finau’s.
the role of Mr Finau was considered by several sentencing judges and that the
finding about his involvement was, or at least
was argued to be, different, the
following should be noted. As sometimes occurs when different sentencing judges
sentence different
offenders, differing or even inconsistent findings of fact
are made. That there are, however, does not give rise to a basis for
intervention
by this Court given that “[s]entencing does not take place on
the basis of objective singular established truth, but on the
basis of the
evidence before the sentencing judge”:
[2017] NSWCCA 179
(2017) 268 A Crim R 61
[2022] NSWCCA 265
; (2022) 374 FLR 201 at
. As Basten JA explained in
“... It is by no means uncommon that, where pleas are negotiated and the
basis of the plea is agreed, A will be sentenced on
the basis that B was the
principal and A played a lesser role, whereas B will be sentenced on the basis
that A was the principal
and it was B who played the lesser role. Usually, there
will be no mechanism by which a sentencing judge can resolve such contradictory
propositions. Nor is it open to this Court to do so. Accordingly, two
co-offenders may be sentenced on entirely different bases.
It is not open to A
(having been sentenced first) to say, ‘I was sentenced on the basis that B
was the principal, but B got
the same sentence that I did and therefore my
sentence must be reduced.’”
Judge Turner gave
consideration to issues of parity between the
applicant and Mr Finau: see [
], above. Her Honour, when fixing the sentence,
emphasised features that distinguished the applicant’s offending to Mr
offending, and other factors including their age and the
“significant point of difference ... that the [applicant] does not
intellectual disability as [Mr Finau] does” (J37). The difference in the
sentence imposed is, I consider, simply the
product of differentiation that was
reasonably open in the exercise of the sentencing discretion vested in judge
my view, contrary to what the applicant argued, the matters relied upon by him
demonstrate that there is unjustifiable disparity between his
sentence and the one imposed upon Mr Finau. Further, the difference
sentencing outcomes is readily explained by differences in the offending and the
subjective cases of each, and in no way impermissibly
the above reasons, I propose the following orders:
(1) Extend the time for the applicant to file his Notice of Appeal to 7 August
(2) Grant leave to appeal.
(3) Dismiss the appeal.
: I agree with Chen J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (431 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter