URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/281.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Iteck Communication Pty Ltd v Tybray Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 281; (5 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Iteck Communication Pty Ltd v Tybray Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 281
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
05 November 2025
Decision Date:
5 November 2025
Appeal Panel
G Blake AM SC, Principal Member
(1) A hearing of the costs application of the respondent is dispensed
(2) The costs application of the respondent is
(3) Each of the appellant and the respondent is to pay
their costs of the appeal other than the costs of the stay application pursuant
to order 12A made on 7 May 2025.
Catchwords:
COSTS – costs application by the respondent – principles
– withdrawal of appeal by the appellant - no hearing on
the merits –
costs application dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW), rr 38, 38A
Fair Trading Act
Cases Cited:
Alijagic v Australian Bosnian-Hercegovina Cultural Association Incorporated
[2025] NSWSC 393
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Re Minister for; ex parte
(1997) 186 CLR 622
[1997] HCA 6
Knox v Bollen; Bollen v Knox
NSWCATAP 106
ONE.TEL Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
(2000) 101 FCR
[2000] FCA 270
Texts Cited:
Iteck Communication Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Tybray Pty Ltd
(Respondent)
Representation:
D Elliott (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Roberts Crosbie
Mortensen Lawyers (Appellant)
SLF Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00154719
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
25 March 2025
R Titterton OAM, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2023/00370396
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an internal appeal from the decision of the Tribunal made on 25 March 2025 in
proceedings between the appellant, Iteck Communication
Pty Ltd (Iteck) and the
respondent, Tybray Pty Ltd (Tybray).
18 July 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by Principal Member D Robertson
dismissed the appeal upon its withdrawal by Iteck.
has applied for an order that Iteck pays its costs of the appeal (the Tybray
costs application).
have decided that the Tybray costs application should be dismissed, and that
each of Iteck and Tybray should pay their costs of
The factual background
on 31 May 2023, Tybray supplied and installed floor tiles at the premises of
Iteck at North Strathfield in New South Wales.
dispute arose between Iteck and Tybray as to the quality of the installation of
the floor tiles.
The history of the proceedings in the Consumer
and Commercial Division
21 October 2023, Iteck as the applicant commenced proceedings GEN 23/47433
(which were subsequently renumbered as 2023/00370396)
in the Consumer and
Commercial Division under the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) against Tybray
as the respondent by lodging an Application Form in which it claimed a work
order in respect of the installation
of the floor tiles (the Iteck
application).
25 March 2025, the Tribunal constituted by Senior Member R Titterton OAM made a
decision in relation to the Iteck application (the
25 March 2025 decision) which
(1) orders (the 25 March 2025 orders):
“1 The application is dismissed.
2 On or before 22 April 2025, the applicant is to pay the
respondent $56,875.15.
3 On or before 01 April 2025, the respondent is to provide to
the applicant and the Tribunal a note setting out its calculation
interest payable to 22 April 2025.
4 On or before 08 April 2025, the applicant is to provide to
the respondent and the Tribunal a note setting out its calculation
interest payable to 22 April 2025.
5 If necessary, 15 April 2025, the respondent may reply to the
applicant’s note of calculation by providing a further note
applicant and the Tribunal.”
(2) reasons relevantly including findings on the issues arising for
determination:
Issue 2: Was it a term of the Agreement that Tybray would level the entire
126 Iteck submits that Tybray was required to level the
sub-floor by reason of three matters.
• the terms of the Quote.
• pursuant to an implied term of the Agreement that the
works be performed with reasonable care and skill.
• by reason of the incorporation of the requirements of
the O&M Manual into the Agreement.
127 I have rejected each of these propositions, and find that
none of them individually or all of them cumulatively lead me to
Tybray was required to level the entire sub-floor. In addition, such a finding
would be inconsistent with Mr Il Kim’s
oral evidence that he agreed that
Tybray would “only [level] those uneven surfaces” to which he had
marked out on the
floor on 31 May 2023.
Issue 3: Was it a term of the Agreement that Tybray install the tiles in
accordance with the O&M Manual?
128 No. As I have found that there was no contractual
obligation on Tybray to install the tiles in accordance with the O&M
and it follows that Tybray did not fail to install the tiles in accordance with
the O&M Manual.
Issue 4: Has Tybray otherwise fail to provide the services contracted for in a
proper and workmanlike manner?
133 The issue of complying with the O&M
Manual/manufacturer’s instructions has been dealt with above and has been
134 As to a lack of compliance on relevant Australian
Standards, no mention was made of any Australian Standard by Mr Roberts in
report. On the contrary, as is explained in Mr Considine’s report at
[109], (and further explored in the “hot tub”),
levelness is not included in AS 1884:2021[1]”, which is the Australian
Standard for the installation of resilient
flooring” - Resilient sheet and
tiles – Installation practices.
135 It follows that I reject the claim the works were not
undertaken in proper and workmanlike manner by reason of a lack of compliance
with the relevant Australian Standard.
Issue 5: Did Tybray breach the Consumer Guarantees found in s 54 of the ACL?
147 I do not find that any of the matters raised by Iteck,
either individually or cumulatively cause me to conclude Tybray has
breached the
consumer guarantee found in s 54 of the ACL, and I find that this is not the
Issue 6: Did Tybray breach the Consumer Guarantees found in ss 55 of the
152 I have already rejected there has any non-compliance with
the O&M Manual or failure to comply with an Australian Standard.
153 As to the flooring having undulations, is lifting and is
incomplete:
(1) I prefer the views of Mr Considine in relation to any
undulations or lifting. He was questioned thoroughly by Iteck’s
during the “hot tub” and see no reason not to accept his views;
(2) for the reasons given above I do not consider that the
works are incomplete.
Accordingly, I do not find that any of the matters raised by Iteck, either
individually or cumulatively cause me to conclude Tybray
has breached the
consumer guarantee found in s 55 of the ACL, and I find that this is not the
Issue 7: Did Tybray breach the Consumer Guarantees found in ss 56 of the
158 I do not find that any of the matters raised by Iteck,
either individually or cumulatively cause me to conclude Tybray has
breached the
consumer guarantee found in s 56 of the ACL, and I find that this is not the
Issue 8: Has Tybray not completed the works such that it is not entitled to seek
Issue 8: Is Tybray entitled to payment of the claimed $56,875.15 plus
162 It follows that Iteck’s “entire contract
“argument fails and that there is no reason in law that excuses
paying Tybray the $56,875.15 which has been owed since 6 June 2023.
163 I will give leave to Tybray to provide an updated note of
the interest due.
164 For the above reasons, Iteck’s claim fails in its
entirety, and is dismissed. Tybray claim for monies owed under Agreement
The history of the appeal
22 April 2025, Iteck as the appellant commenced proceedings 2025/00154719
against Tybray as the respondent by lodging:
(1) a Notice of Appeal in which in which:
(a) in section 5A, it appealed against the 25 March 2025 decision;
(b) in section 5B, it set out its grounds of appeal:
“1. The Tribunal erred in law in finding that:
(a) the respondent’s expert found that there was no
unevenness in the floor over 4mm;
(b) that there were no tiles that were lifting; and
(c) there were no undulations in the floor, where there was no
evidence to support such findings.
2. In the alternative, the Tribunal erred in finding that:
(a) the respondent’s expert found that there was no
unevenness in the floor over 4mm;
(b) that there were no tiles that were lifting; and
(c) there were no undulations in the floor, where such findings
were against the weight of evidence and may have caused the appellant
a substantial miscarriage of justice.
3. The Tribunal erred in law in that there was a constructive
failure to exercise jurisdiction in determining whether there was
a breach of
the consumer guarantees provided by ss 54, 55 and 56 of the
Consumer Law
4. The Tribunal erred in law by failing to give proper reasons
in determining that:
(a) the respondent did not fail to install the tiles in
accordance with the O&M Manual; and
(b) there was no breach of the consumer guarantees provided by
ss 54, 55 and 56 of the
Australian Consumer Law
5. The Tribunal failed to take into account relevant
considerations in determining that:
(a) the respondent did not fail to install the tiles in
accordance with the O&M Manual; and
(b) there was no breach of the consumer guarantees provided by
ss 54, 55 and 56 of the
Australian Consumer Law
6. Paragraphs 165 to 169 of the Decision relate to the
submission in relation to costs to be made by the parties. The Appellant
(a) The costs of the proceedings at first instance should be
decided following the determination of this appeal by the Appeal Panel;
(b) The costs of the proceedings at first instance can be
remitted back to the Tribunal following the determination of this appeal.”
(c) in section 6B, it stated that it was asking for leave to appeal, and
contended that the 25 March 2025 decision in relation to
the appeal grounds:
(i) was against the weight of the evidence and involves a factual error
unreasonably arrived at and clearly in error; and/or
(ii) was not fair and equitable.
(2) an Application for stay of original decision pending appeal in which it
sought a stay of order 2 of the 25 March 2025 orders (the
stay application).
10 On 7 May 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by myself made procedural
orders for the hearing of the appeal including by orders
1 and 2 that the
parties have leave to be legally represented, by order 10 listing the appeal for
hearing on 4 August 2025 at 10.15
AM in Sydney for a half day, and by orders 12
and 12A dismissing the stay application with costs against Iteck (the 7 May 2025
18 July 2025, the Appeal Panel constituted by Principal Member D Robertson
made dismissed the appeal upon its withdrawal by Iteck
and made procedural
orders for the determination of the Tybray costs application including that a
hearing would be on the papers
unless the Tribunal determined otherwise. The
Appeal Panel noted that the parties were agreed that rr 38 and 38A of the
and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (NCAT Rules) are applicable to the
The issues for determination
following two issues arise for determination:
(1) whether a hearing of the Tybray costs application should be dispensed
(2) whether a costs order should be made in favour of Tybray.
Whether a hearing of the Tybray costs application should be dispensed
of Tybray and Iteck consents to a hearing of the Tybray costs application being
dispensed with.
am satisfied that that the issues for determination in relation to the Tybray
costs application can be adequately determined in
the absence of the parties by
considering their evidence and written submissions. Accordingly, I have decided
pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act) to make an order dispensing with a hearing in relation to the
Tybray costs application.
Whether a costs order should be made in
favour of Tybray
Introduction
am satisfied that r 38A(2) of the NCAT Rules is applicable to this appeal
because the amount in dispute in each of in the Consumer
and Commercial Division
and in the appeal is more than $30,000. It follows that the position of each
party paying their own costs
specified in s 60(1) of the NCAT Act does not apply
to the appeal.
dealing with this issue, it is appropriate to set out the applicable legal
principles, and to summarise the submissions of
the parties.
applicable legal principles
general principles concerning the awarding of costs where proceedings are
discontinued or dismissed by consent were considered
by Kunc J in
Australian Bosnian-Hercegovina Cultural Association Incorporated
). His Honour at [3] noted that the only common ground
between the parties was that the principles set out by McHugh J in
Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs of the Commonwealth of Australia;
Ex Parte Lai Qin
(1997) 186 CLR 622
[1997] HCA 6
applicable. His Honour at [52]-[59] relevantly explained and summarised the
principles:
“Legal Principles
[52] The Court has the power to order costs under
Civil Procedure
(NSW). A successful party may have a “reasonable
expectation” of being awarded costs (
Oshlack v Richmond River
(1998) 193 CLR 72
(1998) 152 ALR 83
[1998] HCA 11
Costs generally follow the event: UCPR
[53] However, the position is different where there has been no hearing and,
therefore, no “event”. Where there has been
no hearing, so that the
Court has not determined the merits, there may not be a party who has clearly
won. The principles to be applied
in such a case were set out by McHugh J in
at pages 624-625 (citations omitted):
“In most jurisdictions today, the power to order costs is a discretionary
power. Ordinarily, the power is exercised after a
hearing on the merits and as a
general rule the successful party is entitled to his or her costs. Success in
the action or on particular
issues is the fact that usually controls the
exercise of the discretion. A successful party is prima facie entitled to a
costs order.
When there has been no hearing on the merits, however, a court is
necessarily deprived of the factor that usually determines whether
will make a costs order.
In an appropriate case, a court will make an order for costs even when there has
been no hearing on the merits and the moving party
no longer wishes to proceed
with the action. The court cannot try a hypothetical action between the parties.
To do so would burden
the parties with the costs of a litigated action which by
settlement or extra curial action they had avoided. In some cases, however,
court may be able to conclude that one of the parties has acted so unreasonably
that the other party should obtain the costs
of the action. ...
Moreover, in some cases a judge may feel confident that, although both parties
have acted reasonably, one party was almost certain
to have succeeded if the
matter had been fully tried. ... But such cases are likely to be rare.
If it appears that both parties have acted reasonably in commencing and
defending the proceedings and the conduct of the parties
continued to be
reasonable until the litigation was settled or its further prosecution became
futile, the proper exercise of the
cost discretion will usually mean that the
court will make no order as to the cost of the proceedings.”
[54] Davies AJA, with whom Mason P and Meagher JA agreed, said in
Madigan Torzillo Briggs Pty Ltd v Gloria Stack
[2003] NSWCA 302
“[5] When proceedings are brought to an end without a determination after
a trial, the judge may find it difficult, even impossible,
to make an award of
costs. If the judge does make an award, it will generally be because the judge
is satisfied that one party has
had a substantial victory and the other a
substantial loss, or that there has been a marked difference in the
reasonableness of the
actions taken by the parties, so that one party should be
rewarded for its reasonable actions and the other party should suffer a
detriment in costs.”
[55] This was quoted with approval by Payne JA in
Nichols v NFS Agribusiness
(2018) 97 NSWLR 681
[2018] NSWCA 84
, the correct approach for considering unreasonable actions by a
party was set out by Basten JA at [8]-[10]:
“[8] Secondly, although it is possible to make an order for costs against
one party if it can be shown that it has invited
the litigation by its
unreasonable behaviour, or has unreasonably pursued the litigation, such an
order should only be made where
that judgment is manifest by reference to known
circumstances, not in dispute between the parties. If the question cannot be
without reviewing large swathes of evidence and resolving, on a
tentative basis, disputed questions of fact, the task should not
be embarked
[9] ...Further, once there is a real dispute as to a significant fact in issue
in the proceedings, it is inappropriate to determine
that matter, other than in
making an interlocutory ruling, by accepting one party’s case without
permitting the other party
an opportunity to challenge the opposing
party’s witnesses.
[10] Once it becomes apparent that such a course is required, the hypothesis on
which the examination was undertaken is negated and
the inquiry should
[56] For determining whether one party has capitulated for the purposes of
determining costs, Burchett J in
ONE.TEL v Deputy Commissioner of
(2000) 101 FCR 548
[2000] FCA 270
“[6] In my opinion, it is important to draw a distinction between cases in
which one party, after litigating for some time,
effectively surrenders to the
other, and cases where some supervening event or settlement so removes or
modifies the subject of the
dispute that, although it could not be said that one
side has simply won, no issue remains between the parties except that of costs.
In the former type of case, there will commonly be lacking any basis for an
exercise of the Court’s discretion otherwise than
by an award of costs to
the successful party. It is the latter type of case which more often creates
problems, since there may be
difficulty in discerning a clear reason why one
party, rather than the other, should bear the costs.”
Xero Linear Lighting Systems NSW Pty Ltd v Benson
[2024] NSWSC
and [108] I considered the policy reasons underlying these
principles:
“[82] The approach to the question of costs which is derived from Lai Qin
is both fortified, and independently required, by
the Court’s obligation
to exercise its discretion in accordance with the overriding purpose. It is
completely antithetical
to the overriding purpose to allow arguments over costs
to become substantial satellite hearings which require the Court to traverse
contested matters that have otherwise been resolved by settlement...
[108] First, in general, to displace the outcome of there being no order as to
costs the issues of unreasonable conduct or capitulation
need to be demonstrable
clearly and concisely by reference to uncontroversial facts. If complex
submissions and large amounts of
evidence are required, these are likely to be
signs that the Court is being invited to descend into disputed facts and
analyses of parties’ positions over the course of the
litigation which Lai Qin and the overriding purpose in the CPA make clear
Court should not embark upon.
[109] Second, when negotiating a settlement parties will often be well advised
to consider whether they should factor in their respective
expended legal costs
at an early stage of their settlement calculus as something they are likely to
have to bear, rather than leaving
the question of costs until after all other
issues have been agreed.”
Consideration
[59] As the principles I have set out above make clear, the starting point for
making an order as to costs where there has not been
a final hearing is that the
parties should bear their own costs. While the exercise of discretion will turn
on the facts of each
case, in general to make a costs order against one of the
parties in these circumstances, the Court must be satisfied of one of the
following on clear and uncontested evidence:
(1) One party behaved so unreasonably in commencing or
defending proceedings; or
(2) One party was almost certain to succeed on the
interconvertible facts, which may be evidenced by the other party
capitulating.”
principles in
One.Tel Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of
(2000) 101 FCR 548
[2000] FCA 270
) have been
applied in the Tribunal: see, for example,
Knox v Bollen; Bollen v Knox
[2018] NSWCATAP 106
Iteck’s costs submissions
in its costs submissions in chief has referred to the summary of the applicable
legal principles in
Tybray’s costs
submissions
in its costs submissions, after referring to various authorities including
, has submitted that:
(1) the present case is the clearest of circumstances which constitute a
capitulation. lteck having commenced the appeal (and put
it to the costs of
considering the appeal and appearing at directions hearing before the Appeal
Panel) surrenders and withdraws.
There is no supervening event or settlement
that removes or modifies the subject of the dispute;
(2) Iteck has put it to the costs of preparing written costs submissions in
respect of an application to be excused from paying costs
- which is manifestly
hopeless. It should also have its costs of preparing these costs submissions
which it otherwise would not have
done if Iteck simply agreed to paying
Tybray’s costs in respect of the appeal proceedings;
(3) it seeks:
(a) an order that Iteck pay its costs in respect of the appeal proceedings;
(b) an order that lteck pay its costs in respect of its application for costs in
respect of the appeal proceedings.
Iteck’s costs submissions in reply
in its costs submissions in reply has submitted that:
(1) the only steps taken by Tybray’s solicitors prior to the dismissal of
the appeal on 18 July 2025, other than in connection
with the stay application,
was sending six emails and receiving four emails;
(2) withdrawal without an explanation is not the only factor to be considered in
establishing whether it capitulated and is not determinative
on its own;
(3) there is no evidence before the Appeal Panel to suggest that the appeal and
the withdrawal were a tactical decision by it;
(4) each party should pay its own costs of the appeal.
Consideration
only basis on which Tybray has made the Tybray costs application is the asserted
capitulation by Iteck.
am not satisfied that Tybray has demonstrated that it was almost certain to have
succeeded on the interconvertible facts. In has
not sought to establish that the
grounds of appeal and that the application for leave to appeal had no tenable
basis in fact or law.
In these circumstances there is no proper basis for
finding that Iteck’s withdrawal of the appeal constituted a
capitulation.
follows that the Tybray costs application should be dismissed and that each
party should pay their own costs of the appeal other
than the costs of the stay
application pursuant to order 12A made on 7 May
make the following orders:
(1) A hearing of the costs application of the respondent is dispensed with.
(2) The costs application of the respondent is dismissed.
(3) Each of the appellant and the respondent is to pay their costs of the appeal
other than the costs of the stay application pursuant
to order 12A made on 7 May
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter