URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/144.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Kirby [2025] NSWCATOD 144; (29 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Kirby
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 144
Hearing Date(s):
3 September 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Occupational Division
Coleman SC ADCJ, Principal Member
(1) The decision of the Tribunal of 21 June 2024 is set
(2) The proceedings are to be listed before the List
Manager for further directions on a date to be
(3) Costs are reserved.
Catchwords:
Whether occasional member of Tribunal becoming registered as non-practising
practitioner rendered him ineligible to continue on Tribunal;
whether, if
becoming registered as non-practising practitioner rendered practitioner
ineligible to continue on Tribunal, provisions
of Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act permitted him to - whether provisions of CAT Act inconsistent with
provisions of National
Law - whether Tribunal ceased to have jurisdiction if
occasional member ineligible to continue on Tribunal upon becoming registered
non-practising health practitioner
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
Interpretation Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Attorney-General of New South Wales v World Best Holdings Limited (2005) 63
[2005] NSWCA 261
Australian Alliance Assurance Co Ltd v
Attorney-General (Qld)
(1916) St R Qd 135
C & J Clark Ltd v Inland
Revenue Commissioners
(1973) 1 WLR 905
Commissioner of Australian Federal
Police v Curran (1984) 2 FCR 240
Commonwealth v Baume
(1905) 2 CLR 405
[1905] HCA 11
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Leys
[2012] VSCA 304
(2012) 44 VR
Director of Public Prosecutions v Walters
(2015) 49 VR 356
[2015] VSCA
Gleeson v New South Wales Harness Racing Authority
(1990) 21 ALD
(2004) 218 CLR 216
[2004] HCA 12
McNally v Resolution Life
Australasia Limited
[2025] NSWCATAP 116
Medical Council of New South Wales v
[2017] NSWCA 282
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v
[2002] HCA 11
(2002) 209 CLR 597
; [HCA] 11;
[2002] HCA 11
187 ALR 117
76 ALJR 598
Minister for
Resources v Dover Fisheries Pty Limited
[1993] FCA 366
(1993) 43 FCR 565
Muto v Shepparton
City Council
[2021] VSCA 73
228 LGERA 188
NAQF v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCA 181
Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia v Linquist
[2019] NSWSC 978
Ombudsman v
Commissioner of Police
(1987) 11 NSWLR 386
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
347 ALR 405
91 ALJR 936
Project Blue
Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Association
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Re Australian Federation of construction contractors; Ex parte Billing
[1986] HCA 74
; 68 ALR 420
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
Scott v Moses
(1957) 75 WN (NSW) 101
Tsolis v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2024] NSWCA 284
Tu v University of Sydney
[2003] NSWCA 170
Western Australian Planning Commission v
Southregal Pty Limited
(2017) 259 CLR 106
[2017] HCA 7
Procedural rulings
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr David William Kirby
(Respondent)
Representation:
P Lowson (Applicant)
J Sheller SC
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Applicant)
Graham Billing & Co (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2018/00204556
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
14 March 2025 Dr David William Kirby (Dr Kirby) filed an application in these
proceedings, seeking a declaration that Dr Alex Selby
“was no longer
eligible to sit as an Occupational Member of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal from November 2023”,
and a consequential order that the Stage 1
Decision of the Tribunal of 21 June 2024 finding Dr Kirby guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct be set aside for want of jurisdiction. In
support of his application, Dr Kirby relied on an Affidavit sworn by him on 13
March 2025.
Health Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) opposed Dr Kirby’s
application. The Commission filed no evidence in this
application.
support of his application, Dr Kirby filed submissions on 4 April 2025. The
Commission filed submissions in answer on 30 May 2025.
Dr Kirby filed
submissions in reply on 14 June 2025. Counsel for the parties spoke to their
submissions on 3 September 2025.
3 September 2025, the Tribunal reserved its decision.
reserving its Decision, the Tribunal considered that it would be assisted by
further submissions with respect to a particular
matter with which the
parties’ submissions may not have directly engaged. In the interests of
procedural fairness, the Tribunal
invited the parties to make further
submissions with respect to that issue. On 8 October 2025, pursuant to a
timetable agreed to
by the parties, Dr Kirby filed further submissions. On 14
October 2025, the Commission replied to Dr Kirby’s further
submissions.
was agreed by Counsel for the parties that the Tribunal as presently constituted
has jurisdiction to determine Dr Kirby’s
application. Such agreement was
appropriate in the Tribunal’s view.
165B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(National Law) is
concerned with the constitution of the Tribunal to determine, inter alia,
“applications”. Section 165B(2)
provides that, when hearing
disciplinary proceedings against, in this case, a dental practitioner, the
Tribunal is to be constituted
by an Australian lawyer of at least 7 years’
standing (which includes a Senior Judicial Officer), two health practitioners
selected for appointment by the Dental Council as Occasional Members who are
registered in the same health profession as the dental
practitioner, and a
person who is not registered in the health profession who has been selected by
the Dental Council as an Occasional
Member from among a panel of lay persons for
the time being nominated by the Minister.
165B(5A) provides that, when making an “ancillary decision” or an
“interlocutory decision” within
the meaning of the
Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW) (CAT Act) the Tribunal is to
be constituted by the Tribunal List Manager or, as in this case, a Senior
Judicial Officer.
CAT Act defines “ancillary decision” as a decision that is
“preliminary to, or consequential on, a decision
determining
proceedings”, including, relevantly for present purposes (a) a decision
“concerning whether the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to deal with a
is apparent from the terms of Dr Kirby’s application and the submissions
of the parties, the issue for determination in this
application is whether the
Tribunal had jurisdiction to make its Stage 1 Decision on 21 June 2024, and is
thus, pursuant to s 165B(5A)
of the National Law, able to be determined by
the Tribunal as presently constituted.
background to the present application is not in dispute, and can be briefly
stated. In 2021 Dr Alex Selby was appointed as an
Occasional Member of the
Tribunal pursuant to s 165B(2)(b) for the hearing of disciplinary
proceedings brought against Dr Kirby by
the Commission. Dr Selby was then
registered under the National Law as a practising Dentist. The Stage 1
proceedings were heard on
6 to 10 March 2023 and 30 October 2023. In November
2023 Dr Selby ceased to be registered as a practising Dentist, and became
as a non-practising Dentist. When the Tribunal published its Stage 1
decision on 21 June 2024, Dr Selby was registered as a non-practising
March 2025 Dr Selby recused himself from further sitting as a member of the
Tribunal which, if Dr Kirby’s present application
is unsuccessful, will
conduct a Stage 2 hearing and determine the protective orders which are
appropriate in the circumstances. Dr
Selby’s purported recusal assumes no
significance in the determination of the present application.
the submissions of Counsel for the parties confirm, the controversies requiring
determination in these proceedings are:
(1) whether Dr Selby’s registration as a non-practising Dentist rendered
him ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member
of the Tribunal;
(2) whether, if the provisions of the National Law rendered Dr Selby ineligible
to continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal
after November 2023, the
provisions of the CAT Act enabled him to; and,
(3) whether, if Dr Selby was ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member of
the Tribunal after November 2023 on any basis, the
Tribunal lacked jurisdiction
to continue to hear the proceedings.
Dr Kirby’s Primary Submissions
Kirby submitted, correctly in the Tribunal’s view, that the eligibility of
Dr Selby to sit as an Occasional Member of the
Tribunal after he changed his
registration in November 2023 was to be analysed through the National Law and
the CAT Act. Dr Kirby
submitted that where there was inconsistency between the
provisions of the National Law and the CAT Act, the provisions of the National
Law prevail. As submitted by Dr Kirby, s 165A of the National Law so
particular reference to s 75 and s 165B(2)(b), Senior Counsel for Dr
Kirby submitted that the National Law was “unequivocal
in the terms of the
restraints upon a non-registered practitioner to practise”, and confined
qualification to sit as an Occasional
Member of the Tribunal to, in this case,
Dentists holding practising registration. Sitting as an Occupational Member of
the Tribunal
was submitted to fall within the regulator’s definition of
“practising”, and thus prohibited pursuant to s 75 of
National Law. The AHPRA and National Boards Code of Conduct, as applying to
dental practitioners, and the definition of “practise”
on page 30 of
the Code were relied on in support of that contention. The Code provides that
“Practise means any role, whether
remunerated or not, in which the
individual uses their skills and knowledge as a practitioner in their regulated
health profession.
For the purposes of this code, practise is not restricted to
the provision of direct clinical care. It also includes using professional
knowledge in a direct non-clinical relationship with patients, working in
management, administration, education, research, advisory,
regulatory or policy
development roles and any other roles that have an impact on safe, effective
delivery of health services in
the health profession”.
was submitted by Dr Kirby that, when sitting as an Occasional Member of the
Tribunal, Dr Selby was impermissibly engaging in the
practice of dentistry as
doing so involved “working” in a “regulatory” role. The
role that Members of the
Tribunal play was also submitted to have the
“impact” referred to in the Code of Conduct, and thus constitute
support of his contention that there is a material and important distinction
between practising and non-practising registration,
Dr Kirby relied on
s 75(1) of the National Law, which provides that a practitioner who holds
non-practising registration in a health
profession must not
“practise” the profession. Section 75(2) provides that a
contravention of s 75(1) by a registered
health practitioner does not
constitute an offence but “may constitute behaviour for which health,
conduct or performance action
may be taken”.
Kirby referred to the definition in s 5 of the National Law of
“health practitioner” as an individual who “practises”
health profession. Dr Kirby submitted that, by sitting as an Occasional Member
of the Tribunal, Dr Selby was “practising”
his profession in breach
of s 75, and that it is inconceivable that the legislature would have
intended that a practitioner who was
prohibited from practising his/her
profession by the National Law could nevertheless hold an appointment under the
National Law which
involved “practising” his/her profession.
Counsel for Dr Kirby also relied on the term “when conducting”
proceedings of the kinds referred to in s 165B(2)
as evidencing the
legislative intention that Dr Selby needed to have practising registration at
all times that he was sitting as
an Occupational Member of the Tribunal in order
to remain eligible to do so. The context in which “when conducting”
expression in the statutory provision was submitted to provide no basis
for not adopting the ordinary, present continuous tense meaning
of the verb. The
statutory criteria by reference to which allegations of unsatisfactory
professional conduct are evaluated under
the National Law were submitted to
support finding that, to be able to properly discharge his/her duties as an
Occasional Member
of the Tribunal it was necessary for a practitioner to
maintain the currency of qualifications and experience required of practising
Dentists, which may not be required of non-practising Dentists.
Kirby referred to the provisions of s 8 of Schedule 2 of the CAT Act which
provides that:
“members and former members may complete
unfinished matters:
(1) This clause applies to a member (and “affected
member”) dealing with any matters relating to proceedings before
Tribunal that have been heard or partly heard (or otherwise the subject of
deliberations) by the member if, during the proceedings,
the member –
(a) ceases to have a qualification
specified by a Division Schedule for a division of the Tribunal or enabling
legislation for
participation in the proceedings other than because of any of
the following reasons –
(i) misconduct or
unsatisfactory conduct of the member,
(ii) the mental
incapacity of the member,
(iii) the member
becoming bankrupt or insolvent or
(b) ceases to be a member because of the
expiration of the period of the member’s appointing, or both.
(2) An affected member may, despite becoming an affected
member, complete or otherwise continue to deal with any matters in the
proceedings concerned.
(3) While completing or otherwise dealing with matters
referred to in subclause (2), the affected member is taken to have and may
exercise all the rights and functions of a member that the affected member had
immediately before becoming an affected member.”
the extent that, as he, correctly, anticipated, the Commission relied upon
clause 8(2) of Schedule 2 to the CAT Act as providing
an alternative basis on
which Dr Selby could continue as a Member of the Tribunal after November 2023,
Senior Counsel for Dr Kirby
submitted that so finding was “plainly
contradictory to the stringent provisions” of the National Law, including
definition of health practitioner in s 5, and the unequivocal
prohibition in s 75 against a non-registered health practitioner practising
and thus precluded by s 165A of the National Law.
Kirby’s contention was submitted to be supported by the objectives and
guiding principles of the National Law, as they are
articulated in s 3A,
requiring the Tribunal when exercising functions under the law to regard the
protection of the health and safety
of the public as the paramount
consideration. Hearing disciplinary proceedings involves the Tribunal exercising
a function pursuant
to the National Law. Reliance was also placed on clause 9 of
Schedule 5 to the CAT Act, which provides that, when exercising division
functions for the purposes of the National Law, the Tribunal is under a duty to
observe the objectives and principles referred to
in sections 3 and 3A of the
National Law.
Kirby submitted that finding that a practitioner who becomes a non-practising
health practitioner “with reduced professional
obligations and
responsibilities” loses the right to continue to sit on the Tribunal in
extant Stage 1 proceedings was consistent
with the “weighty role assigned
to members dealing with health matters”, as the provisions of the National
Law and the
CAT Act were asserted to make clear.
Selby’s asserted ineligibility to sit as an Occasional Member of the
Tribunal after November 2023 was submitted to have “irrevocably
tainted” the Tribunal’s Stage 1 Decision. The effect of Dr
Selby’s asserted ineligibility on the validity of the
Stage 1 Decision was submitted to be incurable and that, as such, the Decision
should be set aside for want of jurisdiction.
The Submissions of
the Commission in Response
Commission summarised the basis of its opposition to Dr Kirby’s
application in the following terms:
material times Dr Selby was validly appointed as a Member of the Tribunal.
2 Dr Selby did not at any material time vacate the office of
his appointment as a Member of the Tribunal.
3 To the extent that the change in the nature of Dr
Selby’s registration had the effect that he was no longer qualified for
appointment as an Occasional Member – a matter about which the HCC
reserves its position and makes no submission at this time,
as it is unnecessary
to do so – the provisions of the CAT Act have the effect that Dr Selby was
able and eligible to continue
to sit as a Member of the Tribunal.”
Commission made a number of submissions with respect to jurisdictional error,
and referred to the decision of the High Court in
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
(2002) 209 CLR 597
[2002] HCA 11
76 ALJR 598.
With respect to the Commission, the Tribunal does not
consider that decision materially assists in the determination of this
application.
The authority to which the Commission referred involved a failure
to exercise a jurisdiction which undoubtedly existed. The issue
application is whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction to continue to hear the
disciplinary proceedings against Dr Kirby after
Dr Selby became a non-practising
Dentist in November 2023. Whether the Tribunal failed to exercise jurisdiction,
if it had jurisdiction,
or otherwise erred in its exercise is not for
determination in these proceedings, or by the Tribunal, however
constituted.
Commission referred to clause 12 of Schedule 5 of the CAT Act which mandates
that the President of the Tribunal must appoint a
person as an Occasional Member
for particular proceedings in the Health Practitioner List if that person has
been selected for participation
in the proceedings in accordance with any
applicable procedure specified by or under the National Law. It is not in
dispute that
Dr Selby’s initial appointment was valid.
for the Commission submitted that s 165B(2)(b) of the National Law required
only that Dr Selby be a health practitioner registered
in the same health
profession as Dr Kirby. Dr Selby undoubtedly met that qualification at the time
of his appointment, which was
effected pursuant to s 11 of the CAT Act.
Whether, as the Commission recognised, the change in Dr Selby’s status
from practising
to non-practising registration “invalidated his
appointment in some way” is controversial.
anticipated by Dr Kirby, to the extent that it might be necessary to do so, the
Commission placed significant reliance on the provisions
of clause 8 of Schedule
2 to the CAT Act, the terms of which have been set out earlier in these
for the Commission referred the Tribunal to the provisions of s 11 of the
CAT Act, and to clauses 6 and 7 of Schedule 2 to
the CAT Act. Section 11 of the
CAT Act provides that the President of the Tribunal may appoint a person to be
an Occasional Member
in relation to particular proceedings if the person is
qualified to be appointed as a Member of the kind concerned (pursuant to
165B(2)) and the President is satisfied that the appointment of the
person is necessary to enable the Tribunal to be properly constituted
exercise its functions in the proceedings. As their terms confirm, these
provisions are concerned only with the initial appointment
of a person as a
Member of the Tribunal.
7 of Schedule 2 to the CAT Act is concerned with “vacancy in office of
Member (other than President)” and provides
the circumstances in which a
vacancy in office of a member may arise. As is not in doubt, none of those
provisions applied to Dr
Selby as a result of the change in his
registration.
provisions of clause 8 of Schedule 2 to the CAT Act, which came into effect
after the National Law was enacted, were submitted
to be consistent with the
terms of s 165C of the National Law which provides
“(1) If one of the members (other than
the Presiding Member) constituting the Tribunal for the purpose of conduct a
under this Law vacates office for any reason before an inquiry or appeal
is completed or a decision is made in respect of an inquiry
or appeal, the
inquiry or appeal may be continued and a determination made by the remaining
members of the Tribunal.
(2) If more than one of the members vacate office, or the
Presiding Member vacates office, for any reason before the Tribunal has
completed an inquiry or appeal or made a determination in respect of an inquiry
or appeal, the inquiry or appeal is terminated.
(3) When an inquiry or appeal is terminated, the Tribunal
may be reconstituted in accordance with this Division for the purposes
conducting a new inquiry or appeal in respect of the matter
concerned.”
165C(4) makes clear that, in the present circumstances, a Senior Judicial
Officer constitutes the Presiding Member.
was submitted by Counsel for the Commission that the legislature could have
included in clause 7 the loss of a qualifying feature
as one of the criteria by
reason of which an Occasional Member vacated office but did not do so, and that
clause 8 of Schedule 2
specifically preserves a person’s capacity to
continue sitting as a Member of the Tribunal, notwithstanding a change in, or
loss of a qualification for appointment. The Commission submitted that the
change in Dr Selby’s registration “at most
gave rise to a change to
which clause 8 applies and pursuant to which he was entitled to remain as an
Occasional Member to determine
the Stage 1 proceedings”. The Commission
further submitted that if, contrary to its contentions, the change in Dr
registration from general registration to non-practising
registration did mean that he ceased to have a “qualification specified
... enabling legislation”, Clause 8 of Schedule 2 of the CAT Act operated
to preserve his continued eligibility for membership
of the Tribunal hearing and
determining the disciplinary proceedings against Dr Kirby.
for the Commission submitted with respect to s 165A of the National Law
that there was no inconsistency between the relevant
provisions of the National
Law and those of the CAT. In oral submissions, Counsel for the Commission
confirmed its contention that
the relevant provisions of the National Law and
the CAT Act were “complementary”, and, in the present circumstances,
entailed no inconsistency. It was thus submitted that 165A of the National Law
was not enlivened.
Commission relied on the statement in
Medical Council of New South Wales v
[2017] NSWCA 282
(Basten JA, Beazley P agreeing), and [87]
(Sackville AJA agreeing) that a provision like s 165A of the National Law
engaged only where there is inconsistency or repugnancy between
the paramount and the subordinate legislation”. The Commission
correctly in the Tribunal’s view, that it is first necessary to construe
the provisions of the relevant legislation
in order to determine whether there
is an inconsistency. The Commission relied on the decision in
DPP (Vic) v
[2012] VSCA 304
[2012] 44 VR 1
in which the Supreme Court of Victoria agreed
with the statement by Megarry
J in C & J Clark Ltd v Inland Revenue
Commissioners
(1973) 1 WLR 905
at [911] that “Where there is no clash,
the phrase does nothing: if there is a collision, the phrase shows what is to
The phrase provides no warranty of universal collision”. It was
accordingly submitted that there was neither expressly nor
impliedly any
provision of the National Law which was inconsistent with the application of
clause 8 of Schedule 2 of the CAT Act
which provision “simply does not
conflict with any provision of the National Law”.
was submitted that the National Law mandated “only requirements for
appointment (as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal),
not requirements for the
continuation of that appointment” and that there was accordingly no
inconsistency between the National
Law and the CAT Act in relation to the
circumstances in which a person appointed to be a Member of the Tribunal is
eligible to continue
to be appointed to the Tribunal. The absence of any
provision in the National Law with respect to the circumstances in which the
ineligibility of a Member to continue was relied on by the Commission in support
of its contention that there was no inconsistency
which could enliven
Commission further submitted that its construction of the legislative provisions
was consistent with the provisions of clauses
12 and 13 of Schedule 5 to the CAT
Act and involved no inconsistency with any provision of the National Law.
for the Commission submitted that there was no “real issue of statutory
construction” raised by Dr Kirby but,
that if there was, the observations
of Leeming JA in
Tsolis v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2024] NSWCA
were apposite. His Honour there said:
“This Court
is to prefer a construction which promotes the purpose or object of the statute:
National Law, Schedule 7 clause
7 (which displaces the corresponding
Interpretation Act
(NSW)). The evident purpose is to prevent
the need to appoint a new non-legal member of the Tribunal in the event of
death, incapacity
or other vacation of position. That has benefits to the
public, as well as to the health practitioner. It is a form of provision
has analogies in
Supreme Court Act
Criminal Appeal Act
(NSW). That purpose
would be frustrated if Mr Tsolis’ narrow construction were adopted. It
would be promoted by the construction
propounded by the Commission.”
, albeit involving the construction of s 165C of the National
Law, the Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal challenging the legitimacy
continuation of proceedings by a three Member Tribunal, where one of the Members
was appointed as a Professional Member of
the Psychology Council, thereby
becoming ineligible for continuing appointment to the Tribunal. The decision was
submitted to be
supportive of the Commission’s case.
Commission opposed Dr Kirby’s reliance on the AHPRA Code of Conduct, the
relevant provision of which has been referred to
earlier. The Tribunal suggested
to Counsel for the Commission during the hearing, that it was difficult to
accept that it cannot
permissibly have regard to the Code of Conduct.
Commission referred to the provisions of clause 2 of Schedule 5D of the National
Law which provides that the Tribunal is not bound
to observe the rules of law
governing the admission of evidence and “may inform itself of any matter
in the way it thinks fit”.
Permitting the Tribunal do so is subject to the
rules of natural justice. The Commission did not suggest that there was any
of natural justice or procedural unfairness in the Tribunal receiving and
having regard to the AHPRA Code of Conduct on which Dr
Kirby sought to
Dr Kirby’s Submissions in Reply
Kirby submitted that the change in Dr Selby’s registration gave rise to a
“jurisdictional error that infected the Stage
1 decision”. Reliance
was placed upon the Judgment of Kyrou JA at [47]-[49] (McDonald AJA agreeing) in
Muto v Shepparton City Council
[2018] VSCA 73
228 LGERA 188
, in which it
was said [47] that a “statutory requirement that a court or tribunal be
constituted in a particular manner for
a specified class of proceeding is,
generally speaking, jurisdictional in nature. Where this general principle
applies, if the court
or tribunal in question is not constituted in the
prescribed manner, it lacks jurisdiction in relation to that class of proceeding
and any order that it purports to make is invalid” and [48] “Where a
statute confers jurisdiction on a court or tribunal
to hear and determine a
particular type of proceeding, the court or tribunal must be constituted in the
prescribed manner for both
the hearing and determination of such a proceeding
... In other words, the jurisdiction to hear and determine the proceeding is
of a single adjudicative process and cannot be bifurcated”.
Kirby submitted that s 53 of the CAT Act, which is concerned with
“amendments and irregularities” could not cure any
November 2023. The Tribunal accepts that,
if the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to
continue to hear Dr Kirby’s proceedings after November 2023, s 53 of
the CAT Act could
not cure the absence of jurisdiction. As the terms of
s 53 make clear, the provision provides for the consequences of procedural
irregularities. For s 53 to be enlivened, the Tribunal must have
asserted to
have arisen and amendments, or other orders pursuant to s 53(4) of the CAT
Act are sought to be made.
Kirby also relied on the decision in
Attorney-General (NSW) v World Best
Holdings Ltd
(2005) 63 NSWLR 557;
[2005] NSWCA 261
where Spigelman CJ said
at [97] that the purported exercise of power by an improperly constituted
statutory tribunal was a “jurisdictional
error of a fundamental
kind”. Tobias JA at [197]-[198] agreed with the Chief Justice’s
statement. It was thus further
emphasised by Dr Kirby that, for the Tribunal to
have had jurisdiction to hear the Stage 1 proceedings after November 2023 and
a decision in relation to them on 21 June 2024, Dr Selby needed to
continue to be registered as a practising Dentist, his change
of status in
November 2023 thereafter incurably infecting the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
to continue to hear the Stage 1 proceedings.
Dr Kirby reiterated his submissions
with respect to the use of the present tense “when conducting” in
s 165B(2) in support
of his contention that the National Law clearly
provided that Dr Selby not only needed to be a practising Dentist when he was
to hear the disciplinary proceedings against Dr Kirby, but needed to
retain that registration status until the determination of the
proceedings.
Dr Kirby’s Further Supplementary Submissions
of 8 October 2025
recorded above, whilst its decision was reserved, the Tribunal invited the
parties to file further submissions with respect to
the relevance and effect of
the definition of “registered health practitioner” in s 5(b) of
the National Law.
accordance with the Tribunal’s invitation, Dr Kirby’s further
supplementary submissions addressed s 165B(2)(b) of the
National Law and
referred to s 5 of the National Law which defines a “health
practitioner” as “an individual who
practises a health
profession”. It was not in dispute that dentistry is a health profession.
It was submitted, correctly, that
the National Law does not define the meaning
of “practises” in s 5.
Kirby referred to the inclusion in the definition in s 5 of
“registered health practitioner” of a person who “holds
non-practising registration under this law in a health profession”. Dr
Kirby submitted that the inclusion of a practitioner
holding non-practising
registration in the definition of “registered health practitioner”
did not, for the reasons previously
advanced, preclude finding that Dr Selby
ceased to be a health practitioner in November 2023 for the purpose of
s 165B(2)(b) of the
National Law. Dr Kirby reiterated his reliance on his
previous submissions in support of his contentions with respect to the meaning
and effect of the definition of registered health practitioner in s 5(b) of
the National Law.
The Commission’s Submissions in Response
to Dr Kirby’s Further Supplementary Submissions
Commission submitted that close consideration of “what the legislature
intended” by each of the definitions of “registered
practitioner” appearing in s 5 of the National Law revealed the error
in Dr Kirby’s contentions. The Commission
made a number of submissions
with respect to the legislative intention and submitted that the
“import” of the definition
of “health practitioner” was
not the verb “practises”, but rather:
(1) the fact that the National Law mainly regulates individuals; and
(2) the types of areas of practice that are governed by the National Law by
reference to health profession where health profession
is itself defined in
Commission further submitted that “The purpose of the definition of health
practitioner is unrelated to the fact that the
individual practises a
profession, but very much related to the identity of the health profession in
which the individual happens
to practise”. As will be seen, that
submission encapsulates the construction issue which is pivotal to the
determination of
Dr Kirby’s challenge to jurisdiction. It was submitted
that the use of the verb “practise” was “simply the
used expression” amongst health and other professions but was not a
“specific term of art” for the purpose
of definition of health
practitioner in the National Law. The Commission submitted that to hold
otherwise would render non-practising
registration “lacking any
Commission reiterated its earlier contention that, if the legislature had
intended to limit the category of health practitioners
eligible to be selected
for appointment to the Tribunal to those holding practising registration, it
could have said so, but has
not done so.
Commission urged the Tribunal to avoid utilising a definition to enact a
substantive law, in reliance upon the statements by McHugh
(2004) 218 CLR 216
[2004] HCA 12
in which his Honour
“The function of a definition is not to enact
substantive law. It is to provide aid in construing the statute. Nothing is more
likely to defeat the intention of the legislature than to give a definition a
narrow, literal meaning and then use that meaning to
negate the evident policy
or purpose of a substantive enactment. There is, of course, always a question
whether the definition is
expressly or impliedly excluded. But once it is clear
that the definition applies, the better – I think the only proper –
course is to read the words of the definition into the substantive enactment and
then construe the substantive enactment –
in its extended or confined
sense – in its context and bearing in mind its purpose and the mischief
that it was designed to
overcome. To construe the definition before its text has
been inserted into the fabric of the substantive enactment invites error
the meaning of the substantive enactment.”
Commission submitted that the two definitions of registered health practitioner
in s 5 of the National Law exist for “separate
and non-intersecting
purposes”, the former being submitted to delineate those persons who are
regulated by the National Law,
the second to identify the types of registration
that a practitioner may hold.
Commission made a number of submissions with respect to the terminology
variously applied in the National Law with respect to
“individuals”,
“registered health practitioners” and “health
practitioner”. The Commission submitted
that it was significant that the
National Law does not identify non-practising health practitioners by
designating them “non-practising
health professionals”, but by using
the expression “non-practising registration” and, as s 75 of
the Act makes
clear, prohibiting persons holding such registration from
practising the profession in which he or she is registered.
Commission submitted that s 165B(2) set out three specific, mandatory
requirements with respect to the two Professional Members
appointed to the
Tribunal to conduct an inquiry, they being:
(1) they must be health practitioners;
(2) they must have been selected for appointment by the Council as Occasional
members; and
(3) they must be registered in the same profession as the respondent in the
proceedings.
Commission reiterated the asserted significance of the legislature not having
expressly provided that, for the purpose of s 165B(2)
a health practitioner
must be registered as a practising health practitioner.
Commission submitted that s 165B(2) required “only that a person
appointed to the Tribunal be a health practitioner registered
in the same health
profession as the person the subject of the complaint – there is no
requirement that the person hold practising
registration”.
conceding its primary position, the Commission reiterated its previous
submission that, if Dr Selby ceased to be eligible
to continue as an
Occupational Member of the Tribunal after November 2023, the provisions of
clause 8 of Schedule 2 of the CAT Act
applied, enabling him to continue as an
Occupational Member of the Tribunal.
Consideration
Whether Dr Selby’s registration as a non-practising Dentist rendered
him ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member of the
neither party disputes, s 5 of the National Law defines “health
practitioner” as an individual who “practises”
profession. Dentistry is a health profession referred to in s 5. Section
5(b) defines “registered health practitioner”
to include an
individual who “holds non-practising registration under this law in a
health profession”. From November
2023, that was Dr Selby’s status.
Section 75 of the National law prohibits a practitioner holding non-practising
registration
from “practising” his or her profession. The provisions
of s 116 of the National Law, to which the Commission referred,
“claims by persons as to registration as health practitioner”, and
provides penalties, including imprisonment
for breaches of its provisions.
Counsel for the parties submitted, the determination of Dr Kirby’s
application involves questions of statutory construction.
SZTAL v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 347 ALR 405
, Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ at [14] said
“The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning
of a statutory provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the
regard is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this
first stage and not at some later stage and
it should be regarded in its widest
sense. This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of
a word, namely
how it is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of
construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise
understood in its statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of
a word may be suggested, and so too, if its
ordinary meaning is not consistent
with the statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.”
, Gageler J, as Gageler CJ then was, said at
“37 The task of construction
begins, as it ends, with the statutory text. But the statutory text from
beginning to end is
construed in context, and an understanding of context has
utility “if, and in so far as, it assists in fixing the meaning of
statutory text”.
38 The constructional choice presented by a statutory text
read in context is sometimes between one meaning which can be characterised
the ordinary or grammatical meaning and another meaning which cannot be so
categorised. More commonly, the choice is from a “range
of potential
meanings, some of which may be less immediately obvious or more awkward than
others, but none of which is wholly ungrammatical
or unnatural”, in which
case the choice “turns less on linguistic fit than on evaluation of a
relative coherence of the
alternatives with identified statutory objects or
39 Integral to making such a choice is discernment of
statutory purpose.”
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
(2018) 361 ALR 206
Edelman J said that:
“The task of statutory construction must
begin and end with the text of the statute. That statement does not mean that
of a statute must be interpreted only according to the range of
semantic meanings of the individual words. It means only that the
interpretation
of a statute, like any other legal instrument, is an interpretation of its
words. Those words are interpreted in their
context and in light of their
purpose although legal rules can sometimes exclude or restrict the use of some
context. In ascertaining
the reasonably intended meaning of Parliament context
is, literally, those matters to be considered (simultaneously) together with
text. Context can give words an interpretation that is the opposite of their
ordinary meaning and grammatical sense. Context
can also permit a construction
of words that excludes their application to matters that would have fallen
within the application
of their literal meaning. However, as with contractual
interpretation, where “the clearer the natural meaning the more difficult
it is to justify departing from it”, so too in statutory interpretation
“questions of degree arise” and it will
be more difficult to
displace an interpretation that “has a powerful advantage in ordinary
meaning and grammatical sense”.”
[Citations omitted]
is not in dispute, for present purposes the task of statutory construction
“begins” with the National Law. Senior Counsel
for Dr Kirby
submitted that the task also “ends” with the National Law. Albeit in
the alternative, Counsel for the Commission
disputed that it necessarily did.
5 of the National Law defines a “health practitioner” as an
individual who “practises” a health profession.
Dentistry is
included in the definition of “health profession” in s 5 of the
National Law. The National Law does not
define “practises”.
Cambridge Dictionary defines “practise” as including “working
in a field such as medicine or law which requires
long periods of training and
high levels of skill”. Affording “practises” its ordinary
meaning is not contraindicated
by the context in which it finds expression in
the National Law (
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
Association
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28).
Practising dentistry would
ordinarily involve, particularly in the context of the National Law, treating
patients with presenting
dental conditions or performing remedial or preventive
dental work. As submitted by Dr Kirby, s 75 of the National Law prohibits
practitioner who holds non-practising registration from practising the
profession, and provides that although doing so does not
constitute an offence
it may constitute behaviour for which health, conduct or performance action may
be taken. A health practitioner
with non-practising registration could face
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to the National Law if he or she practised the
profession.
Tribunal has not been referred to any statutory or other legislative provision
which expressly or impliedly identifies the practical
significance of the
distinction between practising and non-practising registration other than as
provided by s 75 and 116 of the
National Law. The Commission contends that,
in those circumstances, the Tribunal cannot permissibly construe the
requirements of
s 165B(2) in the manner asserted by Dr Kirby. Having seen
fit to incorporate s 75 into the National Law, the legislature could have
confined s 165B(2) to health practitioners holding “practising”
registration in the relevant profession. That it did
not is unlikely to have
been inadvertent.
Kirby contends that, in the absence of statutory provisions clarifying the
issue, and as they are not inconsistent with any provision
in the National Law,
reliance on the Code of Conduct is permissible, and informs determining whether,
after November 2023, Dr Selby
was practising his profession when not lawfully
entitled to do so, by continuing to sit as a Member of the Tribunal. Dr Kirby
that, sitting as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal, drawing upon his
long periods of training and high levels of skill, Dr Selby
“working” in the profession of dentistry. A finding in those terms
would be consistent with the provision of the
Code of Conduct relied on by Dr
Kirby. Dr Kirby contends that it is inconceivable that the legislature would
have intended that a
person would be entitled to sit on the Tribunal
notwithstanding that doing so was unlawful. There is logical force in that
contention.
view of the Commission’s opposition, the Tribunal has considered whether
it should have regard to the provisions of the Code
of Practice on which Dr
Kirby relies. Paragraph 2 of Schedule 5D to the National Law permits the
Tribunal to inform itself of any
matter in “the way it thinks fit”,
subject to the overarching requirements of natural justice. The Commission has
heard in opposition to the Tribunal considering the Code of Conduct, and
thus afforded procedural fairness.
Interpretation Act
(NSW) is concerned with the
“use of extrinsic material in the interpretation of Acts and statutory
rules” and provides:
“(1) In the
interpretation of a provision of an Act or statutory rule, if any material not
forming part of the Act or statutory
rule is capable of assisting in the
ascertainment of the meaning of the provision, consideration may be given to
that material-
(a) to confirm that the meaning of the provision is the
ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision (taking into account
context in the Act or statutory rule and the purpose or object underlying the
Act or statutory rule and, in the case of a statutory
rule, the purpose or
object underlying the Act under which the rule was made), or
(b) to determine the meaning of the provision-
(i) if the provision is ambiguous or
(ii) if the ordinary meaning conveyed by
the text of the provision (taking into account its context in the Act or
statutory rule
and the purpose or object underling the Act or statutory rule
and, in the case of a statutory rule, the purpose or object underlying
under which the rule was made) leads to a result that is manifestly absurd or is
unreasonable.”
identifies a number of categories of material which may be considered,
none of which applies in this case. The list is inclusive
of those matters.
provides that:
“In determining whether consideration
should be given to any material, or in considering the weight to be given to any
regard shall be had, in addition to any other relevant matters,
(a) the desirability of persons being able to rely on the
ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision (taking into account
context in the Act or statutory rule and the purpose or object underlying the
Act or statutory rule and, in the case of a statutory
rule, the purpose or
object underlying the Act under which the rule was made), and
(b) the need to avoid prolonging legal or other proceedings
without compensating advantage.”
material may be taken into account even when a statutory provision is
“clear on its face” (
Commissioner of Australian Federal Police v
(1984) 3 FCR 240
NAQF v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2003) FCA 781).
the terms of
make clear, if the statutory provision under
consideration is “clear on its face”, extrinsic materials may only
to confirm the ordinary meaning of the provision. They cannot be used to
alter the interpretation which the Tribunal would place
on the provision without
reference to those materials (
Re Australian Federation of Construction
Contractors; Ex Parte Billing
[1986] HCA 74
; 68 ALR 420). The Judges of the
High Court, in their joint Judgment, said that reference to, in that case
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth), did not
permit recourse to extrinsic material “for the purpose of departing from
the ordinary meaning of the text unless
either the meaning of the provision be
construed as ambiguous or obscure or in its ordinary meaning leads to a result
that is manifestly
absurd or is unreasonable”. In
Ombudsman v
Commissioner of Police
[1987] 11 NSWLR 386
at [396], it was accepted that
Interpretation Act
was subject to that constraint.
Extrinsic materials cannot be used to fil a “gap” in a statute
Director of Public Prosecutions v Walters
[2015] VSCA 303
(2015) 49 VR
Kirby’s reliance on the Code of Conduct, being extrinsic material, is on
the basis that it supports finding that the relevant
provision of the National
Law is as submitted on his behalf, or that, if there is uncertainty, the meaning
of the provision for which
the Commission contends would lead to an unreasonable
one view, the absence in s 165B(2)(b) of a requirement of “practising
registration” or a prohibition on “non-practising
registration” in order to be eligible for appointment as an Occupational
Member of the Tribunal may be significant having regard
to the definition of
“registered health practitioner” in
as including a
practitioner who holds non-practising registration. It is not necessary, if it
be possible, for the Tribunal to attempt
to identify the metes and bounds of
what a health practitioner with non-practising registration can permissibly do.
The Tribunal
is concerned only with whether, although Dr Selby continued to be a
registered health practitioner for the purpose of s 165B(2)(b)
becoming a non-practising practitioner, he continued to be eligible to be a
“health practitioner” in accordance
with the section.
view of the inclusion in s 165B(2)(b) of “health practitioner”
and “registered health practitioner”, construction
of the provision
involves reconciling two apparently different requirements for eligibility-
whether eligibility requires that a
person be a “health
practitioner” who “practises” the health profession, or need
only be “registered
in the same health profession” as the respondent
in the proceedings.
Significantly,
s 165B(2)(b) did not refer to “registered health practitioner”.
The term “registered in the same
health profession” differs
materially from “registered health practitioner”. If the legislature
had intended that
eligibility for appointment pursuant to s 165B(2)(b)
included practitioners holding non-practising registration, articulating that
intention would have been a simple matter. Section 165B(2)(b) does not expressly
or impliedly qualify the requirement that eligibility
for appointment as an
Occasional Member is restricted to “health practitioners” who are,
by definition “practising”
the profession. Nor does the requirement
of registration in the same health profession as the respondent. The Tribunal
cannot accept
that the latter requirement does other than make clear that a
health practitioner appointed to the Tribunal hold registration in
profession as the respondent in the proceedings. From November 2023, Dr Selby
ceased to be a health practitioner in accordance
with s 165B(2)(b) and was
thus ineligible to continue as an Occupational Member of the Tribunal, unless
doing so was permitted by
an applicable provision of the National Law, or the
Commonwealth v Baume
(1905) 2 CLR 405
[1905] HCA 11
Griffith CJ accepted
that, as the 1688 decision to which his Honour referred established with respect
to interpretation of statutes
“Sense is to be made upon the whole as that
no clause, sentence, or word shall prove superfluous, void or insignificant, if
by any other construction they may all be made useful and pertinent”. That
principle was endorsed in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
and on numerous subsequent
occasions. In
Scott v Moses
(1957) 75 WN (NSW) 101
, the Court of Criminal
Appeal said that “Whatever the difficulties of construction may be ... a
Court is bound to give some
meaning to the section, and upon no proper
principles could a Court ever hold that an act of the legislature was to be
regarded as
a nullity because of the uncertainty of the language
Western Australian Planning Commission v Southregal Pty Limited
259 CLR 106
[2017] HCA 7
the plurality in the High Court accepted that
“Words chosen by the legislature should be given meaning and endeavours
be made to avoid them being seen as redundant” but they
“should not be given a strained meaning, one at odds with the
the statute”. It has also been consistently held that Courts have a duty
to give words the construction which produces
the “greatest harmony and
the least inconsistency” (
Australian Alliance Assurance Co Ltd v
Attorney-General (Qld)
(1916) St R Qd 135).
The Tribunal is satisfied that
its construction of s 165B(2)(b) is not strained, at odds with the scheme
of the statute or productive
of disharmony or inconsistency. The National Law
provides for practising and non-practising health practitioners, and prohibits
latter from practising the health profession in which he/she is registered.
Having regard to the issues which the Tribunal is required
to decide in
disciplinary provisions, it is understandable that, to properly evaluate the
conduct of respondents in such proceedings,
Occasional Members appointed
pursuant to s 165B(2)(b) should hold practising registration, which renders
them subject to the requirements
for continuing professional development
articulated in National Boards’ registration standards and CPD guidelines.
The evidence
does not establish whether, and, if so, what CPD requirements
attach to non-practising registration.
there are two provisions in a single piece of legislation which initially appear
to be in conflict, as it is improbable that
the legislature would have intended
to insert a provision which has virtually no practical effect, courts look to
see whether any
other meaning produces a more reasonable result (
Minister for
Resources v Dover Fisheries Pty Limited
[1993] FCA 366
(1993) 43 FCR 565).
Implicit in the
Commission’s case is that accepting Dr Kirby’s construction of
s 165B(2)(b), leaves the definition of
registered health practitioner in
s 5(b) of the National Law with no practical effect. The provisions of
s 116 of the National Law,
to which the Commission referred appear capable
of having significant practical effect. However limited its practical effect
be, the evidence does not support finding that the Tribunal’s
construction of s 165B(2)(b) leaves the definition of registered
practitioner in s 5(b) with no work to do, or redundant.
Kirby sought to rely on the Code of Conduct in support of his case. The
Commission opposed such reliance. Although, in view of
the Tribunal’s
finding it is strictly unnecessary to do so, the Tribunal has considered the
Code. Although doing so is considered
to provide some, but only limited support
for its construction of s 165B(2)(b), the Tribunal’s acceptance of Dr
construction of the provision is not dependent upon consideration
of the Code.
Code of Conduct “sets out the standards of professional conduct the
National Boards expect and is used by Boards to evaluate
practitioners’
conduct. Practitioners have a professional responsibility to be familiar with
and to apply this code”.
It is apparent that the Code is intended to
perform an educative and regulatory function. In disciplinary proceedings
pursuant to
s 139B(1)(a) of the National Law, it is frequently alleged that
a practitioner’s conduct demonstrates that “the knowledge,
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner’s profession is significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience”. The Tribunal has
regard to provisions of the Code of Conduct
when establishing the benchmark by reference to which the practitioner’s
is assessed. Whilst informing that evaluation, as the terms of the Code
confirm, departure from the provisions of the Code does not,
determine whether the practitioner’s conduct offends s 139B(1)(a) of
the National Law.
Code of Conduct applies to a number of professions other than Dentistry. Its
objects and purposes are readily apparent from its
terms. It would be surprising
if, having regard to those objects and purposes, and the terms of its contents,
the Code adopted other
than a broad definition of “practise”. It
would be extraordinary if the boundary and other ethical provisions of the
were not expressed to apply to every activity in which a health practitioner may
be engaged in his or her capacity as a health
practitioner. In the absence of
evidence that they apply to non-practising health practitioners, clauses 7.3 and
7.4 of the Code,
which are concerned with “maintaining and developing
professional capability” and ”continuing professional development
(CPD)” respectively, provide support for the tribunal’s construction
of s 165B(2)(b) of the National Law.
recorded above, Dr Kirby relied significantly on the words in s 165B(2) of
the National Law that “when conducting”
a hearing under the National
Law the Tribunal was to be constituted at all times in the manner provided by
s 165B(2). In
Tsolis v Health Care Complaints Commission
, at [22], Leeming JA said that “the original obligations bearing
upon the constitution of the Tribunal are found in s 165B”
National Law. His Honour referred [23] to the expression upon which Dr Kirby
relies and recorded that the reference in s 165B(2)
and (7) and
s 165C(1), (2) and (3) “extends to all three ways in which
proceedings are commenced in the Tribunal”. The
National Law contemplates
that the Tribunal as constituted in accordance with s 165B(2) does not have
to remain so constituted in
order for it to retain jurisdiction to hear and
finally determine an inquiry or hearing. Section 165C, with which
was concerned, expressly provides for the proceedings to continue, or be
terminated in the circumstances provided by the section.
Whilst the Tribunal
must be properly constituted at all times to retain jurisdiction, it does not
have to be constituted at all times
by the originally appointed Occasional
Members holding practising registration. Acceptance of Dr Kirby’s
construction of s
165B(2)(b) means that, unless “saved” by some
other legislative provision, the Tribunal was not properly constituted
November 2023.
Whether, if the provisions of the National Law
rendered Dr Selby ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal
November 2023, the provisions of the CAT Act enabled him to do so
view of the Tribunal’s finding with respect to Dr Kirby’s challenge
to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal after November
2023 it is necessary to
determine the alternative basis on which the Commission relied in support of the
continuance of the Tribunal’s
was ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal upon holding
non-practising
registration, could he permissibly do so pursuant to a provision
of the National Law or the CAT Act?
Dr Selby become ineligible to sit on the Tribunal in November 2023 and
“vacated” office, for that or any other reason,
s 165C(1) of
the National Law may have preserved the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear
and determine the proceedings notwithstanding
that it was no longer constituted
in accordance with s 165B(2)(b) of the National Law. Whether s 165C is
only enlivened when a Member
“vacates” office, or whether the
Member’s office is constructively vacated upon the Member becoming
to continue in office is not a matter which the Tribunal needs to
consider, as Dr Selby continued to sit as a Member of the Tribunal
Stage 1 decision was published in 2024. If Dr Selby was ineligible to continue
as an Occasional Member after November 2023,
s 165C of the National Law
could not have been enlivened to preserve the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in
the present circumstances.
support of his contention that the proceedings could not be “saved”
by the provisions of clause 8 of Schedule 2 to
the CAT Act, Dr Kirby relied on
the inconsistency provisions of s 165A of the National Law. As the
legislative provisions to which
Counsel for the parties have referred make
clear, save in s 165C, the National Law does not expressly identify the
impact of an Occasional Member becoming ineligible to continue to
sit on the Tribunal but not vacating office.
165A contemplates that, save to the extent of any inconsistency with it, when
exercising jurisdiction under the National Law,
the Tribunal may exercise powers
conferred on it by the CAT Act. Unless precluded by the National Law as an
inconsistent provision,
if Dr Selby was ineligible to continue as an Occasional
Member of the Tribunal after November 2023, he would have been an
member within the terms of clause 8 of Schedule 2 to the
CAT Act, and have been able to continue to sit on the Tribunal until the
conclusion of the part-heard proceedings.
11(5) of the CAT Act provides that a person who is appointed as an Occasional
Member holds office as such until the proceedings
in relation to which the
Member has been appointed as an Occasional Member have been finally determined,
unless the person sooner
vacates office. It is difficult to accept that, if Dr
Selby was ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal after
November 2023, this provision was not inconsistent with the National Law.
11(6) provides that the proceedings in relation to which an Occasional Member
has been appointed as an Occasional Member are
not finally determined for the
purpose of s 11(5) until, relevantly for present purposes, the Tribunal (as
constituted by or with
the Member) has completed all the processes necessary to
decide the substantial merits of the proceedings (including where required
giving of reasons and the determination of costs). The Tribunal’s
observations with respect to s 11(5) of the CAT Act also
apply to this
than as provided by s 165C, the National Law is silent with respect to the
consequences of an Occasional Member appointed pursuant
to s165B(2)(b) ceasing
to be eligible to sit as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal, but continuing to
do so. Dr Kirby submitted
that the words “when conducting an inquiry or
hearing” in s 165B(2) should, giving those words their ordinary
mean “at all times when conducting an inquiry”, save in the
circumstances provided by s 165B(4)(b) or s 165B(5) or
165B(5A). in those circumstances, save if s 165C were enlivened,
recourse to the provisions of the CAT Act relied on by the Commission
submitted to involve inconsistency which enlivens s 165A of the National
in a case involving s 165C, in
by reference to Schedule 7
clause 7 to the National Law, Leeming JA said, at [34] reiterated the obligation
of the Tribunal to prefer
the construction of legislation which promotes the
purpose or object of the statute, and referred to the “benefits to the
as well as to the health practitioner” of statutory provisions
which avoid the termination of proceedings when certain Members
of the Tribunal
are unable to continue to sit as Members of the Tribunal. In proceedings which
have been on foot for as long as these
have, those benefits are considerable. It
is also beneficial the public and health practitioner facing disciplinary
proceedings that
the Occupational Members of the Tribunal maintain the
professional expertise required of health practitioners holding practising
registration. If the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction after November 2023, that
absence could not be cured by considerations of the kind
which assume
significance in the context of s 165C.
2 clause 8 to the CAT Act refers at (1)(a) to a Member who “ceases to have
a qualification specified by a Division
Schedule for a Division of the Tribunal
or enabling legislation for participation in the proceedings”. The
Tribunal apprehends
that s 165B(2)(b) of the National Law is the relevant
enabling legislation for Dr Selby’s participation in the proceedings.
Clause 8 articulates the constraints on its operation, none of which is
suggested to be relevant for present purposes. If Dr Selby
became ineligible to
continue as an Occupational Member of the Tribunal in November 2023, he would
have ceased to have a “qualification”
for the purposes of
s 165B(2)(b). If, as the Tribunal finds, “when conducting”
disciplinary proceedings, the Occupational
Members of the Tribunal must continue
to hold practising registration, it is difficult to accept that the legislature
intended that a person who ceased to have that qualification could
continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal pursuant to a
provision of the
CAT Act, the resultant inconsistency enlivening s 165A of the National
Tribunal considers that the provisions of clause 8 of Schedule 2 to the CAT Act
considered above are inconsistent with the provisions
of the National Law.
Accepting, as the Tribunal does, that, Occupational Members of the Tribunal must
have and retain practising
registration throughout the proceedings in which they
are appointed renders the absence of other legislative provisions capable of
preserving jurisdiction in the present circumstances unsurprising. It also
renders unsurprising the absence of provisions expressly
concerned with the
consequences of an Occupational Member ceasing to hold practising registration
he or she ceases to be eligible
to continue as an Occupational Member.
CAT Act operates in other ways which are not inconsistent with the National Law.
Division 10 of Part 10 of the National Law does
not articulate what is to occur
in the event that the Members of the Tribunal are not in unanimous accord with
respect to the Tribunal’s
decision. Section 57(1) of the CAT Act provides
that when the Tribunal is constituted by more than one Member for the
determination
of any proceedings and the Members are “divided in opinion,
the opinion of the majority is taken to be the decision of the
Section 57(3) further provides that if the Members are “equally divided in
their opinion, the opinion that
prevails” provides for the opinion which
is to prevail. Section 57 effectively precludes proceedings of the present kind
stalemated. The National Law makes no such provision. There is no doubt
that s 57 of the CAT Act applies in proceedings pursuant
to the National
Della Bruna v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2025] NSWCA 125).
If Dr Selby was able to continue as an Occupational Member of the Tribunal after
November 2023, he potentially had a “casting
vote” with respect to
the Tribunal’s decision, notwithstanding that he lacked a
“qualification” which enabled
him to continue on the Tribunal. The
Tribunal cannot accept that, in exercising the protective functions invested in
the Tribunal
by the National Law, such a scenario could have been intended.
the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal is not persuaded that Dr Selby’s
ineligibility after November 2023 was cured by the
provisions of the CAT Act.
Whether, if Dr Selby was ineligible to continue as an Occasional
Member of the Tribunal after November 2023 on any basis, the Tribunal
not involving the National Law, in
McNally v Resolution Life Australasia
[2025] NSWCATAP 116
), the Appeal Panel of the
Tribunal considered whether a change in the constitution of the Tribunal hearing
the proceedings at first
instance vitiated its decision. The Appeal Panel
recognised, at [25], that the CAT Act “specifies special constitution
requirements
in some cases”. Although, in those circumstances the Appeal
Panel’s decision needs to be approached with caution, the
panel’s reasons are instructive for present purposes.
Appeal Panel found [28] that the Tribunal at first instance was not constituted
in accordance with the CAT Act, the question then
becoming whether that vitiated
its decision. The Appeal Panel found that the “weight of authority points
to the conclusion
that a decision made by an invalidly constituted Tribunal is
Tribunal referred [29] to the decision of the Supreme Court in
Gleeson v New
South Wales Harness Racing Authority
(1990) 21 ALD 515
case involving the Tribunal empowered to regulate, control, inquire into and
adjudicate complaints about the conduct of harness
racing trainers. The
Authority suspended the applicant, who applied to the Supreme Court for a
declaration that its decision was
contrary to law. The Appeal Panel recorded the
“primary basis” of the applicant’s challenge being “that
Authority was not validly constituted. The Authority was said to be
invalidly constituted for two reasons: first, that two of the
Authority’s
four members were not present at all days of the hearing; and second, that a
member of the Authority was a witness
in, and assisted in investigating, the
complaint against the applicant”. The Tribunal referred [30] to Young
J’s acceptance
that both of the applicant’s grounds constituted a
denial of natural justice, requiring the Authority’s decision to be
Appeal Panel referred [31] to
Tu v University of
57 NSWLR 376
[2003] NSWCA 170
) which involved proceedings heard by a
Tribunal initially constituted by a Judicial Member and two General Members, in
Judicial Member became unavailable, and a new Judicial Member was
allocated. The precondition for reconstitution of the Tribunal
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
(NSW) (ADT Act) was the
consent of the parties. The applicant withheld his consent, but the
reconstituted Tribunal nevertheless proceeded
to hear and determine the
proceedings. The Appeal Panel recorded that the Court of Appeal held, at [32],
that the reconstitution
of the Tribunal was contrary to the statute and that the
error vitiated the orders made. The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal,
aside the Tribunal’s orders, and remitted the matter for
redetermination.
Appeal Panel referred [32] to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Attorney-General of New South Wales v World Best Holdings Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 261
World Best Holdings
) which concerned a
decision of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal made by a Panel which included
Members who lacked the qualifications
required by the relevant statute. The
Appeal Panel recorded that, that three Judges in the Court of Appeal agreed that
the Tribunal
had been constituted contrary to the legislative requirements and
that the Court considered whether s 81(3) of the ADT Act “saved
Tribunal’s decision from invalidity”. The Appeal Panel recorded that
s 81(3) of the ADT Act was in similar terms
to s 53(3) of the CAT Act,
which is concerned with “amendments and irregularities”.
Appeal Panel referred [33] to Spigelman CJ’s statement that the purpose of
s 81(3) was to “ensure that litigants were
not defeated by mere
technicalities”. The Appeal Panel cited Spigelman CJ’s observations
with respect to s 81(3) at [97]
as applying only to “steps or
decisions of a procedural character. It does not, in my opinion, relate to the
ultimate decision
when made by a decision-maker who does not have the capacity
to exercise a statutory power. ... What happened in this case was that
statutory power was exercised by persons who had no authority of any character
to do so. This is a jurisdictional error of a fundamental
kind. It is not a
procedural irregularity”. The Tribunal referred [33] to Tobias JA’s
acceptance that the “misconstitution”
of the Tribunal was not
“merely procedural in nature”.
Tribunal also referred [36] the decision of Adamson J in
Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia v Linquist
[2019] NSWSC 978.
Significantly,
that case was concerned s 165B(5A) of the National Law, which is concerned
with jurisdiction to make ancillary or
interlocutory decisions. The Appeal Panel
recorded Adamson J as finding at [52] that the provision provided “no
warrant for
a “subset” of a constituted Tribunal to separately
determine matters in the context of a hearing before the Tribunal”.
Appeal Panel recorded that as “there was no reconstitution of the Tribunal
for the purpose of the decision as to jurisdiction,
the decision of the
Presiding Member was beyond its jurisdiction and was void”.
involved a Tribunal which was constituted by fewer members than
the National Law required. The consequence of which was the Tribunal
the determination of the proceedings by the
Tribunal of an ineligible Member
rendered its decision beyond jurisdiction and void.
at [40] the Tribunal considered the “two possible
scenarios” which arose on the facts of the case. The Appeal Panel
the facts at [39] in the following terms:
Tribunal was initially constituted by a Senior Member and a General Member. Both
Members were present on day one of the
hearing, but only the Senior Member
conducted the hearing on days two and three. While day two was a directions
hearing, day three
was a resumption of the hearing of the ancillary application
as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. When the Tribunal delivered
decision on the ancillary question, both Members were named as part of the
first scenario considered by the Appeal Panel at [40] was the possibility
“that both Members participated in the determination
of the ancillary
question, despite that General Member not being present for the resumed hearing
on that issue”. The Appeal
Panel considered such a case to be
“analogous” to
. The second scenario considered by the
Appeal Panel was that “The Tribunal reconstituted to comprise the Senior
Member alone
for the purpose of the ancillary decision, and the General
Member’s name was recorded on the published decision in error”.
Appeal Panel held that as there was no direction to this effect under s 52
of the CAT Act, there had been a “misconstitution
of the Tribunal. The
Tribunal was not separately constituted to determine the ancillary issue of
Panel accordingly held, following
, that such a scenario would amount to a
the decision of the Tribunal was vitiated by jurisdictional error and
must be set aside. This is not a mere irregularity.”
the authorities to which the Appeal Panel referred in
decision of the Appeal Panel itself in that case confirm, the Tribunal being
validly constituted is fundamental to the existence
of its jurisdiction. As Dr
Selby was ineligible to continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal after
November 2023, and that
inability was not cured by any provision of the National
Law or the CAT Act, his continued involvement in the proceedings resulted
Tribunal being misconstituted. That misconstitution could not be cured by
recourse to s 53 of the CAT Act.
Dr Selby was but one of four members of the Tribunal hearing the proceedings
after November 2023, his continued participation
vitiated the Tribunal’s
of the Presiding Member and
Dr Selby would have prevailed in the event of the
other Occasional Member and the General Member making different findings. That
provides further support for finding that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was
vitiated by Dr Selby’s continued participation
in the proceedings. The
Tribunal cannot accept that the continued involvement of a person in the hearing
of proceedings, particularly
under the National Law, could be cured in any way
and could not constitute jurisdictional error.
the foregoing reasons the Tribunal is persuaded that Dr Selby became ineligible
to continue as an Occasional Member of the Tribunal
in November 2023 by reason
of his change of registration status. That ineligibility was not cured by any
provision of the National
Law, or of the CAT Act. The Tribunal was thus deprived
of jurisdiction to continue to hear and determine the proceedings as a result
Dr Selby becoming a non-practising Dentist in November 2023. As the
Tribunal’s reasons confirm, the tribunal’s decision
involves issues
of statutory construction, and does not turn on any absence of professional
skill or competence on Dr Selby’s
part. None was asserted in any
the extent that the Tribunal could permissibly make the declaration sought by Dr
Kirby, it is unnecessary to do so. Having found
as it has with respect to the
order giving effect to
that finding. The definition of “ancillary
decision” in s 4(1)(a) of the CAT Act is considered sufficiently
enable the Tribunal to set aside the Stage 1 decision of 21 June 2024.
As occurred in some of the cases referred to above, the proceedings.
proceedings would remain pending for re-determination by a differently
constituted tribunal.
Tribunal has not heard submissions in relation to costs and will reserve
(1) The decision of the Tribunal of 21 June 2024 is set aside.
(2) The proceedings are to be listed before the List Manager for further
directions on a date to be appointed.
(3) Costs are reserved.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter