URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2018/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MOORE, Colin Campbell Marshall [2018] NSWMPSC 8 (5 October 2018)
MPO095830-02 : DD18/45244
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation
Dr Colin Campbell Marshall
MED0001378934
Dates of Inquiry:
3 & 4 September 2018
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul, Chairperson
Dr Grahame Smith
Dr Celalettin Varol
Catherine Berglund
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Mr Scott Maybury, instructed by Mr Feneil Shah from the Commission
Appearance for Dr Colin Campbell Marshall Moore:
Ms Ragni Mathur, instructed by Ms Barbara Versace from Avant Law
Date of decision:
5 October 2018
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct, and has
issued a reprimand, ordered conditions and imposed a fine.
Publication of decision:
A non-publication direction has been made with respect to the identity of
the patient, paragraph 6.
STATEMENT OF DECISION
Introduction
1. In September 2014 Associate Professor Colin Campbell
Marshall Moore (“Dr Moore”) consulted with a patient about
augmentation surgery. The patient had been referred to Dr Moore for
that purpose, with the referring surgeon indicating he would
be undertaking a
hypospadias repair for the patient. As it turned out, Dr Moore undertook
the hypospadias repair in April 2015,
and last consulted with the patient in
late May 2015. Dr Moore quoted him a significant amount for the
hypospadias repair surgery.
2. Our inquiry concerns whether Dr Moore
gave the patient the right information about the operation, whether he dealt
with him appropriately
after the surgery, and properly spoke about the success
of the surgery. We are also concerned with whether his dealings with the
referring surgeon were improper, and whether his fee was improper.
come to the conclusion that Dr Moore’s communication with the Patient
amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. We have not concluded that the amount charged by
Dr Moore was improper, but we have
concluded that the presentation of his
fee estimate was improper.
4. After considering all the material before us we
have decided to reprimand Dr Moore, to impose conditions concerning his
of this type of surgery, and to impose a fine.
5. Before setting out
our findings on the material questions of fact, referring to the evidence on
which we relied, and giving our
reasons, we deal with some procedural
Non-publication order
6. At the direction hearing on
7 August 2018 the Chairperson made a direction in accordance with
Schedule 5(d), clause 7 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National
Law (NSW) (the National Law) that the name and address of Dr Moore’s
patient (named in the
Complaint as Patient A) not be published including any
information, picture or other material that identifies that person or is likely
to lead to identification of that person. That direction was continued at the
commencement of our inquiry and remains in force.
The hearing
undertook our inquiry on 3 and 4 September 2018. The parties did not
request, and it was not necessary, that we first determine
whether there was any
unsatisfactory professional conduct before deciding what powers we should
exercise. The parties were content
to make submissions on appropriate
protective orders at the conclusion of the hearing.
8. On the morning of
3 September we spoke to the Patient by telephone from Japan. Later that
day Dr Wong and Dr Henry gave evidence,
and did so at the same time in
the nature of a conclave. Neither party required Dr Hinsch to attend, and
we did not need to speak
9. On 4 September we heard submissions
by Mr Maybury and Ms Mathur, and we asked questions of them.
Mr Maybury handed up details
of what the Commission proposed were
appropriate orders and conditions.
Dr Moore did not attend the
10. Dr Moore did not attend our inquiry. Before we commenced the
hearing Ms Mathur provided a supplementary statement from Dr Moore
(Exhibit 2), in which he stated:
“I feel exhausted and depressed
on me. I am
very anxious about the matter and feel I can no longer continue to
deal with the stress involved. I am experiencing significant
depression and I am having difficulties functioning.”
11. Dr Moore said
he did not feel well enough to attend the hearing. Importantly, he stated he
was aware of the Complaint being made
against him and he was not seeking an
adjournment.
12. We were not advised of any medical evidence, and none was
provided, to say that Dr Moore was incapable of attending. Ms Mathur
confirmed she was able to obtain instructions from Dr Moore as the need
arose. In those circumstances we proceeded with our inquiry.
conclusion of the hearing both Ms Mathur and Mr Maybury made
submissions about the effect that Dr Moore’s absence
from the hearing
might have on the conclusions we might draw from the information before us. We
have made our decision without drawing
conclusions against Dr Moore arising
from his absence from the hearing. Even though Dr Moore did not give oral
evidence we have
taken account of the evidence that he did provide in his
various submissions and statements.
The Complaint
14. Our inquiry began
with a complaint made by the Health Care Complains Commission (the Commission)
dated 9 November 2017. A week
before our hearing commenced the
Commission advised Dr Moore of proposed amendments to that complaint. The
amendments fell into
three broad categories. The first category made amendment
to a statutory reference, refined some particulars of the complaint, and
corrected some dates. There was no objection and we accepted these amendments.
15. The second category concerned the addition of further particulars to
what came to be called Particular 5 of the Complaint. Ms
Mathur objected
to the proposed amendments saying the added particulars changed the nature of
the allegation. In his supplementary
statement (Exhibit 2) Dr Moore
said he was aware of the proposed amendment but did admit the allegations. No
prejudice was identified
that could not have been remedied by an adjournment.
No application was made for an adjournment. To the contrary, Dr Moore wanted
matters to be resolved as quickly as possible.
16. The proposed particulars
identified allegations of fact said to support the complaint. Material relating
to the alleged facts
was contained within the materials before us and had been
the subject of consideration by the Commission and Dr Moore and the experts
they engaged.
17. In undertaking our inquiry we are not restricted to the
particulars of a complaint but may give consideration to what arises from
subject matter of the complaint. The proposed amendment provides more detail to
the complaint drawn from the material before
us. For these reasons we allowed
this amendment.
18. The third category of proposed amendment added a new
aspect to the complaint in that Dr Moore’s charge for the surgery and
the way in which he justified his fee was said to be improper.
allegation of unsatisfactory professional conduct is based not only on
s139B(1)(a) of the National Law but also on s139B(1)(l)
of the National Law
being that Dr Moore “engaged in improper or unethical conduct
relating to the practice or purported practice
of medicine”.
the directions hearing on 7 August 2018 the Chairperson had asked the
representatives of both the Commission and Dr Moore whether
the allegation
of improper or unethical conduct would be raised with respect to
Dr Moore’s fees given the issue had been canvassed
in the materials
that were to be provided to us as part of our inquiry. The chairperson
indicated that the inquiry might extend
to that issue.
21. Ms Mathur
objected and referred to the short period of one week’s notice of the
proposal to amend the complaint. No application
was made for an adjournment.
Dr Moore was aware of the proposed amendment.
22. It is apparent from
the material before us that Dr Moore’s fees and the way in which he
justified his fees has been the
subject of investigation by the Commission. The
Commission asked Dr Moore about his fees and Dr Moore responded in
some detail.
The Commission’s expert Dr Wong and
Dr Moore’s expert Dr Henry had both commented on the issue, as
did Dr Moore.
23. We were not told there was relevant information not
available to the Committee such that proceeding without that information would
be unsound.
24. Given the material passing between the parties as part of the
Commission’s investigation and that the question of fees relates
to Dr Moore’s dealings with the Patient we are of the view that the
proposed amendment is within the scope of the
complaint. We allowed the
25. If that is not the case, we have regard to clause 6 of
Schedule 5D of the National Law. If during the proceedings any matters
arise upon which another complaint could have been made then we may proceed to
deal with that complaint. The complaint may be dealt
with upon adjournment if
just and equitable in the circumstances. Having regard to the scope of the
proposed amendment and the material
before us we consider it is just and
equitable to proceed without any adjournment, and even though Dr Moore has
not made that application.
26. The text of the complaint as amended
(“the Complaint”) is set out as Attachment A without some
formalities and the
schedule which identifies the Patient.
Objections to the
27. The Commission provided us with a folder of material with tabbed
documents, which became Exhibit 1. Ms Mathur made three broad
to some of that material (considered below), and also objected to the Committee
taking notice of an earlier Professional
Standards Committee inquiry concerning
Dr Moore unless and until we reached a decision on unsatisfactory
professional conduct. As
to that last objection, we have proceeded on that
28. Ms Mathur objected to the third bulleted paragraph of from
the Patient dated 15 December 2015 (Exhibit 1, Tab 4, page 14) and
paragraph 31 of the Patient’s statement at Tab 6 on the grounds they were
prejudicial and not relevant to our inquiry. After
argument we agreed, and have
disregarded those paragraphs.
29. Ms Mathur objected to a letter from
the Patient’s mother of 19 March 2016 on the basis of relevance
but also that parts
of it amounted to second hand hearsay. We have accepted the
letter into evidence. We are not bound by the rules of evidence but
ourselves of any matter in the way we think fit. The letter helps us to
understand the mother’s understanding of
how she appreciates her son has
been affected by the conduct of Dr Moore, a potentially relevant matter to
the consideration of the
public interest.
30. Ms Mathur objected to
particular parts of Dr Wong’s reports at tabs 11, 13, 16, 18
and 20 of Exhibit 1. The objections were
broadly on the grounds that
Dr Wong was expressing an opinion not within his expertise, or was making a
comment not relevant to our
inquiry. Except as noted below we allowed the
material. Without dealing specifically with each item to which there was an
we considered the material was potentially relevant to matters
concerning Dr Moore’s treatment of the patient. Though Dr Wong
is called an expert it is our task to decide the Complaint. Two of our members
are medical practitioners. We operate as an expert
panel able to assess and
give appropriate weight to the opinions expressed by
31. However, some parts of Dr Wong’s reports were
not relevant to our inquiry. We have disregarded paragraph 5.33 of
report at tab 13, the second and third sentences of
the last paragraph appearing on Dr Wong’s report of
18 August 2018 at tab
20, and Dr Wong’s reference to
the nature of Dr Moore’s reply when answering
question 12.
32. In addition there was an objection to us receiving any
of Dr Wong’s reports on the basis that his comments, his
exaggerations,
the language he used, and the tone of his reports taken together
demonstrated bias such that we could not rely on anything he said.
do not believe Dr Wong’s reports demonstrate bias of that kind, or at
all. Any colourful or strong expression of his
views in his reports is not
evidence of bias such that we would not consider his reports at all. We
accepted his reports. In our
view any issue of alleged bias is best tested by
questions of a witness. We told Ms Mathur to pursue the issue with
Dr Wong, if
she wished, when he gave evidence. Dr Wong was not asked any
questions when he gave evidence, and no submissions were made concerning
The documents before us
34. We have already made reference to some of the
documents. To complete the picture the material before us from the Commission
of a folder of documents marked Exhibit A and containing various
documents tabbed 1 to 32. To this we added a supplementary statement
the Patient dated 27 August 2018, some documents provided by
Dr Hinsch, and a supplementary report of Dr Wong all of which were
placed at spare tabs in Exhibit A.
35. The Commission provided an
undated report of Dr Henry, being an earlier version of his report of
3 August 2018 (of Exhibit 1,
Tab 2), which we marked
36. The Commission also provided a print out of a search of
the Medicare Benefits Schedule showing a Medicare Benefits Schedule fee
$833.10 for item number 37821 being “hypospadias, distal 1 stage repair,
on a person 10 years of age or over”. This
is the item number
recorded by Dr Moore on his Fee Sheet (Exhibit A, Tab 29, page 30) for the
surgery to be carried out on the Patient.
37. On Dr Moore’s behalf
we received, without objection, a folder of documents (Exhibit 1)
containing at tab 1 a statement of
Dr Moore, at tab 2 a pleading
3 August 2018 and associated documents,
and at tab 4 a number of
references on behalf of Dr Moore. Dr Moore’s supplementary
statement of 31 August 2018 became Exhibit
Background to
the Complaint
38. The background to the Complaint is well set out in
Patient’s statement of 20 September 2016. In his words:
born with hypospadias, which is a defect of the penis where the urethral opening
is not at the head of the penis but in my case
behind the scrotum.
underwent surgical repair as an infant to relocate the urethral opening. At
that time the urethral opening was closer to [my] scrotum.
I had a hypospadias
repair when I was about one year old. The urethral opening was relocated about
one third of the way down the
shaft of the penis.
One of the recognized
effects of hypospadias is a shortening of the penis.
Two or three years ago I
decided to have another hypospadias repair.
I attended my local general
practitioner ... who gave me a referral to a urologist ... He recommended me
to Dr Hinsch.
I first saw Dr Hinsch on 23 June 2014. I
told Dr Hinsch that I wanted a hypospadias repair and the penile
augmentation to make the
penis longer. He told me that he could do the
hypospadias repair but not he augmentation. He also recommended that he could
my penis because it is slightly curved. He told me that this was the
only cosmetic surgery he could do. Dr Moore’s name came
specialist who could do the augmentation. I also told Dr Hinsch that when I
urinated some urine pooled in the urethra near
my testicles requiring me to
manually squeeze the residue urine out.
... at this point I was trying to
decide which doctor would do the hypospadias repair. Dr Hinsch told me
that he would do the hypospadias
repair, but it would need to be done in two
procedures. The first was a skin graft which would necessitate taking skin from
back of my ear or cheek to replace the damaged skin on my penis. Six months
later he would create the new urethral opening.
After that consultation I was
planning to see Dr Moore in order to get information about the next step
and if he could do the repair
and augmentation. At that stage I was informed
from his website that he was a pioneer in penile augmentation using a patented
39. The Patient’s supplementary statement of
27 August 2018 provides more detail and in relevant aspects is
consistent with
his first statement. And except in one significant aspect,
discussed below with respect to particular 3, the Patient’s oral
evidence was similarly consistent. These aspects of the matter are not
essentially in dispute and we accept what the Patient has
deal with each of the six components of the Complaint, the detail of which is
set out in the annexure and repeated briefly
below. In considering the evidence
we have applied the civil standard and decided matters on the balance of
probabilities, having
thought carefully about the matters in
contention.
41. Overall there was little dispute about the facts of what
happened. Were relevant we have identified a controversy. There were
differences in the views of Dr Moore to those of Dr Wong and
Dr Henry, mainly to do with risk and the manner of charging
42. Dr Moore, Dr Wong and Dr Henry all used technical
language in their statements, their reports or when giving evidence. Rather
than follow their lead, and because in the end the issues are not ultimately
technical, we will use the terminology that was used
by the Patient and we
expect is understood by him.
Particular 1 – failure to provide adequate
information
43. The substance of Particular 1 of the Complaint is that
Dr Moore did not provide adequate information about the failure rate of
particular secondary hypospadias surgery that he was proposing. What is the
44. The Patient says Dr Moore told him the risks were low or
extremely low, or at least that is what he understood from his discussions
Dr Moore. There is no doubt that Dr Moore believed that his success
rate for hypospadias repair was very good, amongst the
best. In his responses
to the Commission Dr Moore cited various statistics with respect to his
surgery, its success and its complications,
in order to demonstrate that on
every measure he was very good. He again makes the same point in his statement
of 7 August 2018.
45. Part of Particular 1 is that in talking of
his statistics he did not advise the Patient that his personal statistics had
peer reviewed. Nor did he say that the failure rate of the surgery at
the institute where the type of surgery was developed was
significantly higher
than the failure rate he was quoting. Dr Moore admits that he did not do
so. On the evidence Dr Moore spoke
to the Patient about percentage success
and failure rates, in order to demonstrate that he was a good surgeon by
comparison. In
his responses to the Commission Dr Moore said that the
development of a fistula was not a sign of a failure of the procedure, but
simply a known complication.
46. Both Dr Wong and Dr Henry said
there was little benefit in mentioning statistics and percentages, and for that
reason little criticism
could be made if they were provided. What was important
was how the risks of the surgery were discussed. In their view what
failed to do was speak to the Patient about risk in general terms.
47. Dr Wong stressed that it was crucially important to speak in a way
understood by the patient. This meant saying whether the procedure
risk or low risk, and to explain how those risks might affect the patient.
Dr Henry had the same view and we agree. Both
Dr Wong and
Dr Henry were of the view that the proposed surgery was high risk and that
Dr Moore failed in not making that clear to
the Patient.
view, a discussion of percentages and peer review statistics is not helpful for
patients and may well be misunderstood.
Percentages do not tell the whole
story. A stated 90% success rate might be seen a much better than a stated 10%
failure rate,
when they are both the same.
49. Dr Moore’s belief
that he was very good at what he did and his quoting of statistics to the
Patient to support his belief
supports the Patient’s belief that the
procedure would be low risk and that any complications could be easily managed.
Moore believed he was very good at what he did. In our view, the
Patient took Dr Moore’s expression of confidence in his own
as Dr Moore saying the procedure would be low risk. In our view it was
wrong of Dr Moore to consult with the Patient in
such a way that the
Patient would understand and come to accept that the procedure was low risk,
when it was anything but. Both Dr
Wong and Dr Henry said the proposed surgery
was high risk in that it was unlikely to correct the patient’s hypospadias
operation. The surgery had a higher risk of complications, such as a
fistula developing, which would require further surgery.
precise terms of Particular 1 was that Dr Moore was
‘recommending’ that the Patient undertake the surgery.
Mathur submitted that the process of the consultation should not be
considered as Dr Moore making a recommendation in the sense alleged
Commission. We do not consider that the Complaint can be read in such a limited
way or that it needs to be read in that way
in our consideration of whether
there was unsatisfactory professional conduct. Even if Dr Moore did not
use the word ‘recommend’,
the nature of the discussion was that
Dr Moore was explaining the surgery he was proposing to undertake and how
well he would be
able to do it.
51. Dr Moore was responsible for
ensuring that the Patient was given a full and complete explanation of the
nature of the risks involved
and needed to make sure the Patient understood the
risks. Dr Moore did not give that full and complete explanation. In
his emphasis on his success rates and how he was a better surgeon was
understood as meaning minimal or low risk. Based on what the
Patient was told
he expected that the repair would succeed in one operation with no greater risk
of complications than the two-stage
procedure. This was not the case, as the
risks of complications and complete failure (the wound coming apart) were
greater. In
speaking as he did to the Patient we are satisfied and conclude
that Dr Moore’s conduct in this regard amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct – in that it fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or
experience.
Particular 2 – inappropriate
recommendation
52. Dr Moore proposed that he perform “TIP
surgery” for the hypospadias repair. It is not necessary for us to
the surgery in detail or review the alternatives.
Dr Moore’s proposal was that he could do the repair in one stage,
one operation. This is to be contrasted with what Dr Hinsch had
proposed which involved two stages or two operations; the first
involving a skin
graft and the second involving the fashioning of a urethral tube. It was
Dr Moore’s view that he could make
use of available skin to fashion
the urethral tube, and do it all in the one operation.
53. The complaint in
Particular 2 is that because of the way he spoke to the Patient, and what he
said and did not say to the Patient,
led the Patient to choose to proceed with
Dr Moore when that might not have been the outcome if Dr Moore had
spoken in another way
and considered other issues.
54. It is said that
Dr Moore downplayed the surgical failure rate of the TIP surgery. This is
essentially a repeat of Particular
1 and we have already considered that
55. Dr Moore is also criticised for saying or implying that there
was a real risk he would not undertake the penile augmentation surgery
not also do the hypospadias repair. It was submitted on behalf of Dr Moore
that it was sensible for him to do both and
there was nothing wrong in him
making that proposal, especially given that the Patient was given a long time to
decide what he would
56. We think it is likely that Dr Moore’s
confidence in his own abilities was what prompted him to suggest he do both.
there a clinical benefit in him doing both? Dr Henry said he was not
sufficiently qualified to make a judgment on whether there
was some clinical
benefit in the same surgeon doing both operations. Dr Wong could not see
any necessity for the one surgeon to
57. Dr Moore may well
have felt more confident in doing both. We do not have any evidence to conclude
that he proposed that course
of action for any reason other than that he thought
it was in the Patient’s interests.
58. The Patient said he saw
Dr Moore to find out if he could undertake both procedures; the repair and
penile augmentation. He thought
it would be better if the one surgeon did both,
and he had that view before he spoke to Dr Moore. What attracted him to
was that he could do the penile augmentation surgery. It was for
that reason he was disposed towards Dr Moore doing both rather
than because
of anything Dr Moore said. What persuaded the Patient was that if
Dr Moore was involved there would only be two operations
- the repair and
the augmentation. But if Dr Hinsch did the repair there would be three
operations - the skin graft, and the urethral
construction, and then the
augmentation by another surgeon, most likely Dr Moore.
59. It was also
alleged that Dr Moore did not have adequate training and/or experience to
undertake the secondary hypospadias surgery
compared with a specialist
urologist. Both Dr Wong and Dr Henry said that Dr Moore did have
adequate training and experience to
undertake the surgery.
complaint also says that Dr Moore should have told the Patient that the
operation was unlikely to improve post-void dribbling.
Dr Moore admits
that failing. Both Dr Wong and Dr Henry said it was unlikely that any
surgery would solve that problem, so there
can be no basis to criticise
Dr Moore on this point in proposing the surgery that he did.
complaint is also that the proposed surgery was not suitable in any event
“given the condition of penile tissue”.
Quite some time was taken
up in discussion about whether some other surgery would have been preferable and
whether enough was known
in advance for a different decision to have been made.
62. Ultimately both Dr Wong and Dr Henry agreed that the surgical
technique undertaken by Dr Moore was reasonable. The difficulty
surgeon in making a decision about how to proceed depends on what was known
If there was enough penile tissue to
make a successful urethral tube then what Dr Moore proposed was the better
option. But it
might turn out that the quality of the available tissue would
not support the construction of a urethral tube as the skin would not
sufficient blood supply to establish adequate healing.
63. Dr Wong and
Dr Henry had somewhat different views about what could be discerned from
the photographs of the Patient’s penis
or gained from the cystoscopy
reports. They both agreed that even an examination of the Patient might not
provide better information.
What was really needed was to know what had
happened at the time of the first hypospadias repair when the Patient was about
year old, and whether there had been any subsequent surgeries or procedures
which may have affected the quality of the penile tissue.
Both agreed that the
surgery proposed by Dr Moore was a reasonable option on the available
information.
64. As it turned out the surgery undertaken by Dr Moore did
not succeed. The Patient has since had the first stage of the procedure
proposed by Dr Hinsch, and in a few months will undergo the second stage. In
retrospect, whilst the better decision would have been
the two-stage repair we
do not find any unsatisfactory professional conduct in this Particular.
Dr Moore’s decision may have
been less than ideal but it was not
significantly below the standard expected.
Particular 3 – liaison with
65. The substance of Particular 3 is that it was improper for
Dr Moore to proceed as he did. He should have responded to
Dr Hinsch’s
referral by doing no more than penile augmentation and
leaving it to Dr Hinsch to do the hypospadias repair.
Dr Hinsch’s referral
was in the following terms:
Thanks for seeing
[Patient] who had hypospadias repair as infant. He needs cordee correction and
hypospadias salvage which I’m
happy to do, but is desperate to have
lengthening and girth augmentation which I cannot offer. Thanks for your
66. The Commission is also critical that although Dr Moore saw the
Patient on 29 September 2014 it was not until 21 March 2015,
the Patient had booked the surgery, that Dr Moore wrote to
Dr Hinsch to say that he would be undertaking the hypospadias repair.
Dr Moore did not deny these facts, all of which are apparent from the
67. The complaint depends upon there being some obligation upon a
medical practitioner to whom a patient is referred to do no more
than what is
requested in the referral and to keep the referring doctor informed. Without
needing to analyse that issue we have
come to the conclusion that in the
circumstances of this case there was no unsatisfactory professional conduct on
68. The evidence is that Dr Moore asked the
Patient to return to Dr Hinsch before deciding what he wanted to do. When
giving evidence
the Patient said that he did go back and see Dr Hinsch. He
told him he had decided that he would have the repair done by Dr Moore.
Until the Patient gave that evidence during the hearing there was no information
to suggest he had returned to Dr Hinsch and told
him his intentions. That
he did return supports Dr Moore’s statement that he asked him to see
Dr Hinsch again before making
a decision.
69. Although the Patient
could not identify the date he spoke to Dr Hinsch it is likely it was after
he received a quotation for the
surgery by Dr Moore of 15 October 2014
and before he paid Dr Moore in March 2015 and booked the surgery. The
payment and the booking
most likely prompted Dr Moore to write to
Dr Hinsch. His letter opens with an apology for the late reply. He goes
on to give a
full report explaining what he proposes to do and the reasons for
taking that approach.
70. In these circumstances there is nothing improper
in the way Dr Moore responded to the referral from
Complaint 4 – use of stent
71. As part of the
surgery a stent had been placed within the reconstructed urethral tube to assist
in recovery, and the Patient was
provided with a supra-pubic catheter.
72. The complaint is that Dr Moore inappropriately required the Patient
the cease using the supra-pubic catheter, and to then urinate
through the stent
before it would be removed. Doing so would likely cause the Patient significant
discomfort and pain. The alternative
would have been to first remove the stent
and then require the Patient to void through the reconstructed urethra.
73. On the evidence there is no doubt that the Patient experienced
significant pain on the first few occasions when he tried to urinate.
and Dr Henry were both of the view that the Patient would have experienced
significant pain on urination whether the stent
had been left in place or had
first been removed. Significant pain on urination is to be expected after such
an operation, just
as much with a stent as without.
74. If any criticism was
to be made it is not in respect of requiring the Patient to urinate with the
stent still in place, but in
keeping the stent in place at all. Dr Henry
described the practice of leaving a stent in place as “somewhat old
75. It is the opinion of the Committee that it is not now
common practice to leave a stent in place until urethral urination is
established,
although a voiding stent is a practice used by some Paediatric
surgeons in infants. The stent needed to be in place for some of
the recovery
period, but there was no particular need to leave it in place until the Patient
was able to urinate. It is the operation
itself that leads to the pain on
initial urination not the stent being in place.
76. In this regard
Dr Moore’s action whilst somewhat unusual and not strictly necessary
does not amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct as it does not fall
significantly below the standard expected.
Particular 5 –
acknowledgment of failed surgery
77. Following the surgery leaks appeared
along the suture line of the reconstructed urethral tube and a fistula
developed. The Patient
was aware that a fistula was a possible complication.
Both Dr Hinsch and Dr Moore had told him a fistula was a possible
complication.
Even so, the operation was not as successful as the Patient had
78. The Commission says Dr Moore inappropriately failed to accept
and acknowledge to the Patient that the repair surgery had failed.
of that complaint the Commission relies upon the conversations that
Dr Moore had with the Patient and also on Dr Moore’s
responses to the
Commission during the investigation. We see a distinction between
Dr Moore’s responses to the Patient and
what he said to the
Commission.
79. From what we know of Dr Moore’s discussions with
the Patient on 21 and 23 April 2015 Dr Moore did not speak
in terms of
there being a failure of the surgery. In his view the leaks along
the suture line would heal. Dr Moore took the approach of reassurance,
recommended some exercises and proposed further surgery to deal with any
complications.
80. At the time of the follow up consultation on
26 May 2015 the Patient says that Dr Moore did not mention the
fistula that had developed
but spoke as if all was proceeding as expected. He
did say there would need to be another operation to complete the surgery. In
Dr Moore’s view the development of the fistula was an expected
complication, which he did not view as a failure of the surgery.
is no evidence that Dr Moore believed the surgery had failed but chose not
to say so to the Patient. Perhaps his approaches
to the Patient could have been
more thoughtful and caring, but it is not asserted that Dr Moore’s
treatment of the Patient
in this regard was improper or fell significantly below
the standard reasonably expected.
82. In our view the communications of
Dr Moore to the Commission do not support the Complaint. Some of the
correspondence points
to a debate about whether the development of a known
complication, the fistula, can be said to be a failure. But in some parts and
in his statistics Dr Moore does treat the development of a fistula as a
83. At that time of the last consultation there remained a skin
bridge at the meatus but that fell apart about two weeks later. The
Patient was
then essentially back in the position he was before the surgery. The Patient
lost confidence in Dr Moore and he did
not return to him. There is no
evidence to show what if any knowledge Dr Moore had about what happened to
the Patient after that
last consultation.
84. In Dr Wong’s view
the surgery failed because there was insufficient original skin within the
urethral plate to successfully
construct the urethral tube using the method
undertaken by Dr Moore. In retrospect because the original plate no longer
there was insufficient blood supply to create and maintain the urethral
tube and that is why the surgery eventually failed.
85. As mentioned above he
has since commenced the surgery proposed by Dr Hinsch, has had the skin
graft and will soon have the second
stage of the repair.
86. In his responses
to the Commission Dr Moore criticises the Patient and says that it is
possible or likely that the fistula developed
through the Patient picking at the
wound. He says that when he arrived to visit the Patient in hospital he found
him “fiddling”
with the wound. The Patient strongly denies he did
any such thing and says he was very careful to follow all the instructions of
Dr Moore and the nursing staff. The Patient says he did remove dried blood
from locations away from the wound but did not touch
the wound at all. We
accept the Patient’s evidence on this point.
87. At the same time we
accept that Dr Moore was genuinely of the view that the Patient “has
contributed to the occurrence of
his fistula” as he says in his letter of
10 November 2015 (Exhibit A, tab 21, page 7). That he
should state so, and in strong
terms, cannot be taken as an inappropriate
failure to acknowledge the surgery had failed. Dr Moore is explaining his
There is no evidence that he knew when he was responding to the
Commission that the surgery had failed in a way that he identified
as a failure.
He thought the surgery had been successful and the development of the fistula
was a known complication that he believed
was caused by the Patient’s own
actions. There is no evidence that he did not believe what he was saying, or he
was not genuine.
88. We do not accept that Dr Moore’s responses to
the Commission could be called improper for the reason that he was not
acknowledging
failure or that he was blaming the Patient. He genuinely believed
there had not been a failure and he had some basis for his opinion.
same time he believed that the Patient may well have been at fault. In these
circumstances it is not improper for Dr
Moore to have argued his case in
response to the Commission’s investigation.
89. The correspondence from
the Commission did inform Dr Moore that his response might be provided to
the Patient. We do not know
if Dr Moore was conscious of that possibility
when he responded but even if he was that does not change our view. It was open
him to respond as he thought best and in the particular circumstances of this
case we do not conclude it was improper of him to do
Particular 6 –
excessive fee and items claimed
90. The Commission complains that
Dr Moore inappropriately charged the Patent for the surgery in that the
overall fee was excessive
and Dr Moore wrongly claimed certain items. The
Commission submitted Dr Moore’ conduct was improper and relied upon
s139B(1)(l)
of the National Law which defines unsatisfactory professional
conduct to include:
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice or purported practice of medicine.
91. It was not contested that Dr Moore’s conduct
in charging for his services related to the practice of medicine, and that
our view. What is unethical conduct and what is improper conduct may well
overlap. The words are not synonymous and each has
it’s own meaning and
operation. Although there was discussion about whether the alleged conduct could
be unethical as being
contrary to the ethics of the profession, our main
consideration was whether any of the conduct was “improper”.
92. We do not take improper to mean all conduct that is not proper. The word
is used in the context of defining what is unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
In deciding if the conduct was improper we are to have regard to the objectives
and guiding principles of
the National Law. The word “improper” is
to be understood in that context. What is improper conduct connotes an aspect
of wrongness, or something that is incorrect, or is abnormal, or is something
that cannot be justified or defended as conduct that
is within what is fairly
expected of a practitioner within the profession.
93. The allegation in
Particular 6 is that Dr Moore’s overall fee was excessive and that
Dr More inappropriately included charges
for a Surgical Assistant, Extra
Costs, and a Medical Indemnity Insurance Levy when those items did not arise.
We deal with the overall
fee and each item in turn.
Was Dr Moore’s
overall fee for the surgery improper or unethical?
94. The cost of the
surgery was set out in a Fee Sheet dated 15 October 2014 (Exhibit A,
tab 29, page 30), which Dr Moore gave to
the patient at about
that time. A de-identified version is Attachment B. Dr Moore’s
provided another Fee Sheet on 9 March
2015 in similar terms with no
relevant differences. Both Fee Sheets record $21,050 as the Dr Colin Moore
Payment, and this is the
amount the Patient paid Dr Moore.
$21,050 is the total of items 1, 2, 3 and 6, being:
1 Dr Moore $12,000
Surgical Assistant $1,000
3 Extra Costs $6050
6 Medical Indemnity
Insurance Levy $2,000
96. The Patient paid item 4 and 5 direct to the
hospital. For the reasons discussed below when considering each item, we have
the matter on the basis that Dr Moore’s fee for
undertaking the surgery was $21,050. This was the amount that Dr Moore
the Patient pay to him before he would undertake the surgery. We do
not think it can be said that Dr Moore’s fee was only
97. Dr Moore identified the procedure as Hypospadias Salvage
with number 37821. That number corresponds to the item number under
Medicare Benefits Schedule for HYPOSPADIAS, distal, 1 stage repair, on a person
10 years of age or older (Exhibit C) and a fee
of $833.10. The parties
agreed that in 2015 the AMA recommended fee for the procedure was $1,925.00.
98. Dr Moore’s fee was 25 times the MBS fee and 10 times the AMA
recommended fee. Whether or not his fee can be described as
excessive in the
words of the Complaint, the question for us is whether the charge was improper
within the meaning of s139B(1)(l)
of the National Law?
99. The Medical Board
of Australia’s Good Medical Practice does not specifically deal with the
issue other than to require that
doctors must be honest and transparent in their
financial arrangements with patients, and should not exploit a patient’s
vulnerability
or lack of medical knowledge when providing or recommending
treatment or services.
100. It is not only the amount that is relevant to the
consideration of whether the fee was improper but also the circumstances in
which the fee was charged. There are a number of general matters that are
relevant as well as the particular circumstances of this
(a) As a general proposition practitioners are able to set
their own fees;
(b) There is no regulatory system of capping fees;
profession itself has not set a fee for this procedure;
(d) The Patient
consulted Dr Moore knowing he would be charged a fee by
(e) The Patient was aware that if he waited the surgery would
most likely covered by his private health insurance after a qualifying
(f) The Patient knew that as a resident of Queensland Dr Hinsch
could do the surgery (the two stage surgery) free of charge in a public
hospital, although after a waiting period;
(g) Dr Moore gave the Patient
the Fee Sheet disclosing the payment of $21,050.00;
(h) The Patient took into
account that fee in deciding to have Dr Moore undertake the
(i) When the Patient told Dr Moore he wished to proceed he was
provided with an updated Fee Sheet of 9 March 2015 (Exhibit A,
29, page 34) which confirmed the payment of $21,050.00 to
(j) The Patient paid that amount in advance a week or so later
in advance of the surgery;
(k) The Patient does not complain of what might be
called “sales pressure”. His main concern was the penile
augmentation
surgery and that is why he consulted Dr Moore;
Patient preferred Dr Moore’s approach of one operation for the repair
rather than two as proposed by Dr Hinsch;
(m) Dr Moore expressed a
preference for doing both the repair and augmentation surgeries. However, we do
not find he was motivated
to do so in order to unnecessarily oblige the Patient
to pay the fee as a precondition for him undertaking the augmentation
(n) The Patient’s comments about the fee arise in the context
of the surgery not being successful, rather than the amount
(o) Although the patient’s mother took out bank loan to pay the
fee there is no evidence the Dr Moore was aware of the Patient’s
financial position or should have been aware of any hardship that might arise in
paying the fee; and
(p) Dr Henry observed that about 5% of surgeons
regularly and often charged what might be described as similarly
fees” when compared to their colleagues, the Medical
Benefit Schedule fee, and the AMA recommended amount, and that even though
is known there is no general view that doing so is improper.
101. Taking account of all the matters we have come to the
conclusion that the fee of $21,050 charged by Dr Moore was not improper
conduct within the meaning of s139B(1)(l) of the National Law, nor was it
unethical. Accordingly, we make no finding of unsatisfactory
professional
conduct as this point.
102. Particular 5 also concerns the way in which
Dr Moore expressed his fee by referring to Surgical Assistant, Extra Costs
and Medical
Indemnity Insurance levy. When asked by the Commission why he did
so, he said he wanted his patients to “know what they are
paying for &
where possible why they are paying that fee” (Exhibit A, tab 26,
page 1). From that statement we conclude
that presenting his fee in the
way that he did was a conscious decision on his behalf, and that he did so in a
similar way to all
his surgical patients.
103. The Commission complains that
the fee sheet demonstrates improper conduct on behalf of Dr Moore for at
least these reasons:
(a) there is an amount of $6,050.00 for “Extra
Costs” without specification;
(b) there is a fee for a surgical
assistant when there was no surgical assistant; and
(c) the fee
sheet includes an amount of $2,000.00 for what is described as a “Medical
Indemnity Insurance Levy”.
104. The Commission also submitted that presenting these
items separately from the $12,000 for Dr Moore, suggests that the three
were not for Dr Moore’s benefit, when that is not the case.
He uses those amounts to defray his expenses. Doing so misrepresents
confuses the position, a misrepresentation that is compounded by the insertion
of items 4 and 5 in the list, amounts which are
paid to the hospital.
his report of 20 January 2017 (Exhibit A, tab 11,
page 5) Dr Wong had queried these items being included in the Fee
Dr Moore responded in his letter of 19 February 2017
(Exhibit A, tab 26, referred to above), and gave particular
justifications for
106. In his undated report ((Exhibit B)
Dr Henry said he was critical of these billing arrangements saying the
charge of an assistant’s
fee with no obvious assistant, and charging for
disposables which are not itemised and the Medical Indemnity fee was also
107. We deal with each item separately.
108. The charge for the surgical assistant was made on the basis
that there would be a surgical assistant. The hospital notes do
not record a
surgical assistant. Was there a surgical assistant?
109. In his response to
the Commission Dr Moore does say that he works with assistants and he must
have been remiss not to enter the
particular registrar’s name on the
operation record. He went on the say that because of the passage of time (about
he was unable to remember the particular registrar’s name but
he assured the Commission that a registrar was present and was
paid. In that
response Dr Moore did not state that he was unable to check his records to
confirm what he said, or that there are
no records that he could check.
110. We were provided with the clinical notes from the hospital
(Exhibit A, tab 31). There is nothing in those records to suggest
that there was an assistant present during the operation. The hospital
operation notes are a contemporaneous record. At page 44
of Tab 31 is a copy of
the Operating Room Registered Nurses Report, a printed form. It has a hand
written entry of Dr Moore’s
name under the space for Surgical
Consultant. There are printed spaces for Surgeon 1, Surgeon 2,
Assistant 1 or Assistant 2. No
names are recorded in those spaces,
but in each space a dash has been inserted. To us that is strong evidence that
there was no assistant
present during the operation. We accept the
contemporaneous record on this point – there was no surgical assistant.
Medical Insurance Indemnity Levy
111. Dr Moore explained that the
$2,000.00 for insurance was calculated by dividing his medical indemnity
insurance premium for the
year by the number of operations performed in the
previous year. On this explanation the $2,000 had no particular connection to
the Patient’s surgery. Dr Moore had already paid his insurance for
the year, and he would pay the same amount whether he undertook
the operation or
112. We do not know whether Dr Moore undertook more or fewer
operations than the last year. Dr Moore did not say whether he made
adjustments at the end of the year if it turned out he did more operations, or
if he seeks recovery from patients if he did fewer.
We do not mention these
points to suggest that it would be appropriate to proceed in that manner but
only to examine the explanation
used to justify the specification of the $2,000
on the Fee Sheet.
113. Dr Moore refers to the item as the
“Medical Indemnity Insurance Levy”. There is no evidence that there
of that kind imposed upon Dr Moore. The use of the terms
suggests there is some particular regulatory requirement to recover this
specific amount from the Patient. We conclude there was no such levy.
114. Dr Moore says the $6,050 “is the depreciation of the
value of instruments from the previous financial year divided by the
operations performed that year & it applies to each & every operation
that I perform in the ensuing year”
(Exhibit A, tab 26,
page 2). On this explanation there is no direct connection with the
Patient’s surgery in the current year.
115. The Fee Sheet allocates the
$6,050.00 to “Extra Costs. (E.g. Corsets, implants. Etc.)”.
Dr Moore says (Exhibit A,
tab 26, page 2) “no such
additional items were required for [the Patient] hence the base fee of
$6,050.00”. So what
is described as a fee for Extra Costs is in reality a
“base fee.” We conclude there were no Extra Costs.
observations on the Fee Sheet
116. The Fee Sheet includes amount for the
anaesthetic fee and hospital fee mixed within the items and amounts to be paid
to Dr Moore.
The Fee Sheet does give a clear total of the fees to be paid.
But in doing so it gives the clear impression ta the only amount that
Dr Moore’s benefit is the $12,000 recorded against his name.
117. The separate listing of the other items implies that the other items
are not for his benefit, but are amounts to be paid away;
to a surgical
assistant, for extra costs, and for meet a levy. The presentation of the Fee
Sheet in this way and the description
of the items were decisions of
Was the presentation of the items
118. Dr Moore’s justification suggests he was being
transparent. When speaking of the levy he says (Exhibit, Tab 26,
Certainly I could have lost that figure in my surgical fee by increasing
that fee by $2,000.00. However I prefer my patients to know
what they are
paying for & where possible why they are paying for that fee.
119. In our
view it is not transparency but rather confusion. Dr Moore, like every
practitioner, has costs to meet in undertaking
his practice. Those costs are
for the practitioner. To explain a fee by identifying the practitioner’s
expenses in providing
the service is not one of transparency but rather sends a
message that the fee to the surgeon is less than it appears. Presenting
estimates in this way makes comparisons with other surgeons difficult: is the
fee $12,000 or $21,050?
120. The justifications given by Dr Moore have no
necessary connection to the service for which the Patient was paying.
Additionally,
in this particular case there was no surgical assistant, there
were no extra costs and there was no Medical Indemnity Insurance Levy.
Fee Sheet provided by Dr Moore the Patient was paying for services that
were not provided.
121. It is important that patients be told what they are
to be charged for the service being provided by the practitioner. They can
expect to be informed in a way they can understand. It is not up to a patient
to familiarise themselves with the financial arrangements
of the practitioner,
or be put to task of judging whether those arrangements are reasonable. The
patient is reliant on the practitioner,
and is in a weaker position as a
consequence. The discussion of the fee cannot be separated from the special
nature of the doctor
patient relationship. It is up to the practitioner to
present the information in a clear and open way. It is reasonable for a
practitioner
to identify external costs that arise specifically from the
particular service being provided to that patient, but that is not what
Dr Moore did. Dr Moore failed to appreciate the interests of the
Patient; he put his interests first.
122. We have found that Dr Moore
charged $9,050 for three items that he did not incur. Dr Moore believed
there was an assistant surgeon,
but on the evidence that is incorrect. There
were no extra costs. Dr Moore was not subject to any Medical Indemnity
Levy. It is improper to seek to justify these two amounts by
reference to calculation of other expenses, particularly as those expenses
not arise from the provision of the service. The amount of $9.050 was a fee for
no service.
123. Given our findings it might be observed in the words of
Good Medical Practice that it would be “honest and transparent”
Dr Moore return $9,050 to the Patient. A failure to do so, in the absence
of special reasons, could well be characterised as
amounting to improper
conduct. That issue is not before us as part of the Complaint but it may have
relevance to the exercise of
our powers.
124. That issue to one side, we
have come to the conclusion that Dr Moore’s conduct in setting out
the Fee Sheet as he did,
was improper conduct relating to his practice of
medicine, and amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Findings and
exercise of powers
125. We find that the subject-matter of the Complaint as
contained in Particular 1 and Particular 6 has been proved. We now
whether we should exercise any powers having regard to the objectives
and guiding principles of the National Law and giving paramount
consideration to
the protection of the health and safety of the public.
126. As mentioned
earlier Dr Moore felt he was unable to attend the hearing or give evidence.
We have not had the benefit of hearing
from him so that we might better
understand his particular circumstances and how he might reflect upon his
conduct. We have the
benefit of his responses to the Commission and his
statements. Dr Moore says that he ceased all surgery on
30 June 2018 and intends
to retire from practice on
30 June 2019. In the meantime he consults mainly by way of follow up
of his previous surgical patients.
Dr Moore’s referees speak highly
of him, although those references were sought on the basis that Dr Moore
denied the Complaint.
127. Even though Dr Moore will soon cease
practice it is important for us to demonstrate the public interest in expressing
the standards
to be expected of the profession.
128. We reprimand
Dr Moore for his failure to adequately explain the risks of the surgery to
be undertaken by the Patient. His confidence
in wanting to emphasise his own
competency and success got in the way of his obligation to take care that the
Patient had a full
and complete understanding of the risks involved.
issue the reprimand to bring home to Dr Moore the flaws in his conduct and
to underscore what the public can expect of the
profession.
130. Although it
is unlikely that Dr Moore will undertake this kind of surgery again, on
adults or children, we will impose a condition
that would require Dr Moore
to liaise with a urologist before recommending or undertaking secondary
hypospadias repair. The condition
protects the public and expresses the
protection of the public.
131. We now turn to considering the public interest
with respect to our finding that Dr Moore was guilty of improper conduct in
manner of his presenting his fees.
132. Section 148C of the National
Law allows us to impose a fine upon us finding that Dr Moore has been
guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, and that we are satisfied there
is no other order, or combination of orders, that is appropriate in the public
In considering a fine we appreciate the need for specific and general
deterrence.
133. We do not have any evidence of Dr Moore’s current
practice in charging his fees. We do not have the benefit of hearing
Dr Moore, particularly as to what his attitude might be to returning part
of his fee to the Patient were we to find against
him. What we do know is that
Dr Moore sought to justify his conduct in relation to the Fee Sheet even
after being made aware of
Dr Wong’s criticisms and being questioned
by the Commission.
134. We do not think a reprimand would have any utility
given Dr Moore’s apparent attitude. Nor do we think it would
or practical to deal with the matter by way of Dr Moore taking
advice in relation to management of his practice. In our view the
exercise of
any of the powers set out in s146B would not bring home to Dr Moore the
impropriety of his conduct nor would they demonstrate
to the profession the
importance of protecting the public interest: that is best done by imposing a
135. We may impose a fine of an amount of not more than 50 penalty
units. We are of the view that Dr Moore’s conduct was serious
not the most egregious. In our view a mid range of 25 penalty units, being
an amount of $2,750.00 is appropriate in the circumstances,
to be paid to the
Medical Council of NSW on or before 1 November 2018.
Exercise of
136. We reprimand Dr Colin Campbell Marshall Moore.
impose the following conditions of Dr Moore’s registration:
(a) Before recommending or undertaking secondary hypospadias
repair the practitioner must obtain a written second opinion from a urologist
his plan of management, provide a copy to the Medical Council of NSW, and
document the second opinion in the patient’s clinical
file, including
details of:
(i) the name of the urologist;
(ii) what the practitioner
has described to the urologist as his plan of management and
(iii) the urologist’s second opinion;
urologist’s opinion of risks and complications.
(b) To authorise and consent to any exchange of information
between the Medical Council of NSW, the urologist and Medicare Australia
purpose of monitoring compliance with this condition.
138. By order we impose a fine of $2,750.00 (50 penalty
units) payable to the Medical Council of NSW on or before 1 November
Dr Moore and the Health Care Complaints Commission may appeal this decision
in accordance with section 158 of the National Law and
the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act, within 28 days of the date of these written
In accordance with section 163 of the National Law the Medical Council of NSW
is the appropriate review body for the order made under
section 146B of the
National Law. Should Dr Moore’s principal place of practice be anywhere
other than NSW at the time of
seeking a review of the condition, Dr Moore may
make an application for review to the National Board.
Distribution of decision
We provide a copy of this written
statement of our decision to Dr Moore, the Commission, Patient A and the
National Board.
_________________________
Chairperson
5 October 2018
Attachment A
AMENDED COMPLAINT
Dr Colin Campbell Marshall Moore,
being a medical practitioner
registered under the
National Law
(“the practitioner”), Is
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a) and/or
section 139B(1)(l)
National Law
in that the practitioner
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the
practice of medicine is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of medicine.
Each of the particulars of this Complaint in itself justifies a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. In the alternative,
when two or more of
the particulars are taken together, a finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct is justified.
Background to Complaint
The practitioner obtained his MBBS in 1964. He became a Fellow of
the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (in Paediatric Surgery)
in 1971 and a
Fellow of the Australasian College of Cosmetic Surgery in 1999.
A (DOB: July 1992) had undergone primary hypospadias repair as a child and in
September 2014 as an adult was considering secondary
hypospadias repair and
penile augmentation. On 2 September 2014, Patient A saw urologist Dr Roger
Hinsch in relation to the appearance
of his hypospadias repair and for penile
augmentation. Dr Hinsch provided Patient A with a referral letter to the
practitioner for
penile augmentation.
PARTICULARS
29 September 2014 Patient A consulted the practitioner in his rooms at Bondi
Junction. The practitioner recommended to Patient
A that he could perform a form
of hypospadias repair known as the Tubularised Incised Plate Urethroplastry
surgery which used the
‘Snodgrass manoeuvre’ (the
) in addition to penile augmentation. In his discussions with
Patient A the practitioner failed to provide adequate information to
informed Patient A that his failure rate for TIP surgery was extremely low or
words to similar effect;
practitioner did not mention to Patient A that the peer reviewed failure rate
for a secondary repair at the institute where the
TIP surgery was invented was
did not inform Patient A that his failure rate of 11% was not peer reviewed or
provide adequate information to Patient A about
the limitations of his quoted
failure rate compared to the higher rate in the medical literature.
29 September 2014, at the practitioner’s consultation with Patient A he
recommended to Patient A that he perform TIP surgery.
The practitioner’s
recommendation was inappropriate in that:
practitioner downplayed the surgical failure rate of the TIP surgery as set out
in particular 1; and/or
practitioner inappropriately told Patient A that he would not or probably would
not undertake the penile augmentation if the hypospadias
repair was undertaken
by the urologist, in circumstances where penile augmentation would not interfere
with a distal urethral repair;
practitioner did not have adequate training and/or experience to undertake
Patient A’s secondary hypospadias surgery compared
to a specialist
urologist, and he did not inform Patient A of this;
practitioner did not inform Patient A that hypospadias surgery was unlikely to
improve post-void dribbling;
hypospadias surgery the practitioner recommended was not suitable for Patient
A’s case given the primary repair was distal
and was in poor condition,
and given the condition of the penile
practitioner acted improperly or unethically in that on 29 September 2014 he
recommended to Patient A that he perform the hypospadias
repair in circumstances
urologist’s referral of Patient A to the practitioner was only for penile
augmentation and not for hypospadias repair;
practitioner did not write to the urologist after 29 September 2014, until 21
March 2015 and after he had booked Patient A into
or about 20 April 2015, the practitioner inappropriately required Patient A to
void exclusively from a urethral stent in circumstances
where this would likely
cause Patient A significant discomfort or pain on voiding.
Patient A’s hypospadias surgery on 8 April 2015, Patient A developed a
fistula (confirmed after urethroscopy on 23 April
2015) and the wound broke
down. The practitioner inappropriately failed to accept and to acknowledge to
Patient A that his repair
surgery had failed in that:
constructed glans meatus
a1) on or about
26 May 2015 he instructed Patient A to carry out self-dilation of the
constructed glans meatus;
a2) he failed to have a detailed discussion with Patient A about the failure
of the operation on or around 23 April 2015;
a3) he failed to have a detailed discussion with Patient A about the failure
of the operation on or around 26 May 2015;
leaks on the suture line would go away;
his letter to the Health Care Complaints Commission dated 10 November 2015, the
practitioner failed to adequately acknowledge that
Patient A’s fistula
formation was a failure of his operation;
his letter to the Health Care Complaints Commission dated 10 November 2015, the
practitioner stated that his operation site had
not failed;
his letter to the Health Care Complaints Commission dated 10 November 2015, the
practitioner stated or suggested that that the
patient’s refusal at times
of hygiene care and other non-compliance may have contributed to the fistula
practitioner inappropriately charged Patient A for his surgery on 8 April 2015
overall fee for a hypospadias repair ($21,050) was excessive;
charged Patient A a fee of $6050 for “extra costs”, without
itemisation and where the hospital charges separately for
consumables;
charged Patient A for an assistant’s fee when there was no assistant
recorded for the operation;
charged Patient A for his medical indemnity insurance.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (765 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter