URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/275.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gazecki v Mid Coast Council [2025] NSWCATAD 275; (12 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Gazecki v Mid Coast Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 275
Hearing Date(s):
28 August 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
R Block, Senior Member
(1) Pursuant to s 64 of the CAT Act, the Tribunal orders that no record of
the confidential session, nor of the Confidential Bundle,
is to be disclosed or
released to either the Applicant or to the public.
(2) Noting that some of
the material in Item 1 was released to the Applicant prior to the hearing, the
decision under review is otherwise
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - administrative review - government information -
access application - enforceable right to access government
information - public
interest considerations for disclosure - public interest considerations against
disclosure - legal professional
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Evidence Act 1995
Government Information (Public
Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
AEZ v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2013] NSWADT 90
Capital 4A Pty Ltd as trustee for the Archer Capital Trust 4A v Sage Group PLS
(No 2) [2013]
Attorney-General’s Department v Cockcroft
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR
Bailey v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
[2023] NSWCATAP 103
Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police Force v Camilleri
[2013] NSWADT
Commissioner of Policy, NSW Police Force v Barrett
[2015] NSWCATAP
Douglas v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
[2022] NSWCATAD 152
Fahey v NSW
Officer of Liquor, Gaming and Racing
[2012] NSWADT 181
Leech v Sydney Water
Corporation
[2010] NSWADT 298
Luxford v Department of Education and
Communities
[2016] NSWCATAD 118
Snape v Commissioner of Police No 2
NSWCATAP 244
Taylor v Destination NSW
[2017] NSWCATAD 272
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
John Gazecki (Applicant)
Mid Coast Council (Respondent)
Representation:
Applicant (Self-Represented)
Local Government Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00263488
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
material filed by the Respondent on a confidential basis, the evidence given in
private before the Tribunal and the record of
that part of the proceedings
conducted in private pursuant to
is not to be released to either the
Applicant or to the public.
REASONS FOR DECISION
John Gazecki (the
) seeks access to information held by Mid
Coast Council (the
) in relation to his interactions and
dispute with the Respondent regarding the dams on his rural property located in
the mid north
coast region (the Property).
matter has a lengthy history. On 15 December 2023 and 2 May 2024 the Applicant
made requests to the Respondent seeking access
to information per
Government Information (Public Access) Act
). The Applicant also filed a Notice to Produce on
17 January 2025 in relation to proceedings on foot in the Land and Environment
) between the parties, such notice being subsequently withdrawn
on 24 January 2025.
have been various decisions made by the Respondent in response to the access
request. The Applicant sought administrative review
of the first decision in
which the Respondent refused to deal with the application pursuant to ss
60(1)(b) and (e) of the GIPA Act.
Other decisions have been made while the
matter has been before the Tribunal, including a new decision following remittal
matter by the Tribunal to the Respondent for reconsideration. During this
process, the Applicant has advised the Respondent that
he does not press certain
items contained in his access request. As a result of the various decisions made
by the Respondent, the
Applicant has been provided with access to some
information but has been refused access to other information.
most recent decision of the Respondent is the one dated 6 May 2025, and that is
the decision, which is the subject of this review,
as modified by the
Applicant’s decision not to press access to some
Tribunal has jurisdiction to review an administratively reviewable decision
pursuant to s 55 of the
Administrative Decisions Review
). The decision to refuse to deal
with an access application is a reviewable decision by an agency in accordance
with s 80(c) of the
GIPA Act. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine this
application pursuant to s 100 of the GIPA Act.
determination
issue in these proceedings is whether the Respondent’s decision of 6 May
) was correct and preferable and should be affirmed in
relation to the remaining 16 items (of the original 39 items) pressed by the
information which continued to be sought by the Applicant as at the date of the
hearing in relation to this application comprised
the following items:
(a) Copies of any digital carrier device messages, texts, notes, file-notes,
internal memorandum, emails (internal and external)
and letters (including any
drafts), regarding the Property (known as Item 1);
(b) Copy of any video, film or digital footage taken of any interview or
discussion, with any person, in relation to the Property,
between 1 October 2021
and the date of the schedule (known as Item 6);
(c) Copy of any invoice regarding costs Council has incurred in relation to the
Property, between 1 October 2021 and the date of
the schedule, If privilege is
claimed regarding any such invoices, then a total of all invoices can be
provided instead (known as
(d) Copy of any other document (including any drafts) regarding the Property
between 1 October 2021 and the date of the schedule
(known as Item 9);
(e) Copy of any Notice of Intention to issue Orders, issued by Council pursuant
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(Notice of Intention)
between 3 May 2017 and the date of the schedule, regarding any dam or earthworks
in relation to any other Myall
River properties (known as Item 15);
(f) Copy of any Notice of Intention issued between 3 May 2017 and the date of
the schedule regarding any dam in relation to the region
administered by Council
(known as Item 16);
(g) Copy of any Orders issued by Council in relation to dams, between 3 May 2017
and the date of the schedule, pursuant to the Environmental
and Planning
Assessment Act 1979 (Orders) within the region administered by Council (known as
(h) Copy of any Development Applications relating to dams, lodged with Council,
between 3 May 2017 and the date of the schedule,
within the region administered
by Council (known as Item 21);
(i) Copy of any video footage, digital carrier device messages, texts, notes,
file-notes, internal memorandum, emails (internal and
external), letters and
research material (including any drafts, clippings or internet content saved or
collected) regarding John
Gazecki between 1 October 2021 and the date of the
schedule (known as Items 29-30);
(j) Copy of any complaint made against a named Senior Compliance Officer,
employed by Council (de-identified in this decision as
) between 3 May
2017 and the date of the schedule (known as Item 31);
(k) A copy of AF’s phone records, between 1 October 2021 and the date of
the schedule showing the time of call, whether the
call was made or received,
and duration of each such call pertaining the numbers and persons (de-identified
in this decision as ND,
JD, SF) (known as Item 34);
(l) A copy of AF’s browsing history featuring searches for John Gazecki or
Janek Gazecki pertaining to any electronic work
device, including but not
limited to mobile phone, computer or iPad for the period 1 October 2021 to 15
December 2023 (known as Item
(m) The browsing history pertaining to any electronic work device including but
not limited to mobile phone, computer or iPad of
any Council employee carrying
out searches on behalf of or for AF regarding John Gazecki or Janek Gazecki
(known as Item 37);
(n) A copy of the leave application lodged by AF relating to any months between
November 2023 to January 2024 inclusive (known as
Item 38); and
(o) A copy of any document which records the period of leave taken by AF which
includes any months between November 2023 and January
2024 inclusive (known as
the course of the hearing, the parties agreed that the Respondent can provide
copies of invoices, redacted except with regard
to the quantum of such invoices.
Accordingly, Item 8 (detailed in [7](c)) is considered to be settled.
the course of the hearing, the Applicant accepted that the Respondent’s
system does not have the requisite automation
or functionality to conduct
targeted searches of the nature sought per Items 15, 16, 18 and 21 (detailed at
[7] (e)-(h) herein).
Accordingly, these items are considered to be
Material before the Tribunal
material before the Tribunal included submissions, affidavits and correspondence
by both parties.
Applicant submitted a bundle of documents which included written submissions,
grounds for review, photographs and selected correspondence
between the
Respondent submitted a bundle of documents which included their written
submissions, and a number of sworn or affirmed affidavits,
including two
statements dated 16 August 2024 and 23 June 2025 affirmed by Ms K Duggan who is
one of the Respondent’s Governance
Coordinators, and two statements dated
2 September 2024 and 24 June 2025 affirmed by Mr B Newman, who is the
Respondent’s other
Governance Coordinator.
Information Commissioner provided submissions dated 11 December 2024 but did not
appear at the hearing.
parties made oral submissions at the hearing, and one witness, Ms Duggan, gave
evidence and was cross-examined by the Applicant.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
), a confidential session was held in the absence of the Applicant and
the public. The confidential session gave the Tribunal an opportunity
the material provided in confidence by the Respondent (the
Confidential
), in the presence of the Respondent. During that confidential session
the Respondent provided the Tribunal with an unredacted copy
of the identified
documents and each of the documents was considered by reference to the table
to s 14 of the GIPA Act.
Applicant submitted his expectation that the Tribunal should utilise the
confidential session to assess and determine whether
the material included any
statements by any third party informant of the Respondent, and if so, whether
any such statements were
‘fantastical’ or ‘driven by
malice’. The Tribunal notes that the purpose of the confidential session
solely to ascertain whether disclosure was properly refused pursuant to the
applicable law.
Legislative Framework
105 of the GIPA Act places the onus on the Respondent to satisfy the Tribunal
that its Decision was justified. The function
of the Tribunal is to hear the
matter de novo and to reach a view itself, unrestrained by the view taken by the
primary decision-maker.
objects of the GIPA Act as set out in s 3 are to open government to the public.
This is done by authorising and encouraging the
proactive release of information
by agencies and by giving members of the public an enforceable right to access
government information.
Access to government information is to be restricted
only when there is an overriding public interest against disclosure.
was not disputed that the information the subject of this application is
government information which is held by an agency as per
s 4(1) of the GIPA
Section 60 of
the GIPA Act sets out the circumstances in which an agency can refuse to
deal with an application for access and provides:
(1) An agency may refuse to deal with an access application (in whole or
in part) for any of the following reasons (and for no other
(a) dealing with the application would require an unreasonable and
substantial diversion of the agency’s resources,
(b) the agency has already decided a previous application for the
information concerned (or information that is substantially the
same as that
information) made by the applicant and there are no reasonable grounds for
believing that the agency would make a different
decision on the
application...
(e) the agency reasonably believes the applicant, or a person acting in concert
with the applicant, is – (i) a party to current
proceedings before a
court; and (ii) able to apply to that court for the information...
(3A) In deciding whether dealing with an application would require an
unreasonable and substantial diversion of an agency’s
resources, the
agency may, without limitation, take into account the following
considerations—
(a) the estimated volume of information involved in the request,
(b) the agency’s size and resources,
(c) the decision period under section 57.
(3B) Any consideration under subsection (3A) must, on balance,
(a) the general public interest in favour of the disclosure
of government information, and
(b) the demonstrable importance of the information to the applicant,
including whether the information—
(i) is personal information that relates to the applicant, or
(ii) could assist the applicant in exercising any rights under any
Act or law.
(4) Before refusing to deal with an access application because dealing
with it would require an unreasonable and substantial diversion
agency’s resources, the agency must give the applicant a reasonable
opportunity to amend the application. The period
within which the application is
required to be decided stops running while the applicant is being given an
opportunity to amend the
application.
is a presumption in favour of the disclosure of government information unless
there is an “overriding public interest
against disclosure” as per s
5 of the GIPA Act. There are two situations in which there will be an overriding
public interest
against disclosure. First, under s 14(1) of the GIPA Act, it is
to be conclusively presumed that there is an overriding public interest
disclosure of any of the government information described in Schedule 1. Once
the information is established to be of a kind
specified in Schedule 1, no
further inquiry is made.
this application the Respondent maintains that one category of Schedule 1
information is relevant: information subject to legal
professional
the second situation, there will be an overriding public interest against
disclosure if there are public interest considerations
against disclosure and,
on balance, those considerations outweigh the public interest considerations in
favour of disclosure as per
s 13 of the GIPA Act.
12 of the GIPA Act provides that there is a general public interest in favour of
disclosure of government information and
the section sets out a non-exhaustive
list of some examples of such considerations.
public interest considerations against disclosure are set out in a Table in s 14
of the GIPA Act. Several are relevant to this
application and are discussed
further below.
the second situation, the decision-maker’s task is to first determine
whether, in respect of the information sought, there
are public interest
considerations against disclosure and then to balance those considerations
against those public interest considerations
in favour of disclosure.
Bailey v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
[2023] NSWCATAP 103
), it was found that a failure by the Tribunal to make express
findings on any of the individual matters put forward by an appellant
of disclosure, and the failure to attribute them weight, could render the
Tribunal’s reasons inadequate.
will deal in turn with each basis upon which the Respondent submits access to
the information sought should be refused.
Consideration of
section 60(1)(a) matters
of the provisions otherwise relied upon by the Respondent, in making their
Decision, was their right to refuse to deal with an
access application pursuant
to s 60(1)(a) on the basis that certain of the requests would require an
unreasonable and substantial
diversion of resources.
Tribunal must identify and take into
account any matters falling within the scope of s
60(3A) of the GIPA Act and then determine
if, on balance, they
outweigh the matters falling within s 60(3B) of the GIPA
Act. As per
Else v Ministry of Health
[2021] NSW CATAD 381
“It is only where matters in s 60(3A) outweigh those in s60(3B) that an
agency can refuse to deal with an access application
on the basis that it would
require an unreasonable and substantial diversion of an agency’s
resources.”
Appeal Panel in
Commissioner of
Police v Danis
[2017] NSWCATAP 7
noted at [41] that:
“Section 60 is clearly designed to give agencies some flexibility in the
administration and processing of access-to-information
requests. Each of the
grounds has at its core the sensible and efficient deployment of agency
resources.”
information sought by the Applicant is personal in nature, and he has not
offered any compelling argument that there is any public
interest in the
disclosure of this particular information accordingly.
60(3B)(b) of the Act provides that the information sought must be
of demonstrable importance to the Applicant. The Applicant
has sought the
information in the belief that such information will evidence breaches of
procedural fairness in the Respondent’s
treatment of him, and/or expose
the Respondent’s improper or criminal conduct.
Applicant has not adduced any specific or substantial evidence indicating any
misconduct or corruption on the part of officers
of the Respondent. As per
at [54], “it is necessary for an applicant to put forward
some material to indicate the importance of the information sought
rather than
engaging in mere speculation or conjecture”.
the material before the Tribunal I am not satisfied the
Applicant has sufficiently demonstrated any basis on which the information
would assist him in exercising any particular rights under any Act or law,
particularly given the separate LEC proceedings which
should appropriately
address this aspect.
Consideration of section 60(1)(b) and (e)
of the provisions relied upon by the Respondent, in making their Decision, was
their right to refuse to deal with an access
application pursuant to s 60(1)(b)
of the GIPA Act, on the basis that they had already decided a previous
application for substantially
the same information made by the Applicant and
there were no reasonable grounds for believing that the Respondent would make a
as per s 60 (1)(e), an agency can refuse to deal with an access application if
it reasonably believes that an applicant,
or a person acting in concert with an
applicant, is (i) a party to current proceedings before a court, and (ii) able
to apply to
that court for information.
is a matter of fact that the Applicant and/or his wife are party to LEC
proceedings, three of which have since been determined
and one of which was
scheduled for hearing in October 2025.
Respondent has submitted a document detailing the similarities between the
material sought by the Applicant in their access application
and that sought in
their Notice to Produce issued on 17 January 2025 in relation to their LEC
proceedings. Whilst this Notice was
subsequently withdrawn, the issue and
content of the Notice, together with the Applicant’s stated intention to
reissue such
notice at a future date, do prima facie support a refusal to deal
based on s 60(1)(e) of the GIPA Act.
this matter was not pressed at the hearing, and the Respondent rather addressed
each of the remaining items sought by the
Applicant in their submissions,
detailing why each of those items pressed by the Applicant in this application
could not otherwise
be provided.
Tribunal has similarly elected to consider each of the items requested, and make
a decision on that basis in the interests of
clarity, rather than make a
determination in respect of whether ss 60(1)(b) and/or (e) of the GIPA Act
Applicant’s case
Applicant submits the correct and preferable decision was for the Respondent to
provide the material sought. His grounds for this
review include the
(a) That the information may provide evidence that he and his wife have been
unfairly targeted in relation to their dealings with
the Respondent;
(b) That the information may shed light on the Respondent’s procedures and
whether the Respondent has abused their power and
is therefore in the public
interest pursuant to s 12(2)(e) of the GIPA Act;
(c) That he was not provided with sufficient detail except for the descriptor
“Legal Matter” to enable him to determine
whether the claim of legal
professional privilege was valid or not;
(d) That records which the Applicant presumes relate to his neighbour contain
false and defamatory assertions, and have unfairly
tainted the Applicant’s
reputation, and it is in the public interest that the identity of false
complainants be disclosed,
and that any fears of harassment or intimidation are
(e) That the Respondent has failed to carry out reasonable searches, and has
often failed to carry out even a cursory search.
the hearing, the Applicant acknowledged that the requests are driven by his
belief that the Respondent and AF, in particular, have
unfairly and punitively
targeted he and his wife in relation to the dams on the Property.
Applicant acknowledged that obtaining the documents served his own interests,
however submitted that there is an important public
interest disclosure
imperative in relation to how the Respondent and its employees conduct
themselves.
Respondent’s case
Respondent submitted that they made the correct and preferable decision in the
circumstances, and that their Decision should be
affirmed by the Tribunal, for
the reasons briefly outlined as follows:
(a) The requests were substantially the same as those sought by the Applicant in
two previous applications and hence the Respondent
refused to deal with those
requests pursuant to s 60(1)(b) of the GIPA Act, although this matter was not
pressed further during the
(b) Many of the documents were subject to clear legal professional privilege.
(c) Release of certain material was subject to the public interest exclusion in
s 14 Table cl 3(a) and must be refused as it would
reveal an individual’s
personal information, and may also expose that person to harm, harassment or
intimidation as per s 14
Table cl 3(f).
(d) Much of the material sought concerns the proceedings already on foot in the
LEC, or otherwise contemplated, by the Applicant
and/or (in concert with) his
wife, and could, and should, be properly sought through an application to the
court. This submission
was not further pressed at the hearing.
(e) Due to the inherent limitations of the record storage system of the
Respondent, much of the information sought could not be readily
without reviewing an inordinate amount of documents.
(f) Some of the material sought would further disclose proprietary and
confidential internal processes regarding the Respondent’s
approach to
enforcement action, as per the exclusion in s 14 Table cl (1)(f). Similarly,
material provided by informants would prejudice
enforcement of the law, pursuant
to s 14 Table cl (2)(b).
(g) The request was properly considered in accordance with the applicable
principles of the GIPA Act, and opportunity to revise the
scope of the
application was properly afforded to the Applicant.
Respondent submitted that they complied with the full suite of their obligations
pursuant to the GIPA Act, and that the refusal
to provide the remaining items
sought by the Applicant, was based on clear and legitimate exclusions pursuant
to the GIPA Act.
Respondent called Ms Duggan, one of the Respondent’s Governance
Coordinators to give oral evidence under oath, who spoke
to the reasons for
refusing the remaining items sought by the Applicant.
Duggan gave evidence that she obtained a report from Telstra but there was no
functionality to search for text messages relating
to the Property. She further
submitted that she did not ask individual employees if they had ever texted
Duggan submitted that electronic records are not held in such a way as to enable
general category searches such as ‘unlawful
dams’ to be undertaken,
and hence the searches sought by the Applicant would trigger hundreds or
thousands of results, and
therefore have no utility.
Applicant contended that the Respondent’s system should be able to conduct
targeted searches of the nature sought, but accepted
Ms Duggan’s testimony
that it did not have this capability. Accordingly, the Applicant accepted that
Items 15, 16, 18 and 21
(detailed at [7] (e)-(h) herein) cannot be
Tribunal accepts Ms Duggan’s evidence, which was considered and based on
her expertise and experience.
Schedule 1 Matters - Items 1 and 9
(detailed in [7](a) and (d) herein)
14(1) of the GIPA Act provides that Schedule 1 therein details a conclusive
presumption that there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure of
any of the government information described in Schedule 1.
Respondent has since waived privilege on a number of documents and released
those to the Applicant, and has submitted the remainder
in confidence, to the
Respondent claims that the bulk of the remainder of those documents provided to
the Tribunal in a Confidential Bundle are subject
to legal professional
privilege. Clause 5 of Schedule 1 to the GIPA Act provides:
(1) It is to be conclusively presumed that there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure of information that would be
privileged from
production in legal proceedings on the ground of client legal privilege (legal
professional privilege), unless the
person in whose favour the privilege exists
has waived the privilege.
(2) If an access application is made to an agency in whose favour legal
professional privilege exists in all or some of the government
information to
which access is sought, the agency is required to consider whether it would be
appropriate for the agency to waive
that privilege before the agency refuses to
provide access to government information on the basis of this clause.
(3) A decision that an agency makes under subclause (2) is not a reviewable
decision under Part 5.
Tribunal has considered cl 5 of Schedule 1 in numerous matters. Client legal
privilege protects confidential communications between
a lawyer and a client
made for the dominant purpose of the lawyer providing legal advice or
professional legal services to the client
or for use in current or anticipated
litigation.
order for client legal privilege to attach to information, each element of
client legal privilege must be satisfied. The essential
elements of client legal
privilege are:
(i) the existence of a client and lawyer relationship; and
(ii) the confidential nature of the communication or document; and
(iii) the communication or document was brought into existence for the dominant
purpose of either:
(iv) enabling the client to obtain, or the lawyer to give legal advice or
provide legal services, or
(v) for use in existing or anticipated litigation.
considerations are embodied within
sections 118
Respondent submitted that the majority of the relevant documents were
correspondence between the Respondent and the external law
practice they
instructed, for the dominant purpose of providing legal advice in relation to
the Respondent’s legal position
regarding their enforcement action and the
LEC proceedings between the parties.
Archer Capital 4A Pty Ltd as trustee for the Archer Capital Trust 4A v Sage
Group PLS (No 2)
[2013] FCA 1098
, Wigney J stated that “A
communication or document will be privileged if it was made or brought into
existence for the dominant
purpose of obtaining or providing legal advice (the
advice limb), or to conduct or aid in the conduct of litigation in reasonable
prospect (the litigation limb).”
[12] he continues that “The concept of legal advice in the context of the
advice limb is fairly broad. It goes beyond formal
advice as to the law, and
extends to professional advice as to what a party should prudently or sensibly
do in a relevant legal context...”.
on my perusal of the documents over which privilege has been claimed and the
evidence provided by the Respondent, I am satisfied
that the relevant documents
contained in Items 1 and 9 comprise confidential communications between the
Respondent and their lawyers
for the dominant purpose of seeking or receiving
legal advice.
am therefore satisfied that the relevant documents provided in the Confidential
Bundle per Items 1 and 9 are subject to legal professional
Public interest considerations for and against
relation to the remaining pressed, and unresolved, items, the Respondent has
claimed there are public interest considerations against
disclosure. In deciding
whether access should be granted to these documents, the task of the Tribunal is
first, to identify the public
interest considerations in favour of disclosure.
Secondly, to identify the public interest considerations against disclosure.
I must determine the weight of the public interest considerations in
favour of disclosure and of those against disclosure in order
to determine where
the balance between those interests lies.
Respondent submits that (i) access to Item 6 (detailed in [7](b) herein) should
be refused on the basis that disclosure of the
material will result in the
disclosure of material provided in confidence to an agency as per Table 14 cl
1(g); (ii) access to Items
29-30 and 36-37 (detailed at [7](i) (l) and (m)
herein) should be refused on the basis that disclosure of the information could
be expected to prejudice the effective exercise of an agency’s
functions as per Table 14 cl (1)(f); and (iii) access to Items
31, 34, 38 and 39
(detailed at [7](j),(k), (n) and (o) herein) should be refused on the basis that
disclosure of the material could
be reasonably expected to disclose an
individual’s personal information as per Table 14 cl (3)(a).
12 of the GIPA Act sets out the general presumption in favour of disclosure of
government information and lists examples of
public interest considerations that
favour disclosure. There are several considerations in favour of
disclosure:
(i) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to promote the
discussion of public affairs on an issue of public
importance and enhance the
Government’s accountability;
(ii) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to contribute to
positive and informed debate on issues of public
(iii) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to ensure the
effective oversight of a resource owned by the State
and public finds;
(iv) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to inform the
public about the management of natural resources of
significance to the economy
and the environment; and
(v) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to inform the
public about the operation of agencies.
considerations against disclosure set out in the table to s 14 of the GIPA Act
and the examples of considerations in favour of
disclosure in s 12 have the
requirement that disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to
have the nominated effect.
words “could reasonably be expected to” are to be given their
ordinary meaning (
Attorney-General’s Department v
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR 180).
In that case, Bowen CJ and Beaumont J
explained, at [190], that the words “... require a judgment to be made by
the decision-maker
as to whether it is reasonable, as distinct from something
that is irrational, absurd or ridiculous, to expect that those who would
otherwise supply information of the prescribed kind to the agency would decline
to do so if the document in question were disclosed
under the Act. It is
undesirable to attempt any paraphrase of these words. In particular it is
undesirable to consider the operation
of the provision in terms of probabilities
or possibilities or the like”.
Leech v Sydney Water Corporation
[2010] NSWADT 298
the Tribunal
referred to a number of cases which had considered the term “could
reasonably be expected to” and stated
at [25] “The test to be
applied is an objective one, approached from the view point of the reasonable
decision-maker: Neary
v State Rail Authority. Something which could
reasonably be expected is something which is more than a mere possibility, risk
a chance. It must be based on real and substantial grounds, and it must not
be purely speculative, fanciful, imaginary or contrived:
Searle Australia
Pty Ltd v PIA.”
public interest considerations against disclosure require an objective
assessment as to whether the claimed effects could be expected
Consideration and findings in respect of Item 1 sub-items
1.25, 1.48 and 1.53 ([7](a) herein] and Item 6 ([7](b) herein)
Respondent submits that access to the material comprising the Item 1 sub-items
reviewed in the Confidential Bundle by the Tribunal,
and those in Item 6 should
be refused on the basis that disclosure of the information could reasonably be
expected to result in the
disclosure of information provided in confidence as
per Table 14 cl (1)(g) and could reasonably be expected to reveal an
individual’s
personal information, or expose a person to a risk of harm or
of serious harassment or serious intimidation as per Table 14 cl (3)(a)
Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police Force v Camilleri
[2013] NSWADT 80
the Appeal Panel stated that the question as to whether information is
“confidential information” is to “be examined,
primarily at
least, by reference to the agency’s evidence as to the conditions under
which it conducts the service within which
the information was received”.
The inquiry “should focus on the point of receipt, and the administrative
standards and
community understandings which surround it”.
the context of cl 1(d) the Tribunal has previously stated that, in determining
the question of whether the information in issue
is confidential, a number of
principles apply (
Luxford v Department of Education and
Communities
[2016] NSWCATAD 118
principles are also applicable to s 14 Table cl 1(g) and are as follows: There
is a public interest consideration against disclosure
of information if
disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to have one or more
of the following effects (whether
in a particular case or generally) -
(a) reveal or tend to reveal the identity of an informant or
prejudice the future supply of
information from an informant,
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection or investigation of a
contravention or possible contravention
of the law or prejudice the enforcement
of the law, (c) increase the likelihood of, or prejudice the
prevention of, preparedness
against, response to, or recovery from, a public
emergency (including any natural disaster, major accident, civil disturbance or
act of terrorism), (d) endanger, or prejudice any system or procedure for
protecting, the life, health or safety of any person.
Luxford at [70], “(i) the confidential quality of communications is a
question of fact”; (ii) To establish its confidential
quality, information
must have been supplied under an express or implied pledge of confidentiality;
(iii) The confidential quality
of the information may be inferred from the
nature of the relationship between the informer and person informed; and (iv)
The confidential
quality of the information must be determined in the light of
all of the circumstances of the particular case.”
Applicant is seeking a copy of a video interview and correspondence conducted
with a third party. This material was provided to
the Tribunal as part of the
Confidential Bundle for consideration of this access request.
Applicant contends that he knows the third party’s identity and contact
details already, and has never harassed or intimidated
such person. However, the
Applicant further submitted that if the material contained what he considered to
be false or defamatory
statements, he would pursue his legal rights against that
third party.
Applicant submits that it is in the public’s interest to disclose the
identity of a person who makes false complaints, and
that he is a victim of
Fahey v NSW Officer of Liquor, Gaming and Racing
[2012] NSWADT
it is noted that “there is a public interest in disclosing the
identity of persons who make false complaints. Careful distinction
made between allegations which, while based on genuinely-held beliefs are found
to be erroneous and allegations which are
malicious or which are made with
disregard to basic facts.”
is nothing in the material provided by the Applicant to support a finding that
the third party has made intentionally false
complaints or malicious
allegations. The Applicant has a significant litigation history and contentious
relationship with a neighbour
he has therefore presumed is the relevant third
party, but this does not constitute evidence in support of overriding the
presumption
against disclosure. Further, the Applicant acknowledges in his
written submissions that the individual is an informant rather than
complainant.
Respondent submits that the third party informant is subject to a real threat of
harassment and intimidation should their identity
and statements be revealed to
the Applicant. In
AEZ v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
the Tribunal held that “harm should be confined to a
real and substantial detrimental effect on a person, rather than their
interests...A detrimental effect may be to a person’s physical,
psychological or emotional wellbeing.” In [89],
the Tribunal posits in
relation to a definition of harassment, that “the disclosure would expose
a person to serious harassment,
the assessment of the impact of the conduct on
the individual concerned is an objective one...”.
on the material and submissions provided by the parties, I do not find that
there is a genuine risk of harm or serious harassment
or intimidation, on the
objective application of those concepts.
) sets out the limits on the disclosure of personal information
by a public sector agency. Notably s 18(1)(a) prohibits such disclosure
the disclosure is directly related to the purpose for which the information was
collected and the agency disclosing the information
has no reason to believe the
individual concerned would object to the disclosure.
Applicant’s fervent belief that he already knows the identity of the third
party does not, in and of itself, prove the truth
of that statement.
relevant third party has advised the Respondent that they do not wish for their
identity to be revealed to the Applicant, nor
the information they have
provided. In the absence of any compelling reason submitted by the Applicant,
beyond their admission that
they may want to sue that individual, the applicable
law within the PPIA Act and the GIPA Act compel a finding that the Applicant
cannot be provided with that information, where the individual has refused to
provide the necessary consent.
the material provided, I further find that the information provided by the third
party was made as an informant, and was intended
to be made to, and held by, the
Respondent in confidence. In his written submissions, the Applicant asserts that
he is already quite
familiar with the (assumed) third party’s
‘adverse opinions and several more variations of same won’t reveal
new’. This suggests that the Applicant is not really seeking or
expecting new information to be gleaned from this access request,
potential evidence for a defamation lawsuit.
Snape v Commissioner of Police No 2
[2022] NSWCATAP 244
), the Tribunal must balance the public interest disclosure
imperative established per s 13 of the Act, against any applicable s 14
matters, and as per
Taylor v Destination NSW
[2017] NSWCATAD 272
) at [17], the balance is always weighted in favour of
disclosure.
accept the evidence that the information provided by the third party was
provided on a confidential basis as an informant, and that
they have expressly
withheld their consent to the provision of access to the Applicant regarding
their identity and the information
they have provided to the Respondent.
balance, therefore, I am satisfied that the public interest disclosure
imperative does not outweigh the consideration against disclosure
in respect of
the information which was provided in confidence.
Respondent’s decision in relation to the identified sub-items of Item 1
and Item 6 is affirmed.
Consideration and findings in respect of
Items 1 (text messages) and Item 9 (additional searches) [detailed at paragraphs
and (d) herein].
Respondent submitted that the provision of these items would require an
unreasonable and substantial diversion of their resources
per s 60(1)(a) of the
GIPA Act, as their systems did not allow for general automated searches of the
nature that the Applicant sought.
per Ms Duggan’s evidence referenced in [48], the Tribunal further accepts
that obtaining the information sought regarding
text messages of the
Respondent’s employees, was essentially not possible due to the lack of
required functionality. Accordingly,
obtaining such information through manual
efforts would clearly be impractical and involve substantial person hours to
identify those
which might fall within the application.
the material in Item 9 [detailed in [7](d) herein] falls within legal
professional privilege, the Respondent submitted that
any further searches would
similarly require an unreasonable and substantial diversion of the
Respondent’s resources. As per
Ms Duggan’s evidence referenced in
[49], the Tribunal accepts that the Respondent does not have the search
functionality to
readily identify such material, in support of a refusal to deal
per s 60(1)(a) of the GIPA Act.
Respondent’s decision in relation to the Item 1 (text messages) and Item 9
(additional searches) is therefore affirmed.
Consideration and
findings in respect of Items 36-37 [detailed at paragraphs [7](l) and (m)
14 Table at clauses (1)(f) and (h) provide a public interest consideration
against disclosure where it may prejudice the effective
exercise by an agency of
their functions, or where it may prejudice the conduct, effectiveness or
integrity of any audit, test, investigation
or review conducted by or on behalf
of an agency by revealing its purpose, conduct or results (whether or not
commenced and whether
or not completed).
Respondent submits that access to the material comprising Items 36-37 should be
refused on the basis that disclosure of the information
could reasonably be
expected to result in the disclosure of the internal workings of an agency and
how they conduct investigations,
and determine which matters to prosecute or
not, as per s 14 Table at clauses (1)(f) and (h).
Respondent submits that items such as internal memoranda, research, file notes
and other internal documents and deliberations
would be overwhelmingly likely to
form the basis of the Respondent’s investigation and deliberation of
enforcement action.
per Snape, the Tribunal must balance the public interest disclosure imperative
established per s 13 of the Act, against any applicable
s 14 Table matters.
this matter, it is an established fact that the Respondent was conducting an
investigation in contemplation of enforcement action
against the Applicant with
regard to the dams located on the Property.
the Applicant has a genuine and understandable desire to access the inner
workings of the investigation conducted against himself
and his wife, I accept
that an agency must be afforded some level of confidentiality and opacity in
order to contemplate and undertake
investigations and enforcement action
effectively.
to the access request, is that the veracity and foundation of the
Respondent’s enforcement action can and will be properly
tested between
the parties in the LEC, so I will not make any findings in this regard.
attributing weight to the parties’ competing objectives, and noting that
the LEC decision will likely provide additional
clarity and closure for the
Applicant in this regard, I am satisfied that the public interest disclosure
imperative does not outweigh
the consideration against disclosure in respect of
the material sought by the Applicant, and consider that there remains a
predominant
public interest consideration against disclosure of Items 36-37,
detailed at paragraph [7] (l) and (m) herein.
Respondent’s decision in relation to items 36-37 is
Consideration and findings in respect of Items 31, 34,
38 and 39 [detailed at paragraphs [7] (j), (k), (n) and (o) herein].
Respondent submits that they have refused to confirm or deny to the Applicant,
the existence of the material comprising Items
31, 34, 38 and 39, as detailed in
[7] (j), (k), (n) and (o) herein. This refusal is based on the assertion of an
overriding public
interest against disclosure of information confirming or
denying that fact per s 58(1)(f) of the GIPA Act.
Respondent submits that even the disclosure of the existence of any material
sought pursuant to these items should be refused
on the grounds that such
material is subject variously to exclusions in clauses 1(f), 2(a), 3(a), 3(e)
58(1)(f) was considered in
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v
[2015] NSWCATAP 68
) where a decision to refuse to
confirm or deny the existence of material, was made for intelligence reasons.
The Appeal Panel in
that matter noted at [38] that this provision
“introduces a public interest against disclosure that goes beyond those
in the Table to s 14”.
pursuant to s 58(1)(f) of the GIPA Act are notably rare, because a refusal to
confirm or deny the existence of material negates
the commitment to transparency
which underpins the legislation. Consequently, the reasonable approach is to
nevertheless apply the
principles of ss 13 and 14 of the GIPA Act and ensure
that material, which is refused to be provided to an applicant, falls properly,
after weighing, within one of the exclusions detailed therein.
this reasoning is not correct, I have considered whether there is an overriding
public interest against disclosure of the information
pursuant to the clauses of
the s 14 Table identified by the Respondent in their submissions and during the
hearing. This is supported
by the approach taken in
Douglas v Commissioner of
Police (NSW)
[2022] NSWCATAD 152.
the personal nature of the information sought by the Applicant in these items, I
have focussed on clause 3(a) of the table in
s 14 of the GIPA Act in my
consideration of whether this information can and should be disclosed to the
Applicant is seeking to access a range of material relating to AF’s
internal records, including any complaints which may
have been made against AF,
any internal investigations conducted against AF, AF’s leave applications
and his absences from
Respondent submits that such items regarding AF, an employee of the Respondent,
if in existence, would reveal personal information
expressly and vehemently refused permission to reveal any of this information
sought by the Applicant.
54 of the GIPA Act provides for a requirement to consult a person before
disclosing their personal information, where it appears
that the person may
reasonably be expected to have concerns about the disclosure of the information,
and those concerns may reasonably
be expected to be relevant to the question of
whether there is a public interest consideration against disclosure of the
information.
the present matter, the Respondent has undertaken that consultation and AF has
refused to provide the necessary consent to release
such material to the
Applicant, and the Applicant has not otherwise identified any exception pursuant
to s 25 of the PIPA Act pursuant
to which the material could be disclosed.
Applicant has submitted his view that AF has engaged in improper conduct in
relation to the investigation and enforcement action
taken by the Respondent
against the Applicant regarding the dams located on the Property.
Barrett at [136] it was held that “It is a very serious matter for a
Tribunal to accept as relevant to its determination
as a public interest
favouring disclosure that ‘disclosure...could be reasonably be expected to
reveal or substantiate that
an agency (or a member of an agency) has engaged in
misconduct or negligent, improper or unlawful conduct.’ “
order to make a determination that the public interest favours disclosure in
this regard per Snape, the Tribunal must have a reasonable
basis in the material
provided by the Applicant or in the material seen in confidence.
is clear from the Applicant’s oral and written submissions that he is of
the genuine belief that he and his wife have been
unfairly targeted by AF and
the Respondent generally, as well as by his neighbour(s). However, the Applicant
has not adduced sufficient
material which would reasonably support a finding
that the Respondent (or an employee thereof) has engaged in improper or unlawful
noted above, the Applicant’s allegations will likely be tested in the LEC
proceedings, along with the propriety, or otherwise,
of the investigation
conducted, and the enforcement orders made, against the Applicant and/or his
wife. However, with the material
before the Tribunal, I do not have any
evidentiary basis on which to make a finding that the material sought by the
Applicant can
be expected to reveal improper conduct, such as to tip the balance
towards disclosure in this regard.
per Bailey, I cannot attribute sufficient weight to such allegations as posited
by the Applicant, so as to provide the Applicant
with access to AF’s
personal and confidential internal employment-related records.
attributing weight to the parties’ competing objectives, and noting that
the LEC decision will likely provide additional
clarity for the Applicant in
this regard, I am satisfied that the public interest disclosure imperative does
not outweigh the consideration
against disclosure in respect of the material
sought by the Applicant, and consider that there remains a predominant public
consideration against disclosure of Items 31, 34, 38 and 39, detailed
at paragraphs [7] (j), (k) (n) and (o) herein.
regard to the Respondent’s submission that disclosure was rightfully
denied regarding these items on the basis of the exclusion
in clause (1)(f) of
the table in s 14 of the GIPA Act, I am satisfied that my findings per [98] and
[100] herein, apply to this material.
regard to the Respondent’s submission that disclosure was rightfully
denied regarding these items on the basis of the exclusion
in clause (2)(a) of
the table in s 14 of the GIPA Act, I am satisfied that my findings per [86]
herein, apply to this material.
regard to the Respondent’s submission that disclosure was rightfully
denied regarding these items on the basis of the exclusion
in clause (3)(e) of
the table in s 14 of the GIPA Act, I am satisfied that my findings per [78]
herein, apply to this material.
regard to the Respondent’s submission that disclosure was rightfully
denied regarding these items on the basis of the exclusion
in clause (3)(f) of
the table in s 14 of the GIPA Act, I refer to my findings per [80] herein, apply
to this material.
Respondent’s decision in relation to items 31, 34, 38 and 39 is
to s 64 of the CAT Act, the Tribunal orders that no record of the confidential
session, nor of the Confidential Bundle, is
to be disclosed or released to
either the Applicant or to the public.
that some of the material in Item 1 was released to the Applicant prior to the
hearing, the decision under review is otherwise
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter