URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Public Services Association and Professional Officers' Association Amalgamated Union of NSW v Industrial Relations Secretary for the Department of Communities and Justice [2025] NSWIC 11 (22 August 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
Public Services Association and Professional Officers’ Association
Amalgamated Union of NSW v Industrial Relations Secretary
for the Department of
Communities and Justice
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 11
Hearing Date(s):
5 August 2025
Date of Orders:
22 August 2025
Decision Date:
22 August 2025
1 The Court makes the following orders:
(1) The application is
(2) Costs reserved.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Industrial Relations Commission
– jurisdiction – procedure and powers – declarations
hypothetical issue – whether declaration will resolve all issues
Legislation Cited:
Court Suppression and Non-publication Orders Act 2010
Prohibition Act 1998
Firearms Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Inglis v Moore
(1979) 24 ALR 411
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
Truth About Motorways Pty Ltd v Macquarie Infrastructure
Investment Management Ltd
[2000] HCA 11
(2000) 200 CLR 591
Chapman Davis v State of NSW
[2015] NSWIC 10
(2015) 90 NSWLR 533
Ford v SAS Trustee Corporation
[2000] NSWIRComm 92
Commissioner for Children and Young People
[2001] NSWIRComm 194
Texts Cited:
Dyson Heydon J, Mark Leeming JA and Peter Turner, Meagher, Gummow &
Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and Remedies (LexisNexis
Butterworths, 5th ed,
Principal judgment
Public Services Association and Professional Officers’ Association
Amalgamated Union of NSW (Applicant)
Industrial Relations Secretary for the
Department of Communities and Justice (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr D Nagle (Applicant)
Mr M Foran and Ms H Nguyen
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00070712
applicant, on behalf of its member Adam Smith, applied for the following
declarations:
(a) That Adam Smith is permitted/able/entitled/eligible to perform duty as a
Senior Correctional Officer within Corrective Services
(b) That the Weapons Prohibition Order dated 8 March 2022 issued to Adam Smith
does not prevent Adam Smith from entering Corrective
Services NSW premises,
including but not limited to Kirkconnell Correctional Centre, for the purpose of
performing his role as a
Senior Correctional Officer.
(c) That Adam Smith was entitled to receive his usual remuneration on and from 3
April 2024.
matter was listed for hearing over three days commencing 5 August 2025. By
notice of motion filed on 24 July 2025 the respondent
applied to have the
application summarily dismissed and for orders, in the alternative, that the
first two orders be summarily dismissed
or struck out.
motion was listed for directions on 29 July 2025. Counsel and the instructing
solicitor who had been acting in the matter on
behalf of the applicant were both
engaged in trials in other courts. As a result, the motion could not be heard
until the first
day listed for the hearing. I directed the applicant to file
and serve a short outline of submissions in answer to the motion and
respondent to file and serve a response prior to the hearing. The parties
complied with those directions allowing clarification
of the issues between
the commencement of the hearing Mr Nagle of counsel, who appeared for the
applicant, submitted that it was sensible for the respondent’s
be heard first. There was some short discussion about evidence, and I asked
whether the applicant intended to make an
application for leave to amend. The
immediate answer was no, followed by a short statement of the issues as they
seemed to the applicant.
They were, whether the Court had jurisdiction and, if
it did, whether the relief sought was hypothetical. I then referred to the
seemingly common factual position that Mr Smith was not currently a correctional
officer but held the position of a Case Management
Officer (CMO), whereas the
relief sought referred to his role as a Senior Correctional Officer. There was
also the issue of a Firearms
Prohibition Order (FPO) referred to in the
respondent’s evidence and not dealt with at all in the applicant’s
Mr Nagle applied for and was granted a brief adjournment to take some
instructions.
Foran of counsel, who appeared with Ms Nguyen for the respondent, agreed to the
adjournment but made clear the respondent’s
opposition to amendment.
the hearing resumed Mr Nagle sought leave to amend the second prayer for relief
(a) adding a reference to the FPO after the words “Weapons Prohibitions
(b) deleting the word “his” and substituting “a” before
“role”; and
(c) deleting the word “Senior”.
then made some submissions in support of the amendment.
Foran opposed the application for leave to amend.
is unnecessary to detail the submissions because Mr Nagle submitted in reply
that he was happy to defer his application pending
resolution of the
respondent’s motion. He submitted, if the respondent succeeds on the
basis of the application for declarations
being hypothetical, the amendment
would not vary the outcome. The hearing of the motion then commenced.
hearing the parties on the motion, the Court adjourned to consider the
arguments. On resumption I indicated I had formed a
view on the motion, but in
deference to the arguments advanced by the parties, considered I needed some
further time to reflect and
provide detailed reasons. Counsel conferred and
agreed to vacate the balance of the hearing time to await the reasons and
support of the motion the respondent read:
(a) an affidavit, excluding paragraphs 13 and 15, of Mr Samuel Bridgeford,
affirmed on 24 July 2025 together with the annexures to
that affidavit;
(b) an affidavit of Mr Paul Rzepecki, sworn 30 May 2025, but not including the
annexures; and
(c) an affidavit of Mr Michael Green, sworn 29 May 2025 including only Annexure
Bridgeford is a Senior Advisor Employee Relations at the NSW Department of
Communities and Justice (DCJ) and the instructing officer
in the matter on
behalf of the respondent. Based on the respondent’s business records, he
deposed that Mr Smith:
(a) had worked for DCJ since 2011, principally as a Correctional Officer (CO) or
Senior Correctional Officer (SCO);
(b) commenced duty as an SCO on 15 April 2019 at Lithgow Correction Centre
(Lithgow CC);
(c) on or about 28 September 2020, was assigned to Kirkconnell Correctional
Centre (Kirkconnell CC);
(d) following representations from the applicant on his behalf, was assigned to
a temporary CMO position at Kirkconnell CC;
(e) on or about 2 December 2024, was assigned temporarily to a CMO position at
Lithgow CC;
(f) on 5 March 2025, applied for an ongoing full-time CMO position at Lithgow
(g) on 3 June 2025, accepted the offer of ongoing appointment to that position.
will deal first with some of the evidence of Mr Green who is the Custodial
Director Western Region for Corrective Services NSW (CSNSW).
He has held that
position since 21 August 2023. He has been employed in CSNSW for 36 years and
has most recently held positions
of Governor at Lithgow CC and John Maroney
Correctional Centre, Manager of Security (MOS) at the Metropolitan Remand and
Centre, and Senior Superintendent in the Operation, Performance and
Review Branch.
Green says that in November 2020 he became aware that Mr Smith was in custody
and facing criminal charges. Mr Smith was suspended
without pay pending the
outcome of the criminal charges. He was released from custody on 4 February
2021. On 7 February 2023 Mr
Smith was convicted of various offences and was
sentenced on 29 March 2023.
November 2023 Mr Green became aware of a Weapons Prohibition Order (WPO) made
against Mr Green by a delegate of the Commissioner
of Police. On 6 November
2023 he met with Mr Smith at Kirkconnell CC. Also present was a representative
of the applicant and a
representative from the human resources section of CSNSW.
At that meeting Mr Green told Mr Smith that he had formed the view that
could not return to his duties as an SCO while the WPO was in force. Mr Smith
disagreed with that position. After that
meeting Mr Smith took a period of
27 March 2024 Mr Smith wrote to Mr Green asking if he could return to his role
as an SCO at Lithgow CC. The following day Mr Green
emailed Mr Smith to request
a copy of the WPO which was provided by return email. On 3 April 2024 Mr Green
sent an email to Mr Smith
advising that in his view the WPO prevented Mr Smith
from performing his role as SCO. Mr Smith took a period of sick leave before
commencing a temporary role as a CMO at Kirkconnell CC.
preparation for this case Mr Green became aware of an FPO made on the same date
as the WPO. So far as he is aware, the FPO
remains in place.
Rzepecki is the MOS at Kirkconnell CC. He is an employee of DCJ. He has worked
in CSNSW since May 2003 and has held his current
position since June 2024. He
has also held MOS positions at Bathurst Correctional Centre and Mid-North Coast
Correctional Centre.
His most recent positions prior to those appointments were
Principal Correctional Officer at John Maroney Correctional Centre and
Assistant Superintendent at the Prison Bed Capacity Program. He says that as
MOS of Kirkconnell CC he has all the powers
of a Governor of a Correctional
Greene’s and Mr Rzepecki’s affidavits, in so far as they deal with
certain matters of security, are the subject of
a suppression order made under
Court Suppression and Non-publication Orders Act 2010
It is inappropriate, therefore, to detail that information in this judgment.
is sufficient to say that their affidavits provide information as to the
circumstances in which correctional officers (including
SCOs) may have need to
use or possess items which fall within the definitions of prohibited weapons and
firearms in the
Weapons Prohibition Act 1998
Firearms Act
(NSW) respectively. They also fall, therefore, within the scope of the
WPO and FPO (the Orders) made by the delegate of the Commissioner
information informed Mr Greene’s opinion that the WPO prevented Mr Smith
from returning to duty as an SCO.
Nagle read Mr Smith’s affidavit of 1 August 2025. There was no objection
to that affidavit on the hearing of the motion.
In it he refers to his periods
of suspension and steps taken by the applicant to seek and achieve reinstatement
of his pay and some
leave entitlements. He also speaks of his temporary
appointments as a CMO. He had a concern that he lacked security of employment,
so he applied for the permanent position as a CMO.
says that it is his intention to resign his employment as a CMO and return to
work as an SCO if the applicant is successful in
these proceedings. He says he
would not have applied for the position of CMO were it not for the
respondent’s decision not
to permit him to work as an SCO.
applicant also tendered the email by which Mr Green advised Mr Smith of his view
as to the effect of the WPO on his employment.
That document was Annexure D to
Mr Smith’s affidavit of 17 February 2025 (which was not otherwise read).
Mr Nagle also tendered
the WPO which was Annexure C to that affidavit.
terms of the Orders are concise. There are two operative paragraphs in which
the delegate records his opinion which is that Mr
Smith is “not fit, in
the public interest, to have possession of a prohibited weapon” and the
delegate therefore makes
a WPO. The reasons for making the order are set out in
Schedule 1 to the order. The reasons include the following statement:
“It is considered that you are not fit in the public interest
time have access to prohibited weapo
ns. It is critical to ensuring the
public’s safety that a weapons prohibition order is issued against
you.” (Emphasis
FPO is Annexure E to Mr Greene’s affidavit. Apart from substituting the
words “firearm, firearm parts or ammunition”
for the words
“prohibited weapons” it is in identical terms to the WPO both as to
the form of the order and the reasons
in support.
Submissions
respondent submitted:
(1) It is an appropriate time for determination of the motion:
Inglis v Moore
(1979) 24 ALR 411
at 422. This case is an abuse of process because it is
plainly apparent that the first two prayers are without jurisdiction and
third is unsupported by any evidence and is also impermissibly vague.
(2) The first two prayers for relief have significant problems of form in that
they are vaguely expressed and “untethered to
any material facts.”
Declaratory orders need a degree of precision because their effect is to state
the rights and obligations
of the parties in the circumstances which exist.
(3) The relief sought in the first two prayers is hypothetical. They relate to
a possible future state of affairs which may never
happen. Mr Smith does not
have a position as a correctional officer. He is not currently even an
applicant for such a position.
Declarations make clear the current rights and
obligations in law of the parties. As Mr Smith does not hold a position as a
correctional
officer, he has no such right to declare. The making of the
declaration would not have the effect of restoring the
status quo ante
as the applicant submits, and that is not the purpose of the declaration. The
orders sought will not result Mr Smith being appointed
to a position of
correctional officer.
(4) Declarations must have practical utility. It is generally inappropriate to
grant declaratory relief if it will be inconclusive
in resolving the controversy
between the parties:
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
per Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gordon JJ at 582 and Brennan J at 596;
Truth About Motorways Pty Ltd v Macquarie Infrastructure Investment
Management Ltd
[2000] HCA 11
(2000) 200 CLR 591
per Gaudron J at [52];
Chapman Davis v
State of NSW
[2015] NSWIC 10
(2015) 90 NSWLR 533
[2015] NSWIC 10.
(5) By reference to an extract from the text Meagher, Gummow &
Lehane’s Equity Doctrines & Remedies at [19.160], a
means of testing
whether there is a real, not hypothetical, question is to ask whether the
declaration will produce real consequences
for the parties. The future state of
affairs in this case is uncertain. Mr Smith has no legal right to declare. He
have a right to be appointed to a CO or SCO position. The
existence of the WPO is but one factor the employer might consider. The
which was the reason for the conviction may be regarded by the employer as
unacceptable conduct by a candidate for appointment
to a CO or SCO position.
The declarations sought do not address that issue and therefore will not resolve
all the issues between
the parties. See
Commonwealth of Australia v BIS
Cleanaway Limited
[2007] NSWSC 1075
(6) The relief as currently framed does not address the FPO.
(7) The Court’s jurisdiction is statutory and governed by
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW) (IR Act). That section limits the
power to make declarations to a right related to an identifiable matter
otherwise within
the jurisdiction of the Court or Commission;
Trustee Corporation
[2000] NSWIRComm 92.
The applicant has not yet
identified a matter within the Commission’s jurisdiction as required by
the section.
applicant submitted:
(1) The relief is framed as it is because the email from Mr Green, identified in
], states that his
decision to restrict Mr Smith’s access is predicated on, in summary, the
power of the Commissioner of Police
to make such an order, the terms of the
order and the effect of the order as prescribed in
Prohibition Act
Weapons Prohibition Act
provides an immunity from
prosecution for certain people including correctional officers. There is a
question whether the immunity
extends to permitting correctional officers to
hold and utilise prohibited weapons for the purpose of performing the role as a
correctional
officer. Mr Nagle submitted there was a parallel with the decision
of Hungerford J in
A v Commissioner for Children and Young People
NSWIRComm 194.
(3) There has been:
“a determination by someone within the Department of Corrective Services,
... that my client will not be permitted to perform
his role, as it was then,
and therefore affecting his rights as they were then, as a corrections officer,
because of a weapons prohibition
(4) The question, the applicant submitted, is whether that fetter on his then
rights is valid or not. So understood, the question
is tied to his employment,
it is an industrial matter and therefore the court has jurisdiction to deal with
the declaration as sought.
(5) As to whether the declaration relates to hypothetical circumstances, the
applicant submitted that Mr Smith was employed as a correctional
officer. DCJ
formed the view that he could not perform that role because of the WPO. His
right to work as a correctional officer
was affected by that decision. That is
not hypothetical. He is shut out from performing such a role in the future,
given the view
held within DCJ, and his rights are therefore affected because he
cannot even apply for such a position.
Foran, in reply, submitted it would be an absurd construction given the findings
of the Commissioner of Police to say that a person
covered by a WPO should be
entrusted with weapons in their employment.
submitted that the decision in
A v Commissioner for Children and Young People
could be distinguished because the person the subject of the order was still
employed as a teacher. Absent a determination by a relevant
Tribunal such as
the Industrial Relations Commission, they would be unable to remain in that
employment.
Determination
first issue as to jurisdiction is whether there is an identifiable matter
otherwise within the Commission’s jurisdiction
related to the subject
matter of the declaration sought.
accept Mr Nagle’s submission that the decision as expressed in the email
] relates to an
industrial matter. The applicant, being a registered industrial organisation,
could in my view notify a dispute about
that industrial matter. The issues in
that dispute would no doubt focus on the fairness of the decision to exclude Mr
that particular employment.
of the arguments which may be raised in such a dispute is the effect of the WPO.
On the authority of
it is not necessary that such a dispute
proceeding be extant. There is sufficient connection between the application
before the Court
and the envisaged industrial dispute to make premature a strike
out order at this point of the proceeding.
second issue is whether the declaration sought meets the tests required and
summarised so succinctly in
The plurality in that
case, said that the power to grant declaratory relief was discretionary:
“However, it is confined by the considerations which mark out the
boundaries of judicial power. Hence, declaratory relief must
be directed to the
determination of legal controversies and not to answering abstract or
hypothetical questions. The person seeking
relief must have ‘a real
interest’ and relief will not be granted if the question ‘is purely
hypothetical’,
if relief is ‘claimed in relation to circumstances
that [have] not occurred and might never happen’ or if ‘the
declaration will produce no foreseeable consequences for the
this case, to my mind, the issue is hypothetical despite Mr Nagle’s
attempts to make it “real”. Mr Smith, it
may be accepted as an
“interest”, at this point it is not a real legal interest. He does
not hold the position of correctional
officer nor is he currently an applicant
for such a position. There is no evidence that he has sought to apply and been
cannot. Mr Nagle’s submission suggesting to the contrary was more
in the nature of a rhetorical flourish.
does it assist the applicant’s case that he may have had a real interest
in the past. I accept Mr Foran’s submission
that the case in
Commission for Children and Young People
can be distinguished.
case concerned “A”, a teacher who was then employed. On 3 July 2000
Child Protection (Prohibited Employment) Act 1998
(NSW) (CP Act)
commenced. The transitional provisions permitted a “prohibited
person” to remain in employment, subject
to certain steps being taken, for
three months if that status was disclosed within one month of the commencement
of the CP Act.
made an application to the Industrial Relations Commission pursuant to section 9
of the CP Act for an order declaring
that the Act did not apply in respect of a
specified offence of which he had been convicted. Hungerford J made an order
the operation of the statutory prohibition pending final determination.
The offence of which “A” had been convicted
occurred in 1970 when he
was aged 17. The applicant’s case was that as a matter of law he was not
a “prohibited person”.
The applicant submitted that it was not a
theoretical issue because, apart from his application under section 9 of the CP
“more importantly” related to his ongoing employment. The
Commission accepted that submission. The power to make a
declaration under s
154 of the IR Act was enlivened by the related application under s 9 of the CP
was no issue raised about the matter being hypothetical in
A v Commission for
Children and Young People
The sole question before the Commission
was whether “A” was a prohibited person within the meaning of the CP
issues in this case are quite different.
turn the to the argument that
Weapons Prohibition Act
an immunity for corrections officers. The section is in the following terms:
6 Application of Act
(1) This Act binds the Crown in right of New South Wales and,
so far as the legislative power of Parliament permits, the Crown
other capacities (except as otherwise provided by this section).
(2) A person is not guilty of an offence under this Act or the
regulations only because of something done by the person while acting
ordinary course of the person’s duties—
(a) as a police officer (or as a student police officer), or
(a1) as a special constable within the meaning of section 82L
Police Act 1990
who is exercising functions of a police
officer, or
(b) as a correctional officer employed in the Department of
Corrective Services, or
(c) as a member of the police force, or as a custodial officer
(however described), of the Commonwealth or of another State or
Territory, or
(d) as a member of the armed forces of the Commonwealth, or of
any government that is allied or associated with the Commonwealth
in any war or
joint military exercise in which the Commonwealth is engaged.
(3) A person is not guilty of an offence under
because of possessing a prohibited weapon—
(a) that is being conveyed or stored in the ordinary course of
the person’s duties in the business of a carrier or warehouse
operator, or
(b) that has been seized by the person, under the authority of
any Act or other law, in the course of the person’s duties
as an employee
or officer of a government agency or public authority, or
(c) while acting in the ordinary course of the person’s
duties as a member (other than a police officer) of the NSW Police
(4) The regulations may exempt any person or class of persons
from the operation of any provision or requirement of this Act in
circumstances, and subject to such conditions, as may be specified in the
regulations. Any such regulation may create offences
in relation to a failure to
comply with a condition prescribed in relation to an exemption.
(2) applies to police, custodial officers and members of the armed forces and
provides that such persons are not guilty
of an offence “only”
because of something done in the ordinary course of their employment.
Subsection (4) permits regulations
exempting such persons from provisions of the
Act in specified circumstances. Custodial officers are for example exempted
requirement to hold a permit when performing specified duties.
accept that custodial officers will not be guilty of an offence when using or
possessing prohibited weapons in the course of their
duties. The word
“only” creates some doubt in my mind about whether a custodial
officer who is the subject of a WPO
is protected from prosecution under the
section when performing the ordinary duties of such officers. That is because
the existence
of the WPO is an additional element for that person which
distinguishes them from other custodial officers. I don’t need to
resolve this issue, however, for the reasons which follow.
(1) makes clear that the Act binds the Crown. The persons exempted under
subsection (2) are all engaged in the service
of the Crown in one way or
another. One might expect that the protections intended to be put in place by
the Act are achieved by
either the observance of permit requirements or
supervision by the authorities in charge of exempt persons such as police and
officers. It follows that, even if the custodial officer would not be
guilty of an offence, CSNSW would be expected to have regard
to the provisions
of the Act in determining whether, and in what capacity, to employ a person who
was subject to a WPO.
Weapons Prohibition Act
does not mean that CSNSW is
entitled to ignore the existence of a WPO made against one of its custodial
staff members. Indeed, in
my view the contrary is the case. The applicant and
Mr Smith may disagree with that view and that illustrates the scope of the
between the parties. The declarations sought will not resolve all of
these issues. Nor is any amendment likely to change that position.
has no legal right to require CSNSW to ignore the WPO.
Police Commissioner’s delegate has expressed the view that, in the public
interest, Mr Smith should not have access to
prohibited weapons “at any
time”. That is a matter that CSNSW could, and should, have regard to in
deciding the capacity
in which Mr Smith could and should be employed. CSNSW
appears to have done that.
my view, even if
Weapons Prohibition Act
permitted employment
as a corrections officer as though the WPO did not exist, CSNSW would not be
required to employ Mr Smith in that
capacity. The employment in such a capacity
is not merely a future event which may never happen, it is also one which would
be brought about by the declarations sought because they will not
resolve all of the issues between the parties.
Decision and
third declaration seems to depend upon the making of the first two declarations.
The submissions of the respondent about its vagueness
and lack of connection to
any material facts are also correct. For these reasons the application for
declarations will be dismissed.
The application for leave to amend has not been
formally pressed pending my decision on the respondent’s motion.
Accordingly,
it will lapse.
Court makes the following orders:
(1) The application is dismissed.
(2) Costs reserved.
Tcpt, 5 August 2025, p
Ainsworth at582
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter