URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/121.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Saglik v NSW Land and Housing Corporation; NSW Land and Housing Corporation v Pingola Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATCD 121; (28 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Saglik v NSW Land and Housing Corporation; NSW Land and Housing Corporation
v Pingola Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 121
Hearing Date(s):
1 July 2025
Date of Orders:
28 August 2025
Decision Date:
28 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
JA Rose, Senior Member
The claims in proceedings 2024/00454264 and 2025/00076180 are
Catchwords:
LEASES AND TENANCIES —
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Rights and obligations of landlords and tenants — landlord’s
obligations to maintain premises in a reasonable
state of repair
LEASES AND TENANCIES —
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
— Rights and obligations of landlords and tenants — tenants’
right to reasonable quiet enjoyment of rented
TENANCIES —
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
(NSW) — Rent —
Excessive rent
Legislation Cited:
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
Cases Cited:
Advance Fitness Corporation Pty Ltd v Bondi Diggers Memorial & Sporting
[1999] NSWSC 264
Greco v NSW Land & Housing Corporation
[2021] NSWCATCD 25
Makowska v St George Community Housing Ltd
[2020] NSWCATAP 159
McC v Director of Housing
[2009] VCAT
Northern Sandblasting Pty Ltd v Harris
[1997] HCA 39
(1997) 188 CLR 313
NSW Aboriginal Housing Office [2017] NSWCATAP 9
Sewell v Zvirblis
[2022] NSWCATAP 337
Southwark LBC v Tanner
[2001] 1 AC 1
Warner v Hung (No
(2011) 297 ALR 56
[2011] FCA 1123
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
In proceeding 2024/454264:
Fatmagul Saglik (Applicant)
NSW Land and
Housing Corporation (Respondent)
In proceeding 2025/76180:
and Housing Corporation (Applicant)
Pingola Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
In proceeding 2024/454264:
Ms F Saglik, in person (Applicant)
Ratsabouth, authorised officer (Respondent)
In proceeding
2025/76180:
Ms K Ratsabouth, authorised officer (Applicant)
No appearance
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00454264 and 2025/00076180
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction and procedural history
Pty Ltd is the owner of a strata-titled residential townhouse at [address], NSW
). In or before May 2020, Pingola let the premises to NSW
Land & Housing Corporation (
) under a residential tenancy
agreement (the
head tenancy agreement
). NSWLHC then sub-let the premises
under a separate residential tenancy agreement, dated 6 May
subtenancy agreement
). Ms Saglik continues to occupy the
premises under that arrangement.
Saglik complains that the premises have become infested with bird lice since
applications in the
(1) An application by Ms Saglik against her landlord, NSWLHC, which she lodged
with the Tribunal on 5 December 2024 (
Ms Saglik’s application
– which (as amended) alleges that the bird lice has infested her
family’s clothing, shoes, cars, carpets, beds and everywhere
the premises and seeks orders that NSWLHC:
(a) address and resolve the infestation at the premises, by hiring people to
undertake a deep cleaning of the premises and Ms Saglik’s
(b) carry out the necessary repairs in the premises, to ensure that the premises
is in good condition; and
(c) pay compensation of $15,000 to Ms Saglik, covering personal property items
Ms Saglik alleged were infested with fleas, and additional
electricity and pest
control costs that she believed she had incurred in dealing with the bird lice
(2) A cross-application by NSWLHC against Pingola, which was filed on
26 February 2025 (
NSWLHC’s application
), seeking orders
against Pingola under
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
) and the head tenancy agreement, that Pingola carry out
the repair work sought by Ms Saglik to remove the bird lice and that Pingola
NSWLHC compensation of $15,000 to cover the loss and damage claimed by Ms
heard both matters in Parramatta on 1 July 2025, reserving my decision at the
end of the hearing. For the reasons that I set out
below, I have decided that
both claims must be dismissed on the ground that the Tribunal is not satisfied
to the civil standard (being
the balance of probabilities) on the material put
before the Tribunal that there are grounds to make the orders sought in either
Appearances
Saglik appeared for herself at the hearing, while NSWLHC was represented by its
authorised officer, Ms Ratsabouth. There was no
appearance by or on behalf of
Pingola at the hearing.
Tribunal file for the NSWLHC application contains a copy of a notice of hearing
dated 23 May 2025 that was issued by the Registry
and addressed to Pingola in
the care of its managing agents, Laing & Simmons real estate at Merrylands
managing agents
), advising Pingola of the date time and place of the
hearing. On reviewing that file at the hearing, I was satisfied that the notice
of hearing was sent to Pingola’s managing agents by email; that the
transmission of the hearing notice did not fail; and that
Pingola had been given
adequate notice of the hearing.
conclusion was confirmed when Ms Ratsabouth read to the Tribunal an email from
the managing agents, stating that (in summary)
Pingola would not appear at the
hearing and that it was happy for the hearing to proceed in its absence.
those circumstances, I was satisfied that the justice of the case required that
the hearing of the two matters proceed in the absence
of Pingola, having regard
to the fact that (a) both Ms Saglik and NSWLHC had lodged documents in
accordance with the Tribunal’s
directions and had appeared at the hearing
ready to present their respective cases to the Tribunal; (b) that neither of
those parties
could obtain the relief they sought without an order of the
Tribunal and (c) that both those parties would have been seriously
if the matter was not heard on that day. Consequently, I proceeded to
hear both matters.
The hearing
hearing proceeded in the usual manner: after the parties present at the hearing
made brief opening statements they were given
opportunities to present the
evidence that they relied on at the hearing and to question the other
party’s witnesses, before
making their arguments to the Tribunal and
responding to the arguments made against them. I am satisfied that all parties
had adequate
opportunities to present their respective cases to the
opening her case, Ms Saglik stated that, while the tenancy began five years ago,
the infestation of bird lice was only noticed
in October 2024. She asserted that
the infestation came from pigeons that were nesting in the rainwater head at the
top of the downpipe
on the garage wall and spread from there into the house.
Despite her best efforts, including calling pest controllers to spray the
premises twice, she has been unable to control the bird lice. She seeks repair
orders to compel NSWLHC to remove the lice from the
premises and to seal the
premises against further infestations, together with a rent reduction of $185
per week and/or compensation
for economic and non-economic losses, asserting
that NSWLHC has failed to maintain the premises in good repair and has
unreasonably with her quiet enjoyment of the premises.
asserted in its opening address that it was not notified of the infestation
until November 2024, after Ms Saglik returned from
overseas. Nevertheless, it
asserted, this was an issue for Pingola and/or the owners corporation, who it
says sprayed the premises
and undertook the relevant repairs in December 2024.
It further asserted that what Ms Saglik now claims is bird lice is actually
fluff. Consequently, NSWLHC denied that it had breached the repair obligation or
the right to quiet enjoyment under the tenancy
agreement, or that Ms Saglik is
entitled to any of the orders sought against it.
also asserted that it gave Ms Saglik alternative accommodation for 2-3 nights
while the repairs were undertaken, but Ms Saglik
only stayed the one night
before returning to the premises. Ms Saglik asserted in reply that she could not
use that alternative accommodation
after one night because the motel concerned
was infested with bed bugs.
The burden of proof
each proceeding, the party seeking relief carries the burden of satisfying the
Tribunal of the facts that, in the absence of other
facts being proved, would
justify the grant of the relief they seek on the civil standard. In short
compass, this means that:
(1) the applicant in each proceeding must affirmatively persuade the Tribunal of
the facts that support their respective claims on
the balance of probabilities;
(2) the respondent in each proceeding must also persuade the Tribunal of any
facts that support any positive defences that they raise
in respect of the
claims made against them.
proof of a fact is required, the Tribunal must feel an “actual
persuasion” of the occurrence or existence of that
fact before it can be
found. Actual persuasion is achieved where the affirmative of an allegation is
made out to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Tribunal. The seriousness of an
allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given
description, and the
gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular
finding are considerations that must affect whether the fact has been proved
the Tribunal’s reasonable satisfaction.
can be concluded from this analysis, reasonable satisfaction should not be
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or
indirect inferences: see
Warner v Hung (No 2)
(2011) 297 ALR 56
[2011] FCA 1123
to be founded on the available evidence, together with any inferences that can
reasonably be drawn from the evidence.
The applicable law
44(1)(b) of the RT Act gives the Tribunal power to make an order, on the
application of a tenant, finding that the rent payable
under a residential
tenancy agreement is excessive and to determine that the rent payable by the
tenant should not exceed a nominated
amount for a period of up to 12 months,
where the landlord has reduced or withdrawn goods, services or facilities that
are provided
with the premises. That section provides (relevantly, bolding in
original, my underlining):
44 Tenant’s remedies for excessive rent
Excessive rent orders
The Tribunal may, on the
application of a tenant, make any of the following orders--
(b) an order that rent payable under an existing or proposed
residential tenancy agreement is excessive, having regard to the
reduction or
withdrawal by the landlord of any goods, services or facilities provided with
the residential premises and that, from
a specified day, the rent for
residential premises must not exceed a specified amount.
Applications on withdrawal of goods or services
tenant may, before the end of a tenancy, make an application that the rent is
excessive, having regard to the reduction or withdrawal
of any goods, services
or facilities provided with the residential premises, even if those goods,
services or facilities were provided
under a separate or a previous contract,
agreement or arrangement.
Determination of excessive rent
For the purposes of
making an order under this section, the Tribunal may declare that amounts
payable under a contract, agreement
or arrangement under which goods, services
or facilities are provided to the tenant are rent.
(5) The Tribunal may have regard to the following in
determining whether ... rent is excessive--
(a) the general market level of rents for comparable premises
in the locality or a similar locality,
(b) the landlord’s outgoings under the residential
tenancy agreement or proposed agreement,
(c) any fittings, appliances or other goods, services or
facilities provided with the residential premises,
(d) the state of repair of the residential premises,
(e) the accommodation and amenities provided in the
residential premises,
(f) any work done to the residential premises by or on behalf
of the tenant,
(g) when the last increase occurred,
(h) any other matter it considers relevant (other than the
income of the tenant or the tenant’s ability to afford the rent
Effect of excessive rent order
An order by the
Tribunal specifying a maximum amount of rent--
(a) has effect for the period (of not more than 12 months)
specified by the Tribunal, and
(b) binds only the landlord and tenant under the residential
tenancy agreement or proposed residential tenancy agreement under
which the rent
is payable.
Note : A tenant under a social housing tenancy agreement may also apply for an
order that rent is excessive if a rent rebate is cancelled
(see section 141(1)).
50 provides for a tenant’s right to live in rented premises without
unreasonable interference from the landlord or anyone
acting on their behalf.
The section provides:
50 Tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment
(1) A tenant is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the residential
premises without interruption by the landlord or any person claiming
by, through
or under the landlord or having superior title (such as a head landlord) to that
of the landlord.
(2) A landlord or landlord’s agent must not interfere
with, or cause or permit any interference with, the reasonable peace,
: Maximum penalty--10 penalty units.
(3) A landlord or landlord’s agent must take all
reasonable steps to ensure that the landlord’s other neighbouring
do not interfere with the reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant in
using the residential premises.
(4) This section is a term of every residential tenancy
51 sets out the general obligations for the use of rental premises by a tenant.
It provides (relevantly, my underlining):
51 Use of premises by tenant
(2) A tenant must ... --
(a) keep the residential premises in a reasonable state of
cleanliness, having regard to the condition of the premises at the commencement
of the tenancy,
(b) notify the landlord of any damage to the residential
premises as soon as practicable after becoming aware of the damage.
(4) In this section--
residential premises
” includes everything
provided with the residential premises (whether under the residential tenancy
agreement or not) for use
by the tenant.
(5) This section is a term of every residential tenancy
63 sets out a landlord’s general repair obligations under a residential
tenancy agreement. It provides (my underlining):
63 Landlord’s general obligation
(1) A landlord must provide and maintain the residential
premises in a reasonable state of repair, having regard to the age of,
payable for and prospective life of the premises.
(2) A landlord’s obligation to provide and maintain the
residential premises in a reasonable state of repair applies even
tenant had notice of the state of disrepair before entering into occupation of
the residential premises.
(3) A landlord is not in breach of the obligation to provide
and maintain the residential premises in a reasonable state of repair
state of disrepair is caused by the tenant’s breach of this Part.
(4) This section is a term of every residential tenancy
65 empowers the Tribunal to make orders compelling a landlord to undertake
repairs to the rented property, providing (relevantly,
underlining):
65 Tenants’ remedies for repairs--Tribunal orders
Orders for which tenant may apply
The Tribunal may,
on application by a tenant, make any of the following orders--
(a) an order that the landlord carry out specified repairs,
(b).(c) ...
Orders for repairs
The Tribunal may make an order
that the landlord carry out specified repairs only if it determines that the
landlord has breached
the obligation under this Act to maintain the residential
premises in a reasonable state of repair, having regard to the age of,
payable for and prospective life of the premises.
(3) In deciding whether to make an order under this section,
the Tribunal--
(b) may take into consideration whether the landlord failed to
act with reasonable diligence to have the repair carried out.
(3A) The Tribunal must not determine that a landlord has
breached the obligation unless it is satisfied that the landlord had notice
the need for the repair or ought reasonably to have known of the need for the
(4)-(6) ...
Additionally,
section 187(1)(d) and (2) empower the Tribunal to order a party to pay
compensation to another party for breach of a
residential tenancy agreement,
including for breach of the landlord’s obligation to provide and maintain
residential premises
in a reasonable state of repair or the landlord’s
breach of the tenant’s right to reasonable quiet enjoyment of the
The evidence
(a) Ms Saglik’s evidence
Saglik relied on four bundles of documents, being: the bundles that she had
lodged with the Tribunal in respect of her application
on 12 February 2025
(exhibit T1), 29 April 2025 (exhibit T2) and 6 May 2025 (exhibit T3), as well as
a further copy of the statement
from a Yildiz Yenilmez dated 15 January 2025
that was in exhibit T1 which she handed up at the hearing (exhibit T4) and some
screenshots
taken from a mobile phone (exhibit T5).
did not object to any of those documents being used in evidence. It also did not
seek to cross-examine the makers of any of
the statements or reports that were
included in Ms Saglik’s evidence. Instead, it argued that each of those
documents should
be given low weight in the Tribunal’s determination
because they were not sworn evidence.
T1 contained an unsworn statement given by Yildiz Yenilmez (a friend of Ms
Saglik), who said she visited Ms Saglik at the
premises on 10 November 2024. She
reported that when Ms Saglik opened the door:
As soon as I saw her, I noticed she was crying, appeared stressed and depressed,
and had red dots all over her skin. Concerned, I
immediately asked her what had
happened. While we were standing at the front door, she explained her situation
However, I chose not to enter her home because I was concerned about the
possibility of getting infected with fleas. After speaking
briefly, I returned
As Ms Yenilmez’ statement was not sworn and she was not cross-examined
on her evidence, I give the statement low weight in coming
to my decision.
Saglik also produced another pair of letters from long-standing friends, who
commented on Ms Saglik’s predicament in largely-identical
terms, with both
letters stating:
... I am a close friend of [Ms Saglik]. We have been friends for over [15 or 18]
years, and during that time, I have never seen her
as distressed and unhappy as
she has been lately.
[Ms Saglik] has been enduring an extremely difficult time due to a persistent
flea infestation in her home. She has taken numerous
steps to address this
issue, including hiring pest control services, purchasing special sprays or
traps, and deep cleaning regularly,
but despite her efforts, the infestation
remains unresolved.
When I went to visit her, I was unable to enter her home out of fear of being
bitten or bringing fleas back with me. I witnessed
her suffering firsthand; her
arms and legs were covered in itchy, sore bites, and she was clearly in pain.
While explaining her situation
to me, she experienced an anxiety attack, and her
emotional state was deeply troubling.
[Ms Saglik] is an exceptionally clean and responsible person. She takes great
pride in maintaining her home, performing regular cleaning
throughout the week.
In all the years I have visited her, her house has always been immaculate. The
situation is entirely out of
her control, yet it has taken a severe toll on her
The infestation has prevented her from inviting friends and family over,
isolating her socially. It has also disrupted her daily
life and emotional
well-being. She has experienced heightened anxiety, difficulty sleeping, and
extreme frustration.
I am submitting this letter to shed light on [Ms Saglik’s], and I hope
that my testimony underscores the urgency and severity
of her case.
Thank you for your time and understanding.
Because of the nearly-identical form of those letters and the fact that
neither person has signed the letters by their own hand, I
have significant
doubts about whether that evidence is truly the work of the persons named on
each letter. There is a distinct possibility
that the letters have been written
for those people, or that the letters have been produced through a
collaboration. Further, neither
of those letters have been sworn and the persons
named on each letter did not give evidence directly to the Tribunal. Because of
those matters and the general terms in which both letters are written, I do not
find those letters to be particularly probative of
the issues before the
Tribunal. I therefore give those reports very low weight in coming to my
Saglik also produced two bundles of photographs. One bundle showed a large
number of red and inflamed areas on the arms and legs
of someone, presumably Ms
Saglik. The other bundle showed what appeared to be minor cracks or similar
defects in internal walls of
an unspecified building. Both bundles were
unverified and undated, reducing their usefulness to the Tribunal in deciding
the matter.
(b) NSWLHC’s evidence
relied on the bundle of documents that it had lodged on 3 March 2025 in respect
of Ms Saglik’s application (exhibit L1),
together with electronic copies
of some photographs and emails that were handed up at the hearing (exhibit L2).
Saglik did not object to any of those documents being used as evidence in the
hearing. She also did not seek to cross-examine any
of NSWLHC’s witnesses
on their evidence.
(c) Pingola’s
did not submit any documents for the Tribunal to
of the parties objected to the Tribunal having jurisdiction to hear or determine
the claims in either of the proceedings. Nevertheless,
I am also satisfied on
the evidence produced to the Tribunal that there are residential tenancy
agreements in place between Ms Saglik
and NSWLHC and between NSWLHC and Pingola,
and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine the claims in both
proceedings
under the RT Act.
amounts claimed in both proceedings are also within the Tribunal’s
monetary jurisdiction under that Act.
The background
weighed and considered the evidence produced by both parties, I am satisfied on
the balance of probabilities that the background
facts of the matter are as
(1) The premises is a three-storey residential townhouse in a strata titled
townhouse complex at [address], NSW. No evidence was
led to establish the age of
the townhouse with any certainty, however the sequential strata plan
registration number that has been
given to the plan and the photographic
evidence of the building before the Tribunal leads me to conclude that the
premises was likely
constructed in the early to mid-1990’s.
(2) The premises included an inbuilt garage. Part of the garage was covered by
the upper floors of the building. The remaining part
of the garage roof drained
to a rectangular rainwater head on the outside of the building, which was
situated at the top of a stormwater
downpipe. The top of the rainwater head was
open to the sky. The parties agree that birds nested in the top of that
rainwater head,
as shown in photographs produced by the tenant.
(3) While the head tenancy agreement between Pingola and NSWLHC was not produced
in evidence, I am satisfied that such an agreement
exists and that it contains
the terms prescribed in the standard form residential tenancy agreement under
the RT Act. Those terms
(a) Pingola is required to keep the premises in a reasonable state of repair,
considering the age of, the rent paid for and the prospective
life of the
(b) NSWLHC is required to keep the premises reasonably clean, and must notify
Pingola as soon as practicable of any damage to the
(4) Ms Saglik and NSWLHC entered into the subtenancy agreement on 6 May
2020, which generally complied with the standard form residential
agreement prescribed under the RT Act and also contained additional terms and
special conditions. The terms of that subtenancy
agreement include:
(a) The initial fixed term of the agreement was for two years starting on 11 May
2020 and ending on 8 May 2022, following which Ms
Saglik is permitted to occupy
the premises on a periodic tenancy that was generally on the same terms as the
original agreement.
(b) Ms Saglik is required to pay rent at the rate of $630 per week, although
NSWLHC may agree to subsidise that rent from time to
time, as set out in the
(c) Ms Saglik is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the premises, in the same terms
as section 50 of the RT Act, described above (clause
(d) NSWLHC is required to keep the premises in a reasonable state of repair,
considering the age of, the rent paid for and the prospective
life of the
premises (clause 16.3).
(e) Ms Saglik is required to keep the premises reasonably clean (clause 14.1)
and must notify NSWLHC as soon as practicable of any
damage to the premises
(clause 14.2).
(5) At all material times, Ms Saglik has resided at the premises with her two
daughters, now aged 25 and 18 years old. She presently
receives a rental subsidy
that reduces her total weekly rent.
(6) The evidence establishes that Ms Saglik has suffered from eczema since at
least early November 2008. This was reported in the
medical evidence produced by
(7) On 23 October 2024, Ms Saglik was admitted to the Emergency Department at
Auburn Hospital, where she was
“managed ... for pruritic rash
is, itching skin and a visible rash]
from flea bites”
legs, arms, trunk, back and abdomen. In the history that she gave to the
hospital staff, she said that she had a bird nest
outside her window which was
removed and that she had noticed fleas in her carpet in her living room, which
she had been spraying
with insect repellent but that was not working and she
felt things biting her when she was in the living room.
(8) Ms Saglik engaged Pest-Proof Solutions on about 25 October 2024, to
undertake a
“general pest control + flea treatment”
premises. Pest-Proof Solutions carried out a follow-up treatment at the premises
on 9 November 2024.
(9) NSWLHC conducted a client service visit to the premises on 6 November 2024,
at which time they took a bundle of about 11 photographs
to record the condition
of the premises. The report from that visit noted that all rooms in the property
had been inspected and that
there was no sign of any damage to the premises
(also noting that Ms Saglik’s daughters were sleeping in their bedroom at
time of the visit). It also recorded that Ms Saglik did not raise any
maintenance concerns or other issues at that time, such as
the presence of bird
lice in the premises. The photographs included in the report also did not show
any evidence of any bird lice
problem at the premises. I would have expected
that Ms Saglik would have raised it with the inspecting officer at that time if
had been a problem with bird lice at the premises at this time, however
the first complaint to the landlord that is in evidence did
not occur for
several more weeks, to which I now turn.
(10) On or shortly before 26 November 2024, Ms Saglik made contact with
NSWLHC’s Maintenance Response Centre by telephone,
raising concerns about
her wellbeing because of the birds nesting in the roof and being bitten by fleas
and mites that she believed
had been caused by the birds.
(11) On 29 November 2024, Ms Saglik made a second maintenance request to
NSWLHC’s Maintenance Response Centre using its online
portal, with the
report noting:
Birds are nesting and fleas are throughout the property, this is a constant
issue and needs to be actioned. Tenan has sprayed ...
over and over again
in her property to no avail. Birds need ...
removed area where they are
nesting needs to be closed off to prevent them from coming back. House needs to
be flea bombed.
The same day (29 November), Dr. Suleiman Demdl issued a medical certificate
addressed to NSWLHC, setting out Ms Saglik’s various
medical conditions
and reporting that Ms Saglik:
... Is currently suffering from a bird lice infestation at her residence which
she hasn’t [been] able to get rid of despite
pesticiding the property. She
is suffering from persistent severe itching and rash as a reaction to the lice.
This is also flaring
up her pre-existing allergic eczema [which the certificate
noted was active 3 November 2008]
NSWLHC then arranged two nights’ temporary accommodation for Ms Saglik
in a motel. Ms Saglik stayed only one night in the motel
before returning to the
premises, complaining that the motel unit was infested with bed bugs.
(12) On 2 December, Pingola’s managing agents noted that the owners
corporation had issued a work order for the birds nest issue,
asking NSWLHC to
advise Ms Saglik that the trades will attend to her soon and “to be
(13) On 3 December, Ms Saglik sent an email to Pingola’s managing
agents, writing:
I am writing to you about the bird infestation in my home coming from pigeons on
my roof. I have been telling the people that come
to my house for inspection
plus even showed them. But I got totally ignored by your company and housing.
Now my house is infested
with bird fleas inside and out. It’s out of
control and has infested in our furniture carpet tiles, clothing and our beds.
It’s been 2 months I have [been] dealing with this on my own and have
called out pest control twice on my own cost and have
spent so much money on
insecticide sprays. Even the housing and I have told you by emails and you still
haven’t done anything.
Me and my family is very exhausted tired and bitten
all over. I have severe allergy to mites and my health has gone so bad.
in our beds and every night I have to steam iron my clothing’s
and beddings. So whatever we do in our home is not working till
you remove the
bird nest and treat the whole house. I have taken this further to the tenants
Tribunal and ncat. This is an urgent
matter pls do what supposed to be done by
The message was accompanied by digital copies of a video recording and a
photograph, but the evidence does not disclose what was shown
(14) The managing agents acknowledged that email the same afternoon,
apologising “for the challenges you and your family have
been facing and
any delays in addressing the issue to date”, adding:
... To address the matter promptly:
Inspection and Nest Removal:
We have arrange[d] for a
qualified pest control specialist to inspect your property and remove any bird
nests on the roof immediately.
House Treatment:
Following the nest removal, the
property will be treated to address the flea infestation both inside and
Ms Saglik sent a further email to the managing agents the next morning,
seeking a reimbursement of the amount that she has spent in
dealing with the
flea issue to that point and a rent reduction, to which the managing agents
referred her to NSWLHC.
(15) Pingola’s pest controller visited the premises on 5 December
– just 9 days after Ms Saglik made her 26 November complaint
NSWLHC. After they left, Ms Saglik sent further emails to NSWLHC and to
Pingola’s managing agents, writing in each case:
... the pesticide professional came in my home today did the roofing a quick
spray and lightly sprayed indoors leaving me with the
bird flea infestation all
in our cupboards under and in furniture. I’m not happy with how they
treated the house. They didn’t
spray the windows or vertical blinds. The
air con is infested aswell. They said it’s coming from there too. But
take any action about it.
Pls I am in desperate help.
I can’t open my windows for fresh air I have to have the air con on
constantly and I’m still getting bitten and our beds
I have attached a video on how they sprayed it. The shiny areas are only the
places they sprayed.
That evening, she sent another email to NSWLHC which attached a large bundle
of photographic images and stated:
I have attached pictures showing the extent of the flea infestation in my home.
They are in our beds, cupboards, clothing and shoes.
I understand this is a
challenging situation, and I am sending you these attachments as proof of how
infested everything is.
The last picture was taken today after a pest control professional came and very
lightly sprayed only the corners of my house, as
if treating cockroaches instead
of fleas. I informed them that my whole house is infested and asked them to
spray everywhere, but
they declined.
I am concerned about the effectiveness of the treatment, and I would appreciate
assistance in deep cleaning and properly spraying
the entire house. The
professional did not spray the windows, screens, outdoor walls, or covers Could
we discuss a more thorough
approach to address this issue?
Thank you for your attention to this matter.
(16) Ms Saglik sent another email to the managing agents the next day
(6 December), attaching a video recording and writing:
This is the video I took this morning showing the fleas on my bed. The pesticide
men said they can be entering from the air conditioning.
I still cannot open my
windows due to the pest control not spraying them and the fly screens.
Can you get it cleaned asap. I really want the fleas to go. My legs are bitten
again and very extreme.
(17) Ms Saglik sent a further email to Pingola’s managing agents on
9 December, writing:
I’m still waiting for an answer my house is bird flea infested, and you
are treating it like I’ve got cockroaches. I’m
still getting flea
bites and they are ending up in our beds. We still can’t open the windows
because every time I do I feel
the fleas crawling on my legs and start biting
me. The house must be bombed and get rid of the eggs and the growth of the
The pest control said they can be entering from the [ducted] air con. It
needs to be cleaned.
The birds are still sitting on the box and coming to my windows. The fly screens
are infested as well. We can’t open the windows
for fresh air.
I sent you a video as evidence to see and prove it.
The managing agents responded the same day, acknowledging the email but
writing “you need to email NSW Housing for all this”.
(18) On about 11 December, Ms Saglik had a long conversation with her pest
controller by text message, in which she complained that
she was still
“fighting the fleas” and sought advice about how she can clean fleas
on her furniture and belongings.
(19) On 17 December, NSWLHC’s client services officer wrote to Ms
Saglik, stating (my underlining):
I’m writing to you today to confirm that the real estate agents who manage
your property have attended and completed a spray
for pests and report that
there is no evidence of fleas at your home.
Please be advised to stop contacting the real estate agents directly.
Please be aware that when you have any maintenance requests that you report them
to the Maintenance Centre on 1800... or report non-urgent
requests on the My
Housing app.
Please don’t contact the agents directly as our maintenance team will
liaise directly with them. ...
(20) On 27 December, Ms Saglik wrote to NSWLHC in which she requested NSWLHC
hire a professional flea exterminator, describing her
situation at that time as
I am writing to you regarding the ongoing flea infestation in my home. Despite
my previous emails, the issue remains unresolved.
The strata sent pest control,
but they have not succeeded in eliminating the fleas. I am still being bitten,
and the fleas are infesting
our furniture, clothing, and especially our
Could you please arrange for pest control to visit again and treat the unit
comprehensively? Although I have provided evidence of
the flea problem, they
denied it and only sprayed the floors. My home needs to be professionally ...
[There is an obvious cut and join at this point in the email that is in
evidence. The email then continued:]
...situation has severely impacted my mental health, causing my depression to
worsen and leading to PTSD. The infestation has disrupted
our sleep routine,
especially mine, as I suffer from allergic reactions to the bites.
Could you please help resolve this problem by hiring a professional flea
exterminator?
(21) During the same period, Ms Saglik made a large number of telephone calls
to NSWLHC and the managing agents, as shown in the telephone
call logs contained
in exhibit T1.
(22) On 30 December, Ms Saglik engaged Bugfree Pest Control to undertake a
“blanket spray” at the premises. On 15 January,
Ms Saglik purchased
a quantity of “Tekka Pro”, paying $103.75. In the absence of
evidence on the point, I assume (without
making any finding) that the product
concerned was a pest-control chemical.
(23) On 3 March, Ms Saglik wrote to NSWLHC:
... to formally request compensation under Section 187(1)(d), an Order for
Repairs under Section 65(1)(a), and a Rent Reduction under
Section 44(1)(b)
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
(NSW) due to ongoing issues in my rental
As set out above, she lodged a similar application with the Tribunal on
29 April 2025.
I note that Ms Saglik purchased (amongst other things) a variety of various pest
control products and washing products at
local supermarkets between November
2024 and April 2025, for which she has produced receipts in her
Ms Saglik’s pest control report
from that chronology, Exhibit T2 contains a report on Bugfree Pest Control
letterhead which states:
Following multiple visits to the property since December 30, 2024, we have
identified a severe bird lice infestation on site. Despite
our ongoing efforts
to treat the infestation, it remains widespread, with the pests primarily
concentrated around areas where birds
have nested.
Since our first visit, we have applied targeted treatments using non-toxic,
child- and pet-friendly solutions to address the issue.
However, the infestation
continues to be severe, affecting both indoor and outdoor spaces.
Given the persistent nature of the problem, we recommend additional treatments
and monitoring to ensure complete eradication. We
remain committed to resolving
the issue and will continue to work with you until it is fully under control.
Saglik states that she received that report from Bugfree Pest Control on or
in this proceeding.
However it is difficult to give that report much weight, for several
(1) The report is not dated. Consequently, it is difficult to identify when the
report was prepared and, therefore, when it speaks
(2) The report is not signed; nor is the maker of the report or their authority
to represent Bugfree Pest Control identified in any
(3) Similarly, the report does not identify the qualifications of the person who
made the report, or the basis on which the maker
relies to express the findings
and opinions that are stated in the report.
(4) The report refers to an unspecified number of “multiple” visits
to the site, which could have taken place at any
time over a five-month
(5) The report does not set out any specific opinion on how large the
infestation is beyond asserting in general terms that it is
“severe”, “onsite” and “widespread”; or
where the infestation referred to is located within the
indoor space; or how the
infestation may have moved into the house from outdoor areas.
(6) The conclusions expressed in the report are bare assertions that do not
allow the Tribunal to understand or examine the reasoning
or methodology applied
to the background facts asserted in the body of the report.
a hearing under the rules of evidence, the report would most likely be excluded
for those reasons. However this hearing is not
being conducted under the rules
of evidence. The above issues are, nevertheless, relevant in assessing the
weight that can be given
to the report. In this case, I find the report to be of
little use because of those issues, as I will now explain.
at face value, the highest that the unsigned and undated report goes is to
assert (in general terms) that there was a large/severe/widespread
infestation inside and outside the building on or about 30 December 2024, that
has been treated by unspecified “targeted
treatments” over an
unspecified period and has proved to be resistant to those treatments as at the
(unspecified) date the
report was prepared. Even if I assume for the purpose of
the proceeding that the report, with all of those faults, nevertheless
corroborates
Ms Saglik’s claim that there was a bird lice infestation
inside the premises on 30 December 2024, the report does not assist
Tribunal in determining on the balance of probabilities how the infestation came
inside the building; or how (if at all) the
infestation arose from a defect in
the building that was within the scope of the landlord’s repair
obligations under the tenancy
The photographic
Saglik has also produced a bundle of undated and unverified photographs, which
she asserts shows various minor cracks or other
defects in internal walls of the
premises. The photographs concerned have no probative value as they are
unverified: no evidence
has been produced to establish where, when or in what
circumstances the photographs were taken. The cracks also appear to be small
consistent with a building that may be in the order of 30 years old. The overall
conclusion that I reach from examining those
unverified photographs is that the
cracks concerned are cosmetic only. The evidence does not establish that these
cracks have compromised
the structural integrity of the building or that they
have facilitated the entry of any bird lice into the premises. Consequently,
am not satisfied that repairing those minor cracks would be necessary in order
to maintain the premises in a reasonable state of
repair, or that bird lice has
entered the premises through or because of those
Consideration – applying the law to the facts as
have determined the two claims before the Tribunal based on these findings.
I indicated towards the top of these reasons, Ms Saglik has the burden of
proving all of the elements of her claim in order to
succeed (as does NSWLHC in
its claim against Pingola).
will firstly address Ms Saglik’s claim that the infestation is
NSWLHC’s responsibility; together with NSWLHC’s
consequential claim
that the infestation is Pingola’s responsibility, through a failure to
maintain the premises. I will then
address Ms Saglik’s claim of a breach
of her right to quiet enjoyment and her claim for a rent reduction under section
of the RT Act.
(a) The claims of
failure to repair
issues raised in this dispute fall close to the cusp between (firstly) the
landlord’s repair and maintenance obligations
under section 63 and the
residential tenancy agreement, and (secondly) the tenant’s own cleaning
obligations under section
51 and the residential tenancy agreement. There is
consequently a significant factual issue about whether the flea or bird lice
infestation
that Ms Saglik complains of has been caused by a failure to repair
or maintain the premises, or if it is a cleaning issue for which
responsible. Ms Saglik has the burden of demonstrating on the balance of
probabilities that the infestation has been caused
by a failure to repair or
maintain the premises to the required standard.
the many cases that have come before the Tribunal over many years, identifying
which party is responsible for a pest infestation
depends on the particular
circumstances that were applicable at that time:
(1) if the infestation existed at the start of the tenancy, then the landlord is
responsible under the landlord’s repair and
maintenance obligation;
(2) if the infestation was caused by the tenant’s actions or lack of
cleanliness, then the tenant is responsible under the
tenant’s obligation
to maintain the premises in a reasonable state of cleanliness;
(3) if the infestation was caused by a defect in the property, then the landlord
is responsible under the landlord’s repair
and maintenance obligation;
(4) if the infestation has come from an external source, the origin of which is
unclear, then responsibility for the infestation
will depend on the evidence and
the operation of the tenancy agreement.
this case, Ms Saglik has the burden of proving (a) that the bird lice
infestation was caused by a factor for which her landlord,
responsible and (b) that her landlord, NSWLHC breached the tenancy
agreement by failing to maintain the premises in a
reasonable state of repair.
NSWLHC has the same burden in respect of its claim against its landlord, Pingola
arising out of the same
Gummow J stated in
Northern Sandblasting Pty Ltd v Harris
[1997] HCA 39
(1997) 188 CLR
, at 370-371, two criteria must be met for there to be a breach of an express
covenant by a landlord to maintain premises in the required
state of repair:
the landlord must have sufficient information about the existence
of the alleged defect that would put a reasonable landlord on inquiry
whether repair works are needed; and
, thereafter the landlord
must have failed to carry out the necessary works
with reasonable
. Consequently, each tenant must prove that (1) their
respective landlord had notice of the need for repair or ought reasonably to
have known of the need for repair; (2) the lice infestation is linked to a
defect or failure to repair; and (3) that landlord failed
to conduct the repair
with reasonable expedition.
this case, the infestation is alleged to have arisen more than four years into
the tenancy, with no prior history of any previous
infestation. While Ms Saglik
alleges that the lice came in from outside, as a result of a bird nesting in the
rainwater head, there
is no evidence that demonstrates that the rainwater head
was defective, or how the lice entered the premises. That assertion is,
respect, speculative at best.
rainwater head and downpipe concerned appear to be constructed and installed
normally, with an open top to allow excess rainwater
to overflow if the gutter
it serves overfills – which has since been covered over by Ms
Saglik’s pest controller with
bird netting. The evidence does not
establish that the rainwater head required repair in order to comply with either
repair and maintenance obligation under section 63 or either
tenancy agreement.
Saglik asserts that the lice probably entered through the window screens at the
premises, or through the air conditioning servicing
the premises; or through the
ground space under the building, but that is mere speculation on her part. She
has not produced sufficient
evidence to show how the bird lice entered the
premises. Further, Ms Saglik has not produced evidence that establishes that
was a causal link between a bird nesting in that one rainwater head
(either before or after it was netted by Ms Saglik’s pest
controller) and
the entry of bird lice into the premises.
while Ms Saglik (a) was admitted to Auburn Hospital on 23 October 2024 with a
rash over her body from flea bites, and (b)
arranged her own pest controller to
undertake a general pest control and flea treatment at the premises on
25 October and 9 November
2024, there is no evidence before the Tribunal to
establish that Ms Saglik notified either NSWLHC or Pingola/its managing agent of
the flea/bird lice problem until she contacted NSWLHC’s Maintenance
Response Centre by telephone on 26 November 2024, a full
month later. As
mentioned above, there is no record of any bird lice infestation or any
complaint about a potential bird lice infestation
in the record of
NSWLHC’s client service visit on 6 November 2024, and there is no record
of any attempt made by Ms Saglik
to contact either landlord until 26 November.
situation changed after that date. From 26 November, onwards, Ms Saglik was in
regular contact with both NSWLHC and Pingola’s
managing agent, pressing
her complaints that there was a bird lice infestation at that time. NSWLHC also
acted promptly to address
those complaints: by 2 December (6 days later)
NSWLHC had issued a work order to address the bird nest/bird lice issue. NSWLHC
also arranged for Ms Saglik to stay away from the premises for a few nights,
but Ms Saglik did not use all of that accommodation
because of her complaints
following day (3 December),
Pingola’s managing agents had also arranged
for a pest control specialist to inspect the premises and treat the premises. By
Ms Saglik’s account, that pest controller visited the property two days
later (5 December).
her subsequent correspondence, Ms Saglik made unsubstantiated allegations that
the treatment the owner’s pest controller
gave the premises was negligent,
but those complaints were not supported by any evidence – beyond Ms
Saglik’s assertions
– of the work that was undertaken, or any
suitable training, qualifications or experience that gave Ms Saglik sufficient
to judge appropriately the quality of the work that the pest
controller undertook.
photographs produced by Ms Saglik to the Tribunal did not definitively show that
her premises were infested by fleas or bird lice
on any particular date. While
the photographs showed a variety of surfaces within (what I can only assume is)
the premises with either
black specks in the images or hand-drawn circles and
annotations on the images, but none of those photographs establish on the
of probabilities that what is being shown in the image is bird lice. The
only evidence that it might be bird lice are Ms Saglik’s
unsworn and
uncorroborated assertions that the photographs show fleas. Unfortunately, even
when taken together and at their highest,
that evidence does not persuade me on
the balance of probabilities that the premises remained infested with bird lice
were treated in December 2024.
these issues together, Ms Saglik has not established any of the
(1) that the nesting of pigeons in the rainwater head was due to a defect in the
(2) that the lice entered the building because of any such defect or because of
another defect in the premises; or
(3) that NSWLHC failed to act after being notified of the alleged bird lice
infestation.
those circumstances, the tenant has not established that NSWLHC is responsible
for rectifying any bird lice infestation, or that
NSWLHC has breached any
obligations that it had under the subtenancy agreement to rectify the alleged
bird lice infestation. Consequently:
(1) Ms Saglik has not established the prerequisite factors under section
65(2)-(3A) for the Tribunal to make a repair order against
NSWLHC under that
(2) Ms Saglik’s claim for compensation against NSWLHC also fails; and
(3) Ms Saglik remains responsible for pest control at the premises in respect of
the issues that she has raised, under her obligation
to keep the premises
reasonably clean.
claim against Pingola chiefly relied on Ms Saglik’s claims against NSWLHC.
NSWLHC’s claims for repair orders
and compensation against Pingola must
therefore also fail for the same reasons (
mutatis mutandis
evidence before the Tribunal, NSWLHC has similarly failed to
(1) that the nesting of the pigeon in the rainwater head was due to a defect in
the premises;
(2) that the lice entered because of that defect or because of another defect in
the premises; or
(3) that Pingola failed to act after being notified of the alleged bird lice
infestation.
claims made in both proceedings under sections 63 and 65 of the RT Act therefore
(b) The claim of breach of quiet
Saglik claims, additionally and in the alternative, that the alleged bird lice
infestation interfered with her quiet enjoyment
of the premises, as provided for
in s 50 of the RT Act and clause 12 of the subtenancy agreement.
50 and clause 12 give a tenant a
right to quiet enjoyment of
rental premises, without interference by their landlord or by parties connected
with their landlord.
It is not a cast-iron guarantee against interference from
all persons or all causes, regardless of their origin. That is because
enjoyment is defined in ss 50(2) and (3) and in the equivalent parts of
clause 12 in terms of “reasonable”
peace, comfort and privacy. The
tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment must therefore be read accordingly.
use of the word “reasonable” implies that a tenant’s right to
quiet enjoyment is not breached if that tenant
suffers a mere inconvenience.
Consistent with this, the UK House of Lords found in
Southwark LBC v
[2001] 1 AC 1
that a tenant’s comfort must be
“substantially interfered with” for the interference to constitute a
the right of quiet enjoyment.  The Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal similarly held in
McC v Director of Housing
[2009] VCAT 2748
that bird noises, floodlighting and minor invasions of privacy
are all mere inconveniences that do not amount to a breach of a tenant’s
quiet enjoyment.  The Tribunal in that case stated further that
“this is consistent with contemporary living arrangements
requiring a
degree of give and take, of tolerance regarding the behaviour of
neighbours”.
test usually used in New South Wales for determining whether a relevant person
has interfered with the tenant’s “reasonable”
peace, comfort
and privacy was stated in
Advance Fitness Corporation Pty Ltd v Bondi Diggers
Memorial & Sporting Club Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 264
Bondi Diggers
underlining):
A breach of the covenant for quiet enjoyment occurs whenever the Landlord causes
substantial interference with the enjoyment of the
demised premises through an
act or omission that is either deliberate or negligent in the sense that its
consequences were reasonably
foreseeable:
Martin’s Camera Corner
Pty Ltd v Hotel Mayfair Ltd
[1976] 2 NSWLR 15
Kohua Pty Ltd v Tai Ping
Trading Pty Ltd
(1985) 3 BPR  [97,240]; P Butt ,
(3rd ed 1996), p305- 308.
That test is again framed in terms of a “substantial
interference” that must be caused by the landlord (or the agent or
person who is included under the extended terms in s 50).  That test
also requires elements of negligence or
deliberate conduct on those
persons’ behalf, with reasonably foreseeable consequences.
Bondi Diggers
decision has been followed in many residential tenancy
cases in New South Wales, such as
Roberts v NSW Aboriginal Housing Office
[2017] NSWCATAP 9;
Makowska v St George Community Housing Ltd
[2020] NSWCATAP 159 and
Greco v NSW Land & Housing Corporation
[2021] NSWCATCD 25.   Accordingly, I consider it the
appropriate test to apply to Ms Saglik’s claim in this
is often argued before the Tribunal that a landlord’s failure to maintain
premises in a reasonable state of repair gives
rise to a co-extensive breach of
the tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment under the tenancy agreement. For
that logic to apply,
the tenant must first establish that the landlord has
failed to maintain the subject property in a reasonable state of repair under
the tenancy agreement.
the reasons just set out, Ms Saglik has not established any such breach of the
landlord’s repair obligations on the part
of NSWLHC. Further, Ms Saglik
has not established that there has been any substantial interference with the
enjoyment of the premises
through any other act or omission on the part of
NSWLHC that was “either deliberate or negligent in the sense that its
consequences
were reasonably foreseeable”, as described in the Bondi
Diggers test. Consequently, Ms Saglik’s parallel claim that NSWLHC
breached her right to quiet enjoyment of the premises also
(c) The rent reduction claim
last part of Ms Saglik’s claim is the claim that there should be a
reduction in her rent under section 44 of the RT Act
because of a withdrawal or
reduction of goods, services or facilities provided with the premises by the
landlord, chiefly because
of the landlord’s response the bird lice
infestation.
Sewell v Zvirblis
[2022] NSWCATAP 337
makes clear, for s 44(1)(b) to
apply the relevant reduction or withdrawal of goods, services or facilities must
be carried out “by
the landlord”. This is of particular importance
in relation to premises that are part of a strata scheme or a community scheme,
where there is also an owners corporation or a community association who
exercises particular functions in relation to rented premises,
and who may act
in a way that reduces or withdraws good, services or facilities provided with
the premises, independently of the
landlord. Section 44(1)(b) does not apply in
those events.
make good on this part of the claim, Ms Saglik must lead sufficient evidence to
satisfy the Tribunal objectively and on the balance
of probabilities that
(a) there was an infestation; and (b) the failure
with the infestation in accordance with its obligations under the tenancy
agreement, or the delay
in dealing with the infestation in
accordance with those obligations, amounted to a reduction or withdrawal
of goods, services or facilities provided with the premises.
I have concluded above, the evidence does not establish that the resolution of
Ms Saglik’s bird lice complaint was a repair
issue for which NSWLHC was
responsible under the tenancy agreement. Consequently, it was a cleaning issue
for which Ms Saglik was
responsible under the tenancy agreement, not NSWLHC.
at the evidence objectively, while I acknowledge that Ms Saglik made numerous
complaints about bird lice issues up to and
including mid-December 2024, for the
reasons that I have set out above it has not been demonstrated on the balance of
probabilities
that NSWLHC was responsible for dealing with or treating the
alleged bird lice infestation. As a result, it has not been demonstrated
NSWLHC reduced or withdrew any particular goods, services or facilities provided
with the premises by failing to repair or resolve
the infestation issue over
Ms Saglik has not established that there was a relevant reduction or withdrawal
by NSWLHC of any relevant goods, services or facilities
provided with the
premises section 44(1)(b) does not apply in this case. This part of the claim
therefore must also fail.
Conclusion and orders
follows from the above that that the Tribunal is not satisfied to the civil
standard (being the balance of probabilities) on the
material put before the
Tribunal that there are grounds for the Tribunal to make the orders sought in Ms
Saglik’s application.
That claim should therefore be dismissed.
a result of that decision, the Tribunal also has not been satisfied that there
are grounds for the Tribunal to make the orders
sought in NSWLHC’s
application against Pingola.
claims are therefore dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (358 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter