URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rolleston [2013] NSWMT 12 (17 May 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rolleston
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 12
Hearing Date(s):
Decision Date:
17 May 2013
Lakatos SC DCJ
Dr M-A Friend
Respondent's registration cancelled - Respondent is precluded from
reapplying for registration for four years - Respondent is prohibited
supplying health services
Catchwords:
MEDICAL PRACTIONER - serious criminal conduct and convictions - indecent
assault on teenage male patients - professional misconduct
- suitability to hold
registration - failure to comply with chaperone conditions -
de-registration
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National law (NSW) No 86A
Medical Practice Act 1992
Civil Procedure Act
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
Richter v. Walton Court of Appeal (15 July 1993, unreported)
General Medical Council v Spackman
[1943] AC 627
Oshlack v. Richmond
City Council
[1998] 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
NSW Medical Board v Dinakar
[2009] NSWMT 8
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
170 CLR 534
HCCC v Greenwood
[2011] NSWNMT 13
HCCC v Gower
[2011] NSWNMT
HCCC v Rahman [2013] NSWMT 6
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Dr John Philip
Rolleston (Respondent)
Representation
Ms R Mathur for HCCC
Mr M Ainsworth for Respondent
- Solicitors:
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Restriction on publication of any material that could identify the
John Philip Rolleston (the respondent) is a 75 year old medical practitioner,
who commenced to practise medicine in 1968. By an
Amended Complaint, the Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), alleges that the respondent has been
convicted of criminal offences
(Complaint One); that the respondent has been
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in that he engaged in improper or
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of medicine
(Complaint Two); that the respondent has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in that he contravened conditions to which his registration
was subject (Complaint Three); that the respondent
is guilty of professional
misconduct within the terms of section 139E of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (the National
Law) (Complaint Four) and that the
respondent is not a suitable person to hold registration in the medical
profession (Complaint
offences the subject of the criminal convictions, and the further complaints
made by a number of patients each alleged inappropriate
nature, involving the respondent masturbating the teenage boys, or
alternatively, requiring them to masturbate
themselves in his presence, usually
until they ejaculated. A number of the complaints involved the assertion that
the respondent
fondled the testicles of the young men, or moved his fingers
rapidly in and out of their anus at the same time as masturbating them.
these events occurred in the context of a medical consultation, where the boys
presented with symptoms generally of an unrelated
nature, such as asthma or
respondent admits each of the five complaints (as particularised) and concedes
that his conduct calls into question his suitability
to hold registration in the
medical profession. Specifically, the respondent adheres to his earlier stated
intention not to seek
renewal of his registration when it fell
1958, the respondent graduated Bachelor of Pharmacy from the University of
Sydney. In 1967, he graduated Bachelor of Medicine Bachelor
of Surgery from
University of Sydney. After completing an internship, the respondent was
employed at the Sutherland Hospital and
thereafter at Mona Vale Hospital as a
Resident Medical Officer.
1969, the respondent commenced to practise as a general practitioner at St Ives,
Sydney. He became a partner in a firm of general
practitioners, and continued at
the practice until late 1979. Thereafter, the respondent left that practice to
commence as the Medical
Director of the Accident and Emergency Department at the
Royal North Shore Hospital, where he remained until mid-1983. Between 1983
early 1987, the respondent was in general practice at Mt Druitt,
1975, the respondent was convicted of nine offences pertaining to the
pharmaceutical provisions of the National Health Act, in
respect of offences
which occurred in 1971 and 1972. No action was taken at that time in regard to
his medical registration.
April 1986, the respondent was convicted in the New South Wales District Court
of 12 counts of issuing false documents, which were
capable of being used in
relation to an application for a payment under the Health Insurance Act and
fined a total of $17,000 and
sentenced to one year term of imprisonment, but was
released on a five-year good behaviour bond. On 27 February 1987, the respondent
was found guilty of professional misconduct (consequent upon his convictions),
and his name was removed from the Register of Medical
Practitioners, following a
hearing before the New South Wales Medical Tribunal.
October 1990, the respondent successfully applied to have his name restored to
the Register of Medical Practitioners, on a conditional
basis, i.e. he could
only practice within the hospital system, and did not enjoy the right of private
practice for a period of two
October 1990 and February 1993, the respondent was employed in various hospitals
in Sydney and thereafter in Broken Hill.
In February 1993, the respondent's
conditional registration was removed. Accordingly, he became entitled to work as
a general practitioner
in private practice.
1993 and early 1997, the respondent was the Director of Medical Services at the
Broken Hill Hospital. Between 1997 and 25
March 2010, the respondent established
and worked as a principal in the Broken Hill Medical Centre.
2 April 2008, the respondent advised the Board on his annual renewal form that
in July 2007, he had been convicted of a charge
of driving under the influence
of alcohol. He was fined and disqualified from driving for three months. In
2004, the respondent had
been stopped, but not charged for a low range PCA
offence. In 2008, the respondent was assessed in relation to a drinking problem
and found not to be suffering from an impairment.
June 2009, the practitioner appeared at an Inquiry convened by the Medical Board
of New South Wales in accordance with
Medical Practice Act
(repealed). The proceedings were convened in relation to a number of
complaints alleging that the respondent had assaulted adolescent
boys during the
1970s. The allegations related to the period in which the respondent was working
as a general practitioner in St
Ives and in his early years working in the
Emergency Department at Royal North Shore Hospital.
first complaint was received in 1998, and there were a number of investigations
since that time by the HCCC, and the New South
Wales Medical Board. The
delegates to the Inquiry decided on 25 June 2009, that pending a full
investigation of the allegations,
it was appropriate to impose conditions on the
respondent's registration, in order to protect the health and safety of the
Those conditions prohibited the respondent from providing any medical
services at all, to patients between the ages of 11 and 18
years inclusive. The
conditions further required that a chaperone be present at all times during his
provision of medical services
to any patient between the ages of 0 and 10 years.
There were additional conditions affecting the way in which the two principal
practice restrictions were to function.
respondent's response to the allegations considered by the Inquiry was "a
blanket denial that he has not ever molested any patient
at St Ives or
elsewhere". The complainants were Patients E, G and D. The delegates concluded,
correctly in our opinion, that whilst
the events were alleged to have occurred
in the 1970s, this in itself did not mean that the health and safety of persons
now potentially at risk, or that action was not now otherwise required
in the public interest.
3 July 2009, the respondent was arrested and charged with 11 counts of indecent
assault against four males between 11 and 15 years
of age in the 1970s. In
September 2009, the HCCC notified the Board of allegations of indecent assault
made by a number of males
of similar age also in the 1970s. The complainants in
the latter allegations were Patients K, C, J, B, A, I and H.
January 2010, the Board wrote to the respondent in relation to a significant
number of discrepancies between the entries recorded
in his monthly chaperone
logs with data supplied by Medicare Australia regarding medical services he
rendered to patients aged 18
years or younger. The information suggested that he
had consulted with four patients aged between 11 and 18 years, which raised
(Practice Condition 2). The data also suggested that he
had consulted with 22
patients aged 10 years or younger.
respondent accepted that he was in breach of his conditions. However, he
expressed complete surprise as he had thought that he
had already put in place
the "necessary controls". The respondent however, stated that all patients had
been properly chaperoned
and that the only errors were in the paperwork. He was
unable to explain why there had been so many errors in the relevant period.
Furthermore, the respondent asserted that in some cases, the patient was just
short of 19 years of age, in other cases, the patient
had been incorrectly
billed as his consultation rather than that of a colleague and these had been
honest mistakes.
delegates stated that "meticulous compliance with such conditions was
fundamental, as it is the only means by which the Board
can satisfy itself that
the conditions are serving to protect the health and safety of the public". They
considered that his behaviour
amounted to a flagrant disregard of the intent of
the conditions on his registration, as well as the specific reporting
requirements.
Inquiry was told that in early July 2009, the respondent was arrested and
charged in relation to 11 indecent assaults. The delegates
observed that "the
charges are of an extremely serious nature and relate directly to professional
standards and to the public's expectation
of medical professionals who hold
positions of particular trust". Given all these matters, the delegates
considered that the suspension
for a period of eight weeks was appropriate and
necessary, being satisfied that it was appropriate to do so for the protection
the health and safety of the public, alternatively that the action was
otherwise in the public interest.
24 June 2011 after a trial in the District Court, the respondent was sentenced
by Flannery DCJ in respect of 10 counts of indecent
assault upon a male pursuant
to section 81 of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW). Also dealt with in those
proceedings, was a further indictment alleging seven counts of indecent assault
of a male, to which
the respondent pleaded guilty. Two of the seven counts were
placed on a Form 1. The maximum penalty for an offence under section
81 was five
years imprisonment.
the sentencing remarks, Flannery DCJ noted that the respondent or one of his
colleagues in the practice at St Ives, was the family
doctor for 10 of the 12
victims. The other two victims consulted the respondent when he was working at
the Royal North Shore Hospital.
The offences occurred in the course of
consultations between 31 December 1969 and 1 January 1982, at the respondent's
surgery, the
hospital, and during house calls. At the time of the offences, the
victims were all teenage boys aged between 12 to 16 years of age.
relation to these offences, her Honour imposed an aggregate sentence of four
years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 18
months, the latter to expire
on 23 December 2012.
27 March 2012, the respondent was charged with a further four offences of
indecent assault upon a male (the victims being Patients
Q, R, S and T), and
after entering pleas of guilty, was sentenced by Flannery DCJ on 9 November
2012. There were two additional matters
placed on a Form One, which her Honour
took into account. Her Honour imposed an aggregate sentence of 14 months to
expire on 23 March
2013. These were the convictions relied upon to support
Complaint One, and as we have earlier noted, the respondent admitted this
complaint. We are comfortably satisfied that this complaint has been established
to the requisite degree cf
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Two alleges that the respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
in that he engaged in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of medicine. The Complaint is particularised in that between
1 January 1969
and 1 January 1982, the respondent indecently assaulted Patients
A to T during consultations by those patients with the respondent
for medical
services and which were conducted at the respondent's surgery, in hospital or at
the patients' homes during house calls.
The respondent admitted this complaint.
We are comfortably satisfied that this complaint has been
established.
Three alleges that the respondent has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct in that he has contravened conditions
to which his registration was
subject. As has been noted above, on 23 June 2009, the NSW Medical Board imposed
Practice Conditions
upon the respondent's registration, which prohibited the
respondent providing medical services to any patient aged between 11 and
years inclusive (Practice Condition 2). It was also a requirement that a third
person "the chaperone" be present at all times
during any provision of medical
services relating to patients aged from 0 to 10 years (Practice Condition 3).
Finally, the respondent
was required to keep a chaperone record, requiring the
contemporaneous signatures of each chaperone (Practice Condition 4).
complaint alleges that between mid-August 2009 and 30 October 2009, the
respondent contravened Practice Condition 2 in that he
provided medical services
to Patients M, N and O, who were then 18 years of age. Further, the complaint
alleges that between July
and October 2009, the respondent contravened Practice
Condition 4 in that he failed to keep a chaperone record as required, for 22
patients between the ages of 0 and 10 to whom he provided medical services in
that period. The respondent admitted this complaint.
We are comfortably
satisfied that this complaint has been established and endorse the observations
of the delegates in the section
66 Inquiry at paragraph [19]
Four alleges that the respondent is guilty of professional misconduct in that he
engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify the suspension or cancellation of his registration or alternatively
that he engaged
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, of sufficient seriousness to warrant a similar result. The respondent
admitted that he was guilty of professional misconduct. We are comfortably
satisfied that this complaint has been established.
Five alleges that the respondent is not a suitable person to hold registration
in the medical profession. The particulars
to this complaint set out the
underlying conduct, which supports the offences in respect of which the
respondent had been convicted
and sentenced. The Tribunal does not propose to
set out in considerable detail each of the incidents involving the patients with
whom the respondent interfered. In taking this course of action, we do not wish
it to be taken that the effect of the respondent's
conduct upon the individual
patients was insignificant or did not cause long-lasting prejudicial effects
matters were more fully dealt with by her Honour Flannery DCJ in the judgments
her Honour gave in 2011 and 2012. In her remarks
on 24 June 2011, her Honour
Eight of the 12 victims prepared Victim Impact Statements. ... No one could
fail to be moved by their content. The statements describe
a loss of trust in
authority figures, depression and anxiety, achieving less in life than might
have been expected, alcohol and drug
dependence and the loss of meaningful
relationships.
Furthermore, her Honour noted in her remarks on 9 November 2012 that two of
the victims with whom she was dealing, "continue to be
affected by the offending
as a result of the confusion, anger and embarrassment caused".
Given the number of complaints and the similarity in the circumstances in
which they occurred, the facts disclose a depressing similarity
operandi adopted by the respondent in interfering with teenage boys, for what
some of the evidence suggests, was
for his own sexual gratification.
A was aged 13 to 15 years when the assaults occurred. Between 31 December 1974
and 1 January 1977, he visited the respondent
at his surgery for medical
attention. The respondent asked Patient A to lie down and then removed Patient
A's pants. The respondent
masturbated Patient A by stroking his penis until he
ejaculated. Patient A felt awkward and embarrassed, but because he trusted the
respondent, he thought that this was part of the treatment. Patient A did not
say anything at the time, because he was " young and
naive, but most of all I
had placed my trust in him".
B was aged 14 to 15 years and was indecently assaulted by the respondent between
31 December 1975 and 1 January 1977. The
assault occurred in the course of a
consultation at the respondent's surgery. The respondent told Patient B that he
required a semen
sample, and when he was unable to produce the same, the
respondent squeezed clear gel onto the patient's penis and manipulated it
his hand. The respondent then squeezed the patient's penis and applied to a
stick to collect what he said was a sample.
C was aged 12 to 15 years. On two occasions between December 1975 and January
1978, Patient C visited the respondent at his
surgery in relation to acne and
asthma problems. Under the pretext of checking his hormone levels, the
respondent masturbated Patient
C to the point of ejaculation. On one occasion,
the respondent asked the patient whether he wished his girlfriend was doing
(masturbating Patient C). He then purported to take a sample of the
semen. Patient C stated that in later years, he commenced getting
emotional about what had occurred.
D was aged approximately 15 years. Between December 1977 and June 1979, Patient
D was indecently assaulted on four occasions
by the respondent at his surgery.
On each occasion, the respondent masturbated Patient D to the point of
ejaculation. On two further
occasions between April 1979 and January 1982, the
respondent, indecently assaulted Patient D in a similar manner at Royal North
Shore Hospital. Subsequent to these assaults, Patient D noted that his school
grades began to drop, and the repercussions of the
incidents continue to affect
him until the present day.
E was aged 14 to 15 years. On 24 July 1979, he was taken to the Emergency
Department of the Royal North Shore Hospital following
an accident in the school
playground. The respondent examined Patient E stating he wanted to check if
there was any blood in his
anus or semen. The respondent stroked the patient's
penis and inserted a finger of his gloved hand into the patient's anus and moved
vigorously around for approximately 2 minutes. The respondent withdrew his
finger and invited the patient to masturbate himself.
Thereafter the respondent
again placed his finger in the patient's anus whilst the patient was
masturbating himself and invited the
patient to tell him when he was "going to
come". Patient E stated that he was overwhelmed and confused, felt very upset,
bewildered as to what exactly happened. In 1997, Patient E first
disclosed the assault to his general practitioner and commenced
to have frequent
anxiety attacks, resulting in his consulting a psychiatrist and a psychologist
for treatment.
F was aged 12 to 13 years. Between December 1973 and January 1977, the
respondent indecently assaulted the patient on three
occasions by masturbating
Patient F to the point of ejaculation. These events occurred, on one occasion at
the patient's home during
a house call, and on the other two occasions at the
respondent's surgery. Patient F stated that on at least one occasion, he felt
the respondent's erect penis proximate to his right arm. Patient F did not
disclose these matters at the time, because he was ashamed,
and thought that
somehow he encouraged the behaviour, even though he felt embarrassed and
confused at the time.
G was aged approximately 12 years and 14 years respectively. On two occasions
between December 1973 and 1 January 1976, the
patient consulted the respondent
on the first occasion at his surgery in relation to the flu, and on the second
occasion during a
house call. During these consultations, the respondent
indecently assaulted the patient by masturbating him to the point of
ejaculation.
As a result of these events, Patient G has consulted a number of
psychiatrists and attended at various mental health departments,
stating that it
has taken many years for him to gain trust in doctors.
H was approximately 16 years of age. Between December 1973 and January 1977, the
patient attended upon the respondent at the
Royal North Shore Hospital in
relation to gastrointestinal problems. In the course of the purported
examination, the respondent applied
lubricant to the patient's penis and
masturbated him for several minutes. At the time that these events occurred, the
patient thought
that there was medical justification for the procedure. It was
only when he was in his mid-20s, that Patient H realised he had been
I was aged approximately 13 to 14 years. On five occasions between February 1975
and January 1976, the patient attended at
the respondent's surgery for medical
attention in relation to bronchitis and other issues. On each occasion, the
respondent masturbated
Patient I and on at least one occasion, this caused him
significant discomfort. On a further occasion, the respondent commenced to
with the patient's testicles for a number of minutes.
J was aged between 14 and 16 years. On two occasions between December 1973 and
January 1977, the patient attended at the respondent's
surgery for medical
attention. On both occasions, the respondent masturbated the patient until he
ejaculated, for the stated purpose
of providing a semen sample. Patient J did
not disclose the abuse because he thought that it involved proper medical
procedures.
He said that in later years, he became angry at the respondent,
because the latter had abused a position of trust and took advantage
of him as a
young person.
K was aged approximately 16 years. On one occasion, between December 1969 and
January 1971, the patient attended at the respondent's
surgery for medical
attention in relation to glandular fever. The respondent told the patient that
he would have to collect a full
range of samples including blood and semen
samples. The patient was told that a semen sample was required, and the
respondent commenced
to masturbate him. Patient K indicated that he preferred to
undertake the procedure himself, but when he was unable to ejaculate,
respondent applied a black rubber ring and forced it over the patient's erect
penis causing him pain. Ignoring Patient K's pleas
for him to stop, the
respondent masturbated the patient in a furious manner until he ejaculated
causing the patient pain. As a result
of the incident, Patient K's penis had a
deep rounded groove around the shaft, where the rubber ring had been, and a
large blue coloured
bubble like a blister on head of the penis, which remained
very sore and swollen for some days. Patient K stated that at the time
assault, he was fragile, emotionally affected, ashamed and guilty. He lost his
confidence and developed low self-esteem.
L was aged approximately 15 years. On three occasions between December 1973 and
January 1977, the patient attended at the
respondent's surgery for medical
attention in relation to minor ailments and a common cold. The respondent
indecently assaulted the
patient by masturbating him on each occasion. The
patient did not disclose the abuse at the time, although he realised it was
Q was approximately 16 years of age. On one occasion, between January 1969 and
December 1970, the patient attended at the
respondent's surgery for medical
attention. The respondent on two occasions masturbated the patient. He produced
a "girlie" magazine,
but Patient Q could not ejaculate. The patient did not
report the abuse at the time, although he felt guilty and embarrassed about
R aged between 16 and 18 years of age. On two occasions between January 1970 and
December 1972, the patient attended at the
respondent's surgery. On both
occasions, the respondent masturbated patient to the point of ejaculation. He
appeared to test the
semen. On the second occasion, the respondent took a blood
sample from Patient R.
is no small irony that Patient R later studied medicine and became a medical
practitioner. At the time of the second consultation,
Patient R was a medical
student. Nevertheless, he submitted to the assault, although he felt
uncomfortable, but still trusted the
respondent's professional knowledge and
ability. Indeed, the patient spent one week of his general practice placement at
the respondent's
surgery in the middle years of his medical training. At a later
time, when he eventually realised that what had occurred was not
medical procedure, Patient R was working at the Royal North Shore Hospital as a
junior colleague to the respondent. He expressed
a sense of shame and therefore,
did not discuss the details of the sexual abuse inflicted upon
R regretted that he did not come forward earlier, but he stated that he still
felt uncomfortable about such a public disclosure
and its potential effect on
his family. However, since that time, Patient R has become a strong advocate for
the protection of children
and young people from sexual and other
S was aged between 11 and 13 years. On one occasion, between January 1973 and
December 1975, he attended at the respondent's
surgery for medical attention for
a cold or flu. The respondent told him that he required "some fluid from his
penis" and masturbated
him for 10 to 15 minutes. The patient failed to get an
erection. The patient stated that whilst he viewed the incident with mild
suspicion, it seemed to him that the likelihood of a doctor abusing a young
patient was so unlikely that he thought that he had misconstrued
respondent's actions.
T was aged between 11 and 13 years. On an occasion between July 1976 and
December 1977, the patient attended at the respondent
surgery. The respondent
stated that he needed a semen sample. Patient T commenced to masturbate and the
respondent then came and
took over. The respondent appeared to become frustrated
and said: "try harder" and "I really need this". Due to his age, Patient
not understand what was happening and therefore did not
summary, the respondent's misconduct took place between 1969 and 1982, a period
of 13 years, and involved 33 offences of indecent
assault on 16 teenage boys.
The Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the respondent acted in the manner
set out above.
each case, the respondent indecently assaulted his young patients in the guise
of rendering legitimate medical treatment. In each
case, he used his position as
a trusted medical practitioner to gain access to young and impressionable boys,
no doubt for his own
sexual gratification, and without regard to the well-being
of his patients. The conduct took place over a significant period of time,
it has had a profound and lasting effect upon many of the victims. The degree of
abuse of trust and the dominance in the relationship
of a medical practitioner
over his patients, is emphasised by the trust reposed in the respondent by
Patient R, who himself became
a medical practitioner, but nevertheless trusted
the respondent, whilst he himself was abused as a medical student. There is
doubt that the respondent's behaviour constituted a gross dereliction of
his obligations as a medical practitioner.
HCCC relies upon this conduct to establish that the respondent is not a suitable
person to hold registration in the medical profession.
The Tribunal notes that
the National Law does not define the words "suitable" or "unsuitable". That law,
however, indicates that
in given circumstances, the National Board may have
regard to a person's criminal history (as relevant to his/her professional
to assess the suitability of an applicant for registration -
must always be taken when having regard to cases, which turn upon different
legislation. However, some guidance can be obtained
from the decision of the
Court of Appeal in
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1991) 41 NSWLR 630
considered counterpart provisions of the
Medical Practice Act 1992
(repealed).
In that case, the Medical Tribunal determined that a medical practitioner had
engaged in inappropriate sexual conduct
towards three female patients and
suspended him from practice. The practitioner had been acquitted on criminal
charges arising from
the same facts. The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and
determined that the practitioner's conduct warranted his name being removed
the register.
Court of Appeal considered that the Tribunal had failed to properly exercise its
discretion. It had taken into account that the
events were of "considerable
antiquity" - however, the Court noted that the inappropriate conduct had
involved three different female
patients in three different places at different
times. The doctor had denied he had committed the conduct alleged and the
proceedings
were strongly defended. The doctor did not offer any explanation
which "made it unlikely that the conduct would occur again". Furthermore,
was nothing to suggest that the doctor had become a changed person ...". The
Court referred to the absence of any admission
of guilt or expression of
contrition. Nor was there any claim that the incidents were some isolated or
passing departure from proper
professional standards.
Court of Appeal concluded: "In cases such as this, the Tribunal and this Court
should not assume that the doctor has become a
reformed person. ... Disciplinary
proceedings against members of a profession are intended to maintain proper
ethical and professional
standards, primarily for the protection of the public,
but also for the protection of the profession."
but not all these considerations apply in the present case. There has been a
significant lapse of time between 1982 and the present.
There is nothing to
suggest that the respondent continued his misconduct after that time. However he
did defend the earlier matters
before Flannery DCJ, only pleading guilty after
he was found guilty after trial. His expression of contrition is perfunctory and
fails to acknowledge the harm he has caused to the victims. Furthermore, and
most importantly, there is no explanation as to why
this conduct took place. In
our view, these considerations are significant in determining whether or not
(age aside), there is a
prospect of recurrence of the relevant misconduct.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC that there was a disproportionate
power imbalance in the relationship on two levels:
that of doctor-patient and
that of an adult and minor. Furthermore, we accept that, absent any explanation
for his misconduct, the
Tribunal cannot make an assessment as to whether the
respondent had any insight into his misconduct or any motivation to remedy the
underlying causes.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the respondent is not currently a
suitable person to practise medicine. This
is because the respondent's history
as set out above shows grave deficiencies in his professional conduct: his
conviction in 1986
for offences involving fraud in the practice of medicine
indicate a lack of honesty and integrity; the indecent assaults underpinning,
many of the current complaints, indicate his present unsuitability to deal
professionally with younger patients; and his failure
to abide by the Practice
Conditions, indicate his lack of appreciation or insight of the need to protect
younger members of the public
from his misconduct. In short, the respondent has
demonstrated that he lacks the capacity to place the needs and well-being of his
patients over his personal inclinations.
Medical Profession is an honourable profession dedicated to curing those with
illness and injury and alleviating pain. The Australian
Medical Association Code
of Ethics - 2004, states that the code has grown out of other similar ethical
codes stretching back into
history including the Hippocratic Oath. The Code
states as follows:
Because of the special knowledge and expertise, doctors have a responsibility
to improve and maintain the health of their patients
who, either in a vulnerable
state of illness or for the maintenance of their health, entrust themselves to
medical care.
The doctor-patient relationship is itself a partnership based on mutual
respect and collaboration.
Code embodies the principles that the doctor must consider first the well-being
of the patient; he or she must treat the patient
with compassion and respect;
the doctor must make sure that he or she does not exploit the patient for any
reason, and the doctor
should avoid engaging in sexual activity with the
least one translation of the Hippocratic Oath includes the
I will apply dietetic measures for the benefit of the sick according to my
ability and judgment; I will keep them from harm and injustice.
Whatever houses I may visit, I will come for the benefit of the sick,
remaining free of all intentional injustice, or mischief, and
in particular of
sexual relations with both female and male persons ...
principle which guides the proper practice of his profession is set out in
section 3 of the National Law which refers to the rationale
behind the National
regulation and accreditation of health practitioners in terms of the protection
of the public by ensuring that
health practitioners are suitably competent and
act ethically - section 3 (2) (a).
effective functioning of the profession relies upon a relationship of trust
between doctor and patient. The patient may confide
many private and delicate
matters, which may be of an embarrassing and confidential nature. Furthermore, a
patient reposes such trust
in the doctor, which permits the latter to view and
touch intimate parts of the patient's anatomy and to do things which in other
circumstances may constitute a criminal offence. This invasion of privacy is
permitted by patients, because of the close nature of
the relationship and
because the patient believes that the doctor is acting in pursuit of a higher
purpose of assisting the patient
in relation to his or her illness or injury and
not out of personal gratification or self-interest.
this relationship of trust, the doctor-patient relationship is rendered less
effective in achieving those noble objects, if
unworkable. Every doctor who
breaches that relationship contributes to a wider scepticism amongst the
community that the medical
profession is indeed an honourable one, dedicated to
these ideals.
the Court of Appeal noted in
at page 638:
Female patients entrust themselves to doctors, male and female, for medical
examinations and treatment which may require intimate
physical contact which
they would not otherwise accept from the doctor. The standards of the profession
oblige doctors to use the
opportunities afforded them for such contact for
proper therapeutic purposes and not otherwise. This is the standard that the
in general and female patients in particular expect from their doctors,
and which right-thinking members of the profession observe,
and expect their
colleagues to observe.
our view, these statements apply with equal force to male patients, including
teenage boys. Furthermore, the observations of Priestley
Court of Appeal (15 July 1993, unreported), at pages 8 and 9, apply
in the present case:
The degree of trust, which patients necessarily give to their doctors may
vary according to the condition which takes the patient
to the doctor. Even in
regard to the most commonplace medical matters the trust a patient places in a
doctor is considerable. In
some cases, ... the patient's trust cannot help but
be almost absolute. The doctor's power in regard to the patient in such cases
also very great. I do not mean power in an abstract way, but as a matter of
fact; the extent of the power will vary according
to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited periods, because of
the relationship in which
they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with the body of the patient. This is one of the
why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations, and are
expected to maintain very high standards: all this being very
much in the public
it is useful to recall the statement of Viscount Simon LC in
General Medical
Council v Spackman
[1943] AC 627
, where his Lordship
The high reputation of the medical profession as a whole depends in no small
measure on excluding from that those whose professional
misconduct make them
unworthy to belong to it, and the confidence which the public are accustomed to
put in the family doctor is
intimately connected with the assurance that those
who practise the art of medicine are, in all relations with their patients,
individuals
of the highest honour.
from pleading guilty to various but not all of the criminal offences, and not
contesting the proceedings, the respondent has
expressed remorse in a most
perfunctory way. The Tribunal acknowledges that his later conduct in pleading
guilty (and his admissions
in these proceedings) has spared the victims further
trauma in having to give evidence.
respondent's statement in these proceedings concludes with the statement: "I can
indicate to the Medical Tribunal of New South
Wales, that I am truly contrite
for my behaviour, the subject of the Amended Complaint". Given the fact that the
Complaint covers
behaviour involving breach of Practice Conditions as well as
the more serious matters, this statement of remorse is not convincing.
particularly, there is no recognition of the harm the respondent has caused to
the many teenage boys involved in his offences.
Absent such recognition, and
consequently accountability and insight, the Tribunal is left with a serious
question mark as to the
respondent's current fitness to practise and to hold
registration.
Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that, the respondent is guilty of
professional misconduct. The Tribunal finds that the
respondent has been
convicted of the aforementioned criminal offences in New South Wales District
Court and the circumstances of
the offences render the respondent unfit in the
public interest, to practise the medical profession. Finally, the Tribunal finds
that the respondent is not a suitable person for registration as a medical
practitioner.
position so far as the respondent's registration is a little unclear. His
counsel has suggested that he has not renewed his registration
and hence, it has
elapsed. On the other hand, the certificate from the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency which is
in evidence before the Tribunal,
suggests that the respondent's registration is suspended. In these
circumstances, we consider it
appropriate to make orders in the alternative.
Tribunal accepts the submissions of the HCCC that it is in the public interest
for the respondent's registration to be cancelled.
Furthermore, we accept that
the order suggested by the HCCC that the respondent not be permitted to reapply
for re-registration for
a period of four years from the date of the order, is
appropriate. Although on one view, the period of four years it is somewhat
arbitrary, given the unresolved issues of the respondent's insight and
rehabilitation, given his age, the order appears appropriate.
The respondent has
made no submissions in opposition to these orders.
HCCC submits that it is appropriate to make an order pursuant to section
149C(5)(a) of the National Law that following cancellation
of the practitioner's
registration, he should be prohibited from providing health services for a
period specified by the Tribunal.
A pre-requisite for such an order is that the
Tribunal must be satisfied "the person poses a substantial risk to the health of
of the public". The Tribunal notes that Flannery DCJ, in her Honour's
sentencing remarks of 24 June 2011 accepted on the balance
of probabilities that
the offender had rehabilitated himself and was unlikely to re-offend. Her
Honour's conclusion was based on
the extensive references provided to the
Honour noted that it was difficult to reconcile the man those referees knew over
the past 30 years with the man who committed
these offences. Given the admitted
offences occurred covertly and with no immediate complaint from the young
victims for many, many
years, we share her Honour's note of caution. This
Tribunal does not proceed on the basis that the respondent may have continued
his misconduct after 1982, because clearly there is no evidence for that
proposition. On the other hand, the note of caution compels
this Tribunal to
reach a different conclusion concerning the respondent's rehabilitation. In
short, we are left in a neutral position
- i.e., we are simply unable to say on
the state of the evidence that the respondent is rehabilitated or not. Bearing
in mind the
orders that we propose are protective in nature, the Tribunal is of
the opinion that an order should be made pursuant to section
149C(5)(a). The
respondent did not argue against the making of such an order.
Tribunal proposes to make the following orders:
i. The respondent's registration is cancelled;
ii. alternatively, (if the respondent's registration has lapsed) had the
respondent been registered, the Tribunal would have cancelled
the registration
on the bases of section 149C(1)(b), (c) and (d) of the National Law and would
have disqualified him from being registered
in the health profession for a
period of four years - section 149C(4);
iii. the respondent is not permitted to reapply for review of his
registration for a period of four years from the date of this order;
iv. the practitioner is prohibited from providing health services generally
until such time as he is reinstated to the Register of
practitioners.
HCCC makes application that the respondent pay the costs of the proceedings.
Counsel for the respondent contests that application,
submitting that from an
early point of time, the respondent, through his lawyers, indicated that he
would not be defending the proceedings.
The salient facts are that the matter
was before the Court for a directions hearing on 31 January 2013 when the
hearing date was
set. On 25 March 2013, the respondent's bundle was served. It
contained a statement of the respondent dated 28 February 2013, indicating
he had no further intention of practising medicine in the future, and therefore
did not propose to renew his registration when
it fell due. That was a position
he had expressed in an earlier Statutory Declaration dated 3 June 2011, and the
statement indicated
he maintained that position.
is accepted by the respondent that there was no application to vacate the
hearing date. Furthermore, the position appears to be
that there was no contact
between the solicitors for the HCCC and the solicitors for the respondent
concerning the future progress
of the hearing. The Tribunal was informed that
there was contact between counsel in the week prior to the hearing but no
acknowledgement
by the respondent, that he would accept the orders sought by the
is a little puzzling to the Tribunal why there were no communications between
the parties as to the necessity for any formal hearing.
Given that the
respondent's statement indicated no future intention on his part to practise,
and his advanced years, it is difficult
to see how within those parameters,
there would be any contested hearing as to the orders ultimately sought by the
for the HCCC referred to section 167 of the National Law, which she submitted,
correctly in our view, gave a discretion to
the Tribunal to conduct a hearing in
circumstances where the complaint has been admitted. She submitted that whatever
position the
parties might take, it was a matter for the Tribunal to ultimately
determine the necessity for a hearing. That is correct as far
as it goes.
However, it is difficult to see how the Tribunal could properly exercise its
discretion if neither party brought to its
attention, the fact that in effect,
there would be no contest.
Tribunal notes that the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
does not apply to proceedings
before this Tribunal. However, we consider that it is not inappropriate to apply
by analogy the provisions
of that Act, which refers to the
overriding purpose of those provisions being to facilitate the "just, quick and
cheap resolution
of the real issues in dispute". Similar notions appear to
underpin Clause 11 of Schedule 5D of the National Law, which refers to
of the Tribunal to expeditiously determine Inquiries. We recognize that
disciplinary proceedings are not civil proceedings
and, accordingly, the
practice and procedure to be adopted by the Tribunal must accord with the
provisions of the National Law. The
fundamental purpose of disciplinary
proceedings, is to protect the public and preserve the integrity of the medical
profession, in
this particular case. We also accept, as counsel for the HCCC
submitted, that there is a real public interest in the proceedings
Medical Tribunal being publicised to inform the public, to deter members of the
medical profession minded to act inappropriately
and to vindicate the victims of
any unprofessional conduct or professional misconduct perpetrated by any given
medical practitioner.
Indeed, counsel submitted that a number of the victims
involved in the present proceedings, have remained in contact with the HCCC
monitor the progress of these proceedings.
Tribunal does not consider that even if an inquiry was dealt with in the absence
of a public hearing, or alternatively a very
curtailed public hearing, such as
occurred here, that that precludes the publication of a judgment or
determination by the Tribunal.
made reference to three decisions, one of the Medical Tribunal and two of the
Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal in which the
issue of costs was considered, in
circumstances where there was no contest or no significant contest. In each
case, the relevant
Tribunal considered it appropriate to award costs to the
Tribunal accepts that the following principles apply: the Tribunal has an
unfettered discretion (to be exercised judicially) to
award costs to any party
to an Inquiry - clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law. It is not
immediately clear from clause 13
that the ordinary rule in civil litigation
applies, namely that a successful party has a reasonable expectation of being
costs against the unsuccessful party - see
Oshlack v. Richmond City
[1998] 193 CLR 72
[1998] HCA 11
NSW Medical Board v
[2009] NSWMT 8 at [42] - [44], where the Tribunal acknowledged its
unfettered discretion in this regard, but nevertheless applied
the civil law
rule. The issue of costs in disciplinary proceedings is not identical to civil
litigation -
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77.
The purpose of an order for
costs is compensatory not punitive -
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534.
The discretion should be exercised judicially, in accordance with the rules of
reason and justice, and not in accordance with benevolence
authorities referred to by counsel are in our view, materially different to the
present case. In
HCCC v Greenwood
[2011] NSWNMT 13
, the practitioner did
not appear and advised the Tribunal that she did not wish to contest the
hearings nor practise as a nurse or
midwife again. Despite those indications,
the practitioner proffered some exculpatory considerations in relation to one of
the complaints,
did not admit a complaint, and made incomplete admissions to a
further complaint. Against this background, the Tribunal awarded costs
practitioner noting at [59]:
The Tribunal acknowledges that it is not required to conduct an inquiry into
a particular and may make protective orders in relation
to it if a nurse or
midwife who a complaint is about, admits that complaint in writing to the
Tribunal. However, this case shows
why the decision not hold an inquiry is
discretionary.
HCCC v Gower
[2011] NSWNMT 17
, the practitioner was represented by
counsel and admitted all the particulars of the complaint. There was however a
contest about
the appropriate protective orders to be made and evidence was
given by the practitioner in this regard. In our opinion, this is a
difference to the present case.
HCCC v Rahman
[2013] NSWMT 6, the medical practitioner appeared in
person, and whilst admitting the complaints, requested the Tribunal to allow
to practise, upon his release from prison. In those circumstances, the Tribunal
awarded costs against him. Again, this is a significantly
different situation to
the present.
Counsel for the respondent stated that his client had served a jail term and
wished to proceed with his life, without any contact
with the provision of
medical or health services. Given his age and circumstances, this is a
reasonable and understandable approach.
In our opinion, the respondent, through
his lawyers has done all that can be reasonably expected of him to finalise the
proceedings
in an expeditious manner. The Tribunal accepts that the primary
purpose of costs is to compensate the successful party. The Tribunal
accepts that the question of whether an award of costs works hardship on a party
against whom it is made, is not a relevant
matter in the decision to award or
not to award costs. It is the conduct in the course of the proceedings and the
result, which are
in our view relevant.
these reasons, the Tribunal considers it appropriate that each party pay its own
costs, from the time that the respondent's statement
was served on the HCCC. In
our opinion, the content of the statement should have precipitated
communications between the parties
and the potential shortening of this matter,
perhaps even to the extent of rendering unnecessary a formal hearing. The
Tribunal confirms
the preliminary indication it gave that a costs order should
be made on this basis.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
i. The respondent's registration is cancelled;
ii. alternatively, (if the respondent's registration has lapsed) had the
respondent been registered, the Tribunal would have cancelled
the registration
on the bases of
section 149C(1)(b)
, (c) and (d) of the National Law and would
have disqualified him from being registered in the health profession for a
period of four
section 149C(4)
iii. the respondent is not permitted to reapply for review of his
registration for a period of four years from the date of this order;
iv. the respondent is prohibited from providing health services generally
until such time as he is reinstated to the Register of medical
practitioners.
v. the respondent is to pay the costs incurred by the HCCC up until 25 March
2013; thereafter, each party is to pay its own costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (221 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter