URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Patton v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2023] NSWPICMRP 3; (11 August 2023)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Patton v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2023] NSWPICMRP
Jason Patton
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Elizabeth Medland
Hugh Macken
Terrence Stern
DATE OF DECISION:
11 August 2023
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; Merit Review
Panel review of a single Merit Reviewer regarding a determination in respect of
the amount of statutory benefits payable
as weekly payments under Division 3.3;
specifically, the calculation of the claimant’s pre-injury average weekly
earnings (PAWE);
complex financial situation involving business structures
including discretionary trust; dispute as to what should be considered
earnings; whether distributions to trust beneficiaries other than the claimant
should be included in calculation of PAWE; dispute
as to whether superannuation
and leave entitlements should be included in PAWE; Held – original
certificate issued by single
merit reviewer is affirmed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
In relation to
the merit review decision by a single Merit Reviewer, the Merit Review
Panel confirms the decision/certificate (M10539825/22)
of the single Merit
Reviewer dated
21 December 2022.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
is a dispute between Jason Patton (the claimant) and Allianz Australia Insurance
Limited (the insurer) about statutory benefits
payable as weekly payments
under Division 3.3 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
claimant was injured in a motor accident on 11 December 2020 and subsequently
lodged an application for statutory benefits on
the insurer.
have been two separate disputes lodged with the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) by the claimant in respect of the amount
of weekly statutory
benefits he is entitled to. A determination (M10509282/22) was issued by Merit
Reviewer Ruschen on
26 July 2022 which directed that the claimant provide
further information and the insurer to re-determine the claimant’s pre
accident weekly earnings (PAWE).
30 August 2022 the insurer re-determined the claimant’s PAWE as nil. An
internal review decision of the insurer dated 30
August 2022 affirmed the
original decision.
Thereafter,
the claimant lodged a further application for merit review with the Commission.
The application was allocated to Merit
Reviewer Ruschen for determination. In a
determination dated 21 December 2022 (M10539825/22), Merit Reviewer Ruschen set
reviewable decision and certified the claimant’s PAWE to be
claimant applied to the Commission for a review panel to reconsider the merit
President’s delegate decided there was reasonable cause to suspect an
error in the Merit Reviewer’s decision.
Commission's President constituted a Review Panel (the Panel) to review the
Merit Reviewer's decision.
REVIEW CONDUCT
Merit Review Panel (the Panel) met on 3 March 2023. It was noted that the
insurer’s representative had lodged further written
submissions shortly
prior, and as such it was determined that the claimant be provided with further
opportunity to address the content
of such submissions.
claimant provided further written submissions.
Panel met again on 20 April 2023.
DOCUMENTATION
part of the merit review, the Panel has considered the application and reply and
all further documentation provided by the parties.
LEGISLATION
claimant’s application for review of his PAWE is made under the provisions
of the MAI Act.
MAI Act objects are found at s 1.3(2), which addresses among other things "the
early resolution of motor accident claims and the
quick, cost-effective and just
resolution of disputes” and “to provide early and ongoing financial
support for persons
injured in motor accidents".
1.3(4) provides that when interpreting the provisions of the MAI Act, a
construction that would promote the objects of the
Act is to be preferred over
one that would not.
Section 1.3(5)
provides that when exercising a discretion conferred by the MAI Act, that
discretion must be exercised in a way that
would also promote the objects of the
MAI Act. Part 5 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
enables the Commission to make rules with respect to the practice and procedure
before the Commission. This includes panel
proceedings reviewing Merit Reviewers
or Medical Assessors’
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A Review Panel
determines how it conducts and
determines the proceedings and may determine the proceedings solely based on the
written application.
objects of the PIC Act are set out in s 1.3 and include ensuring that the
Commission’s decisions are timely, fair, consistent
and of a high quality
and that the Commission is enabled to decide matters justly, quickly, cost
effectively and with as little formality
as possible.
1.3(2)(b) provides that an object of the MAI Act is to “provide early and
ongoing financial support for persons injured
in motor accidents”.
4 of the PIC Act echoes ss 1.3(4) and (5) of the MAI Act and requires
interpretations of provisions that promote the objects
of the PIC Act and the
exercise of legislatively conferred discretions in a way which promotes the
objects of the PIC Act.
42(1) of the PIC Act and the Commission rules contain the Commission’s
‘guiding principle’ which is that
the Commission must facilitate
“the just, quick and cost-effective resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings”.
42(2) requires the Panel, to give effect to the guiding principle when
exercising any power given to me under the PIC Act
or the rules of when
interpreting any provision of the PIC Act or the rules.
merit review on the amount of PAWE is a fresh decision.
determining a merit review, according to s 7.13(1) of the MAI Act, the Panel
must decide what the "correct and preferable decision"
should be, according to
the material before the Panel.
Panel is required to step into the shoes of the insurer and make its own
decision on the merits of the dispute – s 7.13(2),
based on the
information provided rather than on identifying errors in the previous
to s 7.13(3), the Panel may decide to:
(a) affirm the reviewable decision, or
(b) vary the reviewable decision, or
(c) set aside the reviewable decision and make a
decision in substitution for the reviewable decision, or
(d) set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for reconsideration
by the insurer in accordance with any direction made
by the merit reviewer.
Panel is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to the
Commission in connection with these proceedings, so it
may determine this merit
review without holding a conference or formal hearing (see s 52(3) of the PIC
Act) and can proceed on the
papers in accordance with Procedural Direction
accordance with s 43 of the PIC Act the rules of evidence do not bind
the Panel but it may inform itself on any matter in the manner
appropriate and as the proper consideration of this matter permits.
What is an earner?
1, cl 2 of the MAI Act states as follows:
“Meaning of ‘earner’
A person who is injured as a result of a motor
accident is an
if the person is at
least 15 years of age and who--
(a) was employed or self-employed (whether or not full-time)--
(i) at any time during the 8 weeks immediately preceding the motor
accident, or
(ii) during a period or periods equal to at least 13 weeks during the year
immediately preceding the motor accident, or
(iii) during a period or periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the 2 years
immediately preceding the motor accident,
and, at the date of the motor accident, had not retired permanently from
all employment, or
(b) before the motor accident, had entered into an arrangement (whether or
not an enforceable contract)--
(i) with an employer or other person to undertake employment,
(ii) to commence business as a self-employed person,
at a particular time and place, or
(c) was, immediately before the motor accident, receiving a weekly payment
or other payment in respect of loss of earnings under
this Act or
Workers Compensation Act 1987
1, cl 3 of the MAI Act states as follows:
“Meaning of ‘loss of earnings’
‘Loss of earnings’
a loss incurred or likely to be incurred in a person's income from personal
(2) A person's
‘income from personal
(a) the amount that is the income of the person consisting of earnings,
salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
and retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of
employee or in relation to any services
rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone or in
partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a business.
(3) A person's
‘income from personal exertion’
not include--
(a) interest, unless the person's principal business consists of the lending of
money, or unless the interest is received in respect
of a debt due to the person
for goods supplied or services rendered by the person in the course of the
person's business, or
(b) rents or dividends, or
(c) any employer superannuation contributions, or
(d) the monetary amount of any annual, sick or other leave entitlement.”
1, cl 4 of the MAI Act states as follows:
“Meaning of
‘pre-accident weekly earnings’—general
‘Pre-accident weekly earnings’
, in relation to an
earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident, means the weekly average
of the gross earnings received
by the earner as an earner during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the motor accident occurred, unless
(2) applies.
(2) In the following cases,
‘pre-accident weekly
, in relation to an earner who is injured as a result of a
motor accident, means—
(a) if, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning continuously,
but had not been earning continuously for at least
12 months—the weekly
average of the gross earnings received by the earner as an earner during the
period from when the earner
started to earn continuously to immediately before
the day of the motor accident,
(a1) if the earner was employed or self-employed during a period or periods
equal to at least 26 weeks during the first year of the
pre-accident period, but
was not obtaining earnings from any source at any other time during the
pre-accident period—the average
weekly gross earnings received by the
earner as an earner during the first year of the pre-accident period,
(b) if subclause (3) applies—the weekly average of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner during the period
from when the change of
circumstance referred to in that subclause occurred to immediately before the
day of the motor accident,
(c) if the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into an arrangement
with an employer or other person to undertake employment
or to commence business
as a self-employed person—the average weekly gross earnings that the
earner could reasonably have been
expected to earn, but for the injury, in
employment under that arrangement.
‘pre-accident period’
, in relation to a motor
accident, is the period of 2 years immediately preceding the motor accident.
(3) This subclause applies if, during the 12 months immediately before the
day of the motor accident, there was, as a result of any
action taken by the
earner, a significant change in his or her earnings circumstances that resulted
in the earner regularly earning,
or becoming entitled to earn, more on a weekly
basis than he or she was earning before the change occurred.
[Note: Examples
of a change of circumstances to which this subclause would apply include a
change of job, a promotion, a move from
part-time to full-time employment, or a
pay increase arising from the achievement of performance standards.]
(4) For the purposes of this clause, an earner earns continuously if he or
she obtains earnings from permanent employment or from
a source that, on the day
of the motor accident, was likely to continue for a period of at least 6 months
to provide earnings to
the earner on the same, or a similar, basis to the basis
on which the earnings were being provided as at that day.”
THE REVIEWABLE DECISION
Merit Reviewer in her determination certified that the reviewable decision was
set aside, and the claimant’s PAWE amount
is $1,080.62.
doing so, the Merit Reviewer made a number of findings which are dealt with in
more detail below.
SUBMISSIONS
the sealed application document, the claimant submits the Merit Review is
incorrect in a material respect and submits that the
PAWE ought be determined at
$3,529.61 “before indexing”.
claimant has provided written submissions dated 18 January 2023. The
submissions do correspond with the Merit Reviewer’s
observations of
submissions before her as being long winded.
is submitted by the claimant that the Merit Reviewer was in error as she took a
“narrow, prescriptive view” on the
issue of earnings. The claimant
appears to suggest that provisions of the
Corporations Act 2001
take precedence over provisions of the MAI Act.
claimant submits that the Merit Reviewer has paid regard to a particular
business structure, namely a business operating through
an intermediate trust
structure, generating an income for his benefit and his family that depend on
him. In doing so, she has made
a decision with a perverse outcome which is not
in keeping with “...equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
Essentially,
the claimant submits that whilst some of the trust distributions were allocated
to family members, such amounts should
be counted as his earnings. He submits:
“...I submit to get to CORRECT and PREFERABLE decisions,
faithful adherence to the objects of the MAI Act compels a decision-maker
the work of
looking through
such structures to the facts of the
injured’s personal exertion and what moneys came to be ‘at the
disposal’ of
that person as a result.
It cannot have been the intention of the Act that a person who has clearly
been the sole individual responsible for having generated
an amount of income,
and who has received amounts from clients into a trust account under his sole
control, to be distributed at
his sole discretion, can be denied that amount
being considered in his PAWE,
just for the fact of working via a trust and
having not actually paid that income amount to himself out of the trust
This is perverse effect of Member Ruschen’s narrow, prescriptive view on
earnings derived via a trust structure, making the
decision inconsistent with
the objects of the Act (particularly cl 1.3(2)(b)).”
claimant asserts the Merit Reviewer was in error in declaring certain amounts as
earnings. The claimant notes the Merit Reviewer
declared credits in the bank
statements as being profit distributions from the trust. The claimant submits
that the credits could
be something different than “net profit
distribution” and could instead be loan repayments and expense
reimbursements
to the claimant. He states that “
so the presumption
should surely be that they are loans and expense reimbursements, pending any
evidential clarification to the contrary
”. He notes that loan
repayments would not constitute income from personal exertion. Further in his
submissions the claimant
reiterates that any outgoing amounts visible on the
trust bank account were not distributions. Not to him, and not to any other
claimant notes the Annual Report, effectively the declaration of net profit, was
signed on 5 October 2021 with the liabilities
section of the distribution
entitlements, shows “them continuing on the books of the trust,
undisbursed”.
claimant then states, “this means the net profit for the trust was only
‘declared’ on this date, 5 October 2021.
Until this time –
according to company/trust law – there simply did not exist any net profit
to distribute”. Going
onto submit: “with a diligent reading of the
Annual Statements the Member would know that there was simply WAS NO declared
profit capable of distribution prior to 05 October 2021”. The claimant
then states that the evidence shows that the distribution
amounts were simply
not paid to the beneficiaries.
reference to the Annual Statements, the claimant states:
“...This can be clearly seen in the Annual Statements under
Liabilities >>Beneficiary Entitlements >> Non-Current
Liabilities
>> Beneficiary Entitlement. In 2020 the full $29,809 in nominal
beneficiary distributions remained on the books
as a liability – ie. It
had NOT been paid out – and in 2021 this was added to by the full $59,987
in nominal beneficiary
distributions for that year, yielding a (cumulative)
$89,795 (or $89,796 - $1 off likely due to the accountant’s rounding
protocols).”
claimant notes that the Merit Reviewer had the relevant Annual Statements before
her but “missed this glaring detail”.
claimant submits that the distributions were effectively “set aside”
and are “unpaid present entitlements”
(UPEs). He describes this
arrangement as legal and a conscious decision made by him.
insurer’s submissions dated 10 February 2023 reject the claimant’s
suggestion that the Merit Reviewer’s determination
is incorrect in a
material respect.
insurer lodged further submissions dated 18 April 2023 effectively revising
their earlier position that the Merit Reviewer’s
decision did not contain
a material error.
insurer submits that the provisions of the MAI Act are prescriptive, and in some
respects, arbitrary, and that not every injured
person who may be rendered
incapacitated for work will be entitled to receive statutory weekly benefits.
is asserted by the insurer that distributions from a trust do not constitute
earnings under the MAI Act. In this regard, the insurer
refers to cl 3(2)(b) of
Schedule 1 of the MAI Act wherein earnings by personal exertion are said to
include ‘the proceeds of
any business carried on by the person either
alone or in partnership with any other person...”
insurer suggests that such clause suggests the legislature did not intend to
include the distribution of a trust as constituting
earnings, given the specific
mention of a “partnership” in the aforementioned clause. The
insurer submits that had parliament
intended for distributions to an injured
person as a beneficiary under a trust be taken into account for the purposes of
determining
PAWE, appropriate wording would have been inserted into Schedule 1,
cl 3 of the MAI Act.
is submitted that it is not correct to treat the claimant himself and the
corporate trustee of the trading trust and the trading
trust itself as the same
entity. It is submitted: “It is not a case of equity or fairness but
rather a result of the process
of statutory construction and applying the
objects of the Act in that process, as required by s1.3(4)”.
the insurer refers to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
makes provision, subject to certain qualifications, for a distribution to a
worker as a beneficiary under at trust to constitute
wages. The insurer notes
there is no analogous provision in the MAI Act.
insurer also refers to the change in terminology in determining payments of
weekly statutory benefits after 78 weeks. In this
regard, s 3.8 of the MAI Act
refers to ‘capacity’ rather than ‘earnings’ as used in
ss 3.6 and 3.7. The
insurer then submits:
insurer’s submission, this change in terminology and the change in
conceptual approach it signals reinforces its
submission that the methodology to
be used [to] calculate an injured person’s PAWE (i.e., in the pre-78 week
period) is prescriptive.”
respect of which sub-clause of Schedule 1, cl 4 of the MAI Act is relevant (i.e
cl 4(1) or cl 4(2)(a1)) the insurer notes that
the claimant’s argument, in
effect is that cl 4(1) uses the word ‘received’ while clause
4(2)(a1) uses the word
‘obtaining’.
insurer submits that there is no relevant distinction in the meaning of each of
the words when considered in context, given the
words are not defined in the
legislation.
is submitted that the ordinary meanings are effectively synonymous and there is
no relevant distinction to be made.
insurer submits:
“considered in context, the notion of the
claimant coming into possession of something (i.e., receiving or obtaining), in
case a payment, is the most significant element to be considered and, in
the insurer’s submission, is determinative of this
aspect of the
insurer confirms that on the issue of which sub-clause of Schedule 1, cl 4 is
relevant, the exception provided for in cl 4(2)(a1)
cannot apply given the
earnings from “Grow Super” on 12 December 2019. This is because
the earnings were obtained or
received during the period 11 December 2019 to 10
December 2020, on 12 December 2019.
insurer notes that the Merit Reviewer in the reviewable decision (M10539825/22)
found that certain trust distributions by BluJay
Nominees Pty Ltd atf BluJay
Investment Trust (the Family Trust) were also earnings that should be taken into
account. The insurer
notes that the claimant now submits that such amounts
should not be considered ‘earnings’ for the purposes of Schedule
of the MAI Act. The insurer accepts that such amounts are not earnings from
personal exertion and therefore should not be utilised
in the calculation of the
the insurer submits that the internal review assessment of PAWE of $398 under
Schedule 1, cl4(1) should stand.
supplementary submissions dated 28 April 2023 the claimant responds to the
insurer’s further submissions.
claimant rejects the suggestion that the MAI Act is prescriptive. The claimant
contends that a decision maker is to exercise discretion
afforded under the Act
in a number of ways, inter alia; in a general way “in order that they
might arrive at ‘better
and preferable’ decisions in terms of
promoting the Objects of the Act”.
terms of prescriptive wording, the claimant notes that a number of generic terms
are used within Schedule 1 of the MAI Act. In
specific reply to the insurer, in
respect of cl 3(2)(b), the claimant submits the terms used therein are generic
rather than specific
terms of ‘sole trader’ in accordance with
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
or ‘in legal partnership per the
Partnership Act 1958
’. He goes on to submit:
consistent use of non-specific terms in these key clauses suggests that the
legislators were looking to give considerable
interpretive leeway to the
eventual ‘decision-makers’ in the exercising of their
discretion...”
claimant then submits that he considers the MAI Act to be certainly prescriptive
as to its objects. The object of providing
early and ongoing financial support
is referred to by the claimant by submitting it is “...contrary to s
1.3(2)(b) to defend
a payment of only $391 a week to someone who was clearly
deriving in the order of 10x that for his family through his personal exertion
prior to the injury...”
is submitted by the claimant that the correct and preferable decision would be
to ‘look through’ the business structure
and consider the earnings
from ‘personal exertion’, and look at the whole of the income
derived from his effort despite
the trust distributions.
claimant refers to the High Court case of
Husher v Husher
(1999) 197 CLR
[1999] HCA 47
), in submitting that PAWE should be calculated
by reference to the whole of the income generated.
claimant submits that the insurer has conflated the terms of
‘obtaining’ and
‘obtained’.
claimant appears to contend that the distributions from the discretionary trust
were never actually made and were instead “UPEs”
effectively pending. It is apparent that the claimant makes a suggestion that
he did not receive any earnings from the
trust company in the 12 month period
prior to the accident. However, on the other hand suggests that amounts
generated by the trust
be counted when calculating the PAWE.
claimant seems to suggest that amounts paid to him from the trust represent loan
payments and expense reimbursements.
claimant makes this submission despite the fact that he declared profit
distribution from the trust in his 2020 and 2021 taxation
the claimant’s lengthy sets of submissions, he has not addressed this
fact, or the findings of the Merit Reviewer in
respect of this evidence.
Accordingly, on the basis of all of the material before the Panel, it finds that
on the balance of probabilities
the claimant did in fact receive profit
distribution from the discretionary trust during the relevant period.
Panel agrees with the Merit Reviewer’s summary of the material which
identifies the distributions from the trust as set
out from paragraph 38 of her
determination.
Which sub-clause of Schedule 1(4) applies to
the claimant’s earnings?
considered the evidence, submissions and the reviewable decision, the Panel is
in agreement with the findings of Merit Reviewer
Ruschen in that cl 4(2)(1)
Specifically,
the Panel agrees that cl 4(2)(a1) only applies with there were no earnings in
the 12 months immediately before the day
of the accident (being the period 11
December 2019 to 10 December 2020).
claimant clearly obtained earnings from the trust company as set out in the
documentation and accordingly cl 4(2)(a1) does not
Superannuation and leave entitlements
party specifically address the Merit Reviewer’s findings in respect of
superannuation and leave entitlements. In essence,
it was found that such
amounts are not to be taken into account for the purposes of calculating
Panel has considered Merit Reviewer’s reasons in this regard, and adopts
same. The Panel finds that superannuation payments
and leave entitlements are
not to be taken into account for the purposes of calculating PAWE.
Calculation of PAWE
Panel has considered the findings of Merit Reviewer Ruschen from paragraph 55 as
to the calculation of the PAWE, in the context
of all material provided. The
Panel finds no error in the reasons of the Merit Reviewer and accordingly adopts
the claimant suggests that the PAWE should be calculated on the basis of the
whole of the income generated by the trust, the
Panel does not accept that this
is a proper interpretation of the legislation. The claimant appears to suggest
that Schedule 1 should
not be interpreted in a ‘prescriptive’ way
and rather the objects of the Act should be read prescriptively and effectively
the wording of the Schedule should be put to the side.
Panel has confirmed the Merit Reviewer’s findings that Schedule 1, cl 4(1)
of the MAI Act applies to the meaning of PAWE.
Such subclause provides that the
PAWE includes the gross earnings “received by the earner”.
claimant suggests that the “received by the earner” should be
construed to include the distributions to family members,
distributions to him.
claimant refers to the case of
in making such submission. The
did not involve the application of a statutory benefits
scheme, which is the case in this dispute. The calculation of PAWE is to
carried out in accordance with the wording contained within Schedule 1 of the
the claimant may well have a reasonable basis upon which to rely on such case in
any claim for damages that he may have, given
the wording of Schedule 1(4)(1)
the Panel does not accept the claimant’s argument that all income derived
by the trust should
be utilised in the calculation of PAWE. In this regard, the
Panel considers the words “received by the earner” to mean
that. That is, the distributions that have been received by the claimant. The
Panel finds that the words “received
by the earner” are not
synonymous with “earned,” even if it were accepted that the claimant
generated more income
for the trust than what was distributed to him.
Panel accepts that generally the meaning of a statute is the grammatical
meaning, however, is not always the case.
the leading case for statutory interpretation,
Project Blue Sky v ABA
[1998] HCA 35
[1998] 194 CLR 355
Project Blue Sky
) a para 78, Brennan CJ, McHugh,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ found:
“The duty of a court is to
give the words of a statutory provision the meaning that the legislature is
taken to have intended
them to have. Ordinarily, that meaning (the legal
meaning) will correspond with the grammatical meaning...But not always. The
of the words, the consequences of a literal or grammatical construction,
the purpose of the statute or the canons of construction
may require the words
of a legislative provision to be read in a way that does not correspond with the
literal or grammatical meaning.”
Panel further accepts that statutory interpretation is not a “mechanical
provisions of the
Interpretation Act 1987
have also been considered by
the Panel. Specifically, it is noted that
requires that when interpreting
a certain statutory provision, a construction that would promote the purpose of
the object underlying
the Act is to be preferred to a construction that would
not promote that purpose or object.
carefully considering the wording of Schedule 1, cl 4(1), the Panel finds that
the words should be given their grammatical meaning.
In this regard,
interpretation of “earnings received” by the injured person, as
opposed to all amounts “earned”
and distributed to others, does not,
in the Panel’s view, fall foul of the object contained within s 1.3(2)(b)
of the MAI Act.
The findings of Merit Reviewer Ruschen result in the claimant
being provided with early and ongoing financial support in the context
statutory benefits scheme. The findings essentially ensure that the claimant
receives, by way of weekly payments of statutory
benefits, an amount which is
commensurate with the distributions he received from the trust.
Distributions
to other family members are received by them, and they would have control over
how such funds are utilised.
Other matters
Panel has considered the insurer’s argument in its most recent submissions
that distributions from a discretionary trust
do not constitute earnings for the
purposes of PAWE calculation.
Essentially
it is argued by the insurer that the words contained in Schedule 1, cl 3(2)(b)
preclude such earnings.
Panel does not agree with the insurer’s interpretation of such sub-clause.
interpret the wording of such sub-clause in such a way would preclude earnings
from any business structure other than a legal partnership
or a business
involving an injured person as a sole director or as a sole trader. The Panel
does not consider that such interpretation
is in keeping with the objects of the
MAI Act in providing ongoing financial support to injured persons.
Panel does not consider the wording of “in partnership with any other
person” to be restricted to “partnership”
in the terms of a
legal business structure. When read with the words “any business”,
the Panel considers that such sub-clause
intends to include the income of an
injured person from any business conducted by them, whether they conduct that
business alone
or with other persons.
making this finding, the Panel has considered the statutory interpretation
principles set out above, and find that to interpret
the clause in a way
suggested by the insurer would not be consistent with s 1.3(2)(b) of the MAI
Certification
Review Panel agrees with the Merit Reviewer’s decision and findings.
outcome is the same as the Merit Review certificate dated 21 December 2022.
Panel will affirm the outcome of that certificate.
Section 41(2) of the 2020 Act.
Rule 128 of the PIC
PIC Procedural Direction
MA2, paragraph 25.
New South Wales v Avery
[2016] NSWCA 147
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter