URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/273.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GDQ v Central Coast Council [2025] NSWCATAD 273; (10 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
GDQ v Central Coast Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 273
Hearing Date(s):
14 August 2025
Date of Orders:
10 November 2025
Decision Date:
10 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
J Smith, Senior Member
(1) The Tribunal sets aside the decision made by the
Respondent on 14 March 2025 and in substitution of this decision, decides
(a) The Respondent contravened
(b) The Respondent did not contravene
(2) Within 14 days, the
Respondent is to provide to the Applicant an unreserved written formal
apology for the Respondent’s
contravention of Information Protection
Principles 9 and 10.
(3) Within 14 days, the
Applicant is to provide the Respondent with a written version of events that she
wishes to be attached to
the email between the Respondent’s staff dated 2
March 2022. The Respondent is to then attach the Applicant’s written
version of events to the email.
(4) The Applicant
is to notify the Respondent and the Tribunal in writing within seven days of
this decision as to whether she seeks
to make an application for costs. The
Tribunal will then make appropriate directions in respect of this
application.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – administrative review - privacy –
information protection principles – reasonable steps to check
accuracy of
personal information before use – unlawful use of personal information -
unlawful disclosure of personal information
– actions Tribunal may take in
response to public sector agency’s contravention of information protection
principle –
written formal apology
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
BN v Hornsby Shire Council
[2012] NSWADT 165
Crewdson v Central Sydney
[2002] NSWCA 345
Director General, Department of Education and
Training v MT (GD)
[2005] NSWADTAP 77
DMW and DMX v NSW Local Land Services
[2019] NSWCATAD 128
DTN v Commissioner of Police (No 3)
[2020] NSWCATAP
Jackson v University of NSW
[2018] NSWCATAD 12
JD v Department of
Health (GD)
[2005] NSWADTAP 44
JD v Director General, NSW Department of
Health (No 2)
[2004] NSWADT 227
KO and KP v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police (GD)
[2005] NSWADTAP 56
SY v Northern Sydney Local Health Network
(formerly Northern Sydney Central Coast Area Health Services)
[2011] NSWADT
ZR v Department of Education and Training (GD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 75
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
GDQ (Applicant)
Central Coast Council (Respondent)
Representation:
B Collingwood (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Jameson Law
(Applicant)
Wilshire Webb Staunton Beattie Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00124229
Publication Restriction:
The disclosure of the name of the Applicant is prohibited pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
Tribunal’s decision
Applicant seeks an administrative review under the
Information Protection Act 1988
(NSW) (PPIP Act), alleging that the
Respondent has contravened this Act by using and disclosing her personal
information internally
and externally without her consent. The Applicant also
raises concerns that her personal information that was used by the Respondent
was not accurate.
Tribunal has found that the Respondent has contravened the PPIP Act by not
taking reasonable steps to check the accuracy of the
Applicant’s personal
information before using it, and by unlawfully using the Applicant’s
personal information. The Tribunal
has not found that the Respondent contravened
the PPIP Act through any of the other conduct alleged by the Applicant.
Applicant is a resident in the Respondent’s local government area. The
Applicant has been involved in a dispute with a neighbour
and the Respondent
since 2015 in relation to her concerns about a fence located on the boundary
between the properties owned by the
Applicant and her neighbour, that she
believes has exacerbated flooding in the area.
15 January 2025, the Applicant made a privacy complaint to the Respondent,
attaching the following four emails which she obtained
pursuant to an access
application under the
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW) (GIPA Act):
(1) Internal email between the Respondent’s staff dated 2 March 2022
(“Email 1”).
(2) Email dated 6 December 2023 from the NSW Natural Resources Access Regulator
(NRAR) to the Respondent dated 6 December 2023 (“Email
(3) Email chain between NRAR and the Respondent dated between 2 February 2024
and 9 February 2024 (“Email 3”)
(4) Email from the Respondent to the Applicant, copied to the NSW Ombudsman
dated 12 July 2024 (“Email 4”).
is no dispute that these emails contain the Applicant’s personal
information including her name, address, and employment.
emails also contain information about the Applicant’s complaints about the
fence. The Tribunal considers that the Applicant’s
complaints expressing
her personal concerns to the Respondent and the response to these complaints is
also the Applicant’s
personal information:
BN v Hornsby Shire
[2012] NSWADT 165
, at [27]. However, information strictly about the
fence’s compliance with the relevant State Environmental Planning Policy
(SEPP) is not the Applicant’s personal information.
Applicant alleged that these emails impacted upon her “privacy and
personal information access, accuracy, consent and disclosure”.
Respondent accepted the privacy complaint as alleged contraventions of the
following Information Protection Principles (IPPs):
(1) Accuracy (PPIP Act, s 16; IPP 9)
(2) Use (PPIP Act, s 17; IPP 10)
(3) Disclosure (PPIP Act, s 18; IPP 11).
14 March 2025, the Applicant was notified that the internal review had found
that the Respondent did not contravene any of the
relevant IPPs.
review of conduct under the PPIP Act is not at large. Unless there is an agreed
widening of the scope of an internal review, within
the internal review process,
the application for internal review, reasonably construed, sets the scope for
the review of the conduct
by the Tribunal:
KO and KP v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police (GD)
[2005] NSWADTAP 56
noted above, the internal review considered the alleged contraventions of ss 16,
17 and 18 of the PPIP Act, which are IPPs 9 10
and 11. This sets the parameters
of the Tribunal’s review of the Respondent’s conduct.
the conclusion of the hearing, the Applicant foreshadowed that she would be
making an application for costs.
issues arising from the review of the Respondent’s decision are as
(1) Did the Respondent take reasonable steps to check the accuracy of the
Applicant’s personal information before using it?
(2) Did the Respondent unlawfully use the Applicant’s personal
information?
(3) Did the Respondent unlawfully disclose the Applicant’s personal
information?
Did the Respondent take reasonable steps to check the accuracy of the
Applicant’s personal information before using it?
Relevant law
16 of the PPIP Act (IPP 9) provides that “a public sector agency that
holds personal information must not use the information
without taking such
steps as are reasonable in the circumstances to ensure that, having regard to
the purpose for which the information
is proposed to be used, the information is
relevant, accurate, up to date, complete and not misleading.”
is only possible to give effect to IPP 9 if “use” is interpreted as
the process of considering, assessing or weighing
up personal information so as
to make a decision or adopt a further course of action:
JD v Department of
Health (GD)
[2005] NSWADTAP 44
, at [44]. Mere accessing or viewing
information will not constitute a “use”, unless the information is
also “employed”
for some purpose:
Jackson v University of
[2018] NSWCATAD 12
is reasonable in the circumstances will vary with the significance of the
purpose to which the information is to be put, and
may be affected by the
urgency of the situation:
, at [69]. If personal information is to be
used for a purpose that is adverse to the interests of the person concerned,
of the PPIP Act places a higher threshold on the agency to ensure that
the information is relevant, accurate, up to date, complete
and not misleading:
JD v Director General, NSW Department of Health (No 2)
[2004] NSWADT 227
Court of Appeal has held that use of the PPIP Act as a vehicle for the
collateral review of the merits or validity of official
action should be
rejected. The PPIP Act is concerned with the accuracy of official records, not
with the merits or legality of the
official action recorded in them:
v Central Sydney AHS
[2002] NSWCA 345
Expressions
of opinion and findings are generally not “inaccurate” in the
relative sense under provisions such as s 16
of the PPIP Act, where they were
genuinely formed and held at the time they were recorded:
Relevant evidence and submissions
1 is internal correspondence from a Team Leader to other staff of the
Respondent, summarising information in relation to the
Applicant’s
complaint about flooding caused by the fence, and what action had been taken and
would be taken in relation to
the complaint.
Applicant submits that IPP9 was contravened by the Respondent in Email 1 because
of the following “false and misleading”
information:
(1) The fence (subject of the ongoing dispute) complied with the SEPP.
(2) The Applicant was subject to prior action by the Tribunal (in another
Division) and had damaged the fence and displayed unsightly
objects on the
regard to the first alleged inaccuracy, the Applicant maintains that the fence
is non-compliant with the relevant SEPP and has
filed evidence in support of
this position. The Respondent has conducted investigations and determined that
the fence meets the requirements
of the SEPP. As noted above, however,
information about the fence’s compliance with the relevant SEPP is not the
Applicant’s
personal information.
regard to the second alleged inaccuracy, Email 1 states that: “This matter
has been an ongoing neighbourhood dispute for
many years, which has also
included civil proceedings in NCAT resulting in action against [...] for
damaging the fence and displaying
unsightly materials/objects on the fence
(stuffed animals, dolls and flags) in an attempt to impact her
neighbours.”
Respondent concedes that the reference to Tribunal action against the Applicant
for damaging the fence and displaying unsightly
materials/objects is not
Respondent submits, however, that there was no “use” of the personal
information, as the Team Leader who authored
Email 1, merely retrieved
information to assist the processes of Respondent’s staff to understand
the Applicant’s complaint
and then take further action.
the Respondent submits that the summary of history of actions and events in
Email 1 in relation to the Applicant’s
property was formed on the
information and history of the matter available to the Team Leader at the time
that the Applicant’s
complaint was being processed, including information
that the Applicant herself had given the Respondent. The Respondent submits
this context and summary can be considered a genuine assessment of the matter at
the time. The steps or checks that the Team
Leader conducted to compile this
information for the briefing to staff is not clear and was not set out in the
evidence before the
Respondent submits that it is prepared to attach information to Email 1,
pursuant to s 15(2) of the PPIP Act, such that the Applicant
may express as she
has in her evidence before the Tribunal, that “NCAT action” was not
taken against her and the nature
of the fence decorations. The Respondent states
that this information would then be read with Email 1.
to s 15(2), if a public sector agency is not prepared to amend personal
information in accordance with a request by the
individual to whom the
information relates, the agency must, if so requested by the individual
concerned, take such steps as are
reasonable to attach to the information, in
such a manner as is capable of being read with the information, any statement
by that individual of the amendment sought.
Tribunal’s findings
purpose of Email 1 was to:
(1) Assist with briefing the Respondent’s staff on the background to the
Applicant’s complaint
(2) Describe actions that the Team Leader and other staff had already taken,
including speaking to the Applicant and the Respondent’s
(3) Set out the actions that the Team Leader proposed to take, such as
with multiple areas
within Council to seek clarification of information previously provided.
Team Leader also used descriptors which adds to the information or expresses his
own views after reviewing the information. Examples
of this include:
(1) The concerns by the Applicant having been “thoroughly
investigated”
(2) The Applicant has “made accusations”
(3) The Applicant “demanded a site inspection”
(4) The Applicant had displayed “unsightly materials/objects” on the
fence “in an attempt to impact her neighbours”.
Tribunal therefore does not accept that the information in Email 1 was a
“mere retrieval” of information. The Team
Leader did consider,
assess and weigh up personal information about the Applicant, and proposed
further actions. The Tribunal is
satisfied that there has been “use”
by the Respondent in Email 1 of the Applicant’s personal information.
Tribunal is satisfied that the information in Email 1 about the fence’s
compliance with the SEPP is based on and consistent
with the previous
investigations and assessments that the Respondent had undertaken in relation to
the Applicant’s concerns
with the Respondent’s previous assessments of this issue, as held by the
Court of Appeal in
, the PPIP Act is concerned with the accuracy
of official records, not with the merits or legality of the official action
in them. This information in Email 1, strictly about the fence’s
compliance with the SEPP, is also not the Applicant’s
information.
in relation to the information about previous Tribunal proceedings concerning
the Applicant, the Respondent has conceded
that this information is not
accurate. It is also not clear on what basis the Team Leader had come to the
conclusion that the Applicant
had put “unsightly materials/objects”
on the fence “in an attempt to impact her neighbours”.
content in Email 1 had the potential to influence how the Respondent would treat
the Applicant’s complaint. The Applicant’s
complaint, from her
perspective was urgent (the fence exacerbating flooding in the area where there
had been loss of life) and it
was an issue that had been subject of various
processes for a long period of time. In the Tribunal’s view, it was
for the Team Leader to accurately summarise the Applicant’s
personal information and not present it in a misleading way to
other officers of
the Respondent. The Tribunal is therefore not satisfied that reasonable steps
were taken by the Team Leader to
ensure the accuracy of this information at the
time that Email 1 was prepared.
Tribunal therefore finds that the Respondent’s conduct, in using personal
information about the Applicant’s involvement
in previous Tribunal
proceedings in Email 1, and not taking reasonable steps to ensure the accuracy
of this information, constitutes
a contravention of IPP 9.
the Respondent unlawfully use the Applicant’s personal
information?
Relevant law
17 of the PPIP Act (IPP 10) provides that a public sector agency that holds
personal information must not use the information
for a purpose other than that
for which it was collected unless:
(1) the individual to whom the information relates has consented to the use of
the information for that other purpose; or
(2) the other purpose for which the information is used is directly related to
the purpose for which the information was collected;
(3) the use of the information for that other purpose is necessary to prevent or
lessen a serious and imminent threat to the life
or health of the individual to
whom the information relates or of another person.
10 is concerned with the “internal use” of personal information by
an agency, as opposed to “external disclosure”
which IPP 11 is
concerned with:
Director General, Department of Education and Training v
[2005] NSWADTAP 77
Information
that was unsolicited at origin, once taken under the control of the agency for
one of its administrative purposes, should
be treated as “collected”
and no longer retaining the character of “unsolicited” information:
ZR v Department of Education and Training (GD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 75
forwarding of information about a complainant’s complaint to internal
staff within an agency to help resolve the complaint
is a “directly
related” use:
SY v Northern Sydney Local Health Network (formerly
Northern Sydney Central Coast Area Health Services)
[2011] NSWADT 203
Relevant evidence and submissions
noted above, Email 1 was internal correspondence, summarising information in
relation to the Applicant’s complaint about
flooding caused by the fence,
and what action had been taken and would be taken in relation to the complaint.
In addition to providing
the Respondent’s staff with information,
including personal information about the Applicant, to assist with the
Respondent’s
response to the Applicant’s complaint, Email 1 also
included information about the Applicant’s employment.
Applicant submits that in Email 1, the Respondent used her personal information
for a purpose other than for which it was collected,
and to which she did not
Respondent submits that the Applicant’s personal information (last name,
address and employment) was collected by the Respondent
over an extensive period
in which complaints were made by the Applicant to the Respondent. The Respondent
submits that it was directly
related to a function of the Respondent to resolve
complaints, and the collection of the Applicant’s personal information was
reasonably necessary for that purpose.
Respondent also submits that the Applicant’s personal information was not
collected if the receipt of the information is
unsolicited. The Respondent
submits that the personal information arrived via a complaint and was not
solicited by the Respondent.
Tribunal’s findings
Tribunal has found that Email 1, which was internal correspondence, constituted
“use” by the Respondent of the Applicant’s
information.
Tribunal is satisfied that the personal information in Email 1 was collected by
the Respondent, because it was taken under the
control of the Respondent for one
of its administrative purposes (complaint handling), and as found in
should be treated as “collected” and no longer retaining the
character of “unsolicited” information.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s conduct did not constitute a
contravention of IPP 10, to the extent that the Respondent
Applicant’s personal information, as set out in Email 1, for the purpose
for which it was collected, in exercise of
its lawful and proper functions, in
responding to the Applicant’s complaint. The collection of the
Applicant’s personal
information at the point of the Applicant making
complaints, and the subsequent use of this information to internally brief staff
to respond to the complaint, is directly related to the purpose for which the
information was collected.
Tribunal, however, is not satisfied that the inclusion in Email 1 of the
Applicant’s personal information in terms of her
employment, was directly
related to the purpose of responding to the Applicant’s complaint. There
is no explanation within
Email 1 or in the evidence before the Tribunal of why
the use of this personal information in the context of a briefing to staff
the Applicant’s complaint was necessary or relevant. If there was a reason
for this personal information to be disclosed,
then the Respondent should have
sought the Applicant’s consent before doing so.
Tribunal therefore finds that the Respondent’s conduct, in using personal
information about the Applicant’s employment
in Email 1, which was not
directly related to the purpose for which it was collected, and was not
consented to by the Applicant,
constitutes a contravention of IPP
Did the Respondent unlawfully disclose the Applicant’s
personal information?
Relevant law
18(1) of the PPIP Act (IPP 11) provides that a public sector agency that holds
personal information must not disclose the
information to a person (other than
the individual to whom the information relates) or other body, whether or not
such other person
or body is a public sector agency, unless:
(1) the disclosure is directly related to the purpose for which the information
was collected, and the agency disclosing the information
has no reason to
believe that the individual concerned would object to the disclosure; or
(2) the individual concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware, or has
been made aware in accordance with s 10 (requirements
when collecting personal
information), that information of that kind is usually disclosed to that other
person or body; or
(3) the agency believes on reasonable grounds that the disclosure is necessary
to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat
to the life or health of the
individual concerned or another person.
Relevant evidence and submissions
Applicant submits that the Respondent unlawfully disclosed the Applicant’s
personal information in Email 2, Email 3 and
Email 4, which contain personal
information about the Applicant and were sent to external bodies, the NRAR and
the NSW Ombudsman.
2 is an email that NRAR sent to the Respondent on 6 December 2023, referring to
a request that the Respondent had made to NRAR
against the Applicant’s property. The NRAR advised the Respondent that to
access any information
relating to cases/complaints, the Respondent was required
to make a request under the GIPA Act.
3 is an email chain between the NRAR and the Respondent in February 2024, which
refers to a phone call that occurred between
the Respondent and the NRAR’s
GIPA team. It appears from the email that there was a conversation that occurred
between the
agencies on 9 February 2024 during which the Respondent was provided
with some “general information” about complaints
related to the
Applicant’s property which had been investigated by the NRAR. There is no
reference to what that “general
information” was. The Respondent was
advised that if “any records relating to the property beyond the general
information”
provided during the phone call was required, that the
Respondent would need to lodge a GIPA request. The Respondent replied to this
stating that nothing further was required at that stage.
separate email sent internally between the Respondent’s staff on 9
February 2024 noted that NRAR had advised it held records
for two matters (in
2019 and 2023) in relation to the Applicant’s property, neither of which
were formally investigated and
both deemed to be of minor consequence. This
email provides a short description of the two matters that were not
investigated. The
email notes that while there was no record of the Respondent
referring these matters to the NRAR for investigation, “commentary
surrounding knowledge that NRAR had received a complaint is/was accurate.”
4 is an email to the Applicant on 12 July 2024 by the Respondent, which was
copied to the NSW Ombudsman. The email states that
the Applicant had made an
inquiry with the Respondent of any referrals by the Respondent to the NRAR. The
email states that “Council
officers have reached out to the NRAR who have
advised that they had received two referrals relating to your property, one in
and one in 2023, however they confirmed that these referrals were not from
the Council. The NRAR further advised Council that neither
of these matters were
formally investigated by their agency as both were deemed, by the NRAR, to be of
minor consequence”.
relation to Email 2 and Email 3, the Respondent submits that the information
received by the Respondent from the NARA was for the
purpose of responding to
the Applicant’s request for clarification on whether the Respondent had
made a referral to the NRAR
was not uncommon practice for the Respondent to contact another agency to
a request for information. The Respondent submitted that the advice
given by NRAR was general in nature, and that any further information
GIPA application.
relation to Email 4, the Respondent states that the Applicant had submitted an
enquiry related to the NRAR referrals on 19 August
2023 to the NSW Ombudsman and
that the NSW Ombudsman had made enquiries to the Respondent on the
Applicant’s behalf. The Respondent
submits that based on the
Applicant’s request to the NSW Ombudsman to investigate, it is implied
that consent has been given,
and that the NSW Ombudsman be provided with a
response to their request for information related to the NRAR referral.
Tribunal’s findings
2 and most of Email 3 consists of information sent from the NRAR to the
Respondent, and therefore does not constitute a disclosure
Applicant’s personal information by the Respondent.
Tribunal is not satisfied that the disclosure of the Applicant’s personal
information in Email 3 and Email 4 constitutes
a contravention of IPP 11 because
the disclosure was directly related to the purpose for which the information was
collected, and
the person disclosing the information had no reason to believe
that the Applicant concerned would object to the disclosure (PPIP
18(1)(a)). That is, in response to the Applicant’s request that the
Respondent confirm whether the Respondent had made
any referrals to the NRAR
provided the information that
the NRAR had provided to the Applicant and the NSW
Ombudsman (whose involvement in the matter the Applicant had requested).
Tribunal is also satisfied that the Applicant is reasonably likely to have been
aware that the information of that kind is usually
disclosed to that other
person or body (PPIP Act, s 18(1)(b)). That is, if the Applicant requested that
the Respondent confirm whether
it had made a referral about her property to the
NRAR, the Applicant would reasonably expect the Respondent to make enquiries
could include checking with the NRAR to ascertain if this was the case.
Further, if the Applicant requested that the NSW Ombudsman
advocate for her
expect that the Respondent respond or
provide information about this issue to
the NSW Ombudsman.
DMW and DMX v NSW Local Land Services
[2019] NSWCATAD 128
, the Tribunal
stated at [64]:
“64. The Respondent’s officers disclosed the personal information
while attempting to assist DMW in obtaining the answer
to his query. Rather than
simply giving him a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer, they were
attempting to give him specific
information regarding the process he would need
to follow to obtain consent to clear land so as to be able to carry out his
repair as proposed. The purpose for which the information was disclosed
was related to answering DMW’s original query. In my
view, this disclosure
of the information was for a purpose directly related to the purpose for which
the information had been collected.”
information that the Respondent provided to the Applicant (and the NSW
Ombudsman) after making an enquiry with the NRAR confirms
that the Respondent
did not refer her property to the NRAR for investigation and that the two
matters that were referred to the NRAR
were not made by the Respondent and did
not result in a NRAR investigation. This response fully addressed the
Applicant’s concern
that the NRAR had received complaints about her
property from the Respondent. In the Tribunal’s view, the disclosure of
information
by the Respondent was directly related to the purpose for which the
information had been collected.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s conduct, in disclosing the
Applicant’s personal information in the relevant emails,
constitute a contravention of IPP 11.
What action should the
Tribunal take?
Tribunal has found that the Respondent contravened IPP 9 by using personal
information about the Applicant’s involvement
in previous Tribunal
proceedings in Email 1, and not taking reasonable steps to ensure the accuracy
of this information.
Tribunal has found that the Respondent contravened IPP 10 by using personal
information about the Applicant’s employment
in Email 1, which was not
directly related to the purpose for which it was collected, and was not
consented to by the Applicant.
Tribunal has found that the Respondent did not contravene IPP 11 as alleged by
the Applicant.
s 53(7) of the PPIP Act, following the completion of an internal review, the
public sector agency whose conduct was the subject
of the application may do a
number of things, including making a formal apology to the applicant or taking
such remedial action it
thinks appropriate. Section 63(2) of the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(ADR Act) states that, for the
purpose of determining an application for administrative review, “the
Tribunal may exercise
all of the functions that are conferred or imposed by any
relevant legislation on the administrator who made the decision.”
s 30(2)(b) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
confirms that the Tribunal in its administrative review jurisdiction, is able to
“exercise such other the functions
as are conferred or imposed on the
Tribunal” by or under the NCAT Act, the ADR Act or enabling
legislation “in connection
with the conduct or resolution of the
proceedings.”
DTN v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 73
, the Appeal
Panel Tribunal considered whether the Tribunal has the power to order the making
of a formal apology for a contravention
of a Health Privacy Principle. At [94],
the Appeal Panel held that the Tribunal may either exercise the functions
conferred or imposed
upon the public sector agency pursuant to s 53(7) of the
PPIP Act, as well as make any of the orders provided for in s 55(2) of the
Act. The Appeal Panel found in
that it was appropriate for the
respondent to make a formal apology to the to the appellant.
Tribunal, satisfied that it has the power to do so, is of the view that it is an
appropriate in the circumstances of this case
that the Respondent provide the
Applicant with an unreserved written formal apology for the Respondent’s
contravention of IPPs
9 and 10. The Tribunal accepts that the
Respondent’s contraventions of IPPs 9 and 10 has caused the Applicant
distress, and
an unreserved written formal apology is an appropriate response to
these contraventions.
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent is prepared to attach information to
Email 1, pursuant to s 15(2) of the PPIP Act, to
express the Applicant’s
own version of events. The Tribunal is satisfied that it has the power to order
the Respondent to take
this form of remedial action under s 53(7)(c) of the PPIP
Act. The Tribunal is of the view that this is appropriate form of remedial
action to take in response to the Respondent’s contravention of IPP 9 and
orders that the Respondent do so.
(1) The Tribunal sets aside the decision made by the Respondent on 14 March
2025 and in substitution of this decision, decides that:
(a) The Respondent contravened
Information Protection Act
(b) The Respondent did not contravene
Information Protection Act
(2) Within 14 days, the Respondent is to provide to the
Applicant an unreserved written formal apology for the Respondent’s
contravention of Information Protection Principles 9 and 10.
(3) Within 14 days, the Applicant is to provide the Respondent with a written
version of events that she wishes to be attached to
the email between the
Respondent’s staff dated 2 March 2022. The Respondent is to then attach
the Applicant’s written
version of events to the email.
(4) The Applicant is to notify the Respondent and the Tribunal in writing
within seven days of this decision as to whether she seeks
application for costs. The Tribunal will then make appropriate directions in
respect of this application.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter