URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2013/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Dr BARTOLAZO [2013] NSWDT 4 (9 August 2013)
Dental Tribunal of New South Wales
Inquiry into a Complaint against a Dentist pursuant to the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a
HCCC v Dr BARTOLAZO [2013] NSWDT 4
Complainant:
Health Care Complaints Commission
Respondent:
Dr Arvin Bartolazo
Robinson, Deputy Chairperson
Professor Clive Wright, Dentist Member
Dr Robert Hochstadt, Dentist Member
Dr Catherine Berglund, PhD, Lay Member
of Hearing:
4, 5 and 7 June 2013 at Sydney
Date of Decision:
9 August 2013
Representation:
Mr Britt, of counsel, instructed by Ms Jaimee Dinihan,
solicitor, for the Complainant
Dr Bartolazo appeared, unrepresented
Decision: The Tribunal finds the Respondent Dentist guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct and
finds he is
not a suitable person to hold registration.
Non Publication order applies
Catchwords:
Unsatisfactory professional conduct; professional
misconduct, dentist not suitable to hold registration; previous criminal history
not disclosed; false and misleading statements made to Dental Board and
government authorities; sexual harassment of junior colleague;
cancellation of
registration.
Legislation cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Dental Practice Act 2001
(now repealed)
Cases cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
; Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
; Richter v Walton
1993] NSWCA 233
v Howe [2010] NSWMT 12; Gayed v Walton
[1997] NSWSC 279
; New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
; New South Wales Bar Association v Meakes
(2006) NSWCA 340
; Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Saeid Saedlounia [2013]
NSWMT13; Pillai v Messiter [No.2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
; HCCC V Roopra (No 1)
[2012] NSWDT 5 ; HCCC v Shashati NSWMT (22 September 2006) ; Law Society of NSW
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408.
Reasons for Decision
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal decided that Dr Bartolazo is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct, as alleged in
the Complaints brought before
the Tribunal. He is also a person who is not suitable to hold registration as a
Tribunal reprimanded Dr Bartolazo in the strongest possible terms.
Tribunal ordered the cancellation of Dr Bartolazo’s registration and
further ordered that he not be eligible to apply for
review of that decision
within two years from the date of this order. Any such application for review
must be considered by the
Dental Tribunal.
Tribunal also ordered that Dr Bartolazo pay the costs of the Health Care
Complaints Commission (the Commission).
Dr Bartolazo
Bartolazo undertook his dental training at Temple University, Philadelphia
graduating in 1988. He worked as a dentist in private
practice in the United
States of America until his conviction and subsequent incarceration for several
criminal offences.
August 1990 Dr Bartolazo was arrested in Pennsylvania and charged with indecent
assault, corruption of minors and endangering children.
These charges related to
inappropriate sexual contact with 4 patients, two of whom were minors, under the
age of 16 years and all
of whom were receiving dental treatment from Dr
Bartolazo was convicted of these charges and sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of no less than six months and two consecutive
periods of probation. He was also
fined. His imprisonment began in October 1991.
1991 Dr Bartolazo’s license to practice as a dentist in Pennsylvania was
suspended indefinitely, for at least a period of
five years and his license to
practice was also revoked in New Jersey in 1992. Dr Bartolazo did practice again
as a dentist in the
USA, in Washington, before migrating to
Bartolazo came to Australia in 2002. He initially had a tourist visa, then a
student visa, a bridging visa and finally was awarded
permanent residency. He
applied to become an Australian citizen in 2012. This application was
unsuccessful.
also applied to be registered as a dentist in 2005 and was provisionally
registered from 22 July 2005 and then registered from
8 August 2005. He renewed
his registration on 31 October 2005 for the 12 month period from 31 December
2005 to 31 December 2006.
He again renewed his registration on 8 November 2006
for the 12 month period from 31 December 2006 to 31 December 2007. However he
failed to renew his registration following this and was unregistered between
December 2007 and September 2009.
1 September 2009 Dr Bartolazo completed an “Application for
Re-Registration as a Dentist in New South Wales” form and
registered to practice dentistry in NSW. He is currently registered although he
is not working as a dentist at present.
relation to his employment in Australia, Dr Bartolazo worked as a dental
assistant for some time prior to obtaining qualifications
and registration as a
dentist. After doing so, he worked at the Pitt Street Dental Centre, 70 Pitt
Street Sydney. He was employed
there from September 2005 until June 2010. He
left the Pitt Street Dental Centre following allegations of sexual harassment
against him by two female members of staff.
Bartolazo was interviewed by police in July 2010 and charged with two counts of
assault with act of indecency and common assault
in relation to the two staff
members. He appeared in Hornsby Local Court in July 2010 and was granted
conditional bail. The matter
was heard at the Downing Centre in February 2011
and the charges were dismissed.
leaving the Pitt Street Dental Centre, Dr Bartolazo commenced work with Dr
Michael Finkelstein at the Finkelstein Dental Centre,
300 George Street, Sydney.
He worked with Dr Finkelstein until August 2012.
August 2012 Dr Bartolazo attempted suicide by taking an overdose of diazepam. He
has not worked as a dentist since this time and
is currently employed part-time
for a company which makes defibrillators and for other organisations, working on
their websites.
The Complaint
complaint was made to the Commission in relation to Dr Bartolazo by a dental
assistant at the Pitt Street Dental Centre on 10 June
2010. This complaint, with
additional material concerning Dr Bartolazo’s history of criminal
convictions, was sent to the Commission
by Dr Gadeley, Dr Bartolazo's former
employer at the Pitt Street Dental Centre on 11 June 2010.
Commission, after consulting with the Dental Council of New South Wales, made
four Complaints to the Tribunal. The Complaints
allege that Dr Bartolazo is
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct and
that he is not a suitable
person to be registered as a dentist. It is alleged
that Dr Bartolazo made false and misleading statements to the Dental Board and
two government departments. It is also alleged that he engaged in inappropriate
sexual behavior with a junior colleague.
Complaints, their Background and Particulars are set out in Annexure A to this
Legislative provisions
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is relevantly defined in S139B of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law(NSW) (the National
Law) to include:
(a) Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed or
the care exercised by the practitioner in the practice of
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training of
experience.
(l) Other Improper or Unethical Conduct
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
Professional
Misconduct is defined in S139 E of the National Law as:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) More than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
144 (e) of the National Law provides:
The following complaints may be made about a registered health
practitioner –
(e) Suitable person
A complaint the practitioner is otherwise not a suitable person to hold
registration in the practitioner’s profession.
issues for the Tribunal are:
(1) whether the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that each of the
Particulars of the Complaints are proven; and
(2) if so, whether Dr Bartolazo’s conduct amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct and demonstrates
unsuitability to hold registration; and
(3) if such findings are made, whether orders or directions pursuant to the
National Law are appropriate.
Standard of proof
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Dr Bartolazo has departed to the
requisite degree from the appropriate standards
and so is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and /or professional misconduct or is
otherwise unsuitable to be a dentist.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaints is the civil standard so
the Tribunal must be reasonably satisfied on the
balance of probabilities of the
matters alleged against Dr Bartolazo. However because of the seriousness of the
allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal needs to be
comfortably satisfied that the Complaints have been
established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then was) said
at 362–363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the
inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by inexact
proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
standard of proof is proportionate to the gravity of the issue to be proved.
These disciplinary proceedings may have significant
professional and personal
consequences for Dr Bartolazo and the Tribunal has taken account of this in its
deliberations.
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR 239
Clyne v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
Richter v Walton
1993] NSWCA 233
Kirby P and O’Keefe AJA
Necessarily, the exercise of a disciplinary power in respect of a
professional person may have a consequence that seems punitive and
results for the person that are burdensome and hard. But that is not their
purpose in the eye the law............. Punishment
is not the purpose of the
proceedings. That purpose remains, from first to last, ........ the protection
of the public who deal with
medical practitioners upon the assumption of their
integrity and ethical behaviour.
Tribunal not only has to have appropriate regard to the protection of the
public, it is also in the community interest that the
maintenance of standards
in the dental profession and the maintenance of public confidence in the
profession of dentistry is fostered.
HCCC v Howe [2010] NSWMT 12; Gayed
[1997] NSWSC 279.)
Preliminary/procedural matters
Tribunal considered the following documents which were provided by the parties:
The Commission
provided three folders of documents tabbed 1 to 67. (Exhibit A). These documents
were received without objection, although
some material provided by the
Commission was not pressed.
Dr Bartolazo
provided his written statement dated 27 May 2013 (Exhibit B), documents relating
to the rental of a property at Hunter
Street, Hornsby (Exhibit C) and a
statement from his wife, Mrs Melinda Bartolazo, dated 15 May 2013 (Exhibit
following people attended and gave oral evidence to the Tribunal:
Dr Bartolazo,
the Respondent
Mrs Melinda
Bartolazo, Dr Bartolazo’s wife
The original
complainant, who will be referred to in this decision as Dental Assistant A
dentist and former colleague of Dr Bartolazo
Dr Thomas Tseng, dental surgeon, gave evidence by conference telephone.
Application for proceedings to be closed to the public and Non Publication
At the commencement of the hearing, Dr Bartolazo requested that the proceedings
be closed to the public.
167B of the National Law provides as follows:
167B (2) Proceedings of a Tribunal are to be open to the public except
when the Tribunal otherwise directs.
(3) A Tribunal is not to direct that proceedings are to be closed to the
public unless satisfied that it is desirable to do so in
the public interest for
reasons connected with the subject matter of the inquiry or appeal or the nature
of the evidence to be given.
When asked about the reason for this request, Dr Bartolazo stated it was because
of the sexual nature of some of the complaints.
He said he did not want these
matters to be aired in public and added this would expose the complainant to
public scrutiny.
for the Commission submitted that Dr Bartolazo’s stated concern was a
personal one rather than a public one and that
in other jurisdictions issues of
sexual harassment, which form the basis of Complaint 2, are generally determined
Tribunal accepted this submission and considered that Dr Bartolazo had not
identified why a closed hearing would be in the public
interest. The Tribunal
decided not to grant Dr Bartolazo’s request and the hearing remained
opened to the public.
the Tribunal determined to make a Non Publication Order, to prevent the
publication of the name of the original complainant
or any information which
might identify the original complainant. The Tribunal is satisfied that this
Order is sufficient to address
any concerns about exposing the complainant to
public scrutiny.
Representation
Dr Bartolazo had the assistance of legal representation in his preparation for
the hearing, but appeared unrepresented before the
the first hearing day Dr Bartolazo did not bring the documents which had been
served on him by the Commission. As Dr Bartolazo
was not legally represented the
Tribunal arranged for him to have access to these documents during the hearing
and to have time to
review the documents before the proceedings commenced. The
Tribunal also explained to Dr Bartolazo, amongst other things, the nature
process of the hearing and that he was able to seek an adjournment at any time,
Complaint 1
1 alleges that Dr Bartolazo is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct on
the basis of section 139B (1) (a) and (1)
(l) of the National Law. Eight
Particulars are relied on to establish Complaint 1.
the exception of Particular 4, the Particulars relate to the making of false and
misleading statements to the Dental Board, the
Department of Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous affairs (DIMIA) and the Department of Immigration
and Citizenship and
the practitioner’s alleged failure to inform the
Dental Board of certain required information.
4 relates to the practitioner practising as a dentist whilst unregistered in a
period between 2007 and 2009.
Making false statements/withholding information – the Dental
Particulars 1, 2 and 3
Bartolazo applied to the Dental Board for registration as a dental practitioner
on 22 July 2005. In making this application Dr
Bartolazo completed an
“Application for Registration as a Dentist in New South Wales” form
in which he stated that he
had not been convicted of a serious offence, had not
been refused registration as a dentist in another jurisdiction, had not been
removed or suspended from any statutory register and he declared that the
information in the application form is correct.
1 September 2009, following the period when his registration had lapsed, Dr
Bartolazo completed an “Application for Re-Registration
as a Dentist in
New South Wales” form in which he stated that he had not been convicted of
any offences in or outside of New
South Wales, no criminal findings for a sexual
offence had been made against him, no criminal findings had been made against
for an offence committed in the course of the practice of dentistry, and his
registration had not been suspended or cancelled in
In signing this form, he declared that the information provided was true and
correct. The form notes that the declaration concerns
a 12 month period prior to
registration being due. However the explanatory notes, which applicants are
required to read, make it
clear that if matters occurring prior to this period
have not already been notified, then the Board must be made aware of
In his written statement dated 27 May 2013, Dr Bartolazo says in relation to
Complaint 1,
“I did not purposefully withhold information concerning my prior
criminal convictions from the Dental Board of New South Wales
when applying for
registration to practice as a dentist. I interpreted the question to pertain to
Australia only.”
his oral evidence Dr Bartolazo confirmed that when he read questions about
criminal convictions on the form he thought they referred
to convictions in
Australia or New South Wales and not overseas. Dr Bartolazo was asked about this
in cross examination:
Can I take you then to
question 4. You were asked a question, "Have you been convicted in New
South Wales or elsewhere of an offence?"
Q. You see that someone has ticked "No"?
A. Correct.
Q. The person who ticked "No", that was you?
Q. It's not true, is it?
A. I read it when I was reading it and I ticked it, it was true
because I read it to be elsewhere, Australia.
Q. Well, it doesn't say "elsewhere", "Australia".
A. It doesn't say "elsewhere", "USA", either.
Q. No. It says "in New South Wales or elsewhere"?
A. Yes.................................
Q. Well, I want to put to you that there is no basis for reading this
document as being limited to Australia.
A. I disagree with that....................................
Q. You were aware that if you had informed the Board that you had been
charged with four counts of indecent assault of patients and,
in particular, two
of those being minors, that you would not have been registered in New South
Wales as a dentist?
Q. It didn't cross your mind at all?
Q. You didn't think that this would be any issue at all to the Dental Board
of New South Wales if you had revealed your criminal
convictions?
A. No. I answered the question thinking that it was Australia and that's
what it was.
Q. Do you agree with me it doesn't say that?
A. No. It does not.
Bartolazo stressed that he had not knowingly made false statements and said he
can now see the error he made. He said he now agrees
that the information he
provided was incorrect, but at the time he filled out the form, he believed it
was correct.
10 June 2010 Dr Bartolazo did write to the Dental Board providing information
“This letter is to inform the Dental Board of NSW of information
that I had withheld in 2005 when I registered as a dentist
to practice in New
South Wales.
My dental license was revoked in 1992 for misdemeanour charges against me
for crimes involving moral turpitude, for indiscretions
ensuring my early
adulthood and early days as a dentist. I was re-registered some time after and
remained in good standing till my
emigration to Australia in 2002. It took me a
couple of years to complete the ADC examination and to qualify as a dentist in
Once I passed these examinations I was then eligible to register to
work in New South Wales. As required, I submitted a letter of
good standing from
the U.S. with my application for registration.
I omitted the fact that my license was revoked in the registration form as
I had interpreted the question in that it only applied
to dental registration
for jurisdictions in Australia. In addition, I thought that was not relevant to
my registration since that
happened almost 15 years ago at that time of
registration (nearly 20 years ago today).”
In his oral evidence Dr Bartolazo told the Tribunal that he wrote to the
Dental Board at this time “because it was all going
to come out”. He
said Dr Gadeley, his employer at the Pitt Street Dental Centre, had threatened
to inform the Board of his
criminal convictions. Dr Bartolazo stated that he
wanted to....... tell the registration before someone else
Making false statements – Government Departments
Particulars 6, 7 and 8
Particulars
6, 7 and 8 allege that Dr Bartolazo made false statements to two government
departments when applying to migrate to Australia
and later when applying for
Australian citizenship. The Tribunal had copies of the relevant documents before
28 January 2003 and on 1 February 2006 Dr Bartolazo completed an Application for
General Skilled Migration to Australia. These
forms were submitted to DIMIA to
facilitate Dr Bartolazo and his family migrating to Australia. Dr Bartolazo told
the Tribunal that
he completed the second form after finishing his ADC
examinations and so qualifying to practise as a dentist in
both forms Dr Bartolazo declared that he had not been convicted of a crime or
offence in any country, including a conviction which
is now removed from
official records. He also declared that the information he had supplied in the
form was complete, correct and
up-to-date in every detail.
Bartolazo applied to be an Australian citizen in 2012. He submitted an online
Application for Australian Citizenship by Conferral
– General Eligibility
to the Department of Immigration and Citizenship on 18 June
this application he denied having been convicted of or found guilty of any
offences overseas or in Australia. He also denied having
been confined in a
prison by order of a court made in connection with criminal proceedings overseas
or in Australia. Dr Bartolazo
also declared that the information he supplied in
this form is complete and correct in every detail.
his written statement dated 27 May 2013, Dr Bartolazo says,
“I did not purposefully withhold information concerning my prior
criminal convictions from Department of Immigration and Multicultural
Indigenous affairs (DIMIA)
when applying for residency. I interpreted the
question to pertain to the previous 5 years prior to the
application.”
cross examination, in relation to the Application made in January 2003, Dr
Bartolazo gave the following evidence:
Q. You will see there's a question 47 asking you:
"Have you or any other person included in this application ever been
convicted of an offence or an offence in any country, including
any conviction
which is now removed from official records?"
There's a particular in the "No" box; do you see that?
Q. You made that tick?
Q. No misunderstanding that this applied to the offences committed by you in
the United States of America?
A. Again, I interpreted that as meaning something else.
Q. What did you interpret this to mean?
A. Pertaining to Australia.
Q. So you are seriously suggesting to this Tribunal that in asking this
question, the Department of Immigration is only interested
in offences committed
in Australia?
A. That's how I answered it........
Q. You understood "any country" meant the United States of America?
A. I do now.
Q. Well, when did you first come to the conclusion that any country included
the United States of America?
A. You just mentioned it.
Q. What? In the last three minutes it's dawned on you that being asked
included the United
States of America?
Q. That's your serious evidence in these proceedings?
A. That's the way I interpreted it. I did it quickly.
Later in his evidence Dr Bartolazo said that this explanation was incorrect and
he relied on his statement, dated 27 May 2013, in
which he says he interpreted
the questions to pertain only to the 5 years prior to the application. He was
also asked about this
in cross examination,
Q. Didn't you interpret
this question to mean it only applied to offences committed in the previous five
A. That could be as well.
Q. Well, where do I find in this document anything that gives comfort to
that view that it only applied to matters in the last five
A. I don't know.
Q. Well, how did you possibly gain your interpretation that the question
pertained to the previous five years prior to the application?
A. Because I've been asked that question previously and it says five
Q. Well, it doesn't say five years in this document?
Q. Who asked you previously and restricted it to the five years?
A. I think a job application or something.
Q. A job application, so you equated an application for a visa to this
country based on an answer you had given in a job application?
A. Yes..........
Bartolazo was unable to recall the particular job application in question. He
denied that he completed the form to conceal his
criminal convictions and so
facilitate the grant of a visa, although he did acknowledge that he understood
that his past criminal
record could impact on his visa
application.
Dr Bartolazo informed the Dental Board of his criminal convictions on 10 June
2010 when he knew “it was all going to
come out”, he did not make a
similar disclosure to DIMIA. He stated in oral evidence that he intended to
notify the Department
of Immigration, at the same time, around 10 June 2010, but
did not do so, as he knew “it would happen anyway”.
Bartolazo also acknowledged that when he made his online application for
Australian citizenship on 18 June 2010, several days after
his disclosure to the
Dental Board, he still withheld information in relation to his past criminal
record. In cross examination he
was asked about the citizenship
application,
Q. Well, you didn't tell the truth, did you?
A. I withheld information.
Q. You didn't tell the truth?
A. I didn't disclose information.
Q. What information didn't you disclose?
A. My past.............
Q. You made a deliberate decision at this stage not to reveal that
information?
A. No. It wasn't deliberate.
Q. Well, you said a moment ago you withheld it. You made a deliberate
decision not to reveal it?
A. At that time, yes.
Q. At that time you'd formed the view that it was time to fess up?
Q. Notwithstanding forming the view that it was time to fess up, you
continued to withhold information?
Q. And do so knowingly?
Aside from Dr Bartolazo’s admission in relation to this application, his
primary assertion is that in filling out the forms
in question, he had not
intentionally or knowingly provided false information. However, he stated that
he answered the questions
without reading the forms in full, he did not read the
explanatory notes and he did not read the declaration section before signing
The Practice of Dentistry
1 asserts that Dr Bartolazo’s conduct in
the practice of dentistry
is significantly below the relevant standard and that his conduct is improper or
relating to the practice or purported practice of
practice of dentistry does not refer to conduct that occurs only in the course
of treating a patient. Conduct which is not direct
clinical treatment can
properly be regarded as conduct relating to the practice of dentistry, if an
adequate nexus with dental practice
is established.
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Spigelman CJ
"There is authority in favour of extending the terminology
"professional misconduct" to acts not occurring directly in the course
professional practice. That is not to say that any form of personal misconduct
may be regarded as professional misconduct. The
authorities appear to me to
suggest two kinds of relationships that justify applying the terminology in this
broader way. First,
acts may be sufficiently closely connected with actual
practice, albeit not occurring in the course of such practice. Secondly, conduct
outside the course of practice may manifest the presence or absence of qualities
which are incompatible with, or essential for, the
conduct of practice. In this
second case, the terminology of "professional misconduct" overlaps with and,
usually it is not necessary
to distinguish it from, the terminology of "good
fame and character" or "fit and proper person
Particulars
6, 7 and 8 refer to Dr Bartolazo providing false and misleading information to
DIMIA in the process of obtaining a visa
and to the Department of Immigration
and Citizenship in an application for Australian citizenship. The Tribunal is
satisfied that
there is a nexus between Dr Bartolazo’s visa application
and the practice of dentistry as the visa application was a necessary
his endeavour to work as a dentist in NSW.
application for citizenship may have less of a direct link to the practice of
dentistry, although it may also be seen to facilitate
Dr Bartolazo’s
intention to work as a dentist in Australia. In any event, the Tribunal accepts
this aspect of Dr Bartolazo’s
conduct is relevant to an assessment of the
presence or absence of qualities which are incompatible with, or essential for,
the conduct
of dental practice.
Practising unregistered/Misleading statement as to change of
Particulars 4 and 5.
4 alleges that Dr Bartolazo practised as a dentist while unregistered in the
period 31 December 2007 to 1 September 2009.
his oral evidence Dr Bartolazo admitted Particular 4 and there is no dispute
that he did practise while unregistered between 2007
5 asserts that Dr Bartolazo provided false and misleading information concerning
a change of residential address, to the
Dental Board in Section 72
proceedings.
complaints made to the Dental Board by Dr Gadeley and staff at the Pitt Street
Dental Centre, the Dental Board convened
proceedings under
Dental Practice Act 2001
(now repealed). Delegates of the Board convened on 18
June 2010 to consider whether urgent action was required, in the interests
the protection of the public, given the complaints about Dr Bartolazo.
other things, the delegates considered the fact that Dr Bartolazo had practised,
while unregistered, between December 2007
and September 2009. Dr
Bartolazo’s explanation was that he had moved from Burdett Street, Hornsby
to Hunter Street, Hornsby
in early 2007 but had not changed his address with the
Dental Board. He said, for that reason, he did not receive correspondence
the Board in relation to the renewal of his registration. He said he was unaware
that he was practising while unregistered and
that he had not intentionally
misled the Board.
cross examination before the Tribunal, he explained:
aware of the fact that you were required to inform the Board of a change in your
residential address?
A. It was simply an oversight.............
Q. So when 2008 started, did you think to yourself, "Well, it's been a while
since I've had to register"?
A. No. Actually, you get busy, you're caught up, time goes by.
Q. Time goes, then, into 2009 and you don't think, "Gee, have I sent a
cheque or have I registered?"?
A. No. I didn't.
Q. It gets to the end of August and you think to yourself, "Have I
registered?"?
A. I didn't.
Commission asserts that the explanation offered by Dr Bartolazo at the
proceedings was false and misleading as there is evidence to suggest that Dr
Bartolazo had not moved from Burdett Street Hornsby.
The Commission relies on
the evidence of two police officers, involved in investigating the assault
charges in 2010, who stated that
they spoke to Mrs Bartolazo at the Burdett
Street address in July 2010 and then met Dr Bartolazo at a medical centre next
this property. The Commission also notes that the bail conditions for Dr
Bartolazo, dated 2 July 2010, require him to reside at Burdett
Bartolazo strongly denied this allegation and produced rental receipts and a
copy of a lease agreement in relation to a property
at Hunter Street, Hornsby in
an attempt to demonstrate to the Tribunal that he had moved from Burdett Street
to Hunter Street in
early 2007 and that his statements to the
in this regard were correct.
Bartolazo also told the Tribunal that the family did move from Burdett Street to
Hunter Street. She said that Dr Bartolazo organized
to have the mail redirected
to the new address, but even so some mail went missing.
Tribunal also noted that immigration entry documents completed by Dr Bartolazo
on 9 June 2007 and 28 July 2007 state that his
address was Hunter Street,
The Tribunal’s findings
Tribunal finds that Particular
are proven. The Tribunal
is satisfied on the basis of the documentary evidence and the evidence given by
Dr Bartolazo that he provided
false statements to the Dental Board, DIMIA and
the Department of Immigration and Citizenship and that he failed to inform the
of his past criminal convictions and deregistration in the United
Tribunal did not find Dr Bartolazo’s explanations for his conduct to be
persuasive. His assertion that it was reasonable
for him to assume the
Department of Immigration required information about criminal convictions for
only the last five years and
that the Dental Board enquired only about
Australian convictions, is implausible. The forms Dr Bartolazo completed, on
multiple occasions,
were not obviously ambiguous and any failure to properly
read the questions and the declaration provides no justification for his
Tribunal found Dr Bartolazo to be an unreliable witness. His evidence was
inconsistent and at times contradictory. Dr Bartolazo
gave an erratic account of
his own history of dental practice. He had some difficulty in telling the
Tribunal exactly when he had
ceased to practice as a dentist. He gave several
different answers to questions about this issue and was either unable to recall
because of poor memory or was evasive in answering this question. He also had
considerable difficultly in explaining his employment
history in the
Bartolazo gave conflicting information and this was often apparent when he was
answering questions from the Tribunal and later
similar questions from counsel
for the Commission. The Tribunal did not find Dr Bartolazo to be frank and
forthcoming in his testimony.
Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied that Particular 5 is proven. Particular 5
hinges on whether Dr Bartolazo moved from Burdett
Street, Hornsby to Hunter
Street, Hornsby and if so when such a move took place. The evidence before the
Tribunal on this matter
is equivocal.
Commission bears the onus of proof and the Tribunal, having considered all the
material available, is not satisfied to the requisite
standard that Dr Bartolazo
mislead the
enquiry by stating that he had moved from Burdett Street
to Hunter Street, Hornsby.
Does Dr Bartolazo’s conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional
Dr Tseng’s evidence
Tseng graduated BDS from Sydney University and is a dental surgeon practicing in
Kincumber. Dr Tseng provided 3 reports dated 6
September 2011, 18 February 2012
and 29 February 2012 and gave oral evidence to the Tribunal by conference
Tseng described Dr Bartolazo’s failure to advise the Dental Board of his
past criminal convictions as “conduct that
would not be considered
reasonable for a dentist in NSW.” He expressed concern that Dr Bartolazo
had failed to declare his
past convictions on a number of occasions. In his
report dated 18 February 2012, Dr Tseng stated,
“It is my opinion that Dr Bartolazo's failure to inform the Dental
Board of NSW was improper conduct and I am strongly critical
of his behaviour as
he has been untruthful to not only the Dental Board of NSW, but also the
Department of Immigration and other
authorities.”
Tseng also characterised his conduct as unethical. He said in his report dated
29 February 2012,
“His deliberate omission of his previous criminal charges,
conviction and imprisonment brings into question his ethical behaviour
failure to be registered while practicing for 22 months .........also puts his
patients at risk because they may not be able
to claim any compensation for
negligence. I am strongly critical of Dr Bartolazo's behaviour in all these
his oral evidence Dr Tseng told the Tribunal that it should have been Dr
Bartolazo’s first priority to make sure that he
was registered. Dr Tseng
also discussed the Australian Dental Association's Code of Conduct and stated
that a prudent dentist would
take the time to find out about and read the Code
of Conduct.
The Tribunal’s decision
considering the question of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal
must assess Dr Bartolazo’s conduct against
the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training of experience. Dr
Bartolazo graduated in 1988
and even taking into account the period when he was
unable to practice in the United States, he has been in practice as a dental
professional for over 20 years. He is a dentist with significant training and
experience. The Tribunal must also consider whether
Dr Bartolazo’s conduct
is improper or unethical.
Tseng’s evidence is that Dr Bartolazo’s conduct is unreasonable and
below the standard expected of dentists practising
in NSW. Dr Tseng also notes
that “the gravity of Dr Bartolazo’s crime and imprisonment... his
failure to declare convictions
... lying in his application for registration...
[constitute] improper conduct relating to the purported practice of
dentistry”.
Dr Tseng is strongly critical of Dr
Committee notes the point made in
New South Wales Bar Association v Meakes
(2006) NSWCA 340
, where the Court said that in assessing what constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct reference is made to the views of
“professional
brethren of good repute and competency”. The Dental
Tribunal is an expert tribunal, consisting not only of a chairperson who
legally qualified and a lay member who represents the community, but also two
experienced, senior dentists, who can reflect and
represent the views of
responsible members of the profession.
the exception of Particular 5, all the Particulars relating to Complaint 1 are
proven and reveal significant misconduct, characterised
by a lack of honesty and
integrity. The Tribunal does not accept Dr Bartolazo’s explanation that he
unintentionally made errors
on the forms, because he made reasonable, yet
incorrect assumptions. The Tribunal considers that the forms for the Dental
filled out to enhance his prospects of registration, in the same way
the government forms were completed to promote his chances of
obtaining an
Australian visa and Australian citizenship.
Bartolazo deliberately denied his criminal record and previous professional
license suspension in the USA to Australian regulatory
authorities. He has
demonstrated a reckless disregard for the truth in general and in particular in
relation to the rules and regulations
of his professional registration
when Dr Bartolazo wrote to the Dental Board to admit to his past criminal
record, he did so in a way which minimised his wrongdoing.
In addition,
subsequent to his communication with the Dental Board he again provided false
and misleading information to the government
in his application for Australian
citizenship.
Tribunal notes the recent decision of the Medical Tribunal in
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Dr Saeid Saedlounia [
2013] NSWMT13, in which Dr
Saedlounia had provided misleading information, in his curriculum vitae, for the
purpose of obtaining employment
as a doctor. The Tribunal said,
“The curriculum vitae..........contained false and misleading
particulars of his experience in medical practice, and this was
known to Dr
Saedlounia. The Tribunal is satisfied to the required standard, that in
proffering his curriculum vitae with such misleading
content, Dr Saedlounia's
conduct amounted to improper and unethical conduct related to the practise or
purported practise of medicine.”
Tseng, when asked to consider the appropriateness of the Respondent’s
conduct, referred to a series of Australian and American
Codes of Practice and
Professional Guidelines. Such codes articulate important standards of
professional conduct which are implicit
in health professional education and
training, and society’s expectations for dental practitioners.
Professional values and
qualities have been historically built upon trust,
integrity, self-reflection and upholding the reputation of the
profession.
Bartolazo gave evidence that he had taken an “oath” on graduation
from his dental school, and had studied ethics and
professionalism in his
university courses and in his continuing professional development activities.
However his repeated and deliberate
breaches of the law and ethical standards
demonstrate a flagrant disregard for professional values and the expected
conduct of a
health professional.
Tseng also specifically commented on Dr Bartolazo’s failure to re-register
with the Dental Board of NSW and in his opinion,
it was “improper and
unethical conduct to be practising dentistry while unregistered”.
services provided under both government and private health reimbursement schemes
require that registered practitioners must
be providing these services.
Practising dentistry, while unregistered, gives rise to a risk of breaching
contractual agreements with
health insurance companies regarding the payment of
patient fees. Dr Bartolazo had both a legal and ethical duty of care to his
By not being registered he breached his duty of care and put his
patients, his employer and the reputation of his profession at
all the reasons set out above, the Tribunal is satisfied that Dr
Bartolazo’s conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional
conduct. It is
significantly below the relevant standard and is also properly described as both
improper and unethical.
Complaint 2
2 alleges Dr Bartolazo is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct by
engaging in inappropriate sexual behaviour towards
Dental Assistant A. This
conduct allegedly involved verbal comments to and inappropriate touching of
Dental Assistant A.
Dr Petta’s evidence
Petta made a statement dated 4 April 2011 and gave oral evidence to the
Tribunal. In that statement she said,
“There were many incidents that Dental Assistant A told me about and
I cannot recall all of them individually. I particularly
remember one incident
when Dental Assistant A told me that Dr Bartolazo had touched her near her groin
area. I cannot recall when
this occurred. I also recall one incident shortly
before Dr Bartolazo’s employment was terminated. It happened towards the
end of the afternoon. Dental Assistant A and Dr Bartolazo was speaking in Dr
Bartolazo’s surgery and I was in my surgery nearby
patient notes. I could hear partially hear the conversation between Dental
Assistant A and Dr Bartolazo. I
heard Dr Bartolazo say words to the effect of
“nude photos” and “let's make Craig jealous”. I did not
Dental Assistant A say anything.
Shortly after the conversation ended Dental Assistant A came to speak to
me. She said words to the effect “I was holding the
camera and Dr
Bartolazo said to me “let's take pictures of you with your clothes
off” . I was so shocked I didn't know
what to say. Craig is waiting to
drive me home in the waiting room.”
Tribunal questioned Dr Petta about her recollection of the events in 2010. She
stated that her recollection is very clear. Although
she cannot remember on
which day exactly the incidents occurred, she can remember them as she was in
the role of a support person
for Dental Assistant A. Dr Petta stated that she
had just graduated from university and the job at the Pitt Street Dental Centre
was her first job as a professional dentist. She did not expect the events which
occurred to occur. She said it was not typical and
not what she expected in
day-to-day professional practice.
Petta impressed Tribunal as an open, frank, credible and reliable
Dental Assistant A
Assistant A made a statement dated 9 June 2010 and also gave oral evidence to
the Tribunal. In her statement she said that
she commenced working at the Pitt
Street Dental Centre in mid February 2010. About one a month after commencing
work, Dr Bartolazo,
whilst in a work situation, said to her “let's go make
your boyfriend jealous”. A short time later he approached her
had a camera in her hand and said “we should take photos of you .....with
your clothes off.”
statement continues,
“Around mid March whilst we were at work, I was standing at a
counter in a surgery room when Dr Bartolazo has approached me
from behind. He
placed his hand on my lower back just above my backside. He just held his right
hand on my back talking to me normally.............
It was a quick conversation
that lasted a round a minute. I felt uncomfortable that he was touching me as
that would be something
that my boyfriend would do.
middle of the surgery rooms. Dr Bartolazo has approached me
from front on and
placed his hand on my stomach. His hand was on my lower stomach area, under my
belly button. That day I was wearing
a dress and I was wearing a white lab coat
jacket over top. He had his hand on the outside of my jacket. He was rubbing my
in a circular motion. This lasted for around 30 seconds, at this time we
were having a conversation about work.
I was upset by what he did so I said to him, “That’s
inappropriate the way you’re touching me.” Dr Bartolazo
anything back to me, he just walked off.”
Assistant A told the Tribunal that she discussed these events with Dr Petta, her
boyfriend and her parents. Her parents advised
her to talk to the
stated that she has a clear recollection of the words Dr Bartolazo said to her
as she was shocked and upset by it. She could not
recall whether she was feeling
unwell on the day in question, but was certain that Dr Bartolazo’s
touching of her was not an
accidental event.
Dr Bartolazo’s evidence
Bartolazo denied the allegations in Complaint 2. He said,
“As far as the incidents, I don't recall any of the incidents where
I allegedly spoke inappropriately..........in my recollection
none of that
occurred and that evidence was given in the criminal court as well. As far as
inappropriate touching, I felt that it
wasn't inappropriate. I felt that she
was she was not feeling well and she was rubbing her stomach and I
briefly touched my hand
when her hand was on her stomach, just simply, you know,
"Are you okay?" and "I hope you feel better" and that was all that had
transpired.”
Bartolazo also told the Tribunal that he was the victim of a vendetta as a
result of a very hostile relationship between Dr Gadeley
and Dr Finkelstein. He
said that Dr Gadelay was very angry that he had gone to work with Dr
Finkelstein. He said Dr Gadeley threatened
him. He described Dr Gadeley as a
bully who had coerced the staff into making a false complaint about
“Then one day things turned around. Someone did a Google search on
me and discovered my past criminal history. That history
was used against me in
a personal vendetta between Dr Gadeley and Dr Finkelstein. Although
this vendetta wasn't directly aimed at
me, it turned out that I was the fall
guy. When a bully doesn't get his way, he responds by using bully tactics.
Dr Gadeley was
that bully. When his schoolyard bully tactics didn't work
on me, he bullied his staff to report false statements against me, false
accusations that mimicked my past which was buried well behind me, now more than
20 years ago.”
explained Dental Assistant A’s evidence as the result of her being
persuaded to make a false complaint. He said that both
Dental Assistant A and Dr
Petta could be persuaded to lie under oath. He believes the Pitt Street Dental
Centre practice manager,
Ms Valerie Demarco, had influenced them to do
Q. It's a very big deal......to convince two people to perjure
themselves.
Q. They would have to be telling lies to the police.
Q. Then if the matter went to court, as it did, they would have to take
an oath and lie under oath.
Q. So I think it's fair to say that most people would be very reluctant
to undertake that course of action. Wouldn't you agree?
A. I would agree, but most people don't know Valerie. She
is she's good at what she does.
Q. Even Dr Petta who, as a dental practitioner, as we've been
discussing with you, has a code of professional ethics, do you think
could be persuaded to lie under oath?
A. Yes. Yes. Both of them, absolutely.
Bartolazo stressed that the sexual harassment complaint had been dealt with in
the criminal courts and had been dismissed.
Bartolazo also told the Tribunal that he is not a member of the Australian
Dental Association, but was a member of its American
equivalent. He is aware
that that Association, as well as the Dental Board of Australia, publish a Code
of Conduct. He stated he
had completed courses in professional ethics as part of
his university qualifications. He stated that he took an oath, similar to
Hippocratic oath, when he was admitted to practice in the United States. Dr
Bartolazo said that, in both Australia and the USA,
he had undertaken continuing
professional development relating to professional ethics.
The Tribunal’s findings
Tribunal finds the Particulars in relation to Complaint 2 proven.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Dr Petta and Dental Assistant A and prefers it
to the evidence of Dr Bartolazo. As noted above,
the Tribunal had difficulty in
giving significant weight to Dr Bartolazo’s evidence generally, given its
lack of consistency.
Dr Bartolazo’s explanation was difficult to accept. His assertion that he
was the victim of a vendetta and his account
of the events around this was
erratic and lacked coherence. He acknowledged he left the Pitt Street Dental
Centre after allegations
of sexual harassment were made against him, but he also
claims the vendetta arose and the allegations were made after he had resigned
and commenced employment with Dr Finkelstein.
the assertion that Dr Petta, a dental professional and Dental Assistant A would
be prepared to lay false charges, lie under
oath to the Local Court and lie
under oath to the Dental Tribunal because they have been bullied into doing so,
is not credible.
Particularly as Dr Petta no longer has any professional
connection with the alleged bullies.
Does Dr Bartolazo’s conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional
Dr Tseng’s evidence
Tseng describes Dr Bartolazo's conduct towards Dental Assistant A as
unreasonable and inappropriate. He says it is not behaviour
reasonably expected
of a dentist in New South Wales.
his report dated 18 February 2012 Dr Tseng refers to the Dental Board of
Australia's Code of Conduct and the guidelines available
to practitioners prior
to the release of that Code in July 2010. He noted the professional guidelines
clearly indicate that sexual
harassment of a fellow employee is a serious
offence that justifies a disciplinary procedure and may justify
relation to the matters raised in Complaint 2, Dr Tseng said,
“In my opinion these incidents show that Dr Bartolazo's behaviour
was improper conduct related to the purported practice of
dentistry because it
was a series of episodes of sexual harassment of a fellow employee. Dr
Bartolazo’s behaviour was exploitive
and Dental Assistant A felt
threatened by it.”
The Tribunal’s decision
Tseng referred to Professional Codes and Guidelines for dentists regarding
relationships between employees and power differences
between dentists and their
staff. In particular, Dr Tseng refers to a dentist understanding “the
nature and consequences of
bullying and harassment” in the dental
workplace. He quotes the American College of Dentists section on its Code of
which states that “sexual advances, sexually explicit or offensive
language, sexually offensive materials, inappropriate physical
actions of a related nature are indefensible and must be avoided”. Dr
Tseng concluded that Dr Bartolazo’s
behaviour was improper conduct related
to the practice of dentistry.
Tseng’s evidence was unchallenged and the Tribunal accepts and agrees with
his assessment of Dr Bartolazo’s conduct.
Tribunal is satisfied that Dr Bartolazo’s conduct in relation to Dental
Assistant A was improper and unethical and that
he is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Complaint 3
3 alleges that Dr Bartolazo is guilty of professional misconduct. The
Particulars of this Complaint are the same as the
Particulars of Complaints 1
and 2. It is alleged that his conduct or the pattern of his conduct is
sufficiently serious to justify
suspension or cancellation of Dr
Bartolazo’s registration as a dentist.
Tribunal has found all of the relevant Particulars proven with the exception of
Particular 5 (Complaint 1).
Professional
Misconduct is defined in S139 E of the National Law as:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) More than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
proven Particulars can be considered together in relation to the question of
professional misconduct. As the Medical Tribunal
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Dr Saeid Saedlounia
[2013] NSWMT13,
“there is no prohibition within s 139E for considering whether a
pattern of unsatisfactory professional conduct can amount to
professional
misconduct.......Such an approach would be consistent with a purposive approach
to the legislation.”
determining whether the conduct in question amounts to professional misconduct,
a deliberate departure from, or indifference to,
accepted standards of practice
can qualify as professional misconduct. See
Pillai v Messiter [No.2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197.
Britt, in his written submission, points the Tribunal to the decision in
V Roopra (No 1) [2012] NSWDT
5 where a differently constituted Dental
Tribunal found that inappropriate sexual conduct by a dentist towards staff
members constituted
professional misconduct.
HCCC v Shashati NSWMT (22 September 2006)
the Medical Tribunal referred
to a practitioner’s persistent and systemic lying as inimical to fitness
to practice medicine,
especially where it was not an isolated incident.
Tribunal is satisfied that Dr Bartolazo’s conduct is sufficiently serious
to be characterised as professional misconduct.
Dr Bartolazo repeatedly provided
false and misleading information in a way which demonstrates persistent deceit
and/or disregard
for the law and ethical standards. He did this in the context
of signing documentation which impacts directly on the practice of
dentistry in
Australia. He also demonstrated a serious lack of recognition of the
consequences of his behavior for the standing of
the dental profession in
Australia and his duty of care for his patients.
was a potential for a conflict to arise between Dr Bartolazo's own interests in
securing an Australian visa and his registration
as a dentist in New South Wales
and the public interest. Dr Bartolazo failed to appreciate the need to honestly
and scrupulously
provide information to the Dental Board and the Australian
government. Dr Bartolazo’s conduct can be characterized as a breach
public trust. The Tribunal has no confidence Dr Bartolazo could be relied upon
to disclose matters which were adverse to him professionally.
addition Dr Bartolazo has been sexually inappropriate with a work colleague - a
much younger dental assistant who had only recently
started working at the
practice. In the light of his criminal convictions and incarceration, it might
be expected that Dr Bartolazo
would be acutely aware of the need to avoid
sexually inappropriate behaviour. However he has sexually harassed a junior
and, accordingly, has breached ethical and professional standards.
Dr Bartolazo’s conduct demonstrates serious deficiencies in respect of a
range of professional
responsibilities and the Tribunal is
satisfied his conduct is sufficiently serious to justify suspension or
cancellation of his registration
as a dentist. For these reasons, the Tribunal
considers Dr Bartolazo is guilty of professional misconduct.
Complaint 4
4 alleges that Dr Bartolazo is not a suitable person to hold registration as a
dentist within the meaning of section 144
of the National Law. The Particulars
of this Complaint are the same as the Particulars of Complaints 1 and 2.
section 144 does not provide a definition of “suitable person”,
section 55 of the National Law, which defines when
a person may be unsuitable to
hold general registration, provides some guidance.
55 refers to a number of matters, but relevantly provides:
(1) A National Board may decide an individual is not a suitable person to
hold general registration in a health profession if –
(a) in the Board's opinion, the individual has an impairment that would
detrimentally affect the individual’s capacity to practise
the profession
to such an extent that it would or may place the safety of the public at risk;
(b) having regard to the individual’s criminal history to the extent
that is relevant to the individual’s practice of
the profession,
individual is not, in the Board's opinion, an appropriate person to practise the
profession or it is not in the public
interest for the individual to practise
the profession; or
(h) in the Board's opinion, the individual is for any other reason –
(i) not a fit and proper person for general registration in the profession;
(ii) unable to practise the profession competently and safely.
Dr Bartolazo’s evidence.
Bartolazo told the Tribunal that he had become a dentist because of his family
history - many of the men in his family are dentists.
He is not working as a
dentist at present as he has “lost his taste for practice.” He said
he decided to do different
work, so he could get back “his hunger for
dental practice”. Dr Bartolazo told the Tribunal that he wishes to
again in the future. He said he was considering relinquishing his
registration to “facilitate this hearing”, but did
not do so as he
does wish to return to practice.
Bartolazo discussed with the Tribunal the overdose of Temazepam he took in
August 2012. He said he had had both short term and
long term memory
difficulties since the overdose.
“When they found me I was I was in a hypoxic state for
36 hours and my SAT levels were under 70% so it was rather miraculous
I didn't sustain any heavy brain damage, but as time goes I'm finding little
things here and there, like with memory and things
along that line, that just
weren't as good as when I was before this incident.”
Bartolazo was in hospital for some time and in a coma for several days. He saw a
psychiatrist and a psychologist and was prescribed
antidepressant medication. He
required assistance to regain full mobility and also needed support with speech
therapy. He thinks
he may have had a neuropsychological assessment in hospital
but not a follow up assessment, but told the Tribunal he would be willing
Bartolazo said that members of his church had visited him in hospital and given
him blessings, which he felt was very important
in assisting his recovery. While
he described life at present as “not easy”, mainly because of
financial issues, he said
his religious beliefs and his family are very
important to him and his physical health is now good.
Bartolazo told the Tribunal that when he was not registered as a dentist,
between 1991 and 1996, he engaged, at a competitive level,
in bodybuilding and
in 1995 was awarded the title of Mr USA. At this time he considered not
returning to dentistry and taking up
bodybuilding on a professional basis. He
disclosed that he had used anabolic steroids and human growth hormone in an
effort to improve
his chances of success and acknowledged that these substances
were illegal. He said he took them because he wanted to be competitive,
wanted to win. He said he wasn’t concerned about the illegality as he
wasn’t planning to go back to dentistry, but
when he met his wife she
encouraged him to return to professional practice.
Bartolazo also discussed with the Tribunal the number and variety of visas which
he has been granted since moving to Australia.
Some visas imposed limitations on
the hours of work Dr Bartolazo could undertake and others did not permit him to
work at all.
Bartolazo told the Tribunal that he had begun to work as a dental assistant
shortly after moving to Australia. He worked for a
temp agency – AB Dental
and was employed in about 10 different dental practices. He said that he worked
for the maximum hours
permitted by his visa. He first told the Tribunal he had
worked for 30 hours per week and then later changed that to 20 hours per
when it was pointed out to him that his visa allowed only 20 hours of work each
asked about a reference in the documentary material to a breach of a visa work
condition, Dr Bartolazo said he was unaware of
changes to his visa conditions
and unaware of a ‘no work’ condition being imposed, and had
continued to work as usual.
The Tribunal’s decision
is a very significant Complaint with respect to Dr Bartolazo’s
professional standing and a decision on this matter is not
one taken lightly.
Dr Bartolazo’s professional misconduct in failing to disclose previous
convictions to statutory authorities
on more than one occasion, practising as an
unregistered dentist (for almost two years) and his inability to recognise
positional power and harassment within a professional health setting,
collectively reveal conduct substantially below the standard
of a registered
dental practitioner.
the first breach of professional standards on 22 July 2005, Dr Bartolazo has
demonstrated an on-going pattern of improper conduct,
dishonesty, denial and
lack of insight into ethical issues and the consequent public risk. His
evidence and representations to the
Tribunal indicate a substantive lack of
knowledge and judgment in relation to his ethical, legal and professional
obligations.
55 (1) (b) refers to an individual’s criminal history, to the extent that
it is relevant to the individual’s practice
of the profession, as a
criteria for determining suitability to hold registration. Dr Bartolazo has a
history of serious criminal
offences, involving sexual misconduct, committed
against four women, two of whom were minors and all of whom were his patients at
the time. The Tribunal is unable to comment on what decision would have been
made if Dr Bartolazo had disclosed his criminal convictions
when first applying
to the Dental Board for registration. However the Tribunal considers his
criminal history to be a significant
factor in assessing Complaint
Dr Bartolazo’s conduct, on numerous occasions, in withholding and/or
providing misleading information concerning his
previous suspension and
imprisonment, may have impacted directly on him improperly obtaining
registration as a dentist. There was
no recognition by Dr Bartolazo of the
seriousness of this conduct.
conduct reveals a lack of honesty and a willingness to deceive, to achieve his
own ends. In addition, Dr Bartolazo has demonstrated
a serious lack of insight
into his own behaviour. There was no recognition of the potential impact or
serious consequences for his
patients with regard to him practising as an
unregistered dentist for almost two years. And Dr Bartolazo failed to recognise
his workplace behavior, involving sexual innuendo and harassment, fell well
short of the ethical behaviour expected of a registered
health professional.
Even after having been convicted of offences involving sexual misconduct in the
as a whole, Dr Bartolazo’s dishonesty in his dealings with two government
departments and with the Dental Board, his actions
in practicing unregistered
for an extended period with all the potential associated issues that arise from
that, his inappropriate
conduct with fellow members of staff, his disdain for
the rules of his professional regulatory authority, his stated "drive" to do
whatever it takes to achieve his goals and his lack of insight into the
seriousness of his behaviour convinces the Tribunal that
Dr Bartolazo lacks the
integrity and ethical attributes required of a professional and directly calls
into question whether or not
he is a fit and proper person to practice
Accordingly,
taking into account Dr Bartolazo’s conduct, his criminal history, his lack
of insight and breach of public trust,
the Tribunal is satisfied that Complaint
4 is established and that Dr Bartolazo is not a suitable person to hold
registration as
formulating protective orders, the Tribunal is required to not only consider the
object of protection of the public, but to recognise
that object also includes
deterring the practitioner, and other practitioners, from either repeating the
misconduct or leaving it
open to temptation to act in a manner that falls short
of the required high standards of professional persons in positions of trust
confidence:
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, per Giles
Bartolazo is guilty of professional misconduct and although that does not always
lead to the cancellation of registration, he has
also been found to be a person
who is not suitable to hold registration as a dental practitioner in NSW.
Accordingly, for these reasons
and in the interests of the protection of the
public, the Tribunal considers Dr Bartolazo’s registration should be
Tribunal also considers that Dr Bartolazo should not be able to seek
registration for a period of at least two years from the
date of this order.
This period without registration will enable Dr Bartolazo to reflect on his
conduct and take appropriate action
to remedy the deficiencies in his
professional behaviour which have been identified by these
Complaints.
Bartolazo's responses demonstrate little or no insight into the seriousness of
his deficiencies for his deliberate misleading of
professional and government
authorities, and his unprofessional interactions with fellow staff
members. It may be some time before
Dr Bartolazo is able to achieve
insight into his past deficiencies, and to work towards guarding against similar
failings in the
future. Two years is a minimum time before which the Tribunal
could expect him to have achieved this.
was no evidence to suggest that Dr Bartolazo’s technical skills as a
dentist were below the acceptable clinical standards.
The issues of his
improper and unprofessional conduct lay in his inability to match behavioural
and ethical standards with clinical
practice. If Dr Bartolazo is to be
rehabilitated he would need to successfully acquire and demonstrate competency
in ethics and
professional responsibilities.
structured program of mentoring is not available to Dr Bartolazo while he is
unregistered, however he may decide to attend courses
of study on professional
standards, ethics and medical jurisprudence to assist him to better understand
these issues. If he did so,
then evidence of his successful completion of such
courses should be provided to the Dental Tribunal with any application for
registration.
was evidence that Dr Bartolazo had attempted to take his own life in August
2012; that he has used restricted drugs; that he
is a “driven”
person who likes to win and who is also prone to depression. Dr Bartolazo says
he now feels well, but the
Tribunal is unsure if there are any underlying mental
health issues requiring treatment. Similarly Dr Bartolazo told the Tribunal
any cognitive problems may also need to be explored.
Bartolazo may consider undertaking psychological and psychiatric counselling for
a reasonable period of time. He may also wish
to have a neuropsychological
assessment. If these things occur, reports on his cognitive, psychological and
psychiatric fitness to
practice as a health professional could also be forwarded
to the Dental Tribunal with any application for
registration.
The Tribunal makes the following
Dr Bartolazo
is reprimanded in the strongest possible terms for his conduct
contrary to his professional and ethical obligations as
Cancellation
Dr Bartolazo’s registration is cancelled from the
date of this order.
Application for
An application for review pursuant to Part 8, Division 8
of the National law, of the Tribunal’s Order above, may not be made
after a period of two years from the date of this order and the Dental
Tribunal is the appropriate review body for the purpose
of any such
application for review.
Dr Bartolazo is to pay the
costs of the Health Care Complaints Commission.
Non publication
Pursuant to Schedule 5D, clause 7 of the National Law, the following matters
in these proceedings are not to be published by any person:
The name and
address of the original complainant, referred to in these proceedings as Dental
Assistant A;
Any evidence
relating to the subject matter of the Complaint which may identify the original
complainant, referred to in these proceedings
as Dental Assistant
9 August 2013
_______________
Diane Robinson
_______________
Clive Wright
_______________
Robert Hochstadt
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323 Castlereagh
Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Dental Council of New South
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
the National Law
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law in that he has:
i. engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by him in the practice
of dentistry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience;
ii. engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of dentistry.
Background to Complaint One
August 1990, the practitioner was arrested in Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
United States of America (USA). He was charged with
four counts of indecent
assault, two counts of corruption of minors and one of endangering the welfare
of children.
charges arose from allegations by four female dental patients that they were
each sexually assaulted by the practitioner while
being treated by him in the
dental chair.
of the dental patients assaulted were minors, being under the age of
around 17 October 1991, the practitioner was convicted of criminal charges of
indecent assault, endangering the welfare of children,
and corruption of minors
in Delaware County of Pennsylvania, USA:
d.1 the practitioner was
sentenced to two periods of “confinement” to run concurrently for a
minimum of 6 months and a
maximum of 2 years, 1 day to begin on 17 October 1991
and ordered to pay a fine of $500 for each of the assaults against a minor;
d.2 the practitioner was also sentenced to two periods of probation of 1 year
and 2 years respectively to run consecutively with the
“confinement”; and
d.3 the practitioner was also required to surrender his licence to practice
dentistry and to not practice dentistry for at least 5
e. On 24 October 1991, the practitioner’s licence to practice dentistry
in Pennsylvania, USA, was suspended indefinitely, for
a minimum period of 5
f. The practitioner's licence to practise dentistry was revoked indefinitely
in New Jersey, USA, on 8 June 1992.
g. The practitioner emigrated to Australia in 2002.
h. The practitioner applied to be registered as a dentist in New South Wales
for the first time in 2005.
i. In the practitioner’s application to the Dental Board of NSW
(“the Board”) dated 22 July 2005, the Practitioner
following statements:
i.1 At Question 3: Registration in Other Jurisdictions, the application form
stated “If you are currently registered in another
Australian State or
overseas jurisdiction to practise as a dentist please indicate”. The
practitioner answered “N/A”.
i.2 At Question 4: Convictions for Serious Offences, the application form
stated “have you been convicted in New South Wales
or elsewhere of an
offence”. The practitioner ticked “No”.
i.3 At Question 5: Good Character, the application form stated at sub
question 1 “Have you been refused registration as a dentist
i.4 At Question 5: Good Character, the application form stated at sub
question 2 “Have you been removed or suspended for any
reason from any
statutory register”. The practitioner ticked “No”.
i.5 At Question 8, the practitioner declared that “all the information
provided in this application is correct”.
j. On 8 August 2005, the practitioner’s application to be registered as
a dentist in New South Wales was accepted.
k. On 8 August 2005, the practitioner was informed that pursuant to the
Dental Practice Act
(now repealed)(“
was required to advise the Board in writing within 30 days if he changed his
address from 15/1-5 Burdett Street Hornsby NSW 2077.
l. On 31 October 2005, the practitioner completed a Renewal of Registration
form for the Board.
m. On 8 November 2006, the practitioner completed a Renewal of Registration
form for the Board.
n. In September 2007, the Board mailed to the practitioner, at 15/1-5 Burdett
Street Hornsby, a Renewal of Registration form for registration
o. Between October and December 2007, the Board sent letters to the
practitioner by mail at 15/1-5 Burdett Street Hornsby reminding
him to lodge his
Renewal of Registration form for registration in 2008.
p. On 10 January 2008, the Board sent a letter to the practitioner by mail
informing him that he was no longer entitled to practice
dentistry because he
had “failed to pay your annual roll fee as required by the
Practice Act
section 26(1))
, in spite of two notifications
having been sent to you at the address appearing on the register”.
q. On 1 September 2009, the Pitt Street Dental Centre sent a letter to the
Board by mail to advise the Board of the Practitioner’s
change of address
to 309/25 Hunter Street, Hornsby NSW 2077.
r. On 1 September 2009, the practitioner wrote to the Board stating:
r.1 That it “has just come to my attention that my New South Wales
registration lapsed in December 2007”;
r.2 That “this was an honest oversight, as I changed my home
s. On 1 September 2009 the practitioner completed an application for
re-registration form for the Board.
t. The re-registration form required the practitioner to make declarations
concerning the period of twelve months ending two months
before the registration
expiry date (“the relevant period”) including:
t.1 Question 1: “Have you been convicted of any offence in or outside
NSW except an excluded offence?” The practitioner
t.2 Question 2: “Has a criminal finding for a sex/violence offence
been made against you?” The practitioner circled
t.3 Question 3: “Has a criminal finding been made against you for an
offence committed in the course of the practice or purported
dentistry?” The practitioner circled “No”.
t.4 Question 7: “Has your registration as a dentist been suspended or
cancelled, or any conditions imposed on it, in any other
The practitioner circled “No”.
u. The re-registration form stated that any such matter as referred to in
paragraph t.1 - t.4, above, prior to the relevant period
“should have
previously been notified and are not required to be disclosed to the Board again
(note: if such matters have not
previously been notified to the Board please
v. On 8 October 2009, the practitioner completed a Renewal of Registration
form for the Board.
w. From 31 December 2007 until 1 September 2009, the practitioner was not
registered as a dental practitioner in New South Wales.
x. From 31 December 2007 until 1 September 2009, the practitioner practised
as a dentist in New South Wales.
y. On 18 June 2010, the practitioner appeared before a hearing of the Board
held under section 72 of the
z. On 18 June 2010, the practitioner informed the Board that his registration
had lapsed because “he had not changed his address
aa. After 8 August 2005, the practitioner’s home address was recorded
as 15/1-5 Burdett Street Hornsby from 8 August 2005 until
June or July 2010
aa.1 Statements of Detective Senior Constable David Lillyman dated 13
September 2010 and Detective Adam Vickery dated 15 September
aa.2 Court Attendance Notice and NSW Police Facts Sheet dated 2 July
bb. On 28 January 2003, the practitioner applied to work and reside in
Australia on a skilled migration visa by completing and signing
‘Application for General Skilled Migration to Australia’ form
submitted to the Department of Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous
Affairs (DIMIA). At question 52, the practitioner wrote his nominated occupation
as “Dentist”.
cc. On 1 February 2006, the practitioner applied to work and reside in
Australia on a skilled migration visa by completing and signing
‘Application for General Skilled Migration to Australia’ form
submitted to DIMIA. At question 54, the practitioner
wrote his nominated
occupation as “Dentist”.
dd. On 18 June 2010, the practitioner applied for Australian Citizenship by
completing an ‘Application for Australian Citizenship
by Conferral-General
Eligibility’, submitted online at 20:51 hours to the Department of
Immigration Citizenship. At question
14, the practitioner nominated his
occupation as “Dentist”.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
practitioner made false statements to the Board in his application for
registration form dated 22 July 2005 in that the practitioner:
1.1 answered “No” to Question 4: Convictions for
Serious Offences, “Have you been convicted in New South Wales
or elsewhere
of an offence”;
1.2 answered “No” to Question 5: Good Character, sub question 1
“Have you been refused registration as a dentist
1.3 answered “No” to Question 5: Good Character, sub question 2
“Have you been removed or suspended for any reason
from any statutory
1.4 declared in relation to Question 8, that “all the information
provided in this application is correct”.
practitioner failed to inform the Board of criminal convictions of which he had
been subject in the United States of America:
2.1 in his application
for registration dated 22 July 2005;
2.2 on or after completing his application for re-registration dated 1
September 2009 until 10 June 2010;
3. The practitioner failed to inform the Board of his dentist’s
professional licence suspension and revocation in the United
3.1 in his application for registration dated 22 July 2005;
3.2 on or after completing his application for re-registration dated 1
September 2009 until 10 June 2010;
practitioner practised as a dentist while unregistered in the period 31 December
2007 to 1 September 2009;
a false and misleading statement to the Board in proceedings under section 72 of
on 18 June 2010 in that he stated that his registration had
lapsed because “he had not changed his address with the
6. The practitioner made false statements to DIMIA in
his ‘Application for General Skilled Migration to Australia’
form dated 28 January 2003 in that he:
6.1 Answered “No” to the following question:
“47. Have you or any other person included in this application,
Been convicted of a crime or offence in any country (including a conviction
which is now removed from official records)?”
6.2 Signed a declaration which stated:
“97. I declare that the information I have supplied in this
application is complete, correct and up-to-date in every details.”
7. The practitioner made false statements to DIMIA in his ‘Application
for General Skilled Migration to Australia’ form
dated 1 February 2006 in
7.1 Answered “No” to the following question:
“49. Have you or any other person included in this application,
Been convicted of a crime or offence in any country (including a conviction
which is now removed from official records)?”
7.2 Signed a declaration which stated:
“130. I declare that the information I have supplied in this
application is complete, correct and up-to-date in every detail.”
8. The practitioner made false statements to the Department of Immigration
Citizenship in his ‘Application for Australian Citizenship
Conferral-General Eligibility’, submitted online on 18 June 2012 at 20:51
hours in that he answered “No” to
the following questions:
8.1 “27(a) Have you been convicted of, or found guilty of, ANY
offences overseas or in Australia? (Include all traffic offences
which went to
court including offences declared in your permanent residence application and
any ‘spent’ convictions)?”
8.2 “27(b)Have you been confined in a prison or in a psychiatric
institution by order of a court made in connection with criminal
proceedings
overseas or in Australia?”
8.3 Made the declaration “I declare that the information I have
supplied in this form is complete and correct in every detail”.
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law in that he has engaged
in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of dentistry.
Background to Complaint Two
The practitioner worked as a registered dentist at the Pitt Street Dental
Clinic (“PSDC”) from 17 May 2005 until 31 May
In mid February 2010, Dental Assistant A commenced working at PSDC as a
dental assistant.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1. The practitioner engaged in inappropriate conduct towards Dental Assistant
A, a dental assistant employed at PSDC, being conduct
of a sexual and unwelcome
nature in that:
1.1 About a month after Dental Assistant A commenced working at PSDC in mid
February 2010, while the practitioner and Dental Assistant
A were working at
1.1.1 The practitioner said to Dental Assistant A “let’s go make
your boyfriend jealous” while Dental Assistant
A’s boyfriend was in
the waiting room of PSDC;
1.1.2 Dental Assistant A did not reply and walked away;
1.1.3 Between half an hour later to an hour later, the practitioner
approached Dental Assistant A while she was in Surgery 3 cleaning
previous patient with a camera in her hand after taking photographs of a
patient’s teeth;
1.1.4 The practitioner stood next to Dental Assistant A and said words to
the effect “We should take photographs of you”;
1.1.5 The practitioner then paused for about a second and said to Dental
Assistant A words to the effect “with your clothes
1.1.6 Dental Assistant A walked away without replying.
1.2 About two weeks after the matters referred to in 2, above, while the
practitioner and Dental Assistant A were working at PSDC:
1.2.1 The practitioner approached Dental Assistant A from front on while she
was standing in the hallway in the middle of the surgery
1.2.2 Person A was wearing a white lab coat over her dress;
1.2.3 The practitioner placed his hand on the outside of Dental Assistant
A’s lab coat on her lower stomach under her belly
button close to her
groin area;
1.2.4 The practitioner rubbed Dental Assistant A’s stomach in a
circular motion for up to 30 seconds while he was having a
conversation with
Person A about work;
1.2.5 Dental Assistant A said to the practitioner “That’s
inappropriate the way you’re touching me”;
1.2.6 The practitioner did not say anything and walked away.
COMPLAINT THREE
is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the
in that the practitioner has:
in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
Background to Complaint Three
The background set out in Complaints One and Two is repeated.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
The particulars identified in Complaints One and Two are repeated and relied
upon individually and cumulatively.
COMPLAINT FOUR
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a dentist within the meaning
of section 144 of the National Law
Background to Complaint Four
The background set out in Complaints One and Two is repeated.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
The particulars identified in Complaints One and Two are repeated and relied
upon individually and cumulatively.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.37 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter