URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading v Westfield Concrete Company Limited & Tomassetti [2000] NSWFTT 19 (10 November 2000)
Director-General, Department of Fair Trading v Westfield Concrete Company
Limited & Tomassetti
[2000] NSWFTT 19
(10 November 2000)
File No. BU 2000/3757 and BU 2000/11231
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
: Director-General, Department of Fair
: Westfield Concrete Company Pty Limited
& Tomassetti
APPLICATION
APPEARANCES
: Mr. T Davie of Counsel for
Mr. S Stanton for First & Second
Respondents
: 8 November 2000
Legislative Provisions:
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998
Building Act 1989
Building Services Corporation
entertain actions against either party in view of matters in other jurisdictions
commenced prior to the date of filing of the show cause
Cases cited:
Portazon Pty Ltd v Fair Trading
[1999] NSWSC 1084
Isaacs v Cachia
[1981] 2 NSWLR 92
Fidelitas Shipping Co Ltd v V/O Exportschleb
Tribunal not precluded from hearing or
determining show cause notices herein.
The Tribunal is not precluded from hearing Show Cause actions herein due to
the operation of s.22 Fair Trading Act 1998.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. The Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading has commenced
actions pursuant to
against the First and
Second Respondents, seeking each to show cause in respect of alleged improper
conduct under various sections
and the Building
Services Corporation Act.
2. The Second Respondent is a Director of the First Respondent and a licensed
supervisor in respect of the First Respondent.
Prior to commencement of the hearing of
the substantive allegations of misconduct, brought by the Director-General of
the Department
of Fair Trading, the First and Second Respondent have raised the
issue of the jurisdiction of the Fair Trading Tribunal to entertain
against either party in view of matters in other jurisdictions being commenced
prior to the date of filing of the show cause
actions presently before the Fair
Trading Tribunal for determination.
The Threshold Issue
The purpose of this decision is to deal
with the threshold issue raised by the Respondents that the Tribunal cannot
proceed at this
time to hear and determine the show cause actions brought by the
Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading against the First
Respondents.
A determination of the
threshold matter in favour of the Respondents would result in the present
proceedings being stayed until such
time as each of the three actions brought by
Messrs Krstic, Lovelock and Martin have been finally concluded in other
If to the contrary the
Tribunal determines that the Tribunal is not estopped, the substantive show
cause actions will proceed irrespective
of the state of finalisation of the
three separate actions brought by the First and/or Second Respondent against
Messrs Krstic Lovelock
and Martin.
Non-Contentious Matters
It is not contentious that, in respect of
each of the three contracts between homeowners and the First and/or Second
Respondent, civil
actions were commenced in other jurisdictions by the First
Respondent prior to the filing by the Director-General of the notices
cause. In respect of Mr. & Mrs. Krstic, an action was commenced against
them, by the First Respondent, in the Consumer
Claims Tribunal. All actions were
for the recovery of money from the respective Home Owners. The action against
Krstic was subsequently
the subject of an apparent consent order of 14 May
In respect of Mr. & Mrs. Lovelock,
an action was commenced by Westfield Concrete Company Pty Ltd on 6 January
Westfield Concrete Company Pty Ltd
commenced action against Mr. and Ms. Martin in the District Court in
In each of the three instances,
therefore, the actions were commenced in another jurisdiction prior to the
commencement of show cause
proceedings in the Fair Trading Tribunal, by the
director-general of the Department of Fair
It is accepted that the show cause
notices rely on allegations of improper conduct of the First and/or Second
Respondent, arising
out of the performance by each of them of their obligations
under contract to supply building goods and services to each of the three
of homeowners.
Show Cause Proceedings in FTT
Part 4, Divisions 1 to 4 of the
Building Act 1989
, puts in place a complaint handling and disciplinary scheme in
respect of licensed trades persons in the home building industry,
culminate in a Show Cause hearing such as is now before this
The scheme is effectively
triggered when the Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading (so far as
is relevant in this case),
serves on an individual holder of a licence, a Notice
to Show Cause, under section 63 of the
The service of such a Notice by the
Director-General may, in turn, (though need not necessarily) be triggered by a
complaint from
any person, on one of the grounds under subsection 55 of the Act.
These grounds, so far as is pertinent to this matter, include the
licence holder
being guilty of “improper conduct” (section
The definition of “improper
conduct” (once again so far as is relevant in this instance) is set out in
sections 51(1)
(a) – (d) and
Section 66 of the Act, gives this
Tribunal jurisdiction to hear and determine any show cause action.
The next ‘step’ in the scheme
is section 74 which provides:
74 Determination
after hearing
After considering the evidence given and produced at a hearing, the
Tribunal may make any one or more of the following determinations
which to it
seems proper:
(a) determine to take no further action against the respondent,
(b) caution or reprimand the respondent,
(c) make a determination requiring the respondent to pay to the
Administration Corporation, as a penalty, an amount not exceeding
(d) impose a condition on a licence or a supervisor or registration
certificate held by the respondent,
(e) if the respondent is the holder of a licence, or a supervisor or
registration certificate, suspend the licence or certificate
for a period not
exceeding its unexpired term,
(f) if the respondent is the holder of a licence or a supervisor or
registration certificate, cancel the licence or certificate
and, if it thinks it
appropriate, disqualify the respondent, either permanently or for such period as
may be specified in the determination,
from being any one or more of the
(i) the holder of any licence, or supervisor or registration
certificate (or of a licence, or supervisor or registration certificate,
specified kind),
(ii) a member of a partnership, or an officer of a corporation that is
a member of a partnership, that is the holder of a licence,
(iii) an officer of a corporation that is the holder of a
(g) if the respondent is:
(i) a member of a partnership, or an officer of a corporation that is a
member of a partnership, that is the holder of a licence,
(ii) an officer of a corporation that is the holder of a
make any determination authorised by paragraph (a), (b) or (c) in
respect of the respondent or disqualify the respondent, either
permanently or
for such period as may be specified in the determination, from being any one or
more of the licence or certificate
holders, members and officers specified in
paragraph (f) (i), (ii) or (iii).”
The Respondents’ Submissions
Section 22 of the Fair Trading Tribunal
Act makes provision for resolution of conflict between competing jurisdictions
of the Tribunal
and other courts. The key sub-clause of Section 22, which the
Respondents argue precludes the Tribunal proceeding to hear and determine
Show Cause Actions at this time, is sub-clause (7) which
(7) “If, at the time when an application is
made to the Tribunal in accordance with this Act, an issue arising under the
application
was the subject of a dispute in proceedings pending before a court,
the Tribunal, on becoming aware of those proceedings, ceases
Shortly put, and paraphrasing the
language of His Honour Sully J in
Portazon Pty Ltd v Fair Trading
[1999] NSWSC 1084
, the Tribunal
“does not have
where the Tribunal is aware of
proceedings in other jurisdictions commenced prior to the commencement of the
Show Cause Action. Further,
matters as yet undetermined in at least two of the
matters are
“issues arising under the application ... the subject of a
dispute in proceedings pending before a Court
The Respondents say that
the issues as yet to be determined in the civil cases in other jurisdictions are
“ ... issues are in like terms, if not identical, to the issues
presently before this Tribunal”
. And further
, “ ... are all
pre-dating the applications before this
The Respondents accept
that the civil actions in Krstic have been determined by way of the order of the
Consumer Claims Tribunal made
18th May 1999. However, to paraphrase the
submission of Counsel for the Respondents,
“It is apparent and, it is
submitted, obvious, with respect, that the settlement was made as an order of
the Tribunal by virtue
of the parties seeking such formal order ... Accordingly,
no such result as is contemplated by sub-section (8) was arrived at and
therefore the section cannot impact on the provisions of Sub-Section (7) of
Section 22.”
Applicant’s Submission
Counsel for the Applicant argues that
the Tribunal is not precluded from hearing and determining Notices to show cause
against either
Respondent in respect of any of the three separate contracts
relating to work carried out for the Krstics, Lovelocks or Martins.
Tribunal is urged to prefer a construction of Section 22(7) of the Fair Trading
Tribunal Act such as to promote the purposes
of the Act. It is argued that
where words are being used which have acquired a legal meaning, the Tribunal
would, prima facie, accept
that the legislature had intended that words be
understood with such legal meaning unless a contrary intention is clearly
The Applicant argues against the Respondents’ interpretation of
the Act in these terms,
“The consequence of the
Respondents’ argument is that even though the licence holder’s
claims in those other proceedings
might be unsubstantiated, or the other
proceedings were brought specifically to thwart proposed show cause
proceedings:
the Director-General of the
Department of Fair Trading, (charged by statute with the protection of the
would be (in practical terms)
prevented from issuing show
cause proceedings against a licence holder (no matter how manifest or serious
the improper
conduct alleged),
the licence holder had
commenced or was a party to pending
proceedings,
which involved
alleged facts which were similar to alleged facts which would form the ground of
proposed show cause
proceedings.”
The broad meaning
of Section 22 was, in opinion of the Applicant, intended to no more or less than
prevent duplication of disputes
between the parties by way of avoiding a
multiplicity of actions in different jurisdictions. In compounding this
argument, the Applicant
Isaacs v Cachia
[1981] 2 NSWLR 92.
page 98, His Honour Yeldham J said in respect of a similar provision found in
the then extant Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1974
I regard as the
intention of the legislature – ie that there shall not be competing
actions over the same issue, one before
a tribunal and one before a court, and
that, when an order of the tribunal has been made, it shall (as so provided) be
binding between the parties in respect of the issues which it
(emphasis added).”
summary, the Applicant says that the “issue” before the Tribunal is
not the “issue” before other courts
arising out of civil action
brought by the First Respondent to recover monies pursuant to a contract to
supply goods and perform
services. The issue before the Tribunal is a
disciplinary procedure unrelated to the civil actions brought by the First
Respondent.
The key matter for determination by the
Tribunal as a threshold issue is whether or not Section 22(7) of the Fair
Trading Tribunal
Act acts to stay the show cause action in the Tribunal
whilstsoever there are civil disputes in other jurisdictions wherein
in the Tribunal in the show cause action was
... the subject of the dispute in proceedings pending before a court
. If the Tribunal determines that the meaning of “an
issue” was the “subject of the dispute” the proceedings
pending before the Tribunal cannot proceed to be heard or
determined.
In the case of
Fidelitas Shipping Co
Ltd v V/O Exportschleb
[1966] 1 QB 630
at 642, His Honour Diplock J
observes, “
... while an issue may thus involve a dispute about facts,
a mere dispute about facts divorced from their legal consequences is not
‘issue’....”
. The Applicant’s argument is that the
issue or issues in play and unresolved in other jurisdictions arising out of
civil actions
for the recovery of money is not one and the same
“issue” as that which is agitated before the Tribunal in respect of
the show cause notice.
In the opinion of
the Tribunal, the correct understanding of Section 22(7) of the Fair Trading
Tribunal Act is a mechanism to avoid
the same issues from being litigated
concurrently in different jurisdictions and thereby it is a mechanism to
preclude competition
or forum shopping by way of the simple device of
“first in, best dressed”.
broad intent of Section 22 of the Fair Trading Tribunal Act was to preclude a
multiplicity of actions over the same issue, to
paraphrase the words of Yeldham
Isaacs v Cachia
. The central issue here is whether the intent of
sub-clause (7) is broader than preventing the same dispute being litigated in
different jurisdictions. The Respondents argue that 22(7) Fair Trading
Tribunal Act precludes the Tribunal hearing and determining
an issue based on
the same facts as the civil dispute although the cause of action before the
Tribunal is a show cause action against
In understanding the broad
intentions of Section 22, reference should be made to Section 22(3) of the Fair
Trading Tribunal Act.
This clause acts as a mirror to sub-clause (7) by
precluding a court from hearing and determining “a dispute where an action
has been previously commenced in the Tribunal”. These two sections read
together strengthen the notion of the section as seeking
to preclude split
actions over the same issues, by giving jurisdiction to the forum in which the
civil action is first commenced.
circumstances can clearly only arise where there is concurrent jurisdiction
between, in the present instance, the Fair Trading
Tribunal, and some other
Conversely, where the Fair Trading
Tribunal is the exclusive jurisdiction for any particular cause of action,
Section 22 is irrelevant
as there is no competition between competing
The Tribunal finds that the
meaning of “issue” in the context of Section 22 of the Fair Trading
Tribunal Act must be
read and understood in respect to the cause of action
“in proceedings” before the Tribunal. The “issue”
“issues” for the Fair Trading Tribunal in the instant cases are
issues relating to disciplinary proceedings against
the builder brought by the
Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading. The “issues”
before the local and district
courts in respect of the Lovelock and Martin
actions are civil contractual disputes. The commonality is not the issue or
but the facts.
The causes of action
in the Tribunal are therefore distinctly different, and the actions brought by
different party. Further, the
actions commenced in the Fair Trading Tribunal are
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
The Tribunal does not find that
it is constrained by the terms of Section 22(7) from hearing and determining the
show cause actions
against Westfield Concrete Company Pty Limited and Tomassetti
in respect of allegations of improper conduct in respect of contracts
building work and supply building materials under a contract with Mr. and Ms.
Lovelock and Mr. and Ms. Martin.
of the shortcomings of sub-clause 8 of Section 22, as the Tribunal finds that
the issue or issues before it are different
to the issue or issues before other
courts arising out of the same or similar facts, sub-clause 8 does not act to
preclude a show
cause action in the matter of show cause relating to work done
and materials supplied under the contract with Ljubomir and Zorica
Krstic, even
though the civil dispute between the First Respondent and the Krstics was the
subject of consent order relating to a
settlement.
The Tribunal, therefore, finds that in
respect of both notices to show cause issued against Westfield Concrete Company
Pty Limited
and Tomassetti , it is not precluded from hearing or determining
such show cause notices.
Ian McDonell David Baker
Deputy Chairperson Member
Fair Trading Tribunal Fair Trading Tribunal
Date : 10 November 2000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (39.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter