URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QNN [2013] NSWGT 25 (27 November 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 25
(27 NOVEMBER 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
27 November 2013 at Penrith
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr Jim Simpson
Professional Member:
Dr Helen Creasey
Community Member:
Ms Lyn Porter
Guardianship – application for guardianship
order - restrictive practices – use of bed rails – need for a
guardianship
order – application dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 27 November 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal dismissed the application for a guardianship order.
QNN is an 88-year-old woman with dementia and a range of health conditions who
lives at an aged care facility at Western Sydney.
Mrs QNN's daughter, Mrs KAX,
applied for a guardianship order due to bed rails being used when her mother is
in bed. The application
had been prompted by an Australian Government Department
of Health and Ageing (DOHA) publication,
Decision-making tool: supporting a
restraint free environment in residential aged care
DOHA publication emphasises the risks that restraints can entail and the
importance of seeking a restraint free environment. Any
restraint should be a
strategy of last resort and the least restrictive restraint to ensure the safety
and dignity of a resident.
DOHA also emphasises the importance of considering
whether consent needs to be obtained for any restraint through guardianship
legislation.
similar approach is taken in NSW Health’s
Guidelines for working with
people with challenging behaviour is in residential aged care facilities
including identifying key questions as whether restraint is necessary and
beneficial to the resident, whether the level of risk
and reasons for prevention
of injury outweigh the effects of the restraint, and whether there are any
objections to the restraint.
What did Tribunal have to
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
Mrs QNN someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she has a
disability which prevents her from being able to make
important life
the Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Does Mrs QNN have a disability which prevents her
from being able to make important life decisions?
was clear that Mrs QNN has dementia and high care support needs. She lacks
capacity to make important life decisions.
Tribunal make a guardianship order?
Legal framework and
checklist of circumstances
deciding whether to make a guardianship order, the Tribunal needed to take
account of all relevant factors, including those listed
in Section 14(2) of the
Guardianship Act
. These relate to the views of Mrs QNN and any unpaid
carer, preserving family relationships, preserving cultural and linguistic
environments
and the practicability of services being provided without a
guardianship order. The Tribunal could be guided by the principles in
of the Act. These principles include that the Tribunal should intrude as little
as possible on a person's freedom of decision
and action, protect the person
from neglect, abuse and exploitation and, ultimately, give paramount
consideration to the person’s
interests. The Tribunal ultimately has a
broad discretion whether to make a guardianship order (
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
Tribunal often needs to apply this approach to situations where a guardianship
order is sought because of the use of restrictive
practices such as physical and
mechanical restraints and restrictions on a person's freedom of movement. A
central issue in these
cases is the practicability of services being provided
without a guardianship order, taking into account the importance of protecting
the person from neglect and abuse.
Tribunal considers all of the circumstances including whether the practice would
be unlawful in the absence of the consent of
a guardian. If the practice is
unlawful, that alone may result in a restrictive practices function.
restrictive practice will be unlawful if:
practice amounts to an assault (the application of force to a person), false
imprisonment (physically confining a person to a
particular place); or detinue
(withholding a person’s possessions); AND
legal defence exists.
following are relevant defences:
consent by the person with a full understanding and comprehension of the
by a guardian with a restrictive practices function (or the power to confine a
person to their residence if this is the restriction
in question);
Self-defence
- Where you believed on reasonable grounds that it was necessary self-defence to
do what you did;
- Where you believed on reasonable grounds that it was necessary to do what you
did to avoid death or serious harm.
above is a general summary of the law. Some of the legal boundaries are in fact
not very clear, in particular the boundaries of
the defence of necessity.
(Compare Darcy v State of NSW
[2011] NSWCA 413
, R v Rogers
(1996) 86 A Crim R
and R v Bournwood and Community Mental Health Trust
[1998] 1 AC
with the question of lawfulness, the Tribunal will consider all other relevant
circumstances when deciding whether to appoint
a guardian to decide about
restrictive practices. Other relevant circumstances may
views of the person and others, including how the person reacts to the
restriction.
the person have a fulfilling lifestyle?
skilled professional assessed the behaviour and developed positive behaviour
strategies?
the strategies address the causes of the behaviour?
the strategies be implemented and monitored?
restriction:
is the nature and degree of the restriction?
is the purpose of the restriction? For example, is it for behaviour change or to
keep the person safe or healthy?
the restriction addressing a clear risk to the person?
the practice being used partly for the benefit of others?
only used as a last resort?
other non-restrictive approaches been tried?
the practice involve risks for the person?
there a danger that the restriction will be abused?
restricted, does the person have a comfortable and fulfilling environment?
the use of the practice be reduced?
it conform to current accepted standards of practice?
the person have a strong independent advocate, such as a family member?
there other monitoring and review mechanisms?
guardian needed anyway in relation to other issues?
the Tribunal had a valuable range of evidence from facility staff members and
Mrs QNN's daughter as to why bed rails are being
used and the circumstances of
to moving to the facility, Mrs QNN was in the full-time care of her daughter Mrs
KAX who faced a major problem with Mrs QNN
not realising that she could not
stand and walk without falling. Mrs KAX was watching and monitoring her mother
at all times. However
there was one occasion where Mrs QNN got up, fell and
sustained a serious brain injury which further exacerbated her cognitive
functioning.
Mrs QNN has also sustained a dislocated shoulder. At times when
Mrs QNN has been hospitalised, bed rails were not used and Mrs QNN
had a number
of falls. Similarly, when Mrs QNN had a week of respite in an aged care
facility, she had multiple falls causing bruises
Mrs QNN moved to the current aged care facility in May 2013, the facility
carried out a restraint and bed rail assessment, including
observations of her
sleeping patterns over seven days. In light of this, one bed rail was put in
place with the agreement of Mrs
Subsequently,
there had been three occasions when Mrs QNN had sought to get up and then been
found on the floor. Her risk of falls
was exacerbated by increased confusion
caused by her periodic urinary tract infections for which she is under medical
care including
frequent urine tests. Facility staff reviewed the situation with
Mrs KAX and it was agreed to use two bed rails. Mrs QNN has had
Tribunal looked at Mrs QNN's bed and noted that it is quite low to the floor and
that the bedrails are not particularly high and
also do not go up around the
pillow area.
QNN has not shown any sign of distress from the bed rails, appearing comfortable
with them and going straight off to sleep. She
has not attempted to get out at
the end of the bed (where there is no rail).
the night, there are four staff members on duty for 99 residents. Residents are
monitored periodically. When Mrs QNN has
a urinary tract infection, she is
offered the opportunity to go the toilet each two hours if she is awake. In the
daytime, staff
get Mrs QNN up at 7 AM and she goes to the dining room for
breakfast and then activities which she enjoys. Mrs KAX is often present
volunteer. Mrs QNN has a nap at about 1 PM but then gets up again for dinner and
activities and goes back to bed at around 6
Tribunal looked at Mrs QNN’s care plan which appeared to be a thorough
analysis of her needs and how to meet them.
Z, facility manager, said that if Mrs QNN was showing signs of distress from the
bed rails, the facility would seek an assessment
from someone such as a
geriatrician. The facility usually respects the decision of families in relation
to bed rails. However, if
the facility thought that family decisions were
contrary to a resident’s interests, it would make an application to the
Mr Z was aware of dangers that can be associated with bed rails
including a resident getting their head stuck in the rails. The organisation
that runs the facility has restraint guidelines which are regularly reviewed
including in light of the recent DOHA guidelines. Approximately
30 of the 99
residents have bed rails up at night, some with their own
KAX said that she saw her mother's safety as paramount since previous falls had
worsened her mother's condition and led to reduced
quality of life. It may be
that bed rails will not be needed in future when her mother's condition further
deteriorates. Mrs KAX
was not so much seeking a guardianship order as seeking
the Tribunal’s decision as to whether an order was
to her dementia, the Tribunal found it difficult to obtain views from Mrs QNN
happy at the facility and
showed an obvious close relationship with her daughter.
QNN is receiving ongoing antidepressant medication which was prescribed by a
geriatrician, but no other psychotropic medication.
Mrs KAX would be able to
consent to medications and other medical and dental treatment for her mother as
“person responsible”
Guardianship
bed rails do restrict Mrs QNN’s freedom of movement. However, the Tribunal
was not satisfied that this restriction was unlawful
in the absence of the
consent of a guardian. The defence of necessity, which has not been legally
defined in Australia in a situation
at all like Mrs QNN’s, might well
provide a defence to the restriction.
Tribunal accepted the thrust of the DOHA publication that facilities should aim
for a restraint free environment and be conscious
of the risks of restraints,
for example a person climbing over bed rails and suffering a fall from a great
height, or getting their
head stuck in rails.
factors that the Tribunal saw as particularly significant here
bed rails are being used purely for Mrs QNN’s own safety in light of an
established history of falls and injury;
discussion with Mrs QNN’s daughter;
QNN is not objecting to the rails and has shown no distress from their use.
They have not led to any injury to her;
QNN has a thorough care plan directed at maximising her quality of life;
KAX is a very involved and intelligent advocate for her mother and supports the
use of the bed rails.
light of these factors, the Tribunal did not see a guardianship order as
necessary or appropriate.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter