URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWLEC/2025/1783.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:00:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Panoyan v Ku-ring-gai Council [2025] NSWLEC 1783 (4 November 2025)
Land and Environment Court
New South Wales
Panoyan v Ku-ring-gai Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWLEC 1783
Hearing Date(s):
Conciliation conference on 28-30 October 2025
Date of Orders:
4 November 2025
Decision Date:
4 November 2025
The Court orders that:
In respect of proceedings
2025/129582:
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) The Applicants are directed to
do the following identified in Annexure A within 7 days of the Court’s
(a) The broken tile at the front stairs is to be repaired.
bedroom front glass sliding door (SD2) is to be blocked to prevent access to the
unprotected front balcony.
(c) The rear glass door (D4) at the gallery is to
be blocked or a barrier installed to prevent access to the unprotected drop on
ground level at the rear yard.
(d) A balustrade/barrier is to be
installed to prevent access to the unprotected drop on the ground level at the
rear yard from the
side passageway, either at location 1 or 2 marked on the
(3) Within 7 days from the date the Respondent receives notice that the
matters identified in Order 2 have been completed:
(a) The Respondent is to
carry out an inspection of those works, or alternatively if the Respondent
considers that a site inspection
is not required in the circumstances, it may be
satisfied by photographic evidence or certification provided by the
Applicants.
(b) If the Respondent is not satisfied in relation to those
works, the Respondent is to provide reasons that are sufficiently detailed
inform the Applicants of what needs to be done to enable the Respondent to be
(c) If the Respondent is satisfied in relation to those works,
then pursuant to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(NSW), the Respondent is directed to issue a building information certificate in
respect of Building Information Certificate Application
number eBCU0129/24, for
the dwelling fronting Griffith Avenue, Lot 10 in Deposited Plan 14083,
identified in the plans at Annexure
In respect of proceedings
2025/129611:
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) Development consent is granted
to Development Application No eDA0485/24 (PAN-484928), for the change of use of
existing buildings
for the purposes of a dual occupancy (detached) development,
including alterations and additions at 12 Barana Parade, Roseville Chase
in Deposited Plan 14083), subject to the conditions of consent in Annexure
Catchwords:
APPEAL – building information certificate – dwelling house
development in R2 Low Density Residential zone – development
control order
– conciliation conference – agreement between parties –
Legislation Cited:
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
and Environment Court Act 1979
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
Ku-ring-gai Local Environmental Plan 2015, cl 4.3(2)
Environmental Planning Policy (Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021
Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021,
State Environmental
Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021,
State Environmental
Planning Policy (Sustainable Buildings) 2022,
Cases Cited:
Panoyan v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2025] NSWLEC 1093.
Texts Cited:
Tree Canopy Guide for Low and Mid Rise Housing, published by the Department
in February 2025
Low Rise Housing Diversity Design Guide July 2020
Principal judgment
Antranik Panoyan (First Applicant)
Anne Panoyan (Second
Ku-ring-gai Council (Respondent)
Representation:
M Jaku (Solicitor) (Applicant)
J Walker (Solicitor)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Jaku Legal (Applicant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/129611
2025/129582
Publication Restriction:
COMMISSIONER
This appeal concerns two dwellings occupying a parcel of land with a frontage to
both Barana Parade and to Griffith Avenue, Roseville
Chase. The larger dwelling
fronting Barana Parade is located on a portion of the site that is elevated
above that portion of the
site fronting Griffith Avenue to the north, on which a
smaller dwelling was constructed more recently, being the subject of consent
granted by Ku-ring-gai Council in October 2016 (2016 Consent), that also
included alterations and additions to the existing dwelling
fronting Barana
Parade. At the time, the dwelling fronting Griffith Avenue was characterised as
a secondary dwelling.
2016 Consent was subsequently modified in February 2019. However, a further
modification application, MOD0183/19 seeking consent
for alterations to the
secondary dwelling was refused by the Council on 7 May 2020.
is commonly held that unauthorised works were carried out in the construction of
the secondary dwelling. Between September 2018
and October 2023 five Development
Control Orders (DCOs) were issued by the Council that are not relevant to these
proceedings beyond
the fact that the DCO issued 16 October 2023 was later
modified by the Court in its decision
Panoyan v Ku-ring-gai Council
NSWLEC 1093
, and so is the DCO relevant to these proceedings (the
Relevant DCO).
11 November 2024, the Applicants in this matters, Mr Anitrak Panoyan and Ms Anne
Panoyan (together the Panoyan’s), lodged
a Building Information
Certificate EBCU0129/24 (the BIC) seeking to regularise the unauthorised works
to the secondary dwelling that
are the subject of the Relevant DCO.
15 November 2024, the Panoyan’s also lodged development application No
eDA0485/24 seeking consent for change of use of the
existing dwellings from a
dwelling and secondary dwelling, to a dual occupancy (detached) development,
including alterations and
additions (the DA).
23 December 2024, the Council refused the BIC.
17 March 2025, the Ku-ring-gai Local Planning Panel determined to refuse the DA
on behalf of the Council.
4 April 2025, the Panoyan’s filed an appeal against the refusal of the BIC
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(EPA Act) (the BIC appeal) (proceedings 2025/129582), and against the refusal of
the DA pursuant to s 8.7 of the EPA Act (the
DA appeal) (proceedings
2025/129611).
Court arranged a conciliation conference between the parties on 28 October 2025,
pursuant to
Land and Environment Court Act
(NSW) (LEC Act), in respect of the DA Appeal, and s 34 of the LEC
Act in respect of the BIC Appeal.
presided at the conciliation conference, at which agreement under s 34(3) of the
LEC Act was reached between the parties as to the
terms of a decision in the
both the BIC Appeal and DA Appeal that was acceptable to the parties.
respect of the BIC Appeal, the decision agreed upon is for certain works to be
carried out by the Panoyans, upon completion of
which the Council is directed to
issue a building information certificate.
the presiding Commissioner, I am satisfied that the decision is one that the
Court can make in the proper exercise of its functions,
being the proper test
applied by s 34(3) of the LEC Act.
form this state of satisfaction as the decision reached between the parties in
respect of the BIC Appeal falls within the broad
power of the Court set out in
s 8.25(3) of the EPA Act to “direct the council to issue a building
information certificate
in such terms and on such conditions as the Court thinks
fit” (at subs (a)), and “make any other order that it
appropriate” (at subs (c)).
8.25(3) relevantly provides:
8.25 Appeals with respect to building information
certificates
(1) An applicant—
(a) who is dissatisfied with a council’s refusal to issue a
building information certificate under Part 6, or
(b) who is dissatisfied with a council’s failure to issue a
building information certificate within the period prescribed
regulations, or
(c) who is dissatisfied with a notice from the council to supply
information in connection with an application for a building information
certificate,
may appeal to the Court.
(2) The appeal may be made only within 6 months after the date on which
the person is given notice of the decision appealed against
or the end of the
deemed refusal period referred to in subsection (1).
(3) On hearing the appeal, the Court may do any one or more of the
(a) direct the council to issue a building information certificate in
such terms and on such conditions as the Court thinks fit,
(b) revoke, alter or confirm a notice to supply information,
(c) make any other order that it considers appropriate.
respect of the DA Appeal, the decision is for the grant of development consent
subject to amended plans that were prepared on behalf
of the Panoyan’s,
noting that the final detail of the works and plans are specified in the agreed
conditions of development
consent annexed to the s 34 agreement.
completeness, the DA seeks consent for the following:
(1) Change of use of the secondary dwelling fronting Griffith Avenue from a
secondary dwelling to one half of a dual occupancy (detached),
and alterations
and additions to that dwelling comprising:
(a) New garage and storage area at lower ground level
(b) Provision of on-site detention of stormwater within the subfloor area at the
rear of the garage
(c) New window to existing plant room
(d) Revised subfloor area
(e) New bedroom to the rear of the ground floor with new side window and side
door providing access to private open space to the
(f) Privacy screen to the western side of an external terrace
(g) Removal of side concrete awning
(h) Amended landscape design and private open space to the rear
(i) New laundry and existing bathroom at ground floor level
(j) New stair to first floor level
(k) New bedroom, front balcony (with privacy screen) and ensuite on the first
floor level.
(2) In respect of the primary dwelling fronting Barana Parade, the DA seeks
consent for change of use to constitute the other half
of a dual occupancy
(detached), and alterations and additions comprising:
(a) Demolition of the lower ground floor storage area, below the terrace at the
rear of the dwelling and fill with soil.
(b) Demolition of planter box structures at the top of the rockface and to the
rear of the dwelling.
(c) Demolition of parts of the existing driveway alongside the dwelling
(d) Partial demolition of the front lounge room and associated side windows and
front columns.
(e) Conversion of the front lounge room to a garage.
(f) External changes to existing driveway, removal of water feature, new
landscaping and stormwater drainage.
s 34(3) of the LEC Act, I must dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the
parties’ decision if the parties’
decision is a decision that the
Court could have made in the proper exercise of its functions. The parties
prepared a jurisdictional
statement to assist the Court in understanding how the
requirements of the relevant environmental planning instruments have been
satisfied in order to allow the Court to make the agreed orders at [
considering those matters that are of relevance to the DA Appeal, I have taken
the following into consideration and formed the
requisite opinion of
satisfaction where required by the relevant environmental planning
instrument.
site is located within an area identified by the Ku-ring-gai Local Environmental
Plan 2015 (KLEP) as R2 Low Density Residential,
in which development for the
purposes of dual occupancy dwellings is not permitted, except by operation of s
166 of the State Environmental
Planning Policy (Housing) 2021. The objectives
for development in the R2 zone are as follows:
• To provide for the housing needs of the community within a
low density residential environment.
• To enable other land uses that provide facilities or services
to meet the day to day needs of residents.
• To provide for housing that is compatible with the existing
environmental and built character of Ku-ring-gai.
maximum height of buildings standard shown on the relevant map at cl 4.3(2) of
the KLEP is 9.5m, with which the proposed development
the DA seeks consent for dual occupancy (detached) development by reliance upon
s 166 of the Housing SEPP, such development is
permitted on the land and the
proposal does not exceed the maximum floor space ratio permitted by cl 4.4(2B)
site is identified on the relevant Acid Sulfate Soils Map at cl 6.1(2) of the
KLEP within an area designated Class 5, however
no part of the land is below 5m
Geotechnical Assessment prepared by Mr Tony Crozier of Crozier Geotechnical
Consultants dated 4 August 2025 encloses an earlier
assessment prepared by him
in August 2015 that satisfies me that earthworks undertaken in relation to the
2016 Consent were the subject
of geotechnical assessment at the time. A further
Geotechnical Assessment prepared by Crozier Geotechnical Consultants dated 5
2025 (September Assessment) assesses the excavation now proposed by
the development, including a portion of sandstone of around 600mm
in depth that
is proposed to be removed to provide for private open space to the rear of the
secondary dwelling, the geology evident
on the site and fill material likely to
be required. Consideration is also given to the likelihood of disturbing relics,
the proximity
to, and potential for adverse impact on, waterways and
recommendations are made as to controlling potential instability and other
impacts on adjoining properties. I have considered the matters to be considered
at cl 6.2 of the KLEP and I accept the conclusions
set out on p 9 of the
September Assessment and regard the earthworks proposed by the development to be
acceptable.
Amended Stormwater Plans prepared by Quantum Engineers depicts stormwater
drainage in the vicinity of the Primary dwelling, at
the higher elevation, being
collected firstly in a 2,000L rainwater tank onsite detention (OSD) fitted with
a first flush diverter,
before being directed to the western side of the
southern portion of the lot and connecting to Council’s network in
Avenue via an existing pit to be fitted with a filter.
in the vicinity of the secondary dwelling is proposed to be directed to an
onsite detention tank (OSD) located to the rear
of the garage on the lower
ground floor. The OSD is proposed to be fitted with filtration cartridges with
the resultant MUSIC modelling
indicating an improvement in water quality.
Additionally,
rainwater is directed to an existing 5,000 L rainwater tank located within a
subfloor area of the lower ground floor,
identified for reuse in toilet, laundry
and garden irrigation.
Plans prepared by Conzept states the landscape area on the site to be 418m2 or
40% of the site.
this basis, I am satisfied that water sensitive urban design principles are
incorporated in the development by the collection of
stormwater runoff via first
flush devices, its retention and reuse so that potential adverse environmental
impacts are likely to
be avoided in terms required by cl 6.5 of the KLEP.
on the basis of the same amended stormwater plans prepared by Quantum, the
parties agree that that water conservation is
achieved by use of a two rainwater
tanks and OSD. Given the use of first flush devices and filtration proposed to
stormwater pits
located between the site’s stormwater drainage and
Council’s network, I am satisfied that the effect on the quality of
entering a natural waterbody will be as close as possible to neutral or
beneficial impact, in accordance with s 6.6(2)(a),
and that water flow in or to
a natural waterbody will be minimised, pursuant to s 6.6(2)(b) of the State
Environmental Planning Policy
(Biodiversity and Conservation) 2021 (Biodiversity
similar reasons I have also considered those matters at s 6.7(1) of the
Biodiversity SEPP and am satisfied there will be no direct,
indirect or
cumulative impact on terrestrial, aquatic or migratory animals or vegetation,
and result in no adverse impact on aquatic
reserves, or in terms of erosion.
note that the site is not identified as flood liable land to which s 6.8 of the
Biodiversity SEPP is directed and so does not apply.
Neither will the proposed
development have an impact on recreational land uses or access to public land,
in terms set out in s 6.9
of the Biodiversity SEPP.
Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021
have considered whether the site is contaminated pursuant to cl 4.6(1) of
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021.
basis of the historical chronology of the site set out in the September
Assessment cited at [
I am satisfied that the site is suitable for
the development.
State Environmental Planning Policy
(Sustainable Buildings) 2022
application is accompanied by BASIX certificates (Cert No 1818198M_02 and
A1818123_02 dated 22 October 2025) prepared by Chapman
Environmental Services
Pty Ltd in accordance with the State Environmental Planning Policy (Sustainable
Buildings) 2022 (Sustainable
Buildings SEPP).
the basis of the BASIX certificates, the Court can be satisfied that the
embodied emissions attributable to the proposed development
have been quantified
as required by s 2.1(5) of the Sustainable Buildings SEPP.
the parties’ decision is a decision that the Court could have made in the
proper exercise of its functions, I am required
under s 34(3) of the LEC Act to
dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the parties’ decision.
making the orders to give effect to the agreement between the parties, I was not
required to, and have not, made any merit assessment
of the issues that were
originally in dispute between the parties.
Court notes that the effect of the approval of Building Information Certificate
Application No eBCU0129/24 (Proceedings No 2025/129582)
and Development
Application No eDA0485/24 (PAN-484928) (Proceedings No 2025/129611) is that
Modified Development Control Order No
EPA0130/23 issued by the Court on 20
February 2025 in Proceedings No 2023/347008 will not take effect.
Court also notes that, in respect of proceedings 2025/129611:
(1) Ku-ring-gai Council, as the relevant consent authority for the purposes of
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
(NSW), approves
the Applicant amending Development Application No eDA0485/24 in accordance with
the following plans and documents:
Architectural Plans prepared by Casafabrica:
Drawing No.
Drawing Name
Demolition Plan
Basement Layout Griffith Avenue
Ground Floor Layout Griffith Avenue
First Floor Layout Griffith Avenue
Roof Layout Griffith Avenue
Existing & Proposed Lower Ground Floor Level Plan Barana Parade
Existing And Proposed Ground Floor Plan Barana Parade
First Floor Plan Barana Parade
Existing House North And East Elevations Barana Parade
Existing House South And West Elevation Barana Parade
Proposed West Elevation Barana Parade
12 Barana Parade Demolition Plan
East Elevation Griffith Avenue
North Elevation Griffith Avenue
South Elevation Griffith Avenue
West Elevation Griffith Avenue
Section AA Griffith Avenue
Section CC Griffith Avenue
Section BB Griffith Avenue
Material Schedule Griffith Avenue
(a) BASIX Certificate No 1818198M_02 and A1818123_02 prepared by Chapman
Environmental Services Pty Ltd dated 22 October 2025.
(b) Nationwide House Energy Rating Scheme Certificate No 0012311247.
(c) The Applicants filed the amended development application with the Court.
Court orders that:
In respect of proceedings 2025/129582:
(1) The appeal is upheld.
(2) The Applicants are directed to do the following identified in Annexure A
within 7 days of the Court’s Orders:
(a) The broken tile at the front stairs is to be repaired.
(b) The bedroom front glass sliding door (SD2) is to be blocked to prevent
access to the unprotected front balcony.
(c) The rear glass door (D4) at the gallery is to be blocked or a barrier
installed to prevent access to the unprotected drop on
the ground level at the
(d) A balustrade/barrier is to be installed to prevent access to the unprotected
drop on the ground level at the rear yard from the
side passageway, either at
location 1 or 2 marked on the plan.
(3) Within 7 days from the date the Respondent receives notice that the
matters identified in Order 2 have been completed:
(a) The Respondent is to carry out an inspection of those works, or
alternatively if the Respondent considers that a site inspection
is not required
in the circumstances, it may be satisfied by photographic evidence or
certification provided by the Applicants.
(b) If the Respondent is not satisfied in relation to those works, the
Respondent is to provide reasons that are sufficiently detailed
to inform the
Applicants of what needs to be done to enable the Respondent to be
(c) If the Respondent is satisfied in relation to those works, then pursuant to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
the Respondent is directed to issue a building information certificate in
respect of Building Information Certificate Application
number eBCU0129/24, for
the dwelling fronting Griffith Avenue, Lot 10 in Deposited Plan 14083,
identified in the plans at Annexure
In respect of proceedings 2025/129611:
(4) The appeal is upheld.
(5) Development consent is granted to Development Application No eDA0485/24
(PAN-484928), for the change of use of existing buildings
for the purposes of a
dual occupancy (detached) development, including alterations and additions at 12
Barana Parade, Roseville Chase
(Lot 10 in Deposited Plan 14083), subject to the
conditions of consent in Annexure C.
/asset/19a4c5904711863070aa2a9d.pdf
/asset/19a4c5904711863070aa2a9d.pdf
Commissioner of the Court
A (166 KB, pdf)
B (679 KB, pdf)
C (358 KB, pdf)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (324 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter