URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2013/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Leonard (No 1) [2013] NSWPST 4 (7 November 2013)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL
Inquiry into a Complaint against a psychologist pursuant to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No
Citation: Health Care Complaints Commission v Leonard (No 1)
[2013] NSWPST 4
Complainant: Health Care Complaints
Respondent: Mr Ross
Ms Diane Robinson (Chairperson)
J Kennedy (Psychologist member)
Mr B Sheridan (Psychologist
Dr J Milne PhD (Lay member)
Date and Place
12, 13, 14 February 2013: 5 March 2013
at Sydney; Submissions 24 April 2013
Date of Decision
: 7 November 2013 (Findings as to Complaints &
Particulars)
Representation:
Complainant: Ms Hayley Bennett of Counsel, instructed by Ms R Lewis,
Respondent: Mr Peter Morris, Senior Counsel, instructed by Mr I Denham,
Catchwords:
Unsatisfactory professional conduct; professional
misconduct; failure to establish and maintain professional boundaries; use of
counselling
Legislation cited:
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
Cases cited:
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Wentworth v New South Wales
Bar Association
(1992)176 CLR 239;
Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association
(1960)104 CLR 186;
Richter v Walton
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and Registration
[1894] UKLawRpKQB 36
[1894] 1 QB 750
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Sabag v Health Care Complaints
[2001] NSWCA 411
Qidwai v Brown
[1984] 1 NSWLR 100
; Ex parte Meehan; Re
Medical Practitioners Act
HCCC v Asiminaris
[2009] NSWPST4;
HCCC v Mazaleigue
[2009] NSWPST3;
HCCC v Schubert
[2009] NSWPST6;
Kalil v Bray
(1977) 1 NSWLR 256
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal, having found the Particulars of the Complaints to be proven,
determined that Mr Ross Leonard is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional
Tribunal was not comfortably satisfied that the evidence supported a finding of
professional misconduct.
The Complaints
Ross Leonard is a psychologist practising in Chatswood and regional New South
Wales. A complaint was made to the Health Care Complaints
Commission (the
Commission) in relation to Mr Leonard by Mr A on 22 March 2010. Mr A’s
wife, Client A was treated by Mr Leonard
and the complaint alleged that Mr
Leonard had an inappropriate relationship with Client A in violation of his
professional Code of
investigating that allegation and consulting with the Psychology Council of New
South Wales, the Commission made two Complaints
to the Tribunal alleging that Mr
Leonard is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct.
is alleged that Mr Leonard failed to provide appropriate psychological services
to Client A by using telephone coaching and consultations
which were not
appropriate in her case; that he failed to establish and maintain proper
professional boundaries with Client A and
that he failed to adequately respond
to an identified boundary issue.
Complaints, their Background and Particulars are set out in Annexure A to this
Psychology Tribunal conducted an Inquiry into those Complaints on 12, 13 and 14
February and 5 March 2013. The Tribunal determined
to make its findings in
relation to the Complaints and Particulars before hearing evidence and
submissions in relation to what orders,
if any, should be made in relation to Mr
Legislative provisions
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is relevantly defined in S139B of the National Law to
(a) Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed or
the care exercised by the practitioner in the practice of
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training of
experience.
(l) Other Improper or Unethical Conduct
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
Professional
Misconduct is defined in S139 E of the National Law as:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
b) More than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
issues for the Tribunal are:
(1) whether the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that each of the
Particulars of the Complaints are proven; and
(2) if so, whether Mr Leonard’s conduct amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct and/or professional misconduct ; and
(3) if such findings are made, whether orders or directions pursuant to the
National Law are appropriate. This aspect of the Tribunal’s
deliberations
will be undertaken after further submissions have been received from the
Standard of proof
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Mr Leonard has departed to the
requisite degree from the appropriate standards
and so has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and /or professional misconduct.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaints is the civil standard so
the Tribunal must be reasonably satisfied on the
balance of probabilities that
Mr Leonard engaged in the conduct complained of and that such conduct
constitutes unsatisfactory professional
conduct and/or professional misconduct.
Given the seriousness of the allegations and the gravity of their consequences,
the Tribunal
needs to be comfortably satisfied that the Complaints have been
established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then was) said
at 362–363:
"Reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind
that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of
fact or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the
inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of
the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question
whether the Issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’
should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences............This does not mean that some
of persuasion is fixed intermediate between the satisfaction beyond
reasonable doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable
satisfaction which in a civil issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance
of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the
process by which reasonable satisfaction is attained”.
standard of proof is proportionate to the gravity of the issue to be proved.
These disciplinary proceedings may have significant
professional and personal
consequences for Mr Leonard. The Tribunal has taken account of this in its
deliberations.
Nature of the jurisdiction
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992)176 CLR 239 and
Clyne v New South
Wales Bar Association
(1960)104 CLR 186). In
Richter v Walton
[1993] NSWCA 233
in relation to the medical profession, Kirby P and
O’Keefe AJA said:
Necessarily, the exercise of a disciplinary power in respect of a
professional person may have a consequence that seems punitive and
results for the person that are burdensome and hard. But that is not their
purpose in the eye the law............. Punishment
is not the purpose of the
proceedings. That purpose remains, from first to last, ........ the protection
of the public who deal with
medical practitioners upon the assumption of their
integrity and ethical behaviour.
Tribunal’s paramount consideration is the protection of the public. It is
also in the community interest that members of
the psychology profession
maintain proper ethical standards and that the reputation of the profession and
public confidence and trust
in psychologists is fostered.
Preliminary matters
Tribunal considered the following documentary material:
Commission provided a folder of documents tabbed 1 to 58. (Exhibit C).
Commission also produced an additional folder of documents tabbed 1 to 5.
(Exhibit A)
Ross Leonard provided a written statement dated 13 February 2013 (Exhibit
statement of agreed facts was prepared by the parties (Exhibit B).
submissions were received from the parties following the conclusion of
were raised in relation to certain documents and some material provided by the
Commission was not pressed.
following people attended and gave oral evidence to the
Ross Leonard, the Respondent
Dianna Kenny, Professor of Psychology, University of Sydney and consultant
psychologist, expert witness for the Commission
Non Publication order
accordance with Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law, the Chairperson
made a non publication order in relation to Client
A and her son and any
material which might identify Client A or her son.
Split or two stage Hearing
for Mr Leonard requested a two-stage hearing, citing the decision of the New
South Wales Court of Appeal in
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353.
The Commission did not oppose this request and the Tribunal
was satisfied, in the particular circumstances of this case, that this
accorded fairness to the parties by allowing them appropriate time and
opportunity to make submissions as to suitable orders,
after having considered
the Tribunal’s findings on the Complaints and
Particulars.
Introduction
The Practitioner
Ross Leonard completed a BA degree at the University of New England in 1993 and
a BA (Honours) (Psychology) at the University of
Western Sydney in 1996. He was
also awarded a Master of Science (Forensic Psychology) from the University of
Liverpool, England in
Leonard was conditionally registered as a psychologist in February 1998, with
full registration granted on 2 May 2000.
Leonard's original career was as a serving officer in the New South Wales police
force. After completing his psychology training
he worked as a forensic
psychologist for New South Wales Corrective Services then as a psychologist for
Ramsay Health Services. From
2007 he has practiced as a psychologist with the
Outback Division of General Practice providing services to people living in
New South Wales.
addition, since 2000 Mr Leonard has been a consultant psychologist in private
practice. Mr Leonard specialises in counselling and
therapeutic interventions
using Acceptance Commitment Therapy (ACT), Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
and Dialectic Behavioural
Therapy (DBT). He uses telephone coaching as part of
his therapeutic approach.
is a member of the Australian Psychological Society. He has lectured in
investigative and forensic psychology at the University
of Western Sydney from
1999 to 2007 and also undertook Ph.D. research in 2010 at the University of
Wollongong.
Leonard practices at Chatswood, where he owns rooms, which he shares with a
clinical psychologist. He also rents some rooms to
other health practitioners.
He employs a secretary. He works Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday and sometimes on
a Saturday morning at
Chatswood and on Thursdays and Fridays he works in
regional NSW.
Leonard sees mostly adults and adolescents, rarely children, and many of his
patients have Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD). He may see 5 or 6
patients a day in the country and fewer patients at the moment in Sydney. He was
unsure of the exact number
of clients he has and was unable to say how many
clients use telephone coaching.
Leonard said he was not having formal supervision at the time of the events
alleged in the Complaints but was speaking via Skype
with a psychologist in
Sweden. He also stated that he has now made arrangements for supervision with a
psychologist on a monthly
Leonard told the Tribunal that he has been diagnosed with ADHD and from 2002 he
has been managing this condition with the assistance
of a psychiatrist. Although
this condition caused him some difficulties in the past, he stated since he has
been managing his ADHD
he has not had significant problems.
A and her family migrated to Australia from the Philippines around 2006. At the
time Client A consulted Mr Leonard she had
been married to her husband, Mr A for
17 years. They have 3 children.
A worked on a full time basis as the practice manager of a medical practice in
Chatswood. The medical practice is located close
to Mr Leonard’s
medical practice referred patients to Mr Leonard and since 2007 Client A and Mr
Leonard had contact by telephone from time to
time in relation to such
referrals. Mr Leonard and Client A also passed each other from time to time on
the street in Chatswood.
August 2008 and November 2008 Mr Leonard provided therapy to Client A’s
nine year old son. Client A attended some of
these sessions with her
A was experiencing symptoms of depression and began to see Mr Leonard for
therapy in December 2008. Her general practitioner
sent a referral letter to Mr
Leonard dated 5 January 2009.
29 December 2008 and 21 August 2009 Mr Leonard had 12 face-to- face therapy
sessions with Client A.
is agreed between the parties that Mr Leonard and Client A communicated by way
of telephone calls and SMS messages between December
2008 and March 2010. In
January and February 2010 Mr Leonard had lengthy telephone conversations with
Client A and made clinical
notes in relation to those conversations.
Leonard concedes that he sent Client A two photographs of himself, both of which
show Mr Leonard holding a snake and that on three
occasions in December 2009 Mr
Leonard and Client A met at local cafes in Chatswood.
A telephoned Mr Leonard in March 2010 and informed him that her husband did not
wish her to see him again and she would no
longer be in contact with him.
allegations and refused to provide information or
take part in any
investigation.
The Evidence and the Tribunal’s
Issue 1 - Is the Tribunal comfortably satisfied that the Particulars of
the Complaints are proven?
Background to the Particulars
Commission alleges that Mr Leonard provided professional psychological services
to Client A between 29 December 2008 and early
March 2010. Mr Leonard disputes
this fact and asserts that psychological services were provided only between 29
December 2008 and
21 August 2009.
It is important that a determination is made in relation to this issue as the
Particulars refer to events which occurred “during
the provision of
psychological services”. Also some of the evidence Professor Kenny gave in
cross examination was premised
on the assumption that psychological services
concluded in August 2009.
is not disputed by the parties that Mr Leonard had 12 face-to-face therapy
sessions with Client A between 29 December 2008 and
his statement to the Tribunal dated the 13 February 2013 Mr Leonard states that
on 21 August 2009 he terminated the therapeutic
relationship with Client A. He
“On the occasion of our last therapeutic consultation, 21 August
2009, I told Client A that I would not be seeing her for further
My reasons for ending the therapeutic relationship after the session on 21
August 2009 were mainly personal. My mother had been ill
for the previous nine
or so months...... My father had also suffered ill-health....I wanted to reduce
my patient load. It seemed
an appropriate time for the sessions with Client A to
end. Client A had shown considerable improvement.....I was also conscious of
dual relationship I had with Client A (as client and also as a point of contact
at the referring medical practice) and the requirement
that sessions be outside
of business hours, which was difficult to accommodate.
I explained these matters to Client A and offered to assist her in
identifying a suitable alternative psychologist should she so
Tribunal had copies of Mr Leonard’s clinical notes. The clinical notes for
21 August 2009 make no reference to therapy being
concluded nor do they refer to
advice being given to Client A in relation to seeking alternative psychological
services. In his oral
evidence, Mr Leonard conceded that his notes at no time
refer to advice being given to Client A in relation to finding another
well as statements in relation to Client A’s psychological state, Mr
Leonard’s clinical notes for the session on 21
August 2009
“Discussed homework practice
if not sure call
Leonard’s evidence about the meaning of this note is contradictory. In his
early evidence on 14 February 2013, he agreed
that the notes record an
invitation to contact him.
“Q. You’d agree you're extending an invitation to her to call
your mobile if she's not sure about things?
A. That’s correct, or - yes that would be
correct.....................
Q. This entirely anticipates that in fact she might take it up? Take up
your invitation, that is?
A. Yeah, it would be something I would have reinforced to her again, you
know, that she hasn't used it before, or wants to use it,
that I've reinforced
it. That's the conditions around the phone coaching.
Q. You're being very welcoming of that phone call, about any problems she
A. Certainly.
Q. You’d have considered that to be an extension of this therapeutic
relationship, would you, if she took you up on it?
A. If it's in relation to the homework that needs to be done, yes.”
in his oral evidence later on 14 February 2013, Mr Leonard asserted that the
notes referred to a discussion of previous homework.
Q. I asked some questions about this earlier in the course of this
cross-examination and I asked you if this sentence here which is,
sure call mobile”. I asked you if that was you extending an invitation to
Client A to call you in the future
and you said, “Yes, it
A. Well, I - it well, no, it’s not. Not in the future. This is
talking about the previous homework but it's not in the future,
incorrect. I don't know. I obviously misunderstood.
Q. You’re changing your evidence?
A. Well I've obviously misunderstood. That’s previous homework and
I'm just, that I understand it, just writing down that discussion
around that
at what would be set in the future for
the following week. Sometimes you would
and sometimes you wouldn't, but you’d often do it and that's usually
towards the end.
Q. So, in changing your evidence at this point, Mr Leonard, are you now
saying you didn't extend an invitation to Client A to call
your mobile after
that session?
A. No, not that I can recall, not at all, but - and my notes - well I
don't indicate that not that I can understand from the notes;
indicate that I was doing that at all, I was discussing the previous.
his evidence to the Tribunal, Mr Leonard asserted that the therapeutic
relationship ended on 21 August 2009. However, in this letter
to the Commission,
dated 10 May 2010, Mr Leonard refers to ongoing communication about Client
A’s “progress”, the
provision of emotional support to her,
attempts to organise therapy sessions and telephone therapy sessions in early
“I saw Client A for the last session in August 2009. Following this,
I continued to receive SMS messages from Client A about
her progress or about
her son......
In December 2009, Client A asked me to see her again as a client. Some
tentative appointments were made however they were cancelled
either by me or by
her. During this time I met Client A outside the office on three occasions at
local cafes in Chatswood. This was
largely as a result of convenience, as I was
otherwise unavailable during this time. These meetings did not constitute
therapy sessions,
they were intended to provide her with some support....
Owing to the ongoing difficulties finding a convenient time to re-commence
therapy sessions, I suggested that Client A again make
use of the phone coaching
system, which can be extended to telephone therapy sessions if required, as
occurred on three occasions
(9 & 16 January and 13 February
Leonard received a handwritten note from Client A on 6 September 2009. This note
concluded with the words “thank you so very
very much for guiding me along
the way and for all the encouragement”. Mr Leonard asserts that this thank
you note demonstrates
Client A’s understanding that the therapeutic
relationship ended on 21 August 2009.
Client A telephoned Mr Leonard on the evening of 21 August 2009, at around 9 pm,
Mr Leonard also acknowledges that
telephone calls and text messages between himself and Client A continued from
early September 2009
onwards and with increasing frequency in November and
December 2009.
Leonard recalls Client A as being distressed during this time. She told him
again struggling to cope.
She asked him for further face to face therapy sessions. Although Mr Leonard
stated in his letter of 10
May 2010 that he was attempting to find time to see
Client A again and that he suggested phone coaching “
owing to the
ongoing difficulties finding a convenient time to re-commence therapy
in his written statement dated 13 February 2013 he states
that he was reluctant to resume therapy sessions and “
discussed the
possibility of assisting her to find another psychologist”.
Leonard acknowledges that four further long telephone conversations occurred,
two in January 2010 and two in February 2010. His
clinical records reveal he
made clinical notes for Client A in relation to telephone conversations on 9
January 2010, 16 January
2010, 13 February 2010, 22 February 2010 and 12 March
Leonard was asked why he had recorded the words “phone
consult/session” or “long phone coach” in some of
clinical notes. In oral evidence he said,
“Well, I just treated it like I was talking on the phone, it was a
session; how I would probably, you know, out of habit, do
it the same way as
when I was working in the country. I’d just write it down as a session
because it was quite long and I
needed to make notes and it wasn't a consult, it
wasn't a coaching. It was just a session on the phone. I put it down there to
that clear, however the – it’s obviously ambiguous, I guess,
from the – just the wording and the different definitions
clinical notes refer to Client A’s psychological state, the issues
troubling her and various therapies and supportive
treatments to assist her. In
his statement of 13 February 2013, Mr Leonard says
“My notes record that a call took place on 9 January 2010, in which
Client A complained that she couldn't sleep and that she
had worrying thoughts.
She appeared to be seriously distressed. I spent time on the telephone with her
calming her down and focusing
on diffusing techniques and interpersonal
effectiveness coaching.”
Leonard also acknowledged that he had an ongoing duty of care in relation to
Client A. He acknowledged that she was someone who
was vulnerable and needy. He
agreed that his role as her psychologist placed him in a position of power and
that given Client A’s
vulnerability and her trust in him, he was “in
a position of great responsibility”.
Leonard was asked about his duty of care after 21 August 2009.
Q. So focusing on 9 January there?
Q. Do you agree, in addition to being in a position of trust, you were in
a position of power?
A. Yes, you could say that I would have in – I mean, I - yes, I
guess you could say that.
Q. You agree that based on that recognition of your position of trust and
power that you had ongoing responsibilities to her professionally?
A. That's correct
Q. These extended to you providing psychological services to her at the
A. Sorry, again, could I ask you to repeat the question? I'm -
it’s – I’m just getting confused. It sounds like...
Q. Sorry. You've agreed with me that you were in a position of trust and
power at this point of time in relation to Client A. You've
also agreed.....that
you did have responsibility, you did consider yourself to have responsibility
for her and that you had a duty
of care to her?
A. I'm not sure a responsibility but I felt I had a duty of care in the
sense that - a sense I was previously her psychologist, that
I did have a duty
of care to do - I mean to at least do what I could to assist her given the
circumstances
Leonard said the responsibilities he had as a treating psychologist were
different to the responsibilities he had when not in a
therapeutic relationship.
He asserted that he had an ongoing duty of care without an ongoing therapeutic
relationship with Client
A after 21 August 2009.
Professor Kenny’s evidence
Kenny commented in oral evidence that if a psychologist makes clinical notes
to assume that it has a clinical
component to it. She stated that she had assumed the telephone conversations
recorded in January
and February 2010 were intended to be “professional
phone consults”.
Kenny was asked about the period after 21 August 2009 and before the
‘recorded’ telephone conversations in early
2010. When it was
suggested to Professor Kenny that the clinical relationship ended on 21 August
2008, she said,
“He is clearly in some relationship with her because there is no
cessation of contact, be it attempts to call or SMSs, there
is no cessation of
there was a brief hiatus of about
three weeks and then communication
reinstituted on a very very regular basis subsequent to that.....”
Kenny was asked how she would characterise the relationship between a former
client and a psychologist, when the former
client is making contact in an
attempt to restart the therapeutic connection. She said,
“I think the therapist would have to be in therapist mode, if you
know what I mean. If a patient or a client is trying to reinstitute
therapeutic relationship the response of the therapist has to take into account
everything that has transpired in the therapeutic
relationship in order to
manage the request in a professional way. I mean there are some schools of
thought that say that once a
person has been in a therapeutic relationship with
a psychologist or a psychiatrist they are always in that relationship to some
extent and the psychologist needs to be mindful of the fact that this
relationship is primary between the two of them, particularly
when an attempt is
being made to reinstitute the therapeutic relationship.”
The Tribunal’s decision
The evidence generally
Tribunal found Mr Leonard was not forthright and open in his testimony. His
evidence was inconsistent and contradictory at times.
He appeared unwilling
and/or unable to directly answer the questions put to him. Rather than providing
straightforward and frank
responses to questions, Mr Leonard at times
prevaricated and his answers were sometimes tangential. Many of his responses
described as evasive.
Tribunal reflected on whether Mr Leonard’s ADHD may have impacted on the
manner in which he gave his evidence. Even taking
this into account, the
inconsistencies in Mr Leonard’s evidence and the persistent difficulties
he had in providing a direct
response, meant the Tribunal could have very little
confidence in him as a reliable witness.
the Tribunal did not have evidence from Client A. In these circumstances, the
Tribunal placed considerable weight on the
documentary material, being Mr
Leonard’s existing clinical notes and the available telephone
Tribunal also had the expert evidence of Professor Kenny. Although Mr Leonard
did not call his own expert witness, his Counsel
cross examined Professor Kenny
at length. In relation to matters relevant to the Complaints, the Tribunal
considered Professor Kenny
to be a competent and reliable
Did Mr Leonard provide professional psychological services to Client A
between 29 December 2008 and early March 2010?
is no dispute psychological services were provided between December 2008 and 21
August 2009.
written submissions deal with the issue of a possible ‘hiatus’ in
said to have lasted for 3 weeks
after 21 August and Counsel for Mr Leonard asserts that this is consistent with
the termination of
the therapeutic relationship on 21 August
for the Commission submits that the hiatus probably didn’t occur. The
telephone records are not complete and the records
for that period were not in
evidence. It is submitted that given the frequency of SMS and phone contact from
September 2008 through
to February 2010 it may be safely assumed that such
is no direct evidence of contact in that 3 week period, however that in itself
is not determinative of whether or not the provision
of psychological services
ceased. Psychological therapy is not a continuous business which requires the
psychologist and the client
to have daily contact. Indeed, contact often occurs
at weekly or fortnightly intervals and between December 2008 and August 2009,
there were periods of several weeks between some therapy sessions.
does resume, it continues, it escalates and it involves discussion of the same
personal issues which had been discussed in
the face to face therapy sessions.
The involvement of Mr Leonard, by his own account, was aimed at supporting and
assisting Client
A with her stress and interpersonal issues.
Leonard acknowledges that he was discussing Client A’s personal
difficulties and attempting to support her. In his oral evidence
spoke of trying to keep the relationship as professional as possible.
Leonard’s evidence about attempts to re-commence therapy and to resist
formal therapy is contradictory, however he did undertake
telephone coaching in
January 2010 and this continued until Client A discontinued contact with Mr
Leonard in March 2010.
Kenny’s view that the “recorded” telephone calls in early 2010
were professional consultations accords
with Mr Leonard’s statement on 10
“I suggested that Client A again make use of the phone coaching
system, which can be extended to telephone therapy sessions
if required, as
occurred on three occasions (9 & 16 January and 13 February
Leonard’s clinical notes are consistent with the conclusion that he was
providing psychological services to Client A at this
Leonard's distinction between a therapeutic relationship and a non-therapeutic
relationship, in which life stressors, interpersonal
difficulties and the
psychological strategies to deal with such difficulties are discussed, is at
best a purely semantic distinction.
Mr Leonard continued to attempt to assist
Client A with the issues she had originally consulted him about, up until March
did this through a variety of means, including telephone coaching in
early 2010. His clinical notes reflect those professional consultations
Leonard himself acknowledges an ongoing duty of care towards Client A over this
period of time.
Considering
the evidence as a whole the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Leonard continued to
provide psychological services to Client
A after 21 August 2009 and that the
provision of such services continued until early March 2010.
Particular 1
1 alleges that Mr Leonard failed to provide appropriate psychological services
to Client A in that he used telephone coaching
and consultations which were not
appropriate in her case.
his statement dated 13 February 2013 Mr Leonard states that Client A saw him in
December 2008 complaining of depression and an
inability to cope. He describes
her presenting problems as depression and relationship difficulties. Her
concerns centred around
her sister, who had been diagnosed with cancer,
unresolved conflict with her mother, relationship difficulties with her husband
she described as controlling and who had recently been diagnosed with adult
ADHD. There was also some conflict between Client A and
her husband in relation
to the management of their son.
main therapies Mr Leonard employs are ACT, CBT and DBT. Mr Leonard states that
his treatment of Client A focused on the acquisition
of DBT skills, including
skills in interpersonal effectiveness and emotional regulation. Various
techniques and the need to practice
those techniques and skills were
Kenny, in her report dated 2 November 2010, commented on some aspects of the
various therapies employed by Mr Leonard. She
states that ACT and DBT are
variants and developments of the original CBT model. DBT has four components -
mindfulness, distress
tolerance, emotion regulation and developing interpersonal
effectiveness. Professor Kenny states that DBT, ACT and CBT are therapies
currently being widely taught and practiced amongst the psychology profession.
Kenny is not critical of Mr Leonard's choice of treatment for Client
Kenny acknowledges that DBT can include a phone coaching component. She says
that generally a telephone conversation is
used to deal with acute emotional
trauma, suicidal crises or prior to a client engaging in self -harming
Professor Kenny acknowledged that if a psychologist is away from his regular
city practice, telephone contact with a city
client may be appropriate, she
expressed concern about Mr Leonard's use of telephone coaching with Client A as
there is no information
in Client A's profile to suggest that she is at risk of
self-harm or fits the general profile of clients for whom telephone coaching
Kenny also stated in oral evidence,
“I wouldn't say that it would be a regular practice of psychologists
to offer phone counselling. One of the reasons is there
are a lot of logistical
problems in offering phone counselling and the practice would not be recommended
unless the therapist or
psychologist had a very good reason to believe that the
person was in danger of self harm or harming others.
I don’t believe it’s a standard practice. Some – a
minority of psychologists would perhaps use it but it would not
be considered to
be standard practice outside of the frame that I’ve just described.
of the risks inherent in phone coaching relates to boundary issues. Professor
Kenny states in her report, dated 2 November 2010,
“Phone coaching was introduced because DBT was originally devised
for the treatment of suicidal women with borderline personality
disorder... DBT
is increasingly being applied to other populations and the ‘frame’
around phone coaching has eroded,
in the sense that patients are invited to call
the therapist when they are feeling ‘stressed’. This erosion of the
therapeutic
frame can create difficulties related to boundary
violations......”
Kenny also stated that she would expect the use of telephone consultations to
diminish over the course of therapy as the
client develops resilience and coping
strategies.
Leonard's evidence is that he uses telephone coaching in accordance with the
guidelines he provides to clients. These guidelines
“Phone Coaching Guidelines
Phone coaching is an important part of your Therapy Program. Phone
coaching offers you the opportunity to get help with the application
between sessions. Phone coaching can be used for:
problem-solving
which skills to use in a situation
rehearsing a
skill before a situation
repairing a
relationship
Phone coaching is not individual therapy or a chat. It has the specific
focus of working on skills. Most phone calls will last no
more than 15 minutes.
This is what you can expect in a phone coaching call. You will be asked
Describe the
current situation briefly
which skills you have tried to use
Explore which
skills you think you could use
plan of action for after the phone call
I will work with you to problem solve and identify skills for your
specific situation.
Phone coaching is not a crisis line
. You can contact me for
assistance in times of crisis but I may not always be readily available (due to
groups, appointments, etc).
Therefore you need to have other numbers available
for crisis times (e.g. your doctor, acute care team or Lifeline).
24 hour rule
I welcome phone calls as I see this as an important way to support your
development of skills. The one time when I will not speak
with you is during the
24 hours after self harming, suicidal or other problem behaviour occurs. The
reason for this will be explained
during orientation. If you do contact me
during this time I will respond in a matter of fact manner and direct you to
medical attention
or other safety measures. I am happy to speak with you after
the 24 hour period to review your skills.
Hours of availability
I offer phone coaching most days of the week. I will always attempt to
alert you of times when I will be unavailable or away. I would
usually have my
phone on silent or turned off overnight but you are welcome to leave a message
and I will return your call in the
morning. You are welcome to use a brief SMS
to alert me that you would like to speak with me. I am always happy to ring you
so that you do not incur mobile phone charges.”
Leonard said he only used telephone consultations when there were logistical
difficulties, in remote or regional areas or because
there were no other
alternatives. He said he used telephone coaching “only for particular
clients” who had panic attacks
or suffered borderline personality
disorders. He also stated that, even though he employed a secretary, he might
give his mobile
number to clients to allow them to arrange appointments with
Leonard stated that he provided Client A with the Phone Coaching Guidelines and
acknowledges that telephone coaching took place
with Client A. He identifies
three calls, on Wednesday 24 June 2009, Thursday 23 July 2009 and Thursday 13
August 2009, which he
believes may have involved telephone coaching. Mr Leonard
says he was in Bourke on Thursday 23 July and in Walgett on Thursday 13
Leonard does not admit that telephone consultations occurred at any other time.
He denies that Client A “used the phone consult
option extensively”
as he asserted in his letter dated 10 May 2010. However, as set out above, the
Tribunal is satisfied that
telephone consultations took place with Client A in
January and February 2010.
all telephone contact between Mr Leonard and Client A involved a professional
consultation. Mr Leonard notes that between 13 March
2009 and 21 August 2009,
Client A made 49 phone calls to him, but 43 of those calls were less than 45
seconds duration and he characterises
those calls, not as telephone coaching,
but as unsuccessful attempts by Client A to contact him.
were a great many phone calls and SMS messages between Mr Leonard and Client A
during the time psychological services were provided
to Client A. Many of the
SMS messages and some of the phone calls were of very short duration. Professor
Kenny stated that a professional
consultation would be unlikely to occur during
very brief telephone contact and would rarely be undertaken by way of text
because of the complexities of the issues being dealt with.
Kenny comments that the calls in June, July and August 2009, considered in
isolation may not be inappropriate. However when
the phone records are
considered in their entirety, she remains concerned about the number of attempts
Client A made to contact Mr
Leonard and what that revealed about her
vulnerability and dependence. She also expressed concern about Mr
Leonard’s failure
to address Client A’s level of contact and the
boundary issues associated with it.
her oral evidence Prof Kenny emphasised that Client A’s compulsive
behavior, in trying to get in touch with Mr Leonard, should
have alerted him to
the fact that she had high dependency needs -
“He should have been
alerted to the fact that her behaviour was ringing alarm bells about her
dependency.”
The Tribunal’s decision
Tribunal is satisfied that telephone coaching occurred at the times identified
by Mr Leonard, during the period of face to face
therapy, and at other times
during the period Mr Leonard provided psychological services to Client A,
specifically Saturday 9 January
2010, Saturday 16 January 2010, Saturday 13
February 2010 and Monday 22 February 2010.
Notwithstanding
the diagnosis of depression, Mr Leonard did not suggest, either in his oral
evidence or in his clinical notes, that
Client A might injure herself or
others. The Tribunal accepts Professor Kenny’s evidence that there
is concern about Mr Leonard's
use of telephone coaching as there is no
information in Client A's profile to suggest that she is at risk of self-harm or
general profile of clients for whom telephone coaching is usually used.
Mr Leonard considered phone coaching to be appropriate for Client A is unclear,
especially as Mr Leonard asserted that he only
used telephone coaching when
there was no other alternative. The Tribunal notes that Mr Leonard may have been
in regional New South
Wales for only two of the telephone
consultations.
Kenny explained that the accepted use of telephone consultations in DBT is in a
situation where a client is at risk of self
harm or is otherwise in an acute
crisis. She also stated that some psychologists are “misapplying this
component of the treatment
model” and are using telephone consultations
outside the recognised framework, for example, when clients are stressed. Indeed
Mr Leonard may be using phone coaching in this way. His Phone Coaching
Guidelines refer to crisis situations, but his version of
telephone coaching
appears to involve specific skill development and general psychological support.
other significant issue for Mr Leonard in his management of Client A concerns
the risks of boundary violation inherent in telephone
consultations. Professor
Kenny expressed concern about Mr Leonard’s failure to deal with the issues
apparent from Client A’s
‘compulsive’ attempts to contact him
during the early part of treatment. The number of attempts Client A made to
Mr Leonard should have alerted him to her high dependency needs and
associated boundary ‘risks’.
will be discussed below (see Particular 3) Mr Leonard did identify a boundary
issue with Client A in March 2009. She had displayed
flirtatious behavior
towards him during a face to face session and he spoke to her about this issue.
Leonard used phone coaching in June, July and August 2009, after having
identified that boundary issue. Telephone coaching after
March 2009, and in
circumstances where Client A persisted in calling and messaging Mr Leonard, was
ill advised and inappropriate.
Indeed the phone consultations which took place
in early 2010 occurred during a period when calling and texting between Client A
and Mr Leonard had increased and there was frequent after hours and weekend
these circumstances the use of telephone consultations, with their potential to
exacerbate boundary ‘risks’, was not
appropriate. The Tribunal is
satisfied that Particular 1 is proven.
Particular 2
2 alleges that Mr Leonard failed to establish and maintain appropriate
professional boundaries in a variety of contexts.
Preliminary matters
Complaint against Mr Leonard originated in a complaint, from Client A’s
husband, alleging an inappropriate relationship
between Mr Leonard and his wife.
Particulars of the Complaints made by the Commission do not assert that Mr
Leonard had a romantic or sexual relationship with
Client A, only that he failed
to establish and maintain appropriate professional boundaries.
a failure to establish and maintain proper professional boundaries may mean, in
some circumstances, that there is some other
kind of relationship, other than a
professional one, the Tribunal is not being asked to make findings, with the
exception of Particular
2 (d), about the exact nature of the relationship
between Mr Leonard and Client A.
reinforce this point, Counsel for Mr Leonard on a number of occasions cautioned
the Commission’s expert witness, against
making assumptions about the
nature of the relationship between Mr Leonard and Client A.
Particular 2 (a)
2 (a) contends Mr Leonard failed to establish and maintain appropriate
professional boundaries in that he inappropriately
communicated with Client A
by way of telephone calls and text messaging. It is asserted that the calls and
messages were inappropriate
given their frequency, length, timing and
Commission has provided evidence of phone calls and text messages made by Mr
Leonard to Client A and evidence of calls and text
messages made by Client A to
Mr Leonard. This evidence is not for the entire period during which Mr Leonard
provided professional
services to Client A. However what the evidence reveals is
that telephone calls and text messages between Mr Leonard and Client A
on numerous occasions during this period.
Significant
phone contact occurred between Client A and Mr Leonard during the period of face
to face therapy. Some of this involved
phone coaching. Mr Leonard suggested that
the other calls were failed attempts to contact Mr Leonard. However Professor
Kenny expressed
concern about the frequency and timing of calls during this
continued after the conclusion of the face to face therapy. For example, Mr
Leonard sent a SMS message to Client A on 11 September
and 13 September 2009. On
17 September he sent 6 texts and a further 6 texts on 18 September. On 20
September 2009 he sent 3 text
messages, then on 22 September a further 4 texts.
On 20 September he sent 6 texts and on 28 September 4 texts. During this period
several phone calls were made by Mr Leonard to Client A – on 14, 15, 16,
18, 21, 22, 23, 25 and 28 September 2009 respectively.
and text messages occurred on weekends and late at night. The text sent by Mr
Leonard on Friday 11 September 2009 was sent at
1 am. The next text was sent on
a Sunday, 13 September 2009.
A was also phoning and texting Mr Leonard during this time. For example, in the
7 day period between 7 and 14 February 2010,
Client A sent 77 texts and 76 of
those were sent to Mr Leonard. Mr Leonard acknowledged in his oral evidence that
he knew a lot of
texts were being sent by Client A. He stated that calls and
texts increased from about the end of November 2009 through to March
of Client A’s calls and texts were made late at night and on weekends. In
the month of December 2009, she sent text messages
to Mr Leonard every day with
the exception of 2 December. Many of these, including the messages sent on
Christmas Day and Boxing
Day, were sent very late at night, for example, the
final text sent on New Year’s Eve was sent at 11.52 pm, followed by 2
texts at 12.02 and 12.05 am on New Year’s Day.
phone records also reveal that in early 2010 the frequency of text messages from
Mr Leonard to Client A increased and this contact
continued to occur late at
night, on weekdays and on weekends. For example, telephone records on Saturday 9
January 2010 show there
was an exchange of messages between Mr Leonard and
Client A between 2.40 a.m. and 3:40 am. On Sunday 7 February 2010 Mr Leonard
sent 15 text messages to Client A.
her oral evidence Professor Kenny commented on the communication between Mr
Leonard and Client A. She stated,
“It’s a very, very unusual pattern of
communication.............. It would be very unusual to find any – any
psychologist
having this level of contact with a patient over an extended period
of time in the middle of the night. “
Kenny commented that if Mr Leonard was concerned about Client A’s welfare
then he perhaps could have alerted the mental
health team or some other kind of
emergency service to provide support to her.
Kenny also stated,
“even if we don't make an assumption about what the communications
were about there’re extremely frequent in number and
prima facie,
regardless of their content, are of great concern.”.............
“There is something untoward about the contact that is
occurring......... I don't think it really valid to say that a psychologist
the practice manager are communicating about work issues at 11:23
Kenny highlighted the fact that Client A’s compulsive behaviour in trying
to get in touch with Mr Leonard should have
alerted him to her high dependency
needs. In relation to that dependency Professor Kenny later
“Well, he was feeding it by (sic), you know, constantly responding
to her. And there was no delay of gratification for her,
you know, really. She
would SMS and he had no problem responding to her at midnight or quarter past
midnight or one o'clock in the
morning. You know, he was unable to even put a
boundary on the fact that, “I can't take any more at - you know, in the
of the night, that’s not appropriate.” It sets up an
unhealthy blurring of boundaries .......”
Kenny considered that Mr Leonard was sending very mixed messages to Client A. If
she was attempting to reinstitute the therapeutic
relationship and if he was
resisting that, he needed to be very firm in setting boundaries, for example
prohibiting nocturnal SMS
messages. Instead Professor Kenny believes that Client
A may have received encouragement from Mr Leonard in the absence of such clear
boundaries.
Leonard told the Tribunal that he cannot recall the content of specific calls or
messages , however he said that when the calls
and texts began again after 21
August 2009,
“it was only in reference to work wise as much as
possible, or if......maybe she wanted to see someone else
Leonard was asked what he was discussing with Client A in the early hours of the
morning, for example, at 3.40 am. He said,
Of trying to refer or someone that she could another psychologist that she
could see and, yes, no that and she would text about you
know and she’d
text about some of the problems that her sister that was a big issue. So those
sorts of things and that her
husband coming back home and concerns she was
having. So that was the sort of things and she couldn't sleep and that she
see me again as a psychologist. So those things are sometimes are
there but it's probably because she couldn't sleep and she had
the worries and
she was upset on her mind and some people coming around that she had a friend of
her husband’s came around
at night or something like that, that upset her
and worried her. Those sorts of things that she would. So she would say that
her awake and she would text and that she was stressing again. So that was
the sort of nature of a lot of texts.
well as Mr Leonard’s evidence, the Tribunal did have evidence in relation
to the content of some messages. On 30 December
Client A sent the following
message to Mr Leonard at 12.19 am,
“Yup, there are times a man can be a boy also I completely agreed
w/you, BUT.... When disagreement, regardless of who’s
wrong, a MAN knows
how to say healing and magical words”
30 December Client A sent the following SMS to Mr Leonard at 12:26
“a man is never afraid to say “I don't know”, never
afraid to say “I made a mistake”, never afraid to
say “I need
apologise”. For me, that’s
Kenny described Client A as a vulnerable person, probably with high dependency
needs and at high risk of a transference
reaction. She regarded these messages
as evidence of a transference reaction. Her understanding of the text messages
in the light
of this is,
“the implication that I made from this text message was that she is
making a comparison between the husband she has, and the
quality that Mr Leonard
has that she craves, you know, in her own relationship.”
13 February 2010 Client A sent the following SMS message to Mr Leonard at 11:46
“Nite............. Mr Ross”
his statement dated the 13 February 2013, Mr Leonard comments on this message as
“I can recall receiving a few text messages from Client A in this
form. They followed periods where I had been able to assist
her to resolve her
anxieties and I interpreted the message as an indication that she was settled,
at least at the time being.”
Kenny commented that such a text message suggests a level of intimacy and is
further evidence of transference on the part
of the client.
The Tribunal’s decision
the course of providing psychological services to Client A, between December
2008 and March 2010, Mr Leonard made frequent
telephone calls and sent numerous
text messages to Client A. This was often in response to very frequent contact
from Client A. Mr
Leonard’s calls and messages occurred both on weekdays
and weekends; during the morning, the daytime and the evening and sometimes
late at night.
Tribunal accepts Professor Kenny’s evidence that the numerous attempts by
Client A to contact Mr Leonard should have alerted
him to her vulnerability and
high dependency needs. In this context, the number of calls and messages, their
frequency and their
timing raises significant concerns.
Tribunal also accepts the evidence of Professor Kenny, that regardless of their
content, the making of calls and sending text
messages at this frequency,
outside of the business hours and on weekends, indicates a breakdown of proper
professional boundaries.
with Client A in March 2009. Client A had demonstrated
flirtatious behaviour and
he acknowledged in oral evidence that identifying that issue would require even
more vigilance on his part
in terms of maintaining proper professional
boundaries.
There is some evidence of the content of communications from Client A and this
content should have alerted Mr Leonard to the possibility
of a continuing
boundary issue.
Leonard says that the calls and SMSs were about work related matters or involved
a discussion of Client A’s stresses and
difficulties; although he says
they did not involve therapy.
Tribunal has difficulty accepting Mr Leonard’s account as it is inherently
unlikely that issues relating to referrals from
the medical practice would be
discussed in the early hours of the morning. Indeed if Mr Leonard’s
evidence is accepted, discussing
Client A’s psychological issues via text
message or very brief phone calls and in the context of the boundary dilemmas,
in itself of concern.
the Tribunal is satisfied that the communication was inappropriate in a
professional context and represents a breakdown of
proper professional
boundaries.
Tribunal is satisfied that Particular 2 (a) is proven.
Particular 2(b)
2 (b) alleges that Mr Leonard inappropriately sent Client A two photographs of
Commission asserts that on 14 or 15 September 2009, Mr Leonard sent two
photographs of himself holding a large snake to Client
A. Mr Leonard admits that
he sent these photographs to Client A.
Leonard says that while he was treating Client A's son it became apparent that
her son had an interest in animals. To establish
rapport with her son, Mr
Leonard told him that he was also interested in animals and was a trained
reptile handler. He says he showed
Client A and her son photographs of himself
with various animals and both Client A and her son requested that the photos be
Leonard said that he promised to do this but forgot to do so and that in
September 2009, Client A reminded him that he had not
sent the promised
photographs. He then sent them to Client A although he asserts the intended
recipient was her son.
Kenny’s evidence in relation to this matter is as
“The sending of photographs of one's self to one patient is a
boundary violation of the therapeutic frame......... this conduct
inappropriate regardless of the content of the photograph.”
the photographs occurred during a period when there was significant SMS contact
between Mr Leonard and Client A. Mr Leonard
was asked about this in cross
examination:
Q. Would you agree, given that the level of texting, it was inappropriate
for you to send Client A photographs of you handling the
snake, no matter who
they were intended for?
A. In hindsight I at the time I thought it was appropriate. No, probably
not with me my picture there, but I was only sent to her
interest...
Q You would agree that sending the photos blurred professional
boundaries?
A Well, it certainly in that context, but I think at that time I certainly
felt it was just sent to him.
the letter to the Commission, dated 19 October 2011, Mr Leonard’s
solicitors stated,
“In hindsight Mr Leonard realises that sending these particular
photos may have been inappropriate. However, they were sent
in the context of
attempting to foster in Master A a productive and worthwhile interest in animals
which would assist Client A in
his management.”
The Tribunal’s Decision
Tribunal accepts Professor Kenny’s assessment that regardless of the
content of the photographs, it is not appropriate to
send a personal photograph
to a client, and particularly a client with whom a boundary issue has already
been identified.
is difficult to assess whether or not Mr Leonard acknowledges that sending the
photographs was inappropriate. In his letters to
the Commission he appears to
acknowledge this, however in his oral evidence he says his intention was to send
photographs to Client
A’s son and implies this remedies any level of
impropriety in relation to his conduct.
Tribunal notes that the sending of the snake photographs purportedly to Client
A’s son, occurred one year after the child
ceased to have therapy.
Tribunal is satisfied that Particular 2 (b) is proven.
Particular 2 (c)
2 (c) asserts that Mr Leonard inappropriately engaged in the provision of
psychological services with Client A in an informal
social setting at local
cafes in Chatswood.
Leonard acknowledges that three meetings in cafes in Chatswood occurred with
Client A in December 2009. He says in his written
statement dated 13 February
2013 that these meetings were accidental and unintended and did not involve the
provision of any kind
of psychological service. Although Mr Leonard acknowledges
that he listened to Client A's concerns about her sister's medical condition
noted her distress in relation to her sister's deterioration. He said he
provided a sympathetic ear and words of comfort.
Commission points out that Mr Leonard changed his evidence in relation to this
issue. In his letter, dated 10 May 2010, Mr Leonard
“In December 2009 Client A asked me to see her again as a client.
Some tentative appointments were made, however they were cancelled
either by me
or by her. During this time I met Client A outside the office on three occasions
at local cafes in Chatswood. This was
largely as a result of convenience as I
was otherwise unavailable during this time. Although these meetings did not
constitute therapy
sessions they were intended to provide her with some support.
In retrospect I can see how this could be interpreted by her husband
outside professional boundaries.”
relation to the inconsistency between his statement of 13 February 2013 and his
letter dated 10 May 2010, Mr Leonard stated that
he had spoken to a friend, who
was a general practitioner and familiar with professional disciplinary matters,
in relation to the
work of the Medical Council. His friend assisted him to write
the letter dated 10 May 2010. He now regards some of the content of
that letter
as incorrect. He stated,
“I required assistance from a friend who is a general practitioner
in the drafting of this letter. In 2002, I was diagnosed
as suffering from ADHD
which is manifested in part in a difficulty in formulating words to convey exact
Tribunal notes Mr Leonard also stated that his ADHD had not caused him
significant difficulties since 2002. The Tribunal asked
Mr Leonard about the
impact of ADHD on his professional career and his ability to undertake tertiary
study. He acknowledged that
this condition had not prevented him from
undertaking rigorous academic study and a number of higher degrees, including
Leonard acknowledged that the café meetings took place in December 2009
during a period of almost daily phone or text contact
from Client A, but denied
that they were planned.
Kenny, in oral evidence, stated that it would be a fundamental error for a
psychologist to intentionally arrange to have
a therapeutic session in a
café. She also said that there are dangers if a therapist accidentally
encounters a client in a
social setting. In that situation,
“It is advisable to keep the contact to a minimum... So a brief
greeting and moving on as quickly as possible”.
her written report, dated 2 November 2010, Professor Kenny states,
“It is inadvisable, with rare exceptions, to meet clients in social
settings or outside the psychologist’s consulting
rooms. Given that Mr
Leonard recorded in his clinical notes on 11 March 2009 that there was an
‘elephant in the room’
which he clarified to mean that he observed
Client A’s “flirtatious behaviour” towards him, his meeting
a local cafe was strongly contraindicated, given its potential to be
misinterpreted by the client.”
also notes that Mr Leonard stated that in December 2009 when these meetings
occurred, Client A had requested that the therapeutic
relationship resume.
Meeting Client A in a cafe in this context would be both confusing and dangerous
in terms of blurring professional
boundaries.
The Tribunal’s decision
of Mr Leonard’s evidence are difficult to evaluate. He first says that he
arranged the meetings out of convenience as
he couldn’t arrange a formal
session. He later retracts that and asserts that the meetings were accidental.
Mr Leonard’s evidence is contradictory and his explanation for the
inconsistencies between his statement made in 2013
and his letter of 2010 is
implausible. He refers to the symptoms of ADHD but also states that ADHD has
not caused him any significant
problems since being managed, from 2002, with the
assistance of his psychiatrist.
any event Mr Leonard’s evidence is that the meetings at the cafes were not
therapy and did not involve the provision of psychological
services. But Mr
Leonard acknowledges that the meetings involved discussion of Client A’s
problems – the situation with
her sister, her difficulties at home and the
stress she was then experiencing.
are the same concerns Client A raised in face to face therapy with Mr Leonard
and Mr Leonard acknowledged that he was attempting,
at the café meetings,
to listen, provide assistance and support and to remind Client A of the
psychological techniques he
had taught her.
Tribunal is satisfied that Particular 2 (c) is proven. Providing a psychological
service to Client A in an informal café
setting is not appropriate at any
time and is of particular concern given the boundary issues which had already
been identified by
Mr Leonard.
Particular 2 (d)
2 (d) alleges that Mr Leonard engaged in contact of a personal nature with
Client A in the course of the conduct referred
to in Particulars 2 (a) –
Leonard acknowledged in his evidence to the Tribunal that he had multiple
relationships with Client A. He had a work related relationship
with her, he had
provided therapy to her son and he had also provided psychological services to
is not in dispute that some of the contact between Mr Leonard and Client A was
conduct which occurred in the context of a psychologist/client
relationship.
This included telephone coaching. There was also professional contact in
relation to the care and management of her
is also not in dispute that some of the contact between Mr Leonard and Client A
dealt with work-related matters, such as client
referrals from the medical
practice where Client A worked.
relation to communications which were not work or therapy related, Mr Leonard
said that some texts and calls simply dealt with
‘everyday matters’
or ‘idle chatter’.
Leonard also stated in his oral evidence that he had discussed his personal
weekend activities with Client A. He stated that prior
to sending the
photographs to Client A, he had been at a flying fox course at Northbridge. He
Q. What was the trigger for use sending the photographs at this
A. I was talking to Client A and I had mentioned that I had been to the
course and that she had, as a result, asked why, you know,
they never received
or Master A never received all the photographs that I have promised
previously.
Q. To mention to Client A that you had been away on the weekend at such a
function is information of a personal nature, isn't it?
A. Well, yeah, I just, yeah, day to day sort of
The Tribunal’s decision
Leonard had contact with Client A because of her role as practice manager of a
medical centre which referred clients to him. He
also had contact with her when
he provided psychological services to her son and then later to Client A
herself. The Tribunal considers
which goes outside or beyond the contact associated with those relationships.
the absence of extensive information about the content of communications between
Client A and Mr Leonard, there is little direct
evidence on this matter.
However, the nature, frequency and timing of the contact between them supports
the inference that there
was contact of a personal nature. The Tribunal
considers that it is unlikely that all of the contact between Mr Leonard and
A, especially that which occurred on weekends and late at night, could be
explained on the basis of discussion of work referrals
or discussions in a
professional context.
Mr Leonard’s evidence concerning the content of his discussions with
Client A, confirms that contact of a personal nature
occurred. He refers to idle
chatter and day to day concerns. He discussed his weekend
activities.
Tribunal makes no findings about the nature of the relationship between Mr
Leonard and Client A. The Tribunal’s findings
relate to the nature of the
i.e. contact outside the professional relationships
existing between them.
Tribunal is satisfied that Particular 2 (d) is proven.
Particular 3
3 alleges that Mr Leonard failed to respond adequately or appropriately having
identified a boundary issue in Client A
demonstrating flirtatious behaviour
towards him.
Leonard's clinical notes for 11 March 2009 state,
that could be the last session
Expressed she
would be upset – “miss” me
“respect” for me
“elephant in room”
normalise emotions
Spoke about
boundaries between psychologist/client both during and post
Leonard’s letter to the Commission, dated 5 August 2010, states that the
reference to the “elephant in the room”
is a reference to the
flirtatious behaviour which Client A demonstrated towards Mr Leonard during the
session on 11 March 2009.
the letter to the Commission, dated 1 August 2011, Mr Leonard explained that his
impression of flirtatious behaviour was based
on his observation of Client A
smiling and laughing and making eye contact with him.
Mr Leonard said that he explained to Client A that it was normal for emotions,
including respect and even fondness for a therapist
to arise during therapy and
that it was important to have fixed boundaries at all times between a
psychologist and a client.
Leonard asserted in oral evidence that he considered the issue of flirtatious
behaviour to have been adequately addressed during
this conversation.
Leonard acknowledged in his oral evidence that he understood Client A to be a
vulnerable person, who may feel distressed and needy.
He acknowledged that he
was in a position of trust and power in relation to Client A.
Leonard asserted throughout his evidence that he was aware of boundary issues
and acted to the best of his ability to manage those
Kenny was asked about the difficulties for Mr Leonard in a situation where
Client A is attempting to start up face to face
sessions again and Mr Leonard is
trying to resist this. She acknowledged this could be a difficult situation but
He was sending very mixed messages to her about the possibility of
reinstituting some kind of relationship because had he been very
firm in setting
his own boundaries, he would have told her very early on, once this SMS
communication was re-established, that he
would not be responding to her SMSs
and particularly the nocturnal SMSs... ....So she received in – perhaps
inadvertent encouragement
that the needs that she was hoping to have fulfilled
by him would possibly be fulfilled because he was continuing to respond to
Leonard states that after 21 August 2009 he was attempting to refer Client A to
another psychologist, but he acknowledges that
he failed to do this. He was
unable to prevent Client A phoning and texting him on a regular and repeated
basis. He also initiated
phone and SMS contact with Client A on many
Leonard was asked about supervision and whether he discussed Client A with a
supervisor. It was difficult to ascertain the nature
and level of supervision Mr
Leonard was having at the time. In oral evidence, he said,
Q. Did you discuss this client with your supervisor ......the texts over
two and a half months... ?
A. I didn't have formal supervision in the sense. I've always had peer
supervision or I've been group and that and it settled down
a bit. And I did
have when doing the Ph.D. I had, there was a professor from overseas who was
also interested in learning as much
as possible the sort of work I did in the
country and so I did
Q. Did you discuss the SMSs and your difficulties with Client A with a
supervisor, a peer, a colleague?
A. Yes. But not in a, yes, I did just but I didn't mention and I sort
of... ....Just briefly to discuss it just in like an example
situation or
something like that.
Q. When did you speak to the supervisor?
A. Well I remembered just discussing it briefly, this is over the, when
I, in the course of just conversation, Skype conversations
over the, well we
have regular Skype November December January February
Q. Who were you Skyping, who were you talking to?
A. She is a professor of psychology in Sweden
Q You raised these circumstances with her?
A. In general sort of way probably to just get a sense of what was
Q What did you say to her about Client A specifically about her if
A. Just that, as best I can remember and I can't remember exactly but
just saying that I had some problems and that I was trying
to caught between
running a line, between, you know, is it, am I able to, what will I do? How
much, you know would you, given some
of the previous situations you know, what
would be the best way your best way to go.
Q. Just how did you describe the situation to the professor?
A. It's more just like a general, like, regular communication and the fact
that she couldn't, but didn't want her family to know........I
just mentioned it
vaguely to her and just the difficulties involved of trying to communicate and
whether to see her again or whether
to hold the boundaries tied or trying to
organise something to at least maybe discuss with her.
Q. What did the Professor of psychology say?
A. Well, the first that I know she was just not 100% sure herself but
maybe to, I said I could articulate this to the client pretty
well....... so I'm
not 100% sure exactly what but it was the sense of just me just airing some of
the difficulties I've had and her
listening and as best I can remember, she
didn't give any specific advice.
The Tribunal’s Decision
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Leonard failed to appropriately respond to an
identified boundary issue with Client A. In fact his
conduct fostered and
facilitated ongoing boundary difficulties.
was aware of the multiple relationships he had with Client A and the increased
risk such relationships create in respect to boundary
issues. He was aware that
Client A was a vulnerable and possibly needy person. Her conduct towards him
evidenced a high level of
dependency and a propensity to a transference
was aware after 11 March 2009 of Client A’s feelings towards him. However,
following the consultation on 11 March 2009, Mr
Leonard did a number of things
which demonstrate a clear failure to maintain proper professional boundaries.
Mr Leonard used telephone
coaching, despite its inherent “boundary
risks”; he engaged in very frequent telephone contact, including text
with Client A outside business hours, on weekends and during the
night; he sent her personal photographs and met Client A in coffee
Chatswood. Throughout this time the contact between them included contact of a
personal nature.
Leonard was able to identify the boundary issue on 11 March 2009 but he was
unable to manage the power differential in the psychologist/client
relationship
in an adequate and professional fashion. In the specific context of Client
A’s circumstances, Mr Leonard demonstrated
either ignorance of his
professional ethical obligations or reckless disregard for those
responsibilities.
Tribunal is satisfied that Particular 3 is proven.
ISSUE 2 - Does Mr Leonard’s conduct amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct and/or professional misconduct ?
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
relation to the Complaints concerning Mr Leonard, unsatisfactory professional
conduct refers to:
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed
or the care exercised by the practitioner in the practice
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training of experience;
(b) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
The relevant standard
Leonard has been a registered psychologist since 2000. He has been in practice
since that time and has postgraduate qualifications
in psychology. He can be
regarded as a senior, experienced and well qualified
practitioner.
Tribunal is satisfied that in calling and sending text messages as he did,
sending photographs of himself and meeting in cafes
in Chatswood, Mr Leonard
failed to maintain proper boundaries with Client A. He identified but then
failed to manage a boundary issue,
Client A’s flirtatious behavior, and
gave Client A mixed messages which encouraged boundary
Kenny is strongly critical of Mr Leonard’s use of telephone coaching for
Client A as it can create difficulties related
to boundary issues. She refers to
phone contact between Mr Leonard and Client A as excessive and inappropriate and
she is strongly
critical of Mr Leonard sending photographs of himself to Client
A and meeting her in local cafes, especially when Client A’s
flirtatious
behavior was already identified.
Psychology Tribunal is an expert panel, consisting not only of a chairperson who
is legally qualified and a lay member who represents
the community, but also two
experienced, senior psychologists, who can reflect and represent the views and
values of reasonable and
responsible members of the profession.
has long been recognized that expert panels can and should use their expertise
to weigh and evaluate issues. In
Kalil v Bray
(1977) 1 NSWLR 256
in relation to the extent
to which an expert disciplinary tribunal under the
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1923
(NSW) can draw upon such knowledge, the Court said:
"The tribunal ................will, no doubt, give due weight to such
expert evidence, if any, as may be placed before it. But the
responsibility for forming an expert view upon which the disciplinary powers
will be exercised or withheld is the tribunal
itself. This is a responsibility
to be discharged by drawing on its own internal resources of knowledge of
veterinary science." (at
Tribunal concurs with the views expressed by Professor Kenny and considers that
Mr Leonard should have made many more efforts
to control the frequency of
text messages on weekends
and out of business hours. The frequency and timing of
this contact alone is sufficient to indicate a serious boundary
Leonard should not have sent photographs of himself to Client A or met with her
outside his professional rooms, in local coffee
shops, to discuss her concerns
and worries. These activities involved some therapeutic interventions and some
personal contact and
significantly blurred the client /therapist
boundaries.
inappropriateness of his behavior is highlighted by the fact that Mr Leonard
identified a boundary issue, flirtatious behavior
by Client A, in March 2009 and
nonetheless continued to have contact with Client A in a way which fostered and
facilitated boundary
Leonard’s conduct demonstrates a failure to establish and maintain proper
boundaries with his client and falls significantly
below what would be expected
of a practitioner with his training and experience.
Improper and unethical conduct
terms "improper conduct" or "unethical conduct" are not defined in the Law, and
in the absence of a statutory definition, should
be construed in accordance with
their ordinary meaning.
conduct is conduct which is incorrect or wrongful. It refers to behaviour which
is in some way not in accordance with propriety.
Unethical conduct is arguably a
more serious matter. Unethical is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary as meaning
both, immoral or
contrary to moral precepts and secondly, as relating to a
contravention of a professional code of conduct.
Code of Ethics published by the Australian Psychological Society contains a
series of Standards and Guidelines for practitioners.
Under “General
Principle B: Propriety”, Part B 3 relates to professional responsibility
and states,
Psychologists provide psychological services in a responsible manner.
Having regard to the nature of the psychological services they
are providing,
psychologists:
(a) act with the care and skill expected of a competent
psychologist;
(b) take responsibility for the reasonably foreseeable consequences of
their conduct;
(c) take reasonable steps to prevent harm occurring as a result of their
conduct;..........................................
(g) are aware of, and take steps to establish and maintain, proper
professional boundaries with clients and colleagues
the Heading “General Principle C: Integrity”, Point C 3 refers to a
conflict of interest and states,
Psychologists refrain from engaging in multiple relationships that
(a) impair their competence, effectiveness, objectivity or ability to
render a psychological service;
(b) harm clients or other parties to a psychological service; or
(c) lead to the exploitation of clients or other parties to a
psychological service.
Kenny stressed was that there were several signals alerting Mr Leonard to the
fact that Client A was vulnerable, highly
dependent and as such susceptible to a
transference reaction. These included her compulsive attempts to contact Mr
Leonard, her display
of flirtatious behaviour on 11 March 2009, her continued
calling and texting late at night and on weekends.
this context Mr Leonard should have been alerted to the risks for Client A and
the need to establish and maintain strong boundaries
around the professional
relationship. He should have managed the situation more firmly and with the
support of adequate supervision.
conduct is both improper and unethical. There were a number of things he could
have done to fulfill his professional responsibilities
towards this patient,
such as refer her back to the GP for referral elsewhere, and have calls screened
by his staff, yet he continued
to place himself in a position that inevitably
invited speculation about the nature of his contact with Client A and exposed
to the risks associated with boundary confusion. Further, in failing to
establish and maintain proper professional boundaries, Mr
Leonard has infringed
his professional code of ethics.
Other considerations
his first communication relating to the Complaints, Mr Leonard
“Although I recognise that the pattern of contact with Client A was
often not within usual business hours, I would like to reassure
the HCCC that it
was at all times within the bounds of standard practice for psychologists
dealing with clients in crisis.”
However he acknowledged that meeting Client A outside his consulting room may
have been thoughtless.
the letter to the Commission dated, 19 October 2011, Mr Leonard concedes, with
the benefit of hindsight, he should have been more
definitive in his efforts to
control the frequency of contact with Client A. He also states that with
hindsight, sending photographs
may have been inappropriate.
his written statement provided to the Tribunal on 13 February 2013, Mr Leonard
makes no such acknowledgements or concessions. In
these proceedings he made no
formal admissions in relation to the Complaints and throughout his oral evidence
asserted that his professional
behaviour was appropriate.
written submissions on behalf Mr Leonard it is asserted that although his
conduct highlights the dangers of multiple relationships,
there is no
impropriety on Mr Leonard’s part in the conduct of his practice as a
psychologist. It is asserted that Mr Leonard
was endeavouring at all times to do
what was proper in the interests of his client.
is difficult in these circumstances for the Tribunal to be satisfied that Mr
Leonard has a robust understanding of or insight into
the nature and impropriety
of his conduct. He appears to have retracted his earlier acknowledgement that
his behaviour may not have
been entirely appropriate.
may well be the case that Client A was a particularly difficult client who was
needy and at times intrusive. She may have been
unable to moderate the timing
and frequency of the calls and messages she sent to Mr Leonard. However given
there was a relationship
of psychologist and client, the burden of managing the
relationship and ensuring it remains within appropriate professional bounds
falls squarely on the psychologist.
Tribunal also notes Professor Kenny’s comment that Mr Leonard should have
raised the difficulties he faced with Client A
in supervision and that would
have helped him realise he “had lost control of the
situation”.
Mr Leonard’s stated that he did mention Client A to a
‘supervisor’ but only in an oblique way. He says he received
advice in relation to the situation. Indeed Mr Leonard stated that he was not
having formal supervision, but was talking via Skype
with a Professor of
Psychology in Sweden. Whether this provided him with adequate support in
relation to Client A is questionable
considered the evidence and the submissions, the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr
Leonard’s conduct is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience, and is
improper and unethical.
For these reasons it constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Professional Misconduct
Professional
Misconduct is defined as:
(a) Unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
b) More than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
Commission submits that the totality of the telephone communications, extending
over a period of time from December 2008 to March
2010, establishes more than
one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct. It is also asserted that
Mr Leonard’s conduct
is serous as he was in a position of trust, with a
vulnerable client, and failed to adhere to proper professional practice.
Commission asserts that Mr Leonard shows a gross lack of appreciation of the
potential damage his conduct may have caused Client
A and is a risk to the
public given his lack of insight and his minimisation of his inappropriate
conduct. It is asserted he has
also brought the profession into
for Mr Leonard submits that Mr Leonard made an error of judgment and that cannot
constitute professional misconduct. It is
“The issue properly for determination by the Tribunal is whether the
error of judgment made by Mr Leonard when he agreed to
treat Client A despite a
pre-existing relationship and the errors he made in the management of the
difficult situation as it developed
from the end of November 2009 to February
2010, constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct.”
common law professional misconduct is said to connote “conduct which would
reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable”
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and
Registration
[1894] UKLawRpKQB 36
[1894] 1 QB 750
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284.
has also been said in relation to the medical profession that the conduct, or
the subject of the complaint, has to be of such a
departure from the accepted
standards as would reasonably incur the strong reprobation of professional
colleagues of good repute
and competence:
Qidwai v Brown
[1984] 1 NSWLR 100
; Ex parte Meehan; Re
Medical Practitioners Act
[1965] NSWLR 30.
statutory definition of professional misconduct refers to unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or
cancellation of the psychologist’s registration.
the degree of seriousness is sufficient to warrant suspension or deregistration
is a matter of degree and judgment. See
Sabag v Health Care Complaints
[2001] NSWCA 411.
Psychology Tribunal has from time to time considered cases where a practitioner
has failed to maintain proper professional boundaries
with his client and in
some instances, generally when there has been a sexual relationship between
psychologist and client , the
Tribunal has been satisfied that the
psychologist’s conduct justifies cancellation of his registration. See
HCCC v Asiminaris
[2009] NSWPST4;
HCCC v Mazaleigue
HCCC v Schubert
[2009] NSWPST6.
Tribunal considers that Mr Leonard’s conduct demonstrates significant
deficiencies in respect of his professional responsibilities
demonstrates a lack of adherence to his professional ethical obligations.
However his behaviour cannot be equated with the conduct
which the Tribunal, in
recent decisions, has characterised as professional misconduct.
Leonard failed to maintain proper boundaries and the Tribunal has expressed
concern that he lacks adequate insight into his behaviour.
His conduct is of
considerable concern and constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct.
However, the Tribunal is not comfortably
satisfied, on the evidence before it,
that Mr Leonard’s conduct constitutes professional misconduct.
Having found Particulars 1, 2 and 3 to be proven, the Tribunal finds Mr Ross
Leonard to be guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
----------------------------------------
Ms Diane Robinson
Chairperson
For the Tribunal
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13, 323 Castlereagh
Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Psychology Council of New South
in accordance with
section 39(2)
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National Law”),
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Ross Robert Leonard
(“the practitioner”), of
Thomas Street, Chatswood New South Wales
a psychologist
registered under the
National Law
COMPLAINT ONE
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under s 139B (1) (a) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
(i) Engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgement
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner
in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of
training or experience, and/or
(ii) Engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
At all relevant times the practitioner practised as a psychologist in the
state of New South Wales. Between 29 December 2008 and early
March 2010, the
practitioner provided professional psychological services to Client A including
consultations in his rooms on 29
December 2008, 9, 20 and 27 January 2009, 11
February 2009, 11 and 17 March 2009, 14 and 17 April 2009, 11 and 29 May 2009
August 2009.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
practitioner failed to provide appropriate psychological services to Client A in
that he used telephone coaching and consultations
for Client A which were not
appropriate in her case;
the course of the provision of psychological services to Client A the
practitioner failed to establish and maintain appropriate
professional
boundaries in that he:
Inappropriately
communicated with Client A by telephone, including telephone calls and text
messaging, having regard to frequency,
length, timing and content of the
communications;
Inappropriately
sent Client A two photographs of himself;
Inappropriately
engaged in therapy or other psychological services with Client A in an informal
social setting at local cafes outside
in contact of a personal nature with Client A in the course of the conduct
referred to in a – c above.
3. During the course of the provision of psychological services to Client A
the practitioner failed to respond adequately or appropriately
identified a boundary issue in Client A demonstrating flirtatious behaviour
towards him.
COMPLAINT TWO
Is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of s 139E of the
National Law
in that the practitioner:
(i) Engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s
registration, and/or
(ii) engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct
that, when the instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.
The background of Complaint One is relied upon.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
The particulars of Complaint One are relied upon both individually and
cumulatively.
DATED this day of 2012
.................................................
Karen Mobbs
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (557 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter