URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v WOODS (No 1) [2012] NSWCHT 2 (20 December 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
CHIROPRACTIC TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
PAUL STEWART WOODS
MATTER NUMBER: CH04/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
CHI0001403142
REASONS FOR DECISION
(AS TO THE PARTICULARS AND
THE COMPLAINTS ONLY)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v WOODS (No 1)
[2012] NSWCHT 2
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Ms E Brus of Counsel instructed by Ms F
Westwood, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Paul Stewart Woods
(Respondent) represented by Mr G Farmer of Senior
Counsel instructed by Ms N Brown, Solicitor, of Meridian Lawyers.
FILE NUMBER: CH04/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Sue-Ellen McKelvey (Chiropractic
Dr John Thompson (Chiropractic Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 14 to 18 May 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 20 December 2012
FINDINGS (in summary): Particulars 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7(i), 7(ii), 7(iii),
8(i) and 8(ii) established and found to be unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 8(iii) established.
Particulars 1, 2 and 3 (considered together), 5, 6, 7 (noting that the
Tribunal considers 7(iii) alone to constitute professional
misconduct) and 8
found to be professional misconduct. Costs and Order reserved.
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
by four female patient re inappropriate comments, touching, text messaging -
lack of consent.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – s139B(1)(a) and (l), s139E,
schedule 5D – clause 7
CASES CITED:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
41 NSWLR 630,
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported);
KRM V The Queen
[2001] HCA 11
(2001) 206 CLR 221
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
159 CLR 507
Zaide v HCCC (1998)
44 NSWLR 82;
R v Jovanovic
42 NSWLR 520
Doe v the Queen
NSWCCA 203.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(AS TO THE PARTICULARS AND THE COMPLAINTS ONLY)
Introduction
Chiropractic Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional
Councils Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney
on 14 to 18 May 2012
to conduct an Inquiry into a Complaint made by Health Care Complaints Commission
(the HCCC) dated 21 October
2012 in relation to a registered chiropractor, Paul
Woods (the Respondent).
parties submitted that the Inquiry should be held in ‘two phases’.
The Tribunal heard all evidence relevant to the
determination of the Particulars
and the Complaints and will hear further evidence relevant to Orders (should any
Complaint be established)
at a later stage.
Complaint relates to four female patients. Three patients are members of the
same family. The fourth female patient is unrelated
and unknown to the other
three women (Patient A, Patient B, and Patient C). The Complaint was referred by
the Chiropractic Council
of NSW to the HCCC after receiving the complaints from
the three women who were members of the same family. The HCCC received the
further complaint (from Patient D) several weeks prior to this referral.
Respondent admitted that some of the conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. He did not admit all of the Particulars
nor that the
conduct amounted to professional misconduct.
taking of evidence occupied the entire time set for the Inquiry and a timetable
was set for the exchange of submissions.
The Complaint
Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a registered chiropractor under the
National Law:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B (1)(a) and (l) of
National Law
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the practice of chiropractics (sic)
is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience;
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractics (sic).
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times the practitioner conducted his practice as a
chiropractor at 24 Dewhurst Street Narrabri, NSW.
or about September/October 2009, during a treatment session, the
practitioner
(a) engaged in inappropriate physical contact
with Patient A in that he embraced Patient A and ;
(b) inappropriately said:
“I love you”
to Patient A.
A did not invite nor consent to the hug, nor was there any legitimate clinical
reason for the hug.
or about 26 November 2009:
(i) during a treatment session, the practitioner, without obtaining the consent
of the patient, put his hands under Patient A‘s
clothing and lifted her
bra strap up and down.
(ii) during the same treatment session referred to in (3) (i) above, the
practitioner inquired whether Patient A had breast implants
and commented that
he had never felt implants before. The practitioner then touched
Patient’s A breasts. At no time did the practitioner explain the
clinical purpose of his examination of Patient A’s
or about 17 June 2004, during a treatment session, the practitioner purported to
conduct an examination of a swollen lymph node
under the right arm of Patient B
by placing his hand under the clothing of the patient and touching her breast.
The practitioner
failed to obtain a relevant history about the patient’s
complaint prior to conducting the examination; failed to advise the
the purpose of the examination and failed to obtain the patient’s consent
to the examination.
or about 28 February 2007 during a treatment session for lower back pain, the
practitioner pulled Patient B’s jeans and underwear
down to the top of her
legs so as to examine a tattoo on Patient B’s abdomen. Upon observing the
tattoo, the practitioner inappropriately
commented, “Oh that’s
nice”. There was no legitimate clinical reason for the practitioner to
examine Patient B’s
practitioner failed to advise the patient of any clinical reason for lowering
both the jeans and the underwear and failed to obtain
the patient’s
or about 31 May 2010, during a treatment session:
(i) the practitioner leant down and whispered into Patient C’s ear:
“Of all the patients I
have and I have hundreds, no one makes me feel
the way you do. You make my heart race. I am not only attracted to you
but I am attracted to your personality as well. I have never had
this happen to me before.”
(ii) the practitioner performed a back stretch with Patient C in such a way that
Patient C was able to feel the practitioner’s
penis touch her
(iii) approximately 1 hour after the treatment session referred to, in (7)(i)
and (ii) above, the practitioner sent an inappropriate
text message to Patient C
“I hope you took my comments as a compliment and that you
are not offended. I just haven’t had that happen before. I can’t
the perfect woman. I mean that and I have never said
that to anyone before in my
life. I (sic) so jealous of your husband and hope he knows how lucky he is. PS
I just had to get that
off my chest.”
or about 21 April 2010 during a treatment session:
(i) the practitioner requested that Patient D remove her T shirt and pull down
her bra exposing her breasts. The practitioner touched
and felt around Patient
D’s breasts using the flat palm of his hand. The practitioner did not
obtain the consent of Patient
D to carry out an examination in this manner and
there was not a legitimate clinical reason for such an
examination.
(ii) at 1.11pm, approximately 1 hour after the treatment session referred to in
(8) (i), the practitioner sent an inappropriate text
message to Patient D which
“How is your treatment going? I hope your(sic) not too sore
because I had to do so much. You had a BIG effect on me like I’ve
had in practice before. I’m still in a spin over you. Sorry to be so
forward and if you can keep this between us would
be much appreciated. Cheers
PS I don’t even know why I’m sending you this
(iii) at 2.18pm the practitioner sent Patient D another text message which read
“ I hope I haven’t offended you at all.”
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
the National Law
in that he has:
(i) Engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration;
(ii) Has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct on a number of occasions
which, when considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
Particulars 1 to 8 of Complaint One are repeated and relied upon.
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes.
trust placed in chiropractors is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the patient to
come into close
physical contact with the practitioner and frequently to disclose highly
personal information to the chiropractor
in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their doctors may
vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
the doctor. Even in
regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a patient places in a
doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present seems to be an
example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost absolute. The
power in regard to the patient in such cases is also very great.
I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of fact;
the extent of
the power will vary according to the temperament of the patient, but the doctor
with some patients and for limited
periods, because of the relationship in which
they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do whatever the doctor wants
the body of the patient. This is one of the reasons why doctors are
subject to correspondingly great obligations and are expected
to maintain high
standards; all this being very much in the public interest.
Suppression Orders
the Inquiry the Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in
accordance with Schedule 5D Clause 7 of the Act in
relation to the name of
Patients A, B, C and D and others associated with them as indicated in the
schedule annexed hereto and marked
‘B’. Any information beyond that
contained in this Reasons document which may identify them is also not to be
Annexure B will only be attached to the original Reasons for Decision
held by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence from the HCCC were marked as exhibits 1 - 29.
Those provided by the Respondent were marked as
exhibits R1 – R15 as set
out in annexure A hereto.
A, Patient B, Patient C, Patient D, Ms J (the Respondent’s receptionist),
Dr John Kelly, Mrs Kiara Woods (the Respondent’s
wife) and the Respondent
were all called to give evidence before the Tribunal.
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1975. In 2001 the Respondent completed his chiropractic
degree with honours from the Palmer College of
Chiropractic in Davenport, Iowa,
United States of America. He was first registered on 27 June 2001 and worked as
a chiropractic associate
in an established country chiropractic practice. The
Respondent then took over the premises of a retiring chiropractor in the same
country region and established his own practice. The Respondent has maintained
this practice. Evidence before the Tribunal indicated
that he was registered
until 30 November 2012 (exhibit 1B). At the time of this decision the
Respondent’s registration was
current until 30 November 2013.
his interview with the HCCC on 11 November 2010 the Respondent stated he had
thousands of clients and saw 30 to 40 new patients
per month and considered he
‘healthy and thriving’
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal received documents into evidence from both parties as recorded in the
index lists annexed hereto (annexure A). Some of
the evidence, in particular
parts of the oral evidence of the Respondent is only relevant to ‘phase
two’ of this Inquiry.
It has been recorded in this document for ease of
referral but has not been considered in reaching the findings made with respect
to the Particulars and the Complaints.
Evidence of Patient A
A made a hand written complaint on 6 July 2010 (exhibit 4) on a printed pro
forma document providing brief information in
answer to the questions
‘What happened?’
‘Where did things go
‘Why are you making this complaint?’
more formal statement was provided by Patient A to the HCCC on 4 November 2010
(exhibit 5). This statement recorded that Patient
A was then 47 years of age.
It made reference to the earlier hand written complaint. Patient A stated that
she had been a patient
of the Respondent’s practice since the time it was
operated by the previous chiropractor who she thought had left the practice
be a competent chiropractor and her husband, son
and daughter had also received
treatment from the Respondent.
relevant parts of the statement read as follows:
reflection it was around the time that Paul got a new receptionist about three
years ago that I noticed a change in the conduct
8. It was over this time that I found him to become increasingly over
familiar and friendly. For example when he use to examine my
neck he would run
his fingers through my hair, not in an effort to pull my hair back but more
affectionate.
9. I also recall when he would feel my spine to identify tender spots he
would put his hand underneath my shirt and touch my skin.
I had not experienced
this before with other chiropractors. Paul would not explain what he was doing
or ask if I was comfortable
with it. He was very matter of fact which led me to
believe that this was an appropriate way to examine despite how uncomfortable
made me feel.
10. During these consultations, Paul would chat to me about my family and
my children. Once my younger sister Patient C began seeing
him I noticed these
conversations shifted to be more about her, like how old she was and what were
the age of her children. He would
comment about what good shape we were in and
that we must have had good genes. At the time I just thought these comments were
complimentary
and did not think much of it.
11. Over the years I saw Paul sporadically. If there were issues with my
neck I would see him more regularly.
12. I believe it was around September/October last year I had attended the
clinic for an appointment. When it was over and it was
time for me to leave,
Paul stood at the door with his arm across it which stopped me from being able
to open the door. Paul said
to me, “People always think I am older then I
am. How old do you think I am?” I said, “I don’t know,
With that he put his arms around me and embraced me. He said,
“I love you, I’m 34.” I was taken aback by this gesture
thought it odd for a professional man to act that way. He was overly friendly.
13. I believe it was December 2009 I was at lunch in Narrabri with a group
of friends. One of my friends Patient E was about to cancel
an appointment with
Paul but as my neck was playing up I asked if I could take the appointment
instead. This appointment was around
14. At this appointment Paul was feeling the muscles in my neck and I
asked him, ‘Why is my neck giving me so much trouble?’
Paul put his
hands underneath my shirt and grabbed my bra strap pulling it up and down. He
said, ‘Are these implants?’
I said, ‘Yes.’ He said,
‘I have never felt implants before.’
15. At this point I had been lying down and Paul had been behind me
feeling my neck. He moved around to the side of the table and
said, ‘Maybe
it is the weight in these that are the problem.’
16. Paul then began to start feeling and squeezing my breasts on top of my
clothing. He was moving his hands around and giving them
a good squeeze. It
lasted perhaps 20 seconds.
17. There was no conversation around this and no explanation as to what he
was doing. I was feeling very uncomfortable but thought
perhaps he had to feel
my breasts to determine their weight and if they were the cause of my neck
18. I was kind of in shock and not sure if I was over reacting to what
just happened but I knew that it just did not feel right.
19. I have had my implants for 11 years and have never been examined by a
chiropractor in that way and it has never been suggested
to me that they may
cause such a problem. I am a 12D in a bra size and for my frame they are not
overly large.
20. Following this incident I never went back to Paul Woods because I was
scared about being alone in that room with him again.
21. Following this incident I was too embarrassed to tell anyone about
this. I thought people might question why I didn’t move
and walk away. I
remember sitting in my car afterwards and feeling quite sick about it.
22. I recall a conversation some time before this with my sister Patient C
23. I remember Patient C telling me about a back stretch he did with her
where she could feel his penis in her back and that this
had made her feel
uncomfortable.
24. Following this conversation I spoke to my daughter patient B and she
told me about an incident where he had pulled down the front
of her pants to
look at a tattoo she had on her lower abdomen.
26. I remember
[Patient C]
showing me a text message from Paul and
I had a conversation with her about how this conduct was wrong. I began
considering making
a complaint.
28. This experience has made me wary, especially being alone in a room
with a male, I believed a chiropractor was a professional and
somewhere you
would be safe. I feel angry that Paul Woods did something to my daughter and my
Tribunal received a copy of the clinical notes for Patient A and the Respondent
provided the original thereof during the Inquiry.
A gave oral evidence on the first day of the Inquiry. In her oral evidence
Patient A agreed that she had not disclosed the
breast augmentation operation
(which had occurred in 1998) on the patient information card she filled out for
the Respondent as she
considered that this was very personal information that
she did not want anyone to know. Otherwise, the information she had provided
the Respondent was accurate (T7).
A gave evidence that she had difficulty with dates generally (T10) and would
accept without hesitation that Ms J commenced
working as the Respondent’s
receptionist three year earlier than she had recalled in her statement
A confirmed that she had felt comfortable allowing the Respondent to commence
treating her daughter (T14) and she considered
him to be a competent
chiropractor (T15).
A gave evidence that the Respondent had a ‘matter of fact’ manner
when it came to performing the treatment. She
stated that the Respondent did not
‘explain things’ (T16). Patient A stated that she felt
‘uncomfortable’
when the Respondent touched her spine or back but
did not tell anyone (including the Respondent) as she thought he was a
professional
and knew what he was doing.
A gave evidence that the appointment when the Respondent touched her breast was
an appointment she had swapped with her friend
and the last occasion on which
she consulted the Respondent (T18). This occurred in November 2009. Patient A
gave evidence that the
Respondent had led up to this incident by becoming more
familiar with her. This had included a conversation in October 2009 about
Respondent’s age and the Respondent had given her a hug around her
shoulders and said
‘I love you. I’m 34
’ when Patient A
had indicated she estimated a younger age (T23-26). She had not discussed the
incident with many people as
she was embarrassed by it (T21). Patient A stated
that she had blamed herself for the incident on the basis that she thought the
Respondent had received the wrong message from her. It was only when her sister
(Patient C) raised the text message she had received
from the Respondent that
Patient A had told her sister about this incident (T23). Later in her evidence
Patient A stated that she
thought it was around Christmas 2009 that she had a
conversation with her sister (Patient C) wherein she stated that the Respondent
had made her feel uncomfortable.
A stated that the first occasion that she told the Respondent about her breast
augmentation was the day on which he touched
her breasts. The Respondent said
something like ‘
It might be the weight of these that’s the
Patient A gave firm evidence that the Respondent did not ask
her to sit up so he could show her something (T27). Patient A stated
Respondent had squeezed her breasts on top of her clothing but had reached into
her blouse to grab hold of the bra straps
(T28). Patient A agreed in
cross-examination that the conduct of the Respondent was a sexual assault and
that she had not told anyone
‘a couple of days or a week after’
‘possibly a
week or two weeks’
after, but had not informed the HCCC that she had
told her husband (T29 & 31).
A stated that she did not allow her daughter (Patient B) to attend the
Respondent after he had squeezed her breasts (T33)
and the Tribunal notes that
the last appointment recorded for Patient B is 24 November 2009.
Patient A was able to say that she had had two or three discussions with her
sister about the complaints regarding the Respondent
and recalled that her
daughter was present on occasions, Patient A was unable to provide dates on
which these discussions occurred
A gave evidence that the first occasion on which she spoke to her daughter about
the concerns she had regarding the Respondent
was after the incident when the
Respondent touched her breasts and after Patient C told her about the text
message she had received
from the Respondent (Patient A indicated that she
assumed the text message was sometime in May 2012). Patient A also stated that
Patient B had told her immediately after the Respondent had examined the lump
under her arm that she had felt uncomfortable about
him having his hand inside
her clothing and under her armpit and that his hand
her breast. Patient A stated that she did not think this was a problem at the
time and provided reassurance to Patient B (June 2004).
Patient A agreed with
the proposition that the Respondent’s hand may just have brushed past
Patient B’s breast on the
way to feeling the lump under her arm. Patient A
also confirmed that she allowed her daughter (Patient B) to see the Respondent
herself subsequent to this incident (T35-37).
A was able to say that the first time she spoke to Patient C regarding her
concerns about the Respondent was when they were
on holidays together on the
South Coast. She further recalled that the first occasion that Patient B was
involved in any discussion
of this nature was at her home (i.e. Patient
A’s home). Patient A was unable to provide dates for these discussions.
A stated that the conversations were about the text message sent to
Patient C by the Respondent. Patient A stated that there was
no agreement
between them to make complaints regarding the Respondent (T39).
A gave evidence that she usually had upper neck and thoracic pain when she
presented to the Respondent for treatment and the
last two appointments were as
a result of her suffering from pain (T40). Patient A denied that the last two
appointments were ‘simple
straightforward adjustments’. There was
further extensive cross-examination of Patient A regarding when she may have
appointments with her friend or her husband, when she made future
appointments and the presenting clinical issue for each appointment.
evidence given by Patient A was consistent but did not take the evidence much
further than detailed in her statement.
B is the daughter of Patient A. Patient B also provided a handwritten complaint.
This complaint was dated 7 July 2010 (exhibit
7) on a printed pro forma document
providing brief information in answer to the questions
‘Where did things go wrong?’
‘Why are you making this complaint?’
. This handwritten
statement included the following statement:
Whilst at the chiropractors I told Paul I was going to see a specialist
shirt and started
feeling under my arm and around the area. I felt uncomfortable. On another
occasion in 2008 I was laying down on
my back, Paul had lifted my shirt up to my
ribs, he noticed a tattoo on my lower abdominal area, he pulled the front of my
down to look at my tattoo without permission.
more formal statement was provided by Patient B to the HCCC on 4 November 2010
(exhibit 8). This statement recorded that Patient
B was then 22 years of age and
made reference to the handwritten complaint.
substance of the formal statement reads:
4. I first began seeing
Chiropractor Paul Woods during 2003 I went to him as my mum and dad had both
been to him for treatment. At
this time I was suffering from lower back pain and
I was 17 years old and still in high school.
5. Over this time I had a few consultations with Paul. I remember of one
of these occasions I told him I had a swollen lymph node
under my right arm.
After I told him this, he reached under my shirt and underneath my bra and was
feeling around this area. His
hand was rubbing on the side of my breast as he
rubbed the lump.
6. At this time I thought it was a little weird that he didn’t ask
me if he could touch it or what he was doing. But I just
thought as he was the
Chiropractor he knew what he was doing. I dismissed it and never told anyone.
7. I would say that over a period of a year I would see Paul Woods
reasonable regularly, maybe once every two months.
8. I found him to be appropriate and there was nothing that really
bothered me about these consultations.
9. I recall when I was aged 19 I went for an appointment at Paul’s
clinic which is situated upon Dewhurst Street Narrabri.
10. I was still experiencing lower back pain and Paul was attempting to
adjust my hips. At this time I was lying on the table and
I was wearing jeans
and a t-shirt.
11. I recall Paul lifted my shirt, which he had done before, but in doing
so he noticed the top of my tattoo.
12. I have a tattoo of a butterfly and it’s situated on my lower
abdomen, quite low underneath my underwear line.
13. I recall Paul started laughing saying he thought it was a spider. He
then pulled my jeans and underwear down to the top of my
leg to have a look at
the tattoo and said something like, ‘Oh that’s nice.’
14. I didn’t give him permission to pull my jeans and underwear down
and it made me feel quite uncomfortable and embarrassed.
15. I never told anyone about what happened. I don’t think I ever
went back to Paul after this.
19. I first told my mum about my experience with Paul Woods after she told
me he had done something to my aunty
[Patient C]
. Mum also told me about
what had happened to her.
Tribunal received a copy of the clinical notes for Patient B (exhibit 9) and the
Respondent provided the original thereof during
the Inquiry. In his oral
evidence the Respondent stated that the record made in the
‘treatment’ column of Patient B’s
clinical notes for 7 June
2004 reads/should be interpreted as reading (note that the Respondent provided
guidance as to how to interpret
his clinical note on page 13 of exhibit 23 as
well as in his oral evidence):
Mass left axilla
1° (Primary thought) Swollen
Size of marble
her oral evidence Patient B clarified that when she referred to jeans in
paragraph 10 of her statement dated 4 November 2010 she
was referring to
‘jeggings’.
B was cross examined about the incident when the Respondent put his hand inside
her shirt. Patient B’s account remained
consistent with the evidence given
in her statement. Additional information elicited included Patient B’s
evidence that the
lump was in the part of her arm pit that was closer to her arm
than her breast (T69) and that the top of her tattoo is over her ‘bikini
line’ (T70).
B confirmed that she had the tattoo applied in July 2006 when she turned 18
B’s evidence as to what year the examination of the lump under her arm
occurred was uncertain. She stated she could
not remember which year it was and
was willing to accept that it was 2004. She was clear that it had been in winter
and that the
lump was under her right arm (T73-74). Patient B was certain that
she was in the examination room without her mother when this incident
(T74). The Tribunal notes that at this time Patient B was 15 years of age.
B was cross-examined about why she had not mentioned the Respondent touching her
breast in her first statement (being the
handwritten statement). Patient B also
agreed that she had not informed her mother about this incident after the
consultation and
she accepted that she had not done so and stated that she
thought that
‘maybe it’s just me overreacting’
B agreed that she had not recorded this incident until some six years after it
occurred. Patient B stated that as far as her
recollection of the incident
‘some moments are a bit hazy but other moments I remember quite
(T76). She clearly remembered the Respondent putting his hand
inside her shirt. She also remembered that the Respondent had not asked
put her finger on the place where the lump was located. In answer to questions
from the Tribunal Patient B gave a detailed
account of this interaction adding
that the Respondent only spoke to her about it after he had felt the lump (T96).
B agreed that the date the psoas stretch incident (refer to Particulars 5 and 6
of the Complaint) occurred was February 2007
and that her handwritten statement
recording it as occurring in 2008 was incorrect. Patient B was cross-examined
15 in her typed statement – specifically about the
‘I don’t think I ever went back to Paul after
It was put to Patient B that she returned on nine occasions
after this incident. Patient B stated that her evidence was she couldn’t
remember if she did or she didn’t. She hadn’t raised it with anyone
because she thought she was overreacting as no one
else had brought up any
issues with the Respondent so she thought it was just her (T81).
Patient B was unable to provide the date on which she told her mother and aunt
cross-examination. She was however
able to say that this occurred after her aunt (Patient C) informed her mother
that the Respondent had sent and the Respondent’s
inappropriate conduct towards her (T86). Since that time she had spoken to
aunt directly about the issues when it came up in conversation but they had
never sat down just to talk about the issues relating
to the Respondent (T87).
B stated that after she had informed her mother about the Respondent’s
conduct towards her and expressed the view that
she may have just been
overreacting her mother said to her that she was not overreacting and disclosed
that something like that had
happened to her as the Respondent had
‘grabbed’ her breasts (T88). Patient B stated that her mother was
very uncomfortable
talking about it and did not go into much detail.
B stated that she would not have gone back to see the Respondent after her
mother had told her about the Respondent’s
conduct but was unable to fix
the time that this occurred (T89).
B described the clothing she was wearing as ‘jeggings’ and indicated
that these were at hip level with her underwear
line below that.
Tribunal also received copies of clinical notes relating the surgical removal of
a lump from Patient B’s
axilla in mid-2004 (exhibits 28 and
C is the sister of Patient A. Patient C also provided a handwritten complaint.
This complaint was dated 8 July 2010 (exhibit
10) on a printed pro forma
document providing brief information in answer to the questions
‘Where did things go wrong?’
‘Why are you making this complaint?’
more formal statement was provided by Patient C to the HCCC on 4 November 2010
(exhibit 11). This statement recorded that Patient
B was then 44 years of age
and made reference to the handwritten complaint.
substance of this statement is as follows:
4. I’m unsure of
the exact date but I first saw Chiropractor Paul Woods during winter 2009. His
clinic is situated at 24 Dewhurst
Street Narrabri. I went and saw him because I
was having trouble with my neck and shoulders. I went and saw Paul because my
patient A and her husband Mr A had been to see him and were happy with
his service.
5. I recall seeing Paul Woods for my first appointment during a weekday. I
recall nothing adverse from this consultation and I found
him to be a very good
chiropractor.
6. After this consultation Paul asked me to come back for a further
appointment. I believe I returned about two weeks later. I recall
commenting that he found me more relaxed during this appointment and that I was
quite tense the first time.
7. I believed the nature of these examinations were appropriate for my
injury. He would adjust my neck, check my pelvis was aligned
and stretch my
shoulder. I did not feel uncomfortable with any of this treatment.
8. I am unsure how long after this was my third and fourth appointment. I
believe it was a little longer, perhaps a month a part.
It was around these
appointments I began to feel uncomfortable with comments he made.
9. Paul would say things like, “You look good for your age.”
Or “You have kept yourself in really good shape.”
On one occasion he
said to me, “Don’t change anything about yourself. You look great
just the way you are.”
10. These comments began to make me feel uncomfortable. I guess I just
felt they were unnecessary to the consultation. I don’t
believe they were
appropriate in the context in which I was seeing him.
11. I found around this time Paul was becoming over familiar with me and I
began to feel increasingly uncomfortable. I found that
he was a very touchy
person. He would squeeze my shoulder as part of his greeting and rub my arm. I
started to find his hands were
lingering. I was not use
medical professional being so over familiar.
12. I was feeling increasingly uncomfortable but I did begin to doubt
myself. I thought I was over reacting and being too sensitive.
I reasoned with
myself that he was a Chiropractor and that of course he had to touch me.
13. I remember around this time I had a conversation with my sister
Patient A and I asked her if she ever felt uncomfortable around
Paul. She agreed
that she did. This was mainly in the context of he was too touchy and feely.
14. I remember around November I was at an appointment with Paul. I was
telling him about an elder woman that I had met in Moree that
commented that she
had been to see him and how good he was. I told him she had said something like
“If only I was younger”
and was wondering if he was married. I was
making small talk with him as I often did when I was nervous. I recall him
saying to me,
“I would be really excited if I knew you said that about
me.” I thought this comment was an inappropriate response to
conversation I was having with him.
15. I think I may have had four or five appointments up until December
2009. I was only seeing Paul at this time when my neck would
become quite bad.
16. I believe between November 2009 and February 2010 I did not see Paul
at all. It was around this time I had a further appointment
with him for my neck
and lower back pain.
17. My husband Mr C saw Paul late December for a back injury. On the
February 2010 he was due to go back for a follow up
appointment.
18. I had a conversation with my husband about how I felt around Paul. I
told him I would be more comfortable having an appointment
19. At this appointment I let my husband be treated first. I noticed Paul
looking over at me on several occasions, at one point saying,
have to warn Patient C how healthy you.” It was the way he said this and
looked at me that made me feel uncomfortable.
20. He treated me after my husband, with my husband present in the room.
Nothing adverse happened during this appointment and my husband
dismissed my
concerns saying he found nothing untoward about Paul’s behaviour.
21. On the 3
of May 2010 I had a further appointment with
Paul as my neck was really sore. When I first walked in Paul said to me,
did you feel after your last visit?”. I said “It was ok
for a week but it didn’t last long.” Paul said, “I
didn’t feel like I did a good job. I should have text you to make sure you
were ok. I have to do a good job so that you keep
coming back.”
22. I found this comment odd but nonetheless continued with the
consultation. I felt uncomfortable again but tried to dismiss it thinking
that is just the way he is.
23. I left the appointment and was on my way home to Moree. About an hour
into my journey I received a text message from mobile no.
XXXXXXX275. I did not
know this number and I did not store this message but to the best of my
recollection it said, ‘I hope
this treatment work was better for you.
Paul’ Or words to that effect.
24. I texted him back and I said something like ‘It feels much
better. It is nice to be able to turn my head. Thanks’
25. This was the first time Paul had texted me following a consultation. I
did not think anything of it as we had had the conversation
earlier about how he
felt he should have texted me to check on me.
26. About 6.00pm I received another text message from the same number.
This message is also deleted but it said words to the effect
of ‘So glad
this treatment worked for you. I get so nervous when I treat you. It helps to
know it worked. ☺”
27. I wondered why he would text me in the evening. I was at home and I
felt it pushed the boundary. I showed the message to my friend
C’s friend]
the next day and we had a conversation about it. She said
to me that she felt there was nothing in the message that you could read
28. I made an appointment to return on the 31
almost didn’t go but I thought I am only in there for 10 minutes and then
I get relief from the pain.
29. During this consultation I was lying on my back and Paul was doing an
adjustment on my neck. Paul was standing behind me. Quite
often when he does
this adjustment he tells me my muscles are quite tight. Paul was rubbing my neck
to release the tension. He leant
down and whispered in my ear, “Of all the
patients I have and I have hundreds, no one makes me feel the way you do. You
my heart race. I am not only attracted to you physically but I am attracted
to your personality as well. I have never had this happen
to me before.” I
don’t remember replying to this.
30. He then said “Oh I’ve made you tense” and he began
to rub my arm. Paul then went around to the other end of
the table to stretch
the muscle from my hip to my stomach. This stretch involved lying on your back
with your knees up with one leg
crossed over the other. He would then put
pressure on this leg. I have had this stretch before with him but this time it
it was taking longer, like he was deliberately trying to draw out the
stretch to get my response.
31. Around this time I felt Paul was becoming increasingly irritated. Like
he was annoyed this his advances were going unanswered.
32. Following this we did a back stretch that would involve me standing
with my hand behind my head. He would stand behind me and
loop his arms through
mine and stretch my back. I have done this stretch with him before but on this
occasion as I leant back into
the stretch I believe I felt his penis on my back.
I wondered whether this was because I was hypervigilant given his comments or
whether it actually did happen. I felt he was too close to me. His penis did not
feel erect.
33. Following this stretch I went to leave the consultation room. The door
was closed and Paul was leaning across the door in effect
preventing me from
leaving. I managed to open the door and said goodbye before leaving the room.
34. It was about 12.00pm when I left and went to my parent’s house
for lunch which is out of town. My sister Patient A was there.
received a text message from Paul Woods, which I stored. This message read,
‘I hope you took my comments as
a compliment and that you are not
offended. I just haven’t had that happen to me before. I can’t help
it when your sooooo
god damn sexy and gorgeous. I personally rate you the
perfect woman. I mean that and I have never said that to anyone before in my
life. I’m so jealous of your husband and hope he knows how lucky he is.
P.S. I just had to get that off my chest..:)
35. I showed my sister and she told me to store the message. I did not
respond to this message. I have never been back to Paul Woods
36. It was a couple weeks after this
[Patient A]
told me she was
going to make a complaint about Paul Wood’s conduct over something he had
done to her. She told me she had
whether I would be willing to make a complaint as well. This was the first time
A] told me something had happened to her.
37. [Patient A] told me that she had not told anyone else this prior to
her he had touched
her breasts.
38. My mobile phone number is XXXXXXX432. My carrier is Telstra. I have
had this phone number for at least two years. I am willing
to have my phone
forensically examined if necessary.
39. On this date I provided my phone to HCCC Investigator Alison Brazel
who photographed the text message I received from Paul Woods.
40. For a long time I doubted my intuition regarding the improper conduct
of Paul Woods. This text message proved to me I was not
imagining the behaviour
of Paul Woods and I strongly feel it was professionally inappropriate conduct.
Tribunal received a copy of the clinical notes for Patient C (exhibit 14) and
the Respondent provided the original thereof during
the Inquiry. The clinical
notes record that Patient C was on the medication Aropax.
C gave evidence before the Tribunal on the second day of the Inquiry. Patient C
gave evidence that at the time she commenced
attending the Respondent’s
practice she was aware that Mr A had consulted the Respondent but did not know
at that time that
Patient A and Patient B were also receiving treatment from the
Respondent (T114/116).
C gave evidence that she recalled the first time she had a conversation with
Patient A regarding the Respondent they were
away with their husbands on
holidays. After riding motor bikes together Patient A mentioned that her neck
was sore and the conversation
turned to the Respondent. Patient C asked Patient
A if she ever felt uncomfortable with the Respondent and Patient A had replied
that she did at times (T117).
C confirmed that she had told her husband that she felt
‘uncomfortable’ with the Respondent and that she was not
whether it was her or the Respondent when she asked her husband to accompany her
to the consultation with the Respondent (T118).
Patient C stated that she was
not sure to trust her intuition or whether she was just being overly sensitive.
Patient C also gave
evidence that not only did she think that she may have been
overly sensitive but had also thought that it was possible that the Respondent
‘more of a touchy person’
her evidence she stated that she expected physical contact such as a squeeze of
the shoulder or a rub of an arm as a greeting
from her friends but not from her
chiropractor (T128).
the consultation when her husband attended, her husband told her that he thought
she was being overly sensitive and that of
course a chiropractor had to touch
her during the consultation (T121). After this consultation Patient C told
Patient A what her
husband had said and Patient A had responded that sometimes
men didn’t pick up on these things like women do.
C stated that she had not raised her concerns with the receptionist because she
was the receptionist who worked at the front
desk and she did the book work.
Patient C gave evidence that she did not consider the receptionist was going to
tell the chiropractor
what to do as he was her boss (T130).
C denied that she was a person who complained from time to time about her
appearance or that she was concerned about her appearance
but said she possibly
was a bit hard on herself from time to time in terms of her appearance
(T142/143). She denied that she expressed
this to the Respondent.
Cross-examination returned to this topic at T156 and Patient C maintained her
denials of conversations of
this nature.
C had shown the text message that included the comment ‘so nervous’
in it to a friend. This had occurred when
they were both travelling in the back
of a car to a nearby town to go out for dinner (T147). Her friend expressed the
view that there
was nothing that could be read from the message. Patient C was
not completely reassured by this but trusted her friend (T144). Patient
showed the message to her husband who said he thought it was a little unusual
but did not read anything into it. Patient C
also spoke to Patient A about the
respect to the conduct detailed in Particular 7(i) Patient C confirmed that the
Respondent had leant down and whispered in her
ear while she was receiving
treatment. Patient C stated that the words she had recorded in her statement
were completely correct
as she remembered them clearly (T149). Patient C told
her husband what was said to her by the Respondent when she arrived home that
night. By this time she had received the text message from the Respondent. The
text message arrived not long after she arrived at
her parents’ home.
Patient A was also there and Patient C showed Patient A the text message and
told her what he had said to
her during the treatment session.
care taken by Patient C with respect to giving an accurate account of events is
illustrated by the following section of cross-examination
(T149-151):
Q. You say in your statement that on 31 May
during the course of Mr Woods performing a treatment or an adjustment on
your neck, he
leant down and whispered in your ear?
Q. In your statement, that suggestion that he leant down and whispered in
your ear is not related to any particular conversation at
A. No conversation at all.
Q. He's there performing a treatment on you?
Q. Nothing that you can recall you say he leant down and whispered these
words into your ear?
Q. Did you immediately stand up and leave the treatment?
Q. Did you complain to the receptionist?
Q. Did you complain to Mr Woods?
Q. None of those things?
Q. I suggest that your statement that those words were said is just
incorrect isn't it?
A. They are completely correct.
Q. Completely correct, are they?
A. I remember them clearly.
Q. Word for word
A. Yes I do.
Q. Every single last word of it you remember clearly do you?
Q. Did you make a note of it?
Q. Did you tell your husband about it, having left the treatment
A. Not until I arrived home that night.
Q. You didn't telephone him and say what had happened?
A. No I didn't.
Q. Did you ring your sister and tell her?
A. No I didn't.
Q. You say you went home that night do you?
Q. Spoke to your husband?
Q. Was that after you received the text message?
Q. After the treatment, where did you go?
A. I went to my parents' house.
Q. Which is where your sister was, is that right?
A. Yes, out of town. She was there too.
Q. Just coincidentally she was there?
Q. Did you tell her?
Q. You have been having concerns you say about Mr Woods for almost a
year now, is that right?
Q. You say he leant down and whispered these words in your ear, is that
Q. Confirming, it would seem, all of these concerns that you've been
harbouring over a period of about 12 months, is that right?
Q. You don't tell your sister about it?
A. No, because not long after arriving there I received a text message
and I showed her the text message and then I told her what
he had said.
Q. Why didn't you tell her beforehand? Here it was, according to your
evidence, confirmation that this chiropractor was behaving
inappropriately according to you and you don't do anything
with, about this very subject matter?
A. Because I was there with my parents and then she arrived, and I wasn't
going to bring it up in front of my parents.
Q. Because?
A. Because I didn't want to tell them.
Q. You have indicated earlier that you went to this session because of
complaints about your neck and shoulder, is that right?
Q. You say nothing about any concerns that you may have had in relation
to your hip, is that right?
A. No, I probably don't say that but I often did have lower back pain so
it was par for the course.
Q. Well it's not probably; you didn't say you attended because you had
any concerns with your hip.
A. Okay, obviously I don't recall saying that.
Q. I asked you a moment ago and you said you had concerns about your neck
and your right shoulder, right?
Q. Nothing else.
Q. I suggest that there was no hip stretch performed on you that
particular day as you assert.
A. Well you're wrong. There was.
Q. That's a stretch that you say you've had applied on other occasions,
is that right?
Q. You say in your statement, "On this occasion I felt it was taking
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. I felt that the whole consultation was being drawn out.
Q. Well I'm asking you about this particular stretch, the hip stretch.
You say it was taking longer?
Q. How long did it take?
A. Longer than usual.
few weeks after she showed her sister the text message from the Respondent
Patient C received a telephone call from Patient A. During
that call Patient A
disclosed that the Respondent had put his hands on her breasts and that this had
made her feel shaken and nauseous.
Patient C said that Patient A had told her
when this had occurred and recalled Patient A said it was in December 2009.
recalled that Patient A said it was an appointment that it was a last
minute appointment that a friend of hers had cancelled and
Patient A had rung
and secured the appointment. Patient C stated that Patient A had not told her
that this occurred in February 2009
(i.e. at a time before Patient C had
commenced receiving treatment from the Respondent) (T158).
C gave evidence that the text message was a pivotal shift in her attitude
towards the Respondent. Until that time she had
resigned herself to the fact
that the Respondent was a
sort of person
re-examination Patient C stated that the part of the first text message that she
thought was particularly unusual was the part
nervous when I treat you’
answer to questions from the Tribunal Patient C stated that she felt that during
the adjustment on the last occasion the Respondent
pulled her closer to him. She
felt something on the lower right side of her back during this adjustment. After
extensive questioning
Patient C stated that she was 95% certain that what she
felt was the Respondent’s penis. Patient C described the usual manner
which this adjustment was performed where contact between her and the Respondent
was at the Respondent’s chest level and
the Respondent dragged her
backwards with her heels moving backwards across the floor. This contrasted with
the last occasion when
the Respondent performed this adjustment as by the end of
the adjustment the Respondent
‘ended up being completely behind me,
with contact’
(T169). In this final position Patient C gave evidence
that she believed she could
‘feel mostly his right hip but everything
from his pelvis’
part of which she believed was his penis. She had
not felt this before and she gave evidence that it felt like a penis. She was
to say it did not feel like a belt and it was something other than the firm
feeling of a hip (T170).
D lodged an initial Notification via the AHPRA on line service on 9 July 2010
(exhibit 3). The brief description of the incident
Chiropractor removed clothing and proceeded to
inappropriately touch around my chest. After the appointment he sent two
sexually implicit
text messages and attempted to call three times.
D then made a brief statement on the telephone to the HCCC on 2 September 2010
(exhibit 15).
more formal statement was provided by Patient D to the HCCC on 4 November 2010
(exhibit 16). This statement read as follows:
2. I am 20 years of age
3. I am unsure of the exact dates but following an appointment with Paul
Woods on the 21 April 2010 my mother made a complaint to
the Chiropractic
Council about the conduct of Paul Woods during my consultation. Subsequently I
was spoken to via the telephone by
representatives of the Chiropractic Council
prior to this date.
4. I first saw Paul Woods at his Chiropractic clinic which is at 24
Dewhurst Street Narrabri. My aunty had been to see him a few times
recommended him. I was suffering from back problems.
5. I remember at my first consultation he said to me comments like,
“You shouldn’t be a horse rider you should be a model’.
honest I wasn’t really paying much mind to the comments because I believed
I was in a safe environment.
6. I might have two or three appointments between this first consultation
. The comments continued along the line of, “You have a really
fit body.” Again I didn’t think much of them at the
7. During these appointments I would remain clothed and I felt in general
the manipulations and stretches were appropriate.
8. There was one stretch however that I felt uncomfortable with. This was
meant to be a manipulation for around the back of my shoulders.
I would stand
with my hands across my chest and I would lean back on Paul who would be
standing behind me. His arms would be around
the front of me. This particular
exercise made me feel uncomfortable as I felt it was in my personal space. I
also could feel Paul’s
pelvic area on my back.
9. On the 21 April 2010 I had a further consultation with Paul Woods. At
this time I told him that I was experiencing chest pains
which were unexplained.
Paul asked me to lie on the table and remove my t-shirt. He then asked me to
pull down my bra all the way
down so my breasts were fully exposed.
10. At first Paul was feeling around and on my breasts. He had a flat palm
and was putting pressure on my breasts. This continues
for about three or four
minutes. He didn’t explain to me what he was doing and was just talking
11. When Paul was actually doing the manipulation he was putting more
pressure on my upper chest and not near my breasts. This caused
me to wonder why
he had touched my breasts.
12. I left the clinic and returned home. About an hour after I left I
received a text message from mobile telephone number XXXXXXX275.
I did not know
at the time who it was from. The message read, ‘How is your treatment
going? I hope your not too sore because
I had to do so much. You had a BIG
effect like I’ve never had in practice before. I’m still in a spin
over you. Sorry
to be so forward and if you can keep this between us it would be
much appreciated. Cheers p.s I don’t even know why I’m
sending you
13. I had to read the message a few times before I figured out it had come
from Paul Woods. He had never texted me before following
a consultation.
14. This message made me feel very, very uncomfortable and I felt sick. I
showed my sister [omitted] the message and I told her about
the nature of the
chest manipulation and she told me that she had never experienced that before.
15. I did not reply to this message. About two hours later I received a
further message from the same mobile number. This one said,
haven’t offended you at all.’
16. I did not respond to this message. Around 5pm on this date I received
an incoming call from a landline I recognised belonging
to the Chiropractic
clinic at Narrabri. Following this I received a further three phone calls from
the same mobile number. This was
over the evening within a three hour period. I
did not answer these calls and no message was left.
17. Apart from this there has been no further contact and I have not been
21. I found this experience very upsetting because I believed I was in a
safe environment with a professional. I would never see a
male chiropractor
again and certainly not by myself.
photocopy of the text messages sent by the Respondent on 21 April 2010 reads as
follows (exhibit 18 – as written):
How is your treatment
going? I hope your not to sore because I had to do so much. You had a BIG effect
on me like Ive never had in
practice before Im still in a spin over you. Sorry
to be so forward and if you can keep this between us would be much appreciated.
Cheers ps I don’t even know why Im sending this X
...............
I hope I havent offended you at all.
D was asked to respond to the Respondent’s assertion that the first text
message was in part referring to a conversation
had with Patient D regarding the
possibility of purchasing a horse from her for his daughter. Patient D provided
the following additional
statement (exhibit 19):
4. My current
occupation is a Horse Trainer. Throughout the course of my consultations with
Paul Woods I had disclosed this to him
to assist him with the treatment of my
complaints.
5. I have never had a conversation with Paul Woods about a surprise
purchase of a horse for his daughter. I was unaware he even had
a daughter.
Further I don’t train horses appropriate for children to ride. This
conversation never took place.
6. I have never received a call from the receptionist of Paul Woods
following any of my appointments. There would have been no reason
receptionist to contact me following my appointment with Paul Woods on the 21
April 2010.
D also gave oral evidence on the second day of the Inquiry. During
cross-examination there was little of the Respondent’s
account of the
consultation when Patient D alleges that the Respondent touched her breasts that
Patient D accepted (T187 –
D stated that initially she thought that maybe the actions of the Respondent
were part of what was supposed to be done as
she had never had a rib adjustment
‘so as far as I knew that was the normal thing to be
D gave emphatic evidence that she did not interpret the text message from the
‘You had a big effect and ...etc’
as a reference
to how difficult the Respondent had found providing treatment to her (T192).
D stated that the ‘between us’ part of the message could not be
interpreted as relating to any conversation regarding
the Respondent’s
interest in the purchase of a horse as such a conversation did not occur (T193).
D gave evidence that the Respondent asked her to pull her bra down which she did
by unclipping it at the back and pulling
it down (T198). When this occurred
Patient D was not provided with a towel to cover herself or asked to cover her
breasts with her
answer to the questions from the Tribunal Patient D gave evidence that the
Respondent did not explain what he intended doing when
he was performing the
treatment (T198).
Tribunal received a copy of the clinical notes for Patient D (exhibit 21) and
the Respondent provided the original thereof during
the Inquiry.
D’s sister provided a statement dated 24 November 2010 (exhibit 20).
Patient D’s sister stated that she was with
her sister when she received a
text message from the Respondent. Patient D said to her after reading the text
‘Oh my god, read this’
. Patient D stated that she
thought the message must have come from the Respondent as no one else knew she
had had an appointment
with the chiropractor. Patient D then described to her
sister how the Respondent had asked her to remove her bra during the treatment.
Patient D’s sister observed that Patient D was upset
shocked and bewildered
’) by the text message. Patient D’s sister
was aware that a second text message from the Respondent came through later
that same day.
Evidence of Ms J (the Respondent’s
receptionist)
J gave evidence on 18 May 2012 (commencing at T435). She has worked as the
Respondent’s receptionist/chiropractic assistant
since 2004. When she
takes leave the Respondent’s wife fills her role.
J provided details regarding the hours and days the practice was open and her
role in running the practice. Ms J maintained the
waiting list, would mark the
patient’s record card if an appointment was cancelled or failed to attend.
J gave evidence that she would telephone patients from time to time on behalf of
the Respondent. Generally these telephone calls
related to making appointments.
J confirmed that patients in the same family would sometimes make their own
arrangements to swap appointments (T439). There was
lengthy examination in chief
regarding whether the business records for the practice could confirm whether
Patient A swapped the
appointment with a friend on 26 February 2009 or 26
November 2009.
J confirmed that there were two handsets (both portable handsets that looked
alike) for the one telephone line that came into the
practice. One of the
handsets was located on her office desk and the other was in the
Respondent’s treatment room. The Respondent
used the handset in his
treatment room at times. At some point an additional telephone line was
installed to accommodate the fax
machine and the EFTPOS facility for HICAPS.
J stated that it was possible that she telephoned Patient D in the course of her
J stated that she had not received complaints from Patients A, C or D. She
stated that she hoped that after working for the Respondent
for so many years
that any patient would be able to come to her with
‘any discrepancy or
complaint or any type of that’
cross-examination Ms J stated that she was responsible for placing the date
stamp onto the cards of the patients. She usually
did this at least the day
ahead of the appointments. If an appointment was swapped she would generally
make a notation on the card
of the person who has given away the appointment but
not usually on the person now taking the appointment (T446). Ms J agreed that
times she may not have made a note on the card of the patient who had given away
(swapped) an appointment (T447).
J was taken to the appointment book for 26 February 2009. Ms J confirmed that
there had been a number of alterations made on that
page as evidenced by the
appearance of overwriting and erasing.
J stated that at the end of the day she would have a conversation with the
Respondent then ring patients about matters such as
re-scheduling appointments,
x-rays or reports that had to be returned to patients.
cross-examination Ms J stated that the Respondent had taken the portable
telephone handset off her desk and taken it elsewhere
in the practice.
for patients making complaints to her regarding the Respondent Ms J accepted
that some people would feel uncomfortable doing so.
Ms J stated that all she
could do about a complaint made to her by a patient would be to let the
Respondent know a complaint had
been made and then make sure she looked after
them as best as she could in her job (T450).
answer to questions from the Tribunal Ms J confirmed that she had observed the
Respondent making telephone calls from his office.
She had not seen him using
his mobile telephone for the purpose of these calls.
J confirmed that another reason she may have been asked to contact a patient was
to check on a person after a treatment. This only
occurred once every four to
six months. A record of these conversations was not made on the patient cards.
J also confirmed that the notations in the appointment book for 21 April 2010
indicated that the Respondent’s last appointment
was scheduled for 5.30
and that he was running about half to three quarters of an hour late.
re-examination Ms J confirmed that the patient record card for Patient A’s
friend indicated that she had made an appointment
for 26 February 2009 but that
she did not attend that appointment.
J confirmed that as far as she knew the telephone in the Respondent’s room
worked but she had not used it herself.
Evidence of Kiara
Woods gave evidence on 18 May 2012. Mrs Woods is married to the Respondent
(commencing at T461).
Woods was taken to her statement in the Respondent’s documentation folder.
cross-examination Mrs Woods stated that she recalled her husband telling her in
D regarding horses and at the
time they were trying to buy a horse for their daughter. At the time they had
been mostly looking online.
Eventually they made enquiries of friends who had
horses and a purchase was made via the internet in June or July 2010 with their
assistance. Later in cross-examination she stated that the search had been
exclusively on the internet prior to April 2010. Mrs Woods
explained that the
reason why the search had been restricted as they did not want local people to
know they were looking for a horse
and sell them ‘any sort of horse’
as they were looking for a particular kind of horse for their
Woods gave evidence that she had a distinct recollection of having the
discussion with her husband regarding Patient D as he told
her she had been
working with children and horses. She gave evidence that her husband told her
quite a lot about Patient D (T463).
Woods gave evidence that she saw the text message her husband sent to Patient D
when a fax arrived from the HCCC around the beginning
of October 2010.
Woods gave the following evidence regarding the manner in which the Respondent
sent her text messages (T465.3-466.30 – as
transcribed):
Q. Well, is there anything distinctive about the way he finishes his text
A. Not all the time, no.
Q. Well, some of the time?
Q. What's distinctive some of the time?
A. He'll sign it with three Xs to me and I do that, the same back to
Q. Always three?
Q. Not two or one?
A. Sometimes it'll be one.
Q. You take that X to mean a kiss?
Q. What does an X mean?
A. To him it means because I had to ask him what it
mean to him it means that he's finished the conversation or I'm
not I don't
necessarily need to text him back regarding what he's
spoken about in the text, if it's just one X.
Q. Well, what's it mean to you?
A. I don't sign mine like that, so
Q. Well, I thought you said that you will sometimes send it back to him
with three Xs?
A. With three Xs, yes. That means kisses.
Q. Right. And if he sends it to you with three Xs, that means
Q. If you send it to him with one X, that means a kiss?
A. No, I don't send it with one X, it's always three.
Q. Always three?
Q. Would you agree with me that an X, though, is recognised by a lot of
people, including yourself, as signifying a kiss?
A. Yes. Some people could take it that way.
Q. Indeed, you had to ask your husband why an X was being put on some of
his text messages?
Q. Did you have a view at some point that it was, in fact, a
A. No, because I always sign mine with three and I always
Q. I'm having a lot of trouble hearing you, I'm sorry
A. I always sign mine with three. So I always assumed that when he sent
three back that that's what that meant.
Q. Yes, but when he was sending you messages with just one X on them, you
said you had to ask him what it meant?
A. I question him what did he mean by that, yes.
Q. So prior to that, did you take it to mean that it was a kiss?
A. No. I didn't know what it meant. I didn't make any assumption as to
what it was.
Q. You say in your statement that you've read the texts referred to in
the allegations and that they are open to misinterpretation,
that you've
discussed this with Paul and he's very sorry?
CHAIRPERSON: The witness just nodded her head as a positive response to
both of those last questions.
Woods was then provided with a copy of the text sent by the Respondent to
Patient D. She confirmed her husband had told her the
text message related to
horses and she was not particularly concerned about the message. Mrs Woods
agreed that without having the
message explained that it could be open to
misinterpretation (T468).
Woods was then taken to the message sent to another patient on 31 May 2010
(Patient C). She stated that the Respondent had sought
her advice about the
message on that day (although he did not show it to her) and informed her that
he had upset the client, that
her demeanour towards him had changed and that she
had been dissatisfied and still in discomfort when she left the clinic. The
had given her a general idea as to what was in the text and she
advised him not to make any further contact with the patient as she
did not see
any need to do so. Mrs Woods stated she was a little taken aback when she read
the content of the text message after
the letter arrived from the HCCC. She
agreed that this message was open to misinterpretation. She had not discussed
the words ‘so
godamn sexy’ or anything else about 31 May 2010 with
her husband after reading the text because she believed he had told her
Telephone Records
Tribunal was provided with records regarding mobile telephones which confirm
various text messages were sent. These consisted
of records from the service
providers as well as photocopies of the text messages on the screens of the
telephones. This is not a
matter that was in dispute between the parties.
Rather, it was the interpretation that should be made of the messages that was
The Respondent’s evidence – Record
of Interview with the HCCC
Respondent attended an interview with the HCCC on 11 November 2010. A transcript
of this interview forms exhibit 23. The Respondent
stated that he considered he
had a very professional manner with Patient A which he characterised as being
the same as a doctor/client
relationship.
relation to the conversation alleged by Patient A to have occurred relating to
her breast augmentation the Respondent denied saying
to Patient A
these real of fake?’.
He went on to say that it did not occur in that
fashion, rather (page 9 – exhibit 23):
She was the one that raised the issue but, like I said, it goes back some
time when that occurred, and I even vaguely recall it wasn’t
she’d had had the augmentation done that she made comment about it and
then – yeah, I proceeded to explain
Respondent gave the following account of the conversation he had with Patient A
regarding her age (refer to Particular 1) at page
10 of the transcript (exhibit
BRAZEL: Can you tell me the details of that conversation?
WOODS: I can’t recall what she said specifically, but she prompted
that conversation by making a comment about age, and I said,
people”- like I was basically in agreement: “Yeah, people always
think I’m older than what I am.”
People always walk in the door,
surprised to see someone young, and just because of my upstanding reputation in
the community, people
always walk in expecting- and it’s common thing.
They always expect to see a grey-haired old man.
BRAZEL: Do you recall anything further about that conversation?
WOODS: Yeah, she made the comment, “I don’t think you’re
that old. You’re a lot younger than”- she proceeded
to say how old
she thought I was, “I think you’re such and such, and you’re
younger than what I am,” and
I took great delight in her actually- someone
for once thinking I was younger that what everyone seems to indicate that I am.
BRAZEL: And how did you respond?
WOODS: Yeah, just held the elbow and said, “Thank you. I appreciate
your comment. It means a lot.”
BRAZEL: In that regard, she alleges that you embraced her.
WOODS: No, not at all.
BRAZEL: You hugged her.
WOODS: Not at all. Not at all. It was, like, a friendly gesture where- you
know, “Thanks for that.”
Respondent was then asked about Patient B’s report to the HCCC that she
had a swollen lymph node under her right arm. The
Respondent replied
‘Yeah, I’ve got that listed here’, being a reference to his
clinical notes. After reading the
clinical note that he made regarding this
matter he stated that after examining the lump he ‘distinctly’
remembered that
Patient B had said to him
‘Do you think this is
anything for me to worry about?’
and that he had responded by
indicating that she needed a referral (as recorded in the notes). The Respondent
stated that Patient
B brought up the issue of the lump and asked him to check it
as she said she was concerned about it (Particular 4).
Respondent was asked about Patient B’s evidence (as set out in Particular
5) during the HCCC interview (see around pages
14 and 15 of exhibit 23). After
stating that he did not recall having a conversation with Patient B or observing
her tattoo the Respondent
went on to say that it was possible that he may have
referred to the tattoo as a reference point for a psoas stretch he performed
i.e. used the tattoo to indicate to Patient B the position he would need to
place his hand on to effect the stretch. He then continued
I might have made a comment about the tattoo in relation to, yeah, the
adjustment. Look, I might have explained, “I thought
spider,” but the contact and what I was actually doing was totally related
to the psoas.
Respondent indicated that it was only the belt line that would have to be
exposed for the purpose of undertaking the psoas stretch.
(Particular
relation to Patient C the Respondent was asked about a conversation focused on
Patient C’s appearance that Patient C alleged
to have taken place during a
consultation (see from page 17 of exhibit 23). The Respondent indicated that he
did recall a conversation
along these lines indicating that he had found such
conversations were quite successful with patients and he thought encouraging
words were appropriate – particularly when the patient was exercising. The
Respondent stated that he had not picked up on anything
from Patient C that
evidenced she was feeling discomfort as a result of his comments. The Respondent
stated that he had observed
‘numerous people that show a level of
discomfort or a level of uncertainty by the fact that they stop talking or they
so in some way indicate either through gesture or through comment
Respondent confirmed that he recalled Patient C telling him of a comment made
to in a nearby town (refer
to paragraph 14 of Patient C’s statement). The Respondent stated that he
made no comment in response
to this comment but thought to himself that it was a
‘nice comment’
and took the compliment. The Respondent denied
that he said that he would be excited if it had been Patient C making such a
or made any comment in reply.
Respondent indicated he recalled the consultation that Patient C attended with
her husband, Mr C (likely to have been on 16 February
2010). The Respondent
agreed that during the next consultation that Patient C attended Patient C
stated that after the previous treatment
she had felt ok for about a week but
that it did not have a lasting effect. The Respondent agreed that he responded
to this comment
by saying that he did not feel he had done a ‘good
job’ and that he should have sent her a text to make sure she was
following question was then asked and answered:
BRAZEL: It is your usual practice to text patients to check up how
they’re feeling after consultations?
WOODS: Yeah, I have done so. Mostly to males, mostly to male friends. I
have, yeah, occasionally done it to see how they’re
going, and I remember
sending a text after that following one to ask had her headaches gone, or had
her headaches eased or something
like that, something to that effect.
Respondent agreed that after this consultation he had sent a simple message to
Patient C to the effect that he hoped that the
treatment had worked better on
this occasion to which Patient C responded that she was feeling much better, was
able to turn her
head and ended by saying thank you. The Respondent stated that
he felt he needed to send this text to Patient C as he had felt that
the comment
next matter put to the Respondent was the text message that ended in the smiley
face (see paragraph 26 of Patient C’s statement).
The Respondent agreed
that he had sent this message and he provided the following context for this
statement (at page 22 exhibit
WOODS: That was the context of me having relief that it had worked and the
fact that the seriousness of the nature of her upper cervical
problems are cause
for concern for me, and what prompted that and has prompted like events is when
I find something that is a serious
upper cervical problem – I had a case
back in 2002 or thereabouts that – Guild can confirm that- yeah, a case
and I was found innocent of that –like, an adjustment being
Tribunal notes at this point that this clinical matter is in not relevant to the
issues before this Tribunal.
Respondent elaborated on the reason why he wrote
‘I get so nervours
when I treat you’
in the text to Patient C as follows (see page 23 of
exhibit 23):
Yeah, in the sense that giving that upper cervical adjustment to –
like, the fragility of her neck. She’s got quite a
thin neck, and
I’ve got to really concentrate. It’s hard to adjust. The adjustment
before, it hadn’t worked, and
trying to get the neck right- and, yeah,
like, it makes me, like, have to really concentrate. Like, I suppose it’s
me justifying
the fact that the prior adjustment didn’t work, and it had
me nervous to try and get it right the next time. That’s where
nervousness is. And I suppose it is with other people with similar complaints.
Respondent was then asked questions regarding the consultation with Patient C on
31 May 2010 (Particular 7). The Respondent stated
that his clinical notes record
that he had treated a different area of Patient C’s neck on this occasion.
Rather than the problem
area being the upper neck it was lower down the
the HCCC interview the Respondent said that the comments alleged by Patient C to
have been said by the Respondent as set out
in Particular 7(i) had not been made
(see page 24 of exhibit 23). The Respondent stated that he was concentrating on
working on Patient
C’s neck and did not have time for such idle chatter.
text message set out in Particular 7(iii) was not denied by the Respondent
during the record of interview. The Respondent made
the following comments
during the interview regarding this text message (page 24 exhibit
What can you tell me about that text message?
WOODS: Yeah. I don’t deny that text, but in the context of prior
appointments she would always put herself down and make comments
not looking right. All those people that I’ve come across – and
I’ve had people that come across
like that – like, they’re
deliberately – sort of make a comment to put themselves down and, I
don’t know,
I feel obligated to try and lift their confidence.
BRAZEL: Do you think it’s appropriate to send “you are so
goddamn sexy and gorgeous”?
WOODS: No, and I will tell you, in the context of that, she put herself
down and made comment of how she –her wrinkles or something
like that, and
I said, “Don’t be so hard on yourself,” and she said,
“Well,” and I said, “Your
personality is so much more
important,” and she’s like, “Oh,” so she took offence to
that because I didn’t
specifically compliment her on her looks or
something along that line, and pretty much at the end of the treatment I felt
conversation sort of deteriorated to the point where she felt – I
don’t know, I felt as though I’d put her down.
Instead of trying to
build her confidence, I put her down, and I sent the text.
I told my wife about the text. She said- yeah, she didn’t like it,
and I’d realised what an absolute idiot I was at that
point, and I did try
to contact her to apologise that it could be taken out of context. Felt like a
real idiot by doing that, but
in no way was it a sexual come-on. It was all
totally complimentary. Like, I was trying to build her up because at this point,
the neck going wrong and the prior adjustment, the neck being difficult on
the second adjustment, yeah, and then making comments
that weren’t really
uplifting toward her, yeah, I felt as though I’d basically put her down,
as she came across as being
not very happy, actually, and that’s when I
sort of – afterwards, I thought, “Oh.”
It bothered me. It bothered me that she wasn’t happy with her
treatment or with how things – how the neck was going, like,
bad- yeah, she had headaches, she was still complaining of headaches and neck
trouble, and I suppose I was trying to restore,
like, her happiness, I suppose.
I was trying to restore her happiness to still be a client, being --
after this line of questioning the Respondent asked to have a break from the
HCCC interview process. After the interview resumed
the Respondent stated that
it was only after talking to his wife about the text message later that day that
he realised how it could
have been taken out of context. He was regretful for
‘being a male – silly male’
but the text was made in
the context of being concerned about Patient C’s perception of him and the
quality of his treatment/adjustments.
The Respondent stated that he had hoped by
paying Patient C
’a big compliment’
that he would get
and he was trying to improve the outcome of the
treatment he had provided to Patient C – it was part of his holistic
Later in the interview the Respondent stated that Patient C commented
on her appearance and self-doubt from the second consultation
and he was trying
to lift her sense of wellbeing (page 38 of exhibit 23).
Respondent was asked about his treatment of Patient D during the HCCC interview.
The Respondent stated that Patient D
‘was a horse trainer and breaks in
and this resulted in her having
‘a host of spinal
complaints’
‘the spine, the physical make-up, of an
so that she was
‘a stand out’
Respondent then went through the clinical notes of Patient D to illustrate this
view further.
clinical notes recorded that the Respondent undertook a ‘rib torque’
adjustment after examination found that there
were multiple fixations along the
chest. The examination involved a need to check along her sternum (see around
page 30 of exhibit
23). The Respondent stated that he had explained to Patient D
this procedure before he proceeded to check the costosternal and costotransverse
joints. After the adjustments Patient D reported she could breathe more freely.
the HCCC interview the Respondent stated that Patient D was clothed at the time
this adjustment took place and denied that
he asked her to take her top off or
pull down her bra. The Respondent states that he had never asked anyone to take
off clothing
for the purpose of an adjustment as he could perform these through
clothing (page 31 exhibit 23). The Respondent also stated that
he did not place
his hand on her breast at any time.
the HCCC interview the text message that was sent to Patient D was read to the
Respondent and asked what he could tell the
investigators about the message. His
response was (page 32 exhibit 23):
WOODS: Yeah. I did have to do an extensive amount of treatment, like
I’d done on all of her treatments. I had –it had
a big effect. I
don’t know why I put “you”. It had a big effect like
I’ve never had in my practice before.
BRAZEL: But you wrote, “You had a big effect on me.”
WOODS: -- the amount, like, it was such a challenge. Yeah, look, that was
just a glitch in my thought processes. Absolutely. Like,
yeah. We had to do so
much. Like, you’ve got no idea. Like, this is a person that had extensive
trouble. Like, I was really
blown away, like, that just how bad – I even
told her this. I stressed to her on a couple of treatments I have never seen
come in or present – that’s that age- come in and present
with such extensive trouble. I mean, it was –she was
a chiropractic mess,
a chiropractic train wreck.
BRAZEL: You put in that context, “You had a big effect on me,”
and to the last line, “Sorry to be so forward, and
if you can keep this
between you and I, I would appreciate it” – why would you say
something like that?
WOODS: Because we had a conversation during the course. Because I was
doing so much, like the treatment, and I know I did –even
my receptionist
said on all four treatments, “Boy, you took a long time with her,”
and – like, well, she said that
on the first few treatments the
receptionist commented on how long I took, and I said, “Yeah, like, I had
to do so much.”
That treatment was no different, and in the course of her
treatment, only with the last treatment, specifically horses came up. I’m
looking for a horse for my daughter, and my daughter shows a real interest in
horses. I basically – during the course of the
treatment, I gleaned her
for information, knowing she was a horse trainer, because I actually had the
intent of approaching her or
calling her down the track about getting a horse.
I had a good professional result with her through her treatment, and she
was very happy about the treatment she was receiving, so
I thought – or I
had the belief that a favour would be returned in the form of me actually down
the track asking her to get
a horse for –like, train up a horse for my
daughter, because they’re really expensive to try and get a horse that is
very safe for my seven-year-old daughter to ride, and that is absolutely what
that was about. Absolutely.
BRAZEL: I think for me you didn’t really answer that question.
“Sorry to be so forward, and if you can keep this between
us it would be
much appreciated.”
WOODS: Yeah, because I was –because it was in relation for me sort
of gleaning her about horses, because over the context of
my treatment with
people I spend – in spending a lot of time, I have time to talk about
horses- sorry, I had a lot of time
to talk about the horses, and I felt as
though I was sort of gleaning a lot of information from her with regard to the
horses, which
to me – like, in hindsight, I thought, well, I probably
shouldn’t be gleaning information from her when she’s here
treatment. So I felt as though I was really forward about asking – you
know, I asked her and gleaned off her information
in regard to horses.
BRAZEL: Put in the context of the entire text message, “I’m
still in a spin over you. Sorry to be so forward, and if you
can keep that
between us, I would really appreciate it – it would be much
appreciated.”
WOODS: Yeah, with regard to the –
BRAZEL: There is no mention of horses in this text messages
WOODS: No, because the context of the message was regarding the whole
conversation we had that – about horses. Like, she knew
what I was talking
BRAZEL: In her statement, she did not refer to it as a statement about
WOODS: But that’s all we spoke about during that conversation, like,
during the talking and adjusting.
this exchange the Respondent stated that in hindsight he did not find the text
message 100% professional and he could see if
she was not reading the message in
the context of the actual treatment that she could have taken it out of context.
The Respondent
was asked about the second text message sent later on the same
day and asked why Patient D would find the first message to be offensive
was a horse trainer and a horse breaker and he could not give an
explanation.
the Respondent was asked whether he had spoken to Patient D about his desire to
purchase a horse for his daughter the Respondent
gave the following response
(page 34 exhibit 23):
WOODS: Yeah. Over the course of time, I was looking at actually surprising
her with a horse. She’d been at me and at me and
at me to get a horse, and
I spoke with a couple of other patients that – and one that I can
distinctly remember that I also
gleaned for a bit of information, that could
confirm that I was actually looking to get a horse. I was looking at purchasing
from somewhere, and my wife and I had been looking for some time, and so
I was trying to win favour to actually get a horse. Completely
trying to win her
over to get a good deal out of her, with getting a horse trained or purchased
for my daughter.
Respondent was then asked about the phone calls made to Patient D’s mobile
telephone from the telephone at the Respondent’s
practice (at 5.09pm). The
Respondent stated that it could not have possibly been him as he was always
‘flat out’ between
4 and 6. The Respondent said it was likely that
the practice receptionist was trying to ring Patient D to attend to matters such
as confirming appointments or following up if he had made the request for that
to be done.
investigator then took the Respondent to the telephone records for his mobile
telephone which also recorded an attempt to call
Patient D’s mobile
telephone. This call was made at 6.29pm. The Respondent stated that this
‘would have potentially been me’
but that he could not
actually remember. The Respondent stated that by that time of the day he was
‘absolutely, completely exhausted’
but it could have been to
‘ask for a favour of looking at actually getting and purchasing a
The Respondent stated that he did not in any way attempt to
pursue a sexual relationship with Patient D.
in the interview the Respondent made the following statement to clarify the
position with respect to Patient D (page 39 exhibit
WOODS: Yeah, just you seem to have an issue with regard to why would I
keep it between us with Patient D. That’s because I’m
community, and especially a horsey community where all the horse people –
they are a very close-knit community, and when
I’m trying to get a horse
for my daughter, keeping it between us refers to the fact that if she let it
out, it would have absolutely
got back to my daughter, being in a community
where word of mouth – like I’ve – yeah. Any small thing goes
the town like a wildfire, especially with me having such an upstanding
position in the community.
Respondent conceded that he
‘did do something very stupid’.
He could see how the messages were taken out of context. He said that his
‘pure intention is to have happy patients and have health patients and
just do the absolutely best for them’
Respondent raised the issue of Patient A, Patient B and Patient C referring
family and friends to him.
the interview the Respondent stated that he had never had any sexual desire for
any of his patients as his focus was on
‘getting results, because my
whole practice is based upon patient referral’.
Further, within the
four walls of the practice he had been ‘completely 100%
professional’.
this point the Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated he was recovering from
a viral infection when he gave the interview. The
Tribunal further notes the
Respondent’s claim to have been exhausted during the interview. The
Tribunal has read the transcript
and reviewed the audio file of the interview
and there is nothing that supports this assertion.
Respondent also provided a statement dated 12 March 2012 to the Tribunal which
became exhibit R1.
respect to Patient A, the Respondent’s 12 March 2012 statement (R1)
concedes that during a treatment session, (whilst Patient
A was lying on the
treatment table) he had a conversation with her regarding her breast
augmentation in the context of her spinal
condition. The Respondent stated that
Patient A raised the issue and did not tell him when the procedure took place.
The Respondent
informed Patient A that the augmentation
‘would not be
assisting her neck condition as it is a physical strain on the human
The statement continued as follows (at paragraph
I said that it puts a lot of pressure on the shoulders and the trapezius
muscle area. I then asked Patient A if I could show her something,
if I show her
how much pressure is being placed on her shoulders by sitting her up and lifting
the straps of her bra. Patient A agreed
and she then sat up. I then lifted up
the straps of her bra through her shirt to show her how much weight was being
carried on her
shoulders. At no time did I remove any clothing and certainly at
no time did I reach down inside her blouse. At no time did I ever
squeeze her breasts during treatment as this was not clinically required.
Respondent stated that this did not occur during the consultation on 26 November
Respondent confirmed that early in the treatment of Patient A he had a
conversation with her regarding the fact that he considered
her exercising was
good as it kept her fit and healthy. The Respondent refuted that this included
any inappropriate comments about
her body. The Respondent stated that at the end
of one of the early consultations he had a conversation with Patient A regarding
age. The Respondent gave the following account of the conversation (at paragraph
She made a comment about my age and I asked Patient A how old she thought
I was. I also concede that after Patient A replied with
an age younger than my
age, I briefly held Patient A’s elbow and said words to the effect of
“God love you, thank you.
I appreciate your comment.” I deny that I
ever hugged or embraced Patient A at any time during treatment or said that I
Respondent refuted touching Patient A in any inappropriate way. In particular he
denied running his fingers through her hair which
he only ever touched for the
purpose of moving it out of the way. The Respondent touched Patient A’s
lumbar spine directly
if her clothing was textured or thick, but informed
Patient A prior to so doing.
Respondent refuted ever blocking the doorway when a patient was exiting. He did
however open the door for the patient then stood
aside so they could leave the
room. He further stated that he would not impede a patient leaving the room as
this would impact upon
the time he had allowed for the next patient.
respect to Patient B the Respondent included the following in his 12 March 2012
statement (relevant to Particular 4):
In relation to the consultation on 7 June 2004, Patient B attended with
her mother as she was under 18 years of age. I concede that
Patient B notified
me of a concern regarding a lump in her armpit and asked me to have a look at
it. I asked her how long she had
noticed it and she said not very long. I asked
her if it had grown or was painful and she replied in the negative. I then said
Patient B words to the effect of “can you show me whereabouts you are
referring to by putting your hand on it?”, and
she then indicated the
axilla area under her left arm whilst she was supine on the treatment table. I
explained that I would check
it for her and then checked the lump by placing my
hand on that area in the armpit. I did not rub the side of her breast. I
it was a swollen lymph node and as I am not medically trained to deal
with such conditions, I appropriately recommended that she
seek medical
treatment and did not investigate this finding further. At no time did I ask her
to remove her top as all treatment
is conducted whilst my patients are clothed.
respect to Patient B the Respondent included the following in his 12 March 2012
statement (relevant to Particular 5 and 6):
On 28 February 2007, I examined Patient B’s leg length, which was
even. I then walked to the head of the table to assess for
psoas imbalance, and
noted that the right hand was pulling short and there was tension through the
right side. In light of the low
back pain, right knee pain and a tense right
iliopsoas muscle I decided to conduct a psoas stretch. In accordance with my
practice, I explained to Patient B what I intended to do. Patient B was
supine on the treatment table. So as to access the area,
I advised Patient B
that I had to move the belt down a little (one inch only) and then I would have
to press firmly. Patient B acquiesced
and I proceeded with the stretch. I cannot
recall if Patient B had a tattoo in that area or not. As the belt line was not
moved adequately
so as to expose a sensitive area, a towel or drapery as not
considered necessary.
I refute that I joked with Patient B about a tattoo and refute that I
pulled her jeans and underwear down to the top of her leg. Such
a manoeuvre
would be difficult to perform whilst a patient in jeans is supine on a table in
respect to Patient C the Respondent included the following in his 12 March 2012
statement his concession that he had made statements
good for your age’
in response to Patient C’s self-deprecating
comments about her age, wrinkles, and the like and at no time were they intended
in an inappropriate or sexual manner rather they were to encourage her to
maintain her health and bolster her sense of wellbeing.
Respondent conceded he had a conversation with Patient C regarding a
conversation she had with an older lady in a nearby town
speculating about the
age of the Respondent and whether he was married but refuted having made any
comment to Patient C (paragraph
Respondent also provided a description of the adjustment he undertook to Patient
C’s thoracic spine that accords with that
provided by the Respondent to
the HCCC Investigators. The Respondent stated that Patient C may have felt his
pelvic bone during this
adjustment.
Respondent conceded he sent a number of text messages to Patient C including the
one set out in Particular 7(iii). The Respondent
sets out an apology to Patient
C and provided the following position regarding this particular text message
(paragraph 38):
I also concede that the sending of this text message, whilst not intended
to be inappropriate, was open to be taken out of context
inappropriate course of action to adopt. I acknowledge that the words used in
the message, whilst intended to address
her emotional status at that time, were
ill conceived. After sending this last message, I realised the error of my
actions and sought
counsel from my wife, who reiterated the fact the sending of
that text message was inappropriate, I did not advise my wife until
last text message of what I had done, realising what an error I had caused. I
did not mention any earlier text message
to my wife, as alleged by the expert,
as I did not perceive any issues with the earlier text message.
Respondent made some general comments regarding Patient D which included the
refuting of the allegation that he made comments
regarding Patient D’s
appearance during consultations. The Respondent reports that Patient D told him
she was a horse trainer/broke
in horses. The Respondent further stated he had
had lengthy discussions with Patient D about her career as a horse trainer, her
riding most weekends and the fact that she owned a vehicle for transporting
horses. When she mentioned that she was going to teach
children to ride the
Respondent told Patient D that his daughter liked horses and he wanted to buy
her a horse but was
‘not sure how to do that’.
The statement
However, it was certainly my intent to follow up with Patient D on her
experience and knowledge, so that later I could approach her
for assistance in
selecting a horse for my daughter to train up.
also records his view that Patient D’s spine was suffering multiple and
serious issues
’way beyond that generally expected of a person of her
age, and hence, the treatment required in order to amend such issues
challenging and difficult’.
Respondent refuted that Patient D would have been able to feel his penis against
her while he was undertaking the adjustment undertaken
in the standing position
as the position would not allow such contact and he was not sexually aroused at
any time during the treatment.
respect to Patient D the Respondent included the following in his 12 March 2012
statement (relevant to Particular 8(i)):
She then advised me, whilst she was supine, that she had left chest pain
and pointed to her left breast. I explained that I would
need to check the
sternum/costosternal joints to which she agreed. I made a comment with words to
the effect I did not know why the
pain was so wide (referring to where she
pointed). I then palpated the sternum/costosternal joints, asking about soreness
Patient D to move her own bra slightly up or down as required. I
noted that she was sore on the costosternal joints on the left side.
palpated down the outside of the rib cage through the clothing, asking about
soreness. She said “Not really”.
I then checked the bottom of her
rib case by holding my thumbs on the left and right lower rib cage area in the
upper abdomen and
could see that her left rib cage was higher. I said words to
Patient D to the effect that all the ribs seem to be out on that side
be associated with her back. Hence I recommended a total body modification style
of adjustment with a Thompson drop piece.
She agreed and I then proceeded to
perform the rib torque adjustment, where I held the clavicle and upper rib area
of the chest with
my right hand and the lower rib area on the opposite side with
my left hand, whilst standing perpendicular to the table. I applied
a rotational
pressure to the chest, whilst the table drops away. I performed this procedure 3
times. I then went and palpated the
sternum again asking how it felt and Patient
D indicated that it felt much better. I state that at all times, during the
and the performance of the treatment, Patient D was fully clothed. At
no time do I ask my patients to remove the clothing during
assessment of
treatment. I also refute that at any time I asked Patient D to remove her top
and pull down her bra so that her breasts
were exposed or that I felt her
breast. I assisted Patient D off the table, she thanked me and I wished her the
best with her horse
riding events.
respect to Patient D the Respondent included the following in his 12 March 2012
statement (relevant to Particulars 8(ii) and
47. I concede that on 21 April 2010, after Patient D’s consultation,
I forwarded a text message to Patient D which stated, as
is alleged by Patient D
“how is your treatment going? I hope you’re not too sore because I
had to do so much... I don’t
even know why I’m sending you
48. I refute that the intention behind this message was of an
inappropriate or sexual nature. I was referring to the fact that Patient
presented a challenging clinical case for me during that consultation
(“big effect”) and that I wished to ensure
that Patient D was
comfortable with the treatment performed.
49. I state that the comment “sorry to be so forward and if you can
keep this between us” refers specifically to this
conversation in relation
to horses and my intent to seek Patient D’s help in the selection of a
horse for my daughter. I realised
that I probably should not be using the
consultation in such a manner and hence, I wished to apologise to Patient D for
raising such
issues during the course of the consultation. I emphasise that all
my emotive comments made to Patient D in the text message (such
as I was still
in a spin over her, that she had a big effect on me and the like) were purely in
the context of what a challenging
clinical case she presented to me, which I was
grappling with at the time, and did not reflect any personal impact Patient D
on me at all.
50. I now concede that the sending of such a text message, whilst it was
not intended in any inappropriate manner, was ill conceived
and was open to
being taken out of context. I apologise to Patient D for this lack of
professionalism and for any angst or inconvenience
this has caused her.
51. I concede that I sent a second text message at 2.18pm but repeat my
submissions in relation to the first text message sent to
Patient D. I state
that the receptionist at my clinic may have telephoned her at 5:09pm as it was
the practice of the clinic for
the receptionist to sometimes telephone the
patients who were consulted that day to see how they were and if they wished to
re-schedule
an appointment, or for some other administrative reasons. I did not
make that telephone call as I was still treating patients at
that time, as is
evidenced by my appointment book for 21 April 2010.
52. I concede that after I finished work I attempted to telephone Patient
D on her mobile but deny that I had a sexual or inappropriate
purpose. I again
wished to ensure that Patient D was satisfied with her difficult treatment that
day and was not offended by my discussing
The Respondent – other written evidence
HCCC sent a section 40 letter dated 24 January 2011 to the Respondent (exhibit
25). A reply letter dated 4 March 2011 came from
the Respondent’s legal
representatives (Meridian Lawyers – exhibit 26). This letter noted that
the response was being
made without the benefit of all of the source documents
relied upon by the peer reviewer.
3 - With respect to Patient A the Respondent stated that the lifting up of the
bra straps occurred while the patient was
on the treatment table. The Respondent
moved the bra strap for the purpose of demonstrating the effect of the weight of
her breasts
on her neck. The letter continued (page 2 exhibit
Patient A acquiesced to this and whilst Patient A was in a seated
position, my client demonstrated the stress issues on her upper
back and neck as
explained by lifting up and lowering her bra strap on one side. My client denies
that he ever touched her breasts
at any stage during treatment as this was not
clinically required.
Respondent provided the following account of a conversation he had with Patient
A (Particular 1(b)) in 2009 (page 2 exhibit 26):
My client concedes that he had a conversation with Patient A at the
conclusion of a consultation in 2009 during which the subject
discussed and my client asked Patient A how old she thought my client was. My
client also concedes that after Patient
A replied with an age younger than my
client’s age, he briefly held Patient A’s elbow and said words to
the effect of
“God love you, thank you. I appreciate your comment”.
My client denies that he ever hugged or embraced Patient A at any
time during
treatment or said that he loved her.
letter also notes that Patient A referred Patient B (in May 2009), her husband
(in December 2009) and her son (after the alleged
incidents) for treatment with
the Respondent which did not sit comfortably with the suggestion that Patient A
was concerned about
the manner in which the Respondent had dealings with her.
respect to Patient B the Respondent gave the following account of the
consultation on 7 June 2004 (Particular 4 - page 2 exhibit
In relation to the consultation on 7 June 2004, Patient B attended with
her mother as she was under 18 years of age. My client concedes
that Patient B
notified him of a concern regarding a lump in her armpit and asked him to have a
look at it. My client said to Patient
B words to the effect of “I am going
to check in your armpit, can you show me whereabouts you are referring
she then indicated the axilla area under her left arm whilst she
was supine on the treatment table. He explained that he would check
through her clothing and then checked the indicated lump. He considered it was a
swollen lymph node and as he is not medically
trained to deal with such
conditions, he appropriately recommended that she seek medical treatment and did
not investigate this finding
further. At no time did her ask her to remove her
top or remove her top for her as all treatment is conducted whilst his patients
are clothed.
respect to the conduct described in Particulars 4 and 5 the Respondent gave the
following account of the consultation on 28 February
2012 (page 3 exhibit
Part of my client’s treatment of Patient B was a psoas stretch on 28
February 2007. This was clinically appropriate as she had
low back pain and
right knee pain and a tense right iliopsoas muscle. My client explained to
Patient B what he intended to do. Patient
B was supine on the treatment table.
So as to access the area, he advised Patient B that he had to move the belt down
a little (one
inch only) and then he would have to press firmly. Patient B
acquiesced and my client proceeded with the stretch. My client cannot
Patient B had a tattoo in that area or not. As the belt line was not moved
adequately so as to expose a sensitive area
towel or drapery was not considered
My client refutes that he joked with Patient B about a tattoo and refutes
that he pulled her jeans and underwear down to the top of
her leg. Such a
manoeuvre would be difficult to perform whilst a patient in jeans is supine on a
table in any event.
26 also contains a statement to the effect that the conduct alleged by Patient B
does not sit comfortably with Patient B having
referred her aunt to the
Respondent in 2009 after these incidents were said to have occurred and suggests
the level of concern Patient
B had for the Respondent’s dealings with
26 records that the Respondent conceded he had said things like
look good for your age’, ‘You keep yourself in good shape’ and
‘you look great the way you are’
but emphasised that these
comments were made in response the Patient C’s
‘self-deprecating
comments about her age, wrinkles and the like and at no time were these intended
in an inappropriate or sexual
manner, but were to encourage her to maintain her
health and bolster her sense of wellbeing’.
The Respondent further
concedes that there was a conversation between himself and Patient C wherein
Patient C recounted a conversation
she had had with an older lady in a nearby
town about the Respondent (speculating as to whether he was married and that he
younger than his age). The Respondent refutes that he made any comment to
Patient C and
‘simply recalls thinking that was a nice
compliment’
Respondent also conceded that after a consultation on 3 May 2010 he sent a text
message that read
‘I hope this treatment works better for you,
and after Patient C replied he sent a further text which read
‘So glad this treatment worked for you, I get so nervous when I treat
you, it helps to know it worked ☺’.
The Respondent refutes that
the text was inappropriate or sexual in nature rather it was a reference to his
difficulty in treating
Patient C’s upper cervical spine and his concern
that clients were
‘happy with the treatment performed’.
Respondent stated he was relieved to find out that Patient C had benefited from
his treatment.
respect to the conduct detailed in Particular 7(i) exhibit 26 records that the
Respondent ‘categorically refutes’
that he whispered any comment in
Patient C’s ear although he sometimes tells clients to relax using a quiet
voice while he
concentrates on the adjustments.
respect to the conduct described in Particular 7(ii) the Respondent provides a
detailed account of the manner in which he performed
this adjustment and states
that at no time during this adjustment would Patient C have been in a position
to feel his penis as the
position ‘simply did not enable that to
occur’. The Respondent also stated that at no time during the consultation
he sexually aroused. The letter (exhibit 26) noted that Patient C ‘may
have felt’ the Respondent’s pelvic bone.
Respondent denied that he prevented Patient C from leaving his treatment room on
that day but he may have reached across Patient
C to open the door of the
treatment room.
respect to the conduct detailed in Particular 7(iii) the Respondent conceded
that he sent the text message
‘I hope you took my comment.....’
but refutes that his intention was inappropriate or sexual. Rather, it was
an attempt on his part to bolster Patient C’s self-esteem
perception that Patient C was not very happy with the treatment provided by the
Respondent on that day.
26 then provides the following comments in relation to this
My client also concedes that the sending of this text message, whilst not
intended to be inappropriate was open to be taken out of
context and was an
inappropriate course of action to adopt. My client acknowledges that the words
used in the message, whilst intended
to address her emotional status at that
time, were ill conceived. My client, after sending this last message, realised
of his actions and sought counsel from his wife, who reiterated the
fact the sending of that text message was inappropriate. My client
advise his wife until after this last text message of what he had done,
realising what an error he had caused. My client
did not mention any earlier
text message to his wife, as alleged by the expert, as he did not perceive any
issues with the earlier
text messages.
Tribunal notes that exhibit 26 contains an apology from the Respondent to
Patient C for any distress this text message may have
respect to Patient D exhibit 26 records that the Respondent would have asked her
time would have found out that
she was a horse trainer/broke in horses. The letter records that the Respondent
found that Patient
D’s spine was suffering from
‘multiple and
serious issues, way beyond that generally expected of a person of her age, and
hence, the treatment required in
order to amend such issues was challenging and
(page 5 – exhibit 26).
not subject of a Particular Patient D gave evidence that she had felt the
Respondent’s pelvic area during an adjustment.
The Respondent sets out a
similar description of the adjustment as he had done for Patient C and refutes
this type of conduct as
a possibility.
Respondent gives the following response to the conduct set out in Particular
8(i) (page 5 exhibit 26):
My client concedes that on 21 April 2010, Patient D advised him during
treatment, whilst she was supine, that she had left chest pain
and pointed to
her left breast. My client explained that he would need to check the
sternum/costosternal joints to which she agreed.
He made a comment with words to
effect he did not know why the pain was so wide (referring to where she
pointed). My client then
palpated the sternum/costosternal joints, asking about
soreness and asking Patient D to move her own bra up or down as required.
noted that she was sore on the costosternal joints and that her left rib cage
was higher. He said words to Patient D to the effect
of all the ribs seem to be
out on that side and it may be associated with her back. Hence he recommended a
rib torque adjustment.
She agreed and he then proceeded to perform the rib
torque adjustment, where he contacted the top of the rib cage on the opposite
side whilst Patient D was on the Thompson table where contact is with the
hypothenar area of the palm of his hand with his fingers
raised. The Thompson
table is then dropped slightly whilst slight pressure is applied. He performed
this procedure 3 times. He then
went and palpated the sternum again asking how
it felt and Patient D indicated that it felt much better. My client states that
all times, during the palpation and the performance of the treatment, Patient
D was fully clothed. At no time does my client ask
his patients to remove the
clothing during assessment or treatment. My client also refutes that at any time
he asked Patient D to
remove her top and pull down her bra or that he felt her
Respondent concedes he sent the text message referred to in Particular 8(ii) but
refutes that the intention was inappropriate
or sexual. Rather the Respondent
was referring to the fact that Patient D presented a
‘challenging
clinical case for him’
– i.e. “big effect”. And that
he wished to ensure Patient D was comfortable with the treatment performed.
Respondent provides additional information to place this text message into
context as follows:
My client also states that during this consultation, he held a
conversation with Patient D in relation to her profession, being a
trainer, and that he discussed the issue of horses with her. He recalls telling
her his daughter was interested in horses and
he may purchase one for her. He
concedes he may not have mentioned his daughter’s birthday or that he
specifically wanted to
arrange a horse through Patient D. However, it was
certainly his intent to follow up with Patient D on her experience and
so that later he could approach her for assistance in selecting a
horse for his daughter to train up. My client states that the comment
“sorry to be so forward and if you can keep this between us” refers
specifically to this conversation in relation to
horses and his intent to seek
Patient D’ help in the selection of a horse for his daughter. He realised
that he probably should
not be using the consultation in such a manner and
hence, he wished to apologise to Patient D for raising such issues during the
course of the consultation. My client emphasises that all his emotive comments
made to Patient D in the text message (such as he
was still in a spin over her,
that she had a big effect on him and the like) were purely in the context of
what a challenging clinical
case she presented to him, which he was grappling
with at the time, and did not reflect any personal impact Patient D had on him
My client now concedes that the sending of such a text message, whilst it
was not intended in any inappropriate manner, was ill conceived
and was open to
being taken out of context. My client apologises to Patient D for this lack of
professionalism and for any angst
or inconvenience this has caused her.
respect to the conduct set out in Particular 8 (iii) the Respondent makes the
following comments:
My client concedes that he sent a second text message at 2.18pm but
repeats his submissions in relation to the first text message
[Patient D]
. He states that the receptionist at his clinic may have
telephoned her at 5:09pm as it was the practice of the clinic for the
receptionist
to sometimes telephone the patients who were consulted that day to
see how they were and if they wished to re-schedule an appointment,
or for some
other administrative reasons. My client did not make that telephone call as he
was still treating patients at that time,
as is evidenced by my client’s
appointment book for 21 April 2010.
The Respondent – oral evidence
Respondent gave extensive evidence before the Tribunal.
respect to the position in which he performed the adjustment subject of
Particular 7(ii) the Respondent stated he always used
the ‘Fencer’s
Stance’ where the legs were apart and one foot in front of the other
relation to his conversation with Patient C the Respondent could not recall the
exact conversation with her that he made reference
to in his text message when
he said he hoped that she had taken his comments as a
‘compliment’
but he had formed the view that he had
‘put his foot in it’
. The Respondent recalled that Patient C
had made comments about wrinkles and her age and he had tried to dispel this by
saying that
she wasn’t too bad for her age and possibly said that her
personality was ‘nice’. The ‘
hadn’t happened
part of the text referred to him having put his
in his mouth’
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the final part of the text as
follows (T327.41-328.45):
Q. You then say, "I can't help it when you are so god damned sexy and
gorgeous". What couldn't you help?
A. I don't know what I meant by that.
Q. These are your words I am reading to you sir?
A. I know but sitting here now I can't recall why I said that, all I know
is I sent the text trying to undo what I'd done by insulting
Q. You made a point in your text of spelling, so, with five O's in it;
any particular reason for doing that sir? Were you trying
to emphasise the
word? You have to have a verbal response Mr Woods?
Q. You weren't trying to emphasise the word, so?
A. No, not to my recollection under oath, not to my recollection.
Q. Do you have any explanation for why you spelled, so, with five
Q. Any explanation for referring to
[Patient C]
as, god damn sexy
and gorgeous? We have to have a verbal response sir?
A. No, I was just trying to uplift her. I don't know why I sent the text
and used that sort of language. I was feeling I was having
bad even before she came in I was having a stressful I was
partially depressed myself over some people who weren't too happy
treatments earlier in the day.
Q. I used that term, its habit and I do apologise. You mentioned that
you were under some stress on 31 May is that correct?
A. As the morning progressed and there were a couple of patients, a man
in particular, was pretty derogatory toward me because he
wasn't happy with how
his last treatment had gone. He expected all the pain to be gone.
Q. Is that something unusual, that patients complain?
A. For me it is, I take it to heart. I hold myself to a very high
Q. Just going back to the text message; the next part of the message
said, "I personally rate you the perfect woman", what was your
putting that into the text message sir?
A. Trying to uplift her spirits.
Q. You then said, "I mean that and I have never said that to anyone
before in my life", any reason why you put that there sir?
Q. Can't recall?
A. I honestly can't recall why I would have done that.
Q. Then you said, "I'm so jealous of your husband and hope he knows how
lucky he is". What was your reason for putting that in sir?
A. I have no idea.
Q. Then you ended the message with, "PS I just had to get that off
A. I can't explain.
respect to Patient D the Respondent accepted that she had written horse rider on
her patient information card and that he had
trainer/breaks in horses’
on her patient card. He stated that he had
written this comment onto the card when he was taking down Patient D’s
she was telling him about it. It was only after he had heard Patient
D’s evidence did he appreciate the difference (T331).
The Respondent
confirmed in cross-examination that he considered Patient D had serious spinal
Respondent stated that he had quite a lengthy conversation with Patient D during
their fourth (and final) consultation about her
involvement in riding horses.
The conversation was a solid five minutes before Patient D actually got onto the
treatment table. The
Respondent stated that Patient D said she was teaching
children to ride, travelled to riding shows including the Easter Show using
horse float (T332). It was the mention by Patient D that she taught children to
ride that had prompted the Respondent to tell her
that his daughter was
interested in horses and that they (meaning he and his wife) were thinking of
buying her one.
Respondent gave evidence under re-examination that the error in his notes
regarding which arm under which Patient B had a lump
arose due to time
constraints caused by Patient B raising this matter right at the end of the
consultation. He maintained that he
completed clinical records at the end of the
consultation (T355).
Respondent was also re-examined regarding his conversations with Patient D. He
stated that he had questioned Patient D about horses
as he had been thinking of
buying a horse for about two weeks to a month prior to this consultation. The
Respondent gave evidence
that Patient D was not the only patient he had in the
horse industry (T355). He had asked at least one other patient who had children
that rode horses but the others did not mention children with respect to
breaking in horses (T356). The Respondent confirmed he had
lived in the area for
a number of years and was aware there was a pony club in town. He had not made
enquiries there as he did not
‘inundated with people forcing
horses upon us left, right and centre, being old ones, young ones, when we just
want that’.
It was for this reason he had said to Patient
D in his text to her to
‘keep it between us’
re-examination occurred regarding the conversation between himself and Patient D
in the consultation prior to the text messages
being sent. The Respondent stated
that there had been a lengthy conversation, at the commencement of the
consultation, regarding
horses. The Respondent stated that the majority of the
conversation focused on the treatment. The text message he sent related to
the horse issue as well as the treatment and he had thought she would understand
this to be the context for the text message.
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the manner in which he ended
the first text message to Patient D (T357.16-360.38
&T361.5-23):
Q. Other than the professional dealings you had with her between February
and 21 April you didn't know [Patient D] personally?
Q. You didn't have anything to do with her socially?
Q. You didn't know her in any other capacity other than as chiropractor
and patient?
Q. Why did you end your text message to her with an "X"?
A. I have no idea. Usually an "X" is referred to as a full stop in some
instances, but I can't give a definite explanation after
all this time as to why
I ended the message with an "X" other than to explain it was possibly as a full
Q. You have the respondent's material on the table there in front of you?
If you go to tab 18 and there should be two pages, and
I'd ask you to
accept, sir, that that's a photograph of
[Patient D]
Q. With the text message?
Q. Do you see sir on the first page at the end of the first sentence
there is a question mark?
Q. And at the end of the second question there's a full stop?
Q. The next sentence there's a full stop?
Q. Over the page the sentence which ends, "be much appreciated", there is
a full stop?
Q. Then, "Cheers, PS I don't even know why I am sending you this
A. End of conversation.
Q. End of conversation?
A. Yes possibly, I have no other explanation other than that.
Q. Sir, you are aware, are you not that an "X" is also another way of
expressing a kiss?
A. That certainly was not my intention.
Q. No, that's not what I asked you? You are aware are you not sir that
putting an "X" either in a text message, on a card, on a
letter, is a way of
expressing a kiss?
A. No, my understanding of that, and I can say this under oath, is that I
am of the understanding that when you do "XXX" or "XOX"
is in relation to
something along the lines that you're talking about. Certainly an "X" in my
view, and it still is now, is not
considered in my mind and never has
been and I say that under oath relevant to a kiss;
especially in the context of that.
Q. You ended other sentences with a full stop but you didn't end that
particular sentence with a full stop, you ended it with an
"X". Are you still
saying sir that that "X" represents a full stop?
A. Or end of conversation potentially; I don't know why I did it.
Q. You don't know why you did it, okay?
A. I'm giving you a possible explanation.
Q. Would you agree with me sir now you've still got it in
front of you?
Q. That there is nothing in that text message that makes any direct
reference to a horse?
A. No not of its own, but in the context that
Q. You've answered the question. Is there any reference in that text
message to a future purchase of a horse?
Q. Going back to the beginning of the message; the first question is,
"How is your treatment going?" with a question mark, do you
Q. Were you expecting an answer to this text message?
A. Potentially.
Q. For what purpose?
A. To see how her treatment was going had gone.
Q. Is that the main reason you sent this text?
A. That is what would have initiated yes that's
what that was the first thing on my mind clearly.
Q. But was it the main reason for sending the text?
A. Yes that was the initiation of my thought process, yes.
Q. Why then did you put in anything other than, "How is your treatment
A. I have no explanation for that other than, well it's sort of in
relation to the treatment and me expressing that I hoped she wasn't
So it's just an expression of my view on in regard to the treatment.
I don't see what the problem with that is.
Q. You then go on to say that she had a big effect on you?
Q. You have written, BIG, in upper case?
Q. Why did you do that?
A. Because of all the patients I've treated in relation to the
adjustments I made on her spine, and I can remember it because when
her on that treatment, at each level that I adjusted her spine I had an
incredible amount of cavitations even though I
was only contacting one spot,
from the bottom of her spine to the top of her spine I would have had more
cavitations in her spine
than I could confidently say I've ever had in any
spinal adjustments I've given anyone and I've adjusted thousands of people over
a decade. I was quite surprised at the extent of how the spine seemed to be
fixated right through and just by contacting certain
points I was getting
multiple cavitations to the extent that I don't reckon there would have been too
many segmental levels that
did not give a cavitation in the adjustment
Q. Why did you feel it was necessary to share that with [Patient
A. I have no idea conversation.
Q. This was something clinically unique as I understand your
explanation?
A. It was yes.
Q. Why would you need to explain or say something about that to [Patient
A. Once again it's just an expression of my thoughts at the time.
Q. You went further and said that you were still in a spin over her, you
said, "I'm still in a spin over you"?
A. Over the adjustment that I'd given her yes.
Q. But you don't say that do you?
Q. You don't say I'm still in a spin over the treatment or over your
condition, you say, "I'm still in a spin over you"?
A. Yes I've potentially left the word out there when I've done the
Q. What did you leave out?
A. It is very easy for misinterpretation.
Q. What word did you leave out Mr Woods?
A. I'm still in a spin over the treatment I gave you, potentially, I
don't know this happened so long ago and there's certainly no
ill intent that
you're trying to
Q. You didn't mean to write, I'm still in a spin over you, is that what
you're saying?
A. No, not as I read it.
Q. You then apologise for being so forward, do you see the next
A. In regard to talking about the horse and your socalled gleaning, or
what I call asking her questions about it.
Q. Well the word gleaning sir was your word when you spoke to
Ms Brassel, you may recall that I ask you to explain the word?
A. Yes. And then I've said in using the word gleaning, I meant
Q. If you were being apologetic for being so forward about the horse, why
didn't you say, sorry to be so forward about the horse?
A. Sorry, can you ask that again?
Q. You said a moment ago that when I directed your attention to the
words, "Sorry to be so forward", you said that was to do with
the discussion
................
Q. The text message then continues, "and if you can keep this between us
would be much appreciated"?
A. Yes, like you've already covered with me, I've already given my answer
that I didn't want anyone and everyone knowing that my
wife and I were looking
for a horse.
Q. After you signed off, "I don't know why I'm sending this", you then
send her a further text message, as I understand it, which
says, "I hope I
haven't offended you at all"?
Q. Why did you send that text message?
A. In relation to the first text message.
Q. Yes, but what, were you concerned that you might have caused
A. Yes possibly.
Q. What part of the first text message did you think might have caused
evidence as to the effect of the treatment on Patient D was given by the
Respondent at T366.6-19 as follows:
Q. Which of the treatments that you've identified; the Gonstead, the
Vasometer or the Rib Torque gave you that very unusual reaction
you had or very
unusual response of the cavitation?
A. It was the combination of all the adjustments. As I said before, when
I adjusted the low back, the thoracic and the cervical
areas I got multiple
cavitations to the extent that I don't reckon there would have been many
segmental levels that didn't cavitate
along her entire spine, which is very
unusual, considering I've only contacted a few point. It was like a rippling
effect through
the spine, so it's not one specific adjustment that had a
profound set of audibles and we don't we list whether or not we hear the
audibles, it's in relation to the actual segmental level that we're contacting
and adjusting upon that we're interested in. The
emphasis is not on the
cavitations how many cavitations as far as your listings are
concerned or your note taking is concerned.
the Respondent continued cross-examination on 18 May 2012 he gave the following
evidence regarding the meaning of the text message
set out in Particular 8(ii)
(T372.39-373.16):
Q. The big effect that she had on you was such that you sent her a text
A. No. The reason for my text message was because it was promoted
by my initial thoughts were prompted by the fact that I wanted
know how the adjustment had been going and then it led into a series of other
statements.
Q. But you don't deny, sir, that you asserted to [Patient D] that you were
in a spin over her and that she had had a big effect on
A. Clinically, yes.
Q. You've given evidence about the clinical nature of that big
Q. Did you make no further inquiry as to why [Patient D] didn't come
A. No. It didn't occur to me.
Q. This clinically challenging patient?
A. Well, it wasn't the fact that it was clinically challenging, all
patients, I find, are clinically challenging. Every single one
of them. I put
myself to a very high standard as far as wanting to completely clear the spine
of any fixations or subluxations,
but it was more the response that the
treatment had had in the way of practically every segment in that spine giving
some sort of
an audible release, even though I was only contacting certain
segmental levels and I can still remember that quite vividly because
had anyone that I reckon every segment gave some sort of a sound at the
different points that I contacted from the lumbar
spine to the cervical
in his evidence the Respondent was asked the following questions by the Tribunal
regarding the ending of the text message to
Patient D with an ‘X’
(T419.39-42 & 420.9-29):
Q. If I can take you to the text message to [Patient D] behind 18, do you
again say that it's your evidence that there was no intention
to be flirtatious
with [Patient D]?
A. No, none whatsoever. None at all, and that's under oath.
................
Q. Is it your evidence that the "X" at the end of that message, is
indicative of the end of the conversation?
Q. And not a symbol representing a kiss?
A. Under oath, and I can promise you under oath, that was an attempt to
refer to it as an end to the conversation, as I do with my
wife. I've done that
on many occasions. I put the cross at the end of a conversation with my wife to
say I can't talk to you anymore
after that. If I ever send a message to my wife
referring to a kiss or something of endearment, it's always been
XX an absolute
multitude of Xs or XOX or at least a minimum of three.
Never have I, when I've sent a text to my wife of endearment, has it ever
any less than three crosses. However, like I said, I've sent plenty of texts to
my wife over the time when we've been talking
at the end of it to indicate that that's the end of the message.
Q. Would you accept that a 19 or 20 year old girl reading that
message would read that X as meaning something else, other than the
conversation?
A. Yes. Sadly, I would say yes there was it's very open to
misinterpretation. I'm very sorry for that and quite embarrassed, to
least. Very embarrassed I am about it.
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent confirmed that he had
significant concerns regarding Patient D but did not
have in place any mechanism
to follow up when she failed to attend for further treatment (376-377).
in his evidence the Respondent elaborated on the spinal conditions he considered
Patient D suffered from as follows (T409.5-44
411.29-412.34):
Q. What do you mean by spinal conditions?
A. Well, just the overall appearance. Like, there was a lot
of it wasn't a scoliosis but she certainly had enough curvature there
that if you had her lean forward it would straighten out but she basically had a
functional what I would call a functional curvature
of the spine, or
a functional scoliosis or a functional spinal problem that was causing overall
spinal stress and her paraspinal
muscles were just rigid because there was so
much spinal stress from multilevel spinal fixations, subluxations, that the
muscles were bordering on being quite rigid for someone of that age.
I mean, at that age, like when she's laying on the table, her
muscles should be
quite supple at rest.
Q. You've got your notes there?
Q. Can you compare the notes and the treatment that you gave to, say,
[Patient D] and to [Patient B] and I just chose, say, 8 March
[Patient B]'s 17 June 2010. They're girls of much the same age but one has
a standout case and pretty bad and I'm just wondering,
I see very little
difference in treatment protocol?
A. Yeah. My treatment protocols are very similar.
Q. There's no comment. Now you've had a lot
A. That's my error in note taking really. I am improving upon
Q. What would you think would be the cause of all that crepitation that
she felt the cavitation?
A. Just one thing that I do go off, is when there are a lot of listings,
there's a lot of problems. When there are lesser listings
on my treatment card,
to me that is my gauge that if I get down in the quagmire, I'm only
finding one or two segmental levels, they're
usually pretty good. If I had more
treatment cards here, you'll see there are some treatment cards where it
is I've got very small
writing and I'll have adjusted six or eight
areas. My view is some chiropractors might only adjust one or two segments and
them on their way. My experience over the years I found that I could get
incredible results in a short period of time by initially
adjusting as
much if I find a subluxation or even a fixation, I will adjust it and
release it and usually after their first treatment
or two they will usually, at
times when they've got a lot going on, feel like they've been hit by a truck the
next day in the sense
that they will be very muscle sore. But within
48 hours to three days they notice the improvement and improve out of sight
................
Q. But going back to [Patient D], there's no mention of hyper flexibility
in the spine on the notes and that is, presumably, what
happened at that time in
your mobility pattern?
A. No. My view on it is when she first presented, when I adjusted the
spine it was really hard to get any movement at all. On the
subsequent visits I
got a little bit more movement and my view is that because on the first
treatment you can see there was a shortening
of the right leg by an inch with
right soleus spasm, I recommended soleus stretches because it was so tight. I
adjusted quite a
number of levels and got very little movement, or it was only
very specific to that level even though the whole spine was rigid.
her again, the movement was somewhat improved. I readjusted. The third time, a
similar thing, and I fully believed
that because of that dramatic or drastic
right leg shortening it was creating a pelvic imbalance. That was being
compensated for
by the shoulder drop on the left hand side. As you can see,
that would then create that lateral sort of functional curvature of
and by levelling that pelvis up I'm fully of the belief that gradually over time
it depreciated the amount of spasm, not
only in the paraspinal muscles but also
the soleus muscles by releasing and stretching those out, that by the time I got
fourth adjustment the spine was just ready to completely relax and
release all those fixations that had been present in the spine.
It actually
would've been quite clinically interesting for me to see her again after that
date to have seen how much of a difference
there was in not only how the spine
was laying straight and how much more freer or supple the muscles were. I would
have liked to
have known whether they'd actually gone back to someone that I
deemed would have been appropriate for her age and also whether she
complained at all about any of her symptoms, or whether she would have felt
absolutely, you know, great. Like, would
have felt physically fantastic. I
would've really liked to have known that actually.
Q. So the incredible amount of noise, the cavitation
A. Was just yeah.
Q. you deemed that normal?
A. In light of what I've just explained, yeah. Yeah.
Q. Because it seemed to me that when you were talking earlier, you deemed
it more than normal or abnormal?
A. Well, it is. Yeah. Certainly on the it's certainly on
that upper limit, isn't it? By getting that many cavitations I'm sure
appreciate in your clinical practice that it's not very often you could get that
degree of cavitations along a spine.
Q. To the point of hypermobility?
A. Well, I don't think it was that. I think the spine was more fixated
and it's just created this massive release and the body was
ready for it by
getting that pelvis level, releasing all that muscle tension, the spine was
almost primed to just release back to
how it should've always been for someone
her age to allow her to go back to normal flexibility. Being so rigid, going
not hypermobile, but just bringing her back from being so rigid
to normal instead of out on this end of the spectrum. I don't believe
anywhere near that end of the hypermobility spectrum after just that one
adjustment, going from only four treatments ago
being quite difficult to even
get a single audible at one level.
Respondent placed Patient D into the ‘worst’ 5-10% of cases he saw.
The Respondent stated that as his reputation has
grown he had seen an increasing
number of complicated cases being those patients that had not achieved results
from another practitioner
and then turned to the Respondent for help (T418).
to the call that was made from the Respondent’s practice landline to
Patient D’s mobile telephone after the two text
messages were sent the
Respondent gave the following evidence during cross-examination
(T362.25-363.15):
Q. You are aware that [Patient D] said that she received a telephone call
from a landline, recognised as being from your clinic?
Q. That was around five o'clock on 21 April?
Q. Do you know who made that call?
A. I can only assume it was my receptionist because she's the only one
that has access is to the landline out in the front of the
clinic, as I have no
access to a landline in the clinic and at five o'clock I can assure you I still
would have been treating patients
at that time. As I recall, I was actually
quite well behind.
Q. Did you ask your receptionist to make that call for you?
Q. Could you have a look at [Patient D]' patient notes?
A. I don't have them.
Q. Would you agree with me, sir, that there's nothing on those notes or
the patient card that would indicate a directive to your
receptionist to call
[Patient D]?
Q. If you wanted your receptionist to followup or call a patient would
you put it on the patient records or the patient card?
A. You're assuming that the patient was called in relation to me and my
receptionist calls people all the time to reschedule appointments
or to schedule
appointments, so I don't understand why you're directing it at me that I was the
one that would have initiated the
call when my receptionist initiates calls from
the landline on a very regular daily basis, multiple times rescheduling,
appointments.
Q. Is it your evidence that you have no knowledge of why your
receptionist would call [Patient D]?
A. That's exactly right.
Q. But she may have?
A. She may have.
Respondent was taken to his appointment book for the afternoon he sent the two
text messages to Patient D. There were two appointment
slots (4.50pm and 5.20pm)
where there was a notation that they were not to be filled. The Respondent
stated that this may have been
a result of a consultation being cancelled by a
patient and the receptionist asking him whether or not he wanted it filled. If
had ‘had enough’ he would have said not to fill it (T363). The
other was not filled as he was running half an hour late
as indicated by the
‘Don’t fill half hour late’
Respondent was asked further questions during cross-examination regarding
attempted telephone contact with Patient D on the afternoon
of 21 April 2010 and
he gave the following evidence (T369.1-370.12):
Q. Just so I can have this clear in my mind. I think your evidence
yesterday was that you did not make a call from the practice
landline to
[Patient D]. Was that correct?
Q. You don't have a handset
A. I don't have a recollection of that, because I don't have a handset
and I was busy. I do recall being busy that afternoon. I
was behind. I do
recall I was very much behind.
Q. But you do recall making a phone call to her, or attempting to make a
phone to her from your mobile phone?
A. When was that supposed to be?
Q. Well, could you look at paragraph 52 of your statement?
A. Yes. That day when we finished work, yes.
Q. You did?
Q. Was that around half past 6.00?
A. Yes, that's about when I would finish. That would sound
Q. What was the purpose of that call? Without looking at your statement,
do you recall?
A. Yes. It would've been similar to in response to my text
Q. Why did you feel it was necessary to give her a call after sending her
a text message?
A. Well, once again, to I mean, I'm under oath, so I would
assume that and I use the word "assume" it would have been in
to the text. But I can't say in my mind exactly what purpose I had in
my mind when I can't remember exactly what the purpose was.
But I'd assume it
would have been similar to the text to basically reaffirm that there
was I hoped that there was no offence in
relation to the
text the first text.
Q. You were becoming concerned about the nature of the text, weren't you?
The first text?
A. No, I wouldn't say the nature of the text. The fact that I had sent
the text but not the nature of the text, no.
Q. Well, you sent a follow up text apologising or indicating that you
hoped you hadn't caused any offence?
Q. Then you, I believe it was a couple of hours or at least an hour
later, tried to do a phone call. Your concern was growing, wasn't
A. I wouldn't say growing. I was so busy that afternoon, my mind was
completely preoccupied with treating patients. So I would
have to strongly
disagree with that notion that it was growing over the course of the afternoon
when my mind is so preoccupied treating
patients until 6.30 and then the thought
would have occurred to me that there hadn't been a message sent because
I when I'm behind
I have no time to be assessing or looking at my
phone. I wouldn't have looked at my phone until the end of the day, as with
Q. The fact that you hadn't had a response is what prompted the phone
call, is that it?
A. I would say yes to that.
Respondent gave evidence that he did not often send text messages to clients
regarding clinical matters, possibly only on a weekly
or monthly basis (T370)
and he did so when he had patients he had concerned about treatment outcomes
Respondent gave evidence that he had the following practice regarding the
recording of complaints made to him by patients (T296):
Whenever a patient complains of anything I will list it in the box to the
right of my chiropractic treatment, and I make an absolute
point of doing that.
When someone comes in, if they have a complaint, I make a point of writing down
their complaint.
answer to questions from the Tribunal regarding why he had not recorded the fact
that Patient A had had a breast augmentation in
her clinical records the
Respondent gave the following evidence (T380.1-16):
A. Yeah, just because I didn't I really didn't deem
it coming back to that point, the breast augmentation was, in my
opinion, an
example of what could cause problems. I wasn't saying that was the
cause and, in my opinion, that wasn't the potential cause of
her pain. I gave
her an example that that could be, so it wasn't my primary diagnosis of that
being the cause to her complaint.
I didn't deem that it potentially was. I
just gave her an example of what could be in showing her that. I didn't deem it
to necessarily
be and I didn't diagnose that as the primary problem.
Q. You've heard the evidence of two peer reviewers that both expressed
views that it would be a piece of information that would be
of assistance
possibly to any locum or anyone who was taking over the care of your
Q. Would you agree with that?
A. Potentially it would be.
Respondent also gave evidence that he had not recorded Patient D’s
complaint about chest pain as she only mentioned it during
the consultation and
he completed the ‘history’ part of the card at the commencement of
the consultation (T365). This
is despite the description of Patient D provided
by the Respondent during the interview on 11 November 2010 with the HCCC
investigators
(exhibit 23- page 30):
....and one thing that I absolutely confidently remember, because it was
such a stand-out case, is just how bad she was. For someone
her age, she had
– like, I made comment to her that she had the back of someone twice her
age. She had the spine, the physical
make-up, of an old lady. That’s how
bad her chiropractic or structural make-up was. Like, it was stand-out.
Respondent also gave evidence that he did have locums in his practice from time
to time (T380).
Respondent gave the following evidence relating to the conduct described in
Particular 8(i) as follows (T366.21-367.26):
Q. This checking you did of the costosternal joints; your evidence is as
I understand it, is that you did it through her clothing?
Q. That if [Patient D] says you asked her to pull her top down or up and
drop her bra, then that's just simply not right?
A. No, I asked her when I was
examining so just so that we're clear on this; I've
adjusted, I've evaluated the pelvis found that
to be level. I've adjusted the
lumbar spine, I've adjusted, that is rolling her onto the side and adjusting the
lumbar spine; then
she was asked to roll onto her back. I have her cross her
arms and then sit up and adjust the thoracic levels. I lay her back down,
roll her a bit, I adjust the ribs on one side, I roll her the other way; I
adjust the ribs by walking around the other side of
the table adjusting the
ribs. I adjusted the cervical spine while she was still supine and in my visual
recollection it was when
I was walking, after adjusting the cervical spine, I
was walking to the foot of the table and I was half way down the table and she
raised the issue of the chest pain at which I asked her exactly whereabouts she
was referring to. She indicated the left side of
her breast not the
left side of her breast, the left side of her chest, pointing towards her left
breast and that's when I asked
her more questions and proceeded to palpate along
the costosternal joints and I even explained to her, and I can recall this, that
it's odd that it was in the centre of her left side chest or breast but I was
going to check having adjusted the ribs at the back
already, I didn't have to go
there. Because she complained that it was chest generally, was my understanding
when she first told
me that she had a problem. When I asked her to clarify it
she was more specific, to the left side. I even told her that it was
that it was where she was pointing at, that it must be coming from the
costosternal joints. I said, "Do you mind me palpating
down along the
costosternal joints or along the sternum here and I'll see if they're tender.
You tell me if they're tender, of which
she agreed and had no problem with it
and I started palpating down along those joints. The first rib or two were not
I got to the third, fourth, fifth, sixth they were tender but as I
progressed down the bra was involved and I asked her to pull the
little bit to palpate a rib, then I asked her to pull it up a little bit while I
palpated the ribs slightly below it and
noting that there were four tender ribs
I went down to the bottom of the rib cage because there were so many ribs of
involvement
on that side and checked the bottom of the rib cage and I even
verbally said to her, that they were uneven, and I determined from
that to do a
rib torque adjustment involving all the ribs of which I proceeded to do using a
method that was shown, which is a combination
of total body modification and
it's a diversified style of treatment that I'd learned not only Dr Froglee
who was teaching pit classes
at Palmer University. Pit classes are the classes
where in your final year, especially the final couple of trimesters when you're
doing your clinic time that you can sit in on him and learn his ways; God rest
his soul, he passed away at close to 100, and I also
did my tenth trimester with
a Dr Ron Liss who was also a past SOT instructor, post graduate SOT
instructor that I did my externship
with. That's because I finished all my
patient numbers by the end of ninth trimester a select few people are then able
their tenth trimester abroad, working with a practitioner and
Dr Ron Liss further gave education on how to perform that
adjustment.
Q. Sir, I put it to you that in the process of examining or treating
[Patient D] in the costosternal areas you did ask her to remove
her bra and her
A. No I did not.
re-examination the Respondent was asked the following questions regarding the
evidence he had given regarding Patient D (T429.33-42):
Q. In relation to [Patient D], there's been a number of questions and,
indeed, answers that deal with whether her presentation itself
was a complicated
or difficult one or whether the results you obtained from them were the things
which marked her as a different
A. Yeah. It was more the results.
Q. Rather than?
A. The cavitations, the response to the adjustment the physical
cavitations up her spine were what I found quite different or interesting
surprising was the word I was thinking of.
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent recalled the following
regarding Patient B and her complaint regarding the
(T382.45-383.42):
A. Yes. I'd finished with those adjustment on the left and I was
standing at the foot of the table part way down the table but
foot of the table and I recall I was about to bring the table up when she
brought that to my attention. And I was standing
on the window side of the
table, yeah, when she raised the issue and I think I got my left and right
sides I've been pondering this
over the days that this has all been
spoken about as to how I got the lefts and rights wrong and I think because she
told me on the
left side of the table I must have this
is I must have, because I can't recall I must have walked
around to the other side, I'm
thinking, to have it wrong and I've actually
checked on the right side by going to the lump. But because she told me on the
side she's laying on her back still and I've been on her left
side at the foot of the table, about to bring it up, that's when she's
it to my attention but I must have I must have come around and
checked where the lump was.
Q. So do I take it the bed was still
A. She was on her back and the bed was still flat and
Q. You'd just finished the adjustments?
A. Adjustments, yes. And she brought it to my attention and I asked her
a couple of questions. You know, "How long have you noticed
it for?" "How big
is it? Where is it? Can you show me?" Yeah. And then I've when
I've written the card out, it must be just
yeah. It must be my human
error. I feel a bit embarrassed by that actually, how I got that wrong so soon
after because I filled
that straight out after. So, I don't know. Because
of because of I don't know. I'm just giving possible
explanations as to why
I got that wrong that she was when I'm
reliving the treatment protocol as I'm writing it out, I have them pictured as
being prone
and I think I've just got my lefts and rights because she
was on her back when I checked the lump under my armpit I think I've
just got it mixed up in my mind as to which side because, like I said, when I'm
writing out my adjustments when I'm recalling the
adjustments I've
given them it's in relation to them laying prone. Like, in my mind
when I'm evaluating, like, say I find the lumbar
spine, I, say, find the L2 PR,
I log that in my mind as they're laying down on their tummy. So when they're
supine, I've got to
reverse that in my mind.
Q. After you checked the lump, do I take it that your bed sort of moves
up somehow?
A. It's High Low table, yeah.
Q. I don't know what that is, so if you could
A. Yes. So it's a table that is on a machine that mechanically, when you
kick the footplate or there's a button at the top, lowers
down to flat and when
you finish the treatment you can press a button or kick the footplate and it
brings them back up to upright,
so they don't have to lay down. It takes them
from standing to laying to standing.
re-examination the Respondent was asked the following questions relating to the
consultation involving Patient B and the lump under
(T430.46-431.25):
Q. You were also asked some questions about
[Patient A]
[Patient B]
and their attendance together?
Q. Are you able to go back over a period of now in excess from eight
years through to now and recall every instance when they were
in attendance on
the same day?
A. I don't want to have to put my brain through that. I know that there
were a few occasions but I'd have to go home and lay in
bed and pray and try and
visualise all those events in relation to the patient records and try and
remember to be more accurate.
Q. The record, for example, of 7 June 2004 when the lymph node was
examined, the exhibit the diary shows that one had an
appointment
at five and then the other at 5.10, is that right?
Q. I accept that's correct?
Q. That doesn't necessarily assist as to whether they were in the room
together, does it?
A. No, but there is a good chance that that may have been the case with
them both being in the office together?
A. Yes. But to answer honestly
Q. Well, absolutely you can't say?
Respondent gave evidence to the Tribunal that the term ‘yellow
flags’ was relatively new technology to him. The questions
of the Tribunal
continued as follows (T389.34-390.2):
Q. So would you know what it is to consider psycho social issues in a
patient, in terms of their presentation?
A. You're probably starting to get out of my league a bit, as far as
these yellow flags, red flags. We didn't learn about the yellow
flag, red flags
at Palmer University when I went through. They taught us about red flags from a
stance of if someone's having a
stroke, they'll display these symptoms. That's
the only time I've ever had explanation of sort of, had the notion of
red flags, but not on a what did you say? A psycho
Q. Well, psycho social factors in health?
Q. So, I mean, you've been in practice a number of years so do you have
procedures in place to recognise whether the emotional or
mental state of a
patient may be becoming persistent, a symptomatic picture?
re-examination the Respondent was asked the following related questions
(T432.30-433.9):
Q. You were asked some questions about yellow flags. Do you remember
Q. I think in your response that you indicated that you didn't have any
particular protocol but you had, on occasions, sent others
to help. Is that
right? You had indicated that on occasions you sent patients for help to
A. Yes. I've done that. Certainly. I refer because of the
nature of some of these more serious cases that have come in over the
was explaining to you, that the severity of cases increased over time so I've
actually, in the last few years, recommended
and assisted people and actually
have come to know of a very good neurosurgeon in Sydney here that I regularly
have not regularly
what's a better word for
it? that I refer or suggest people go and see. Admittedly, they've
got to go through a GP but sometimes
specialists these days now, I've noticed,
the patient can call the specialist directly and make an appointment the way
people have
described it. Whether or not they've gone through the GP for a
referral I'm not sure because they've directly indicated they've
gone straight
to the neurosurgeon.
Q. But in general terms in your practice, are you alive to the
possibility that some clients who attend may have some mental or other
which might be better treated than an adjustment being provided?
A. Yes. Yeah. By the way, I believe chiropractic has some component
with everyone's care, to some level, so I'm certainly not going
to, just because
I identify they've got a condition, stop treatment just because some other
method is more effective. I'm still
going to assist them, as best I can, with
chiropractic because chiropractic helps with the overall health and wellbeing of
Respondent gave evidence that there was one telephone line coming into his
practice that was used for telephone, fax and HICAPS
communications. The
telephone had a portable handset which had a docking station at the front desk
(T391-392).
Respondent gave evidence that he had only recalled the conversation he had with
Patient C wherein he potentially offended her
by assuming she was older than her
sister (when in fact she was three years younger) about three days earlier. The
Respondent stated
that he had a vague recollection about it at the time he was
interviewed by the HCCC and he should have mentioned it then but he
tired and fatigued and was not of sound enough mind to have mentioned it at the
relevant time during the interview. The
Respondent stated that he had sensed
‘pretty much straight away’
that he may have upset Patient C.
The Respondent gave evidence that Patient C had
of the door when he opened it and did not respond when he said something like
‘have a good day’ (T393). The Respondent
was not sure if he
mentioned this incident to his wife. The Respondent was also not sure if he
showed the text message he sent to
Patient C to his wife
asked questions arising by the HCCC the Respondent gave evidence that the
recollection of the conduct of Patient C at the end
of the 31 May 2010
consultation had come back to him over the course of the week (meaning the week
of the Inquiry). The description
he had given earlier in his evidence (see
paragraph above) was an ‘accurate description’. The Respondent
confirmed that
he did have a vague recollection of this incident when he was
going into the interview with the HCCC but for
‘it just didn’t come out at that
The Respondent made reference to being tired, under a great
deal of stress and having health issues as possible explanations as to
occurred (T422).
re-examination the Respondent gave evidence that he had spoken to his counsel on
the morning of 16 May 2012 and was asked to look
at the transcript of the
interview with the HCCC and as a result he recalled the comment he had made
(in particular being wrong about her age). The
Respondent confirmed that even as at 16 May 2012 he was not certain about his
recollection
further re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his
use of the term ‘stormed out’ (T433.11-38):
Q. Then in relation to
[Patient C]
, you have given evidence that
there was a conversation and you indicated that you said something to her like
"Take care" and she
left without responding and then today, as you've been
reminded, you said that you sensed that she was upset or pretty upset, you
pulled the door back and you said that she stormed out?
A. I don't know why I said stormed.
Q. Well, you've said on one occasion that she walked out or left and
then, the next, stormed out?
A. Yes, she walked out.
Q. She didn't storm out?
Q. Can you describe now the way in which she did leave?
A. Yeah. I recall as I said, I did the standing thoracic
adjustment.
Q. Sorry, let's speed it up a bit. Get to the door. We're at the
A. Well, no, I
Q. You were at the door. Just listen. You opened the door and she
Q. Can you describe the way she walked?
A. Well, she just walked out?
Q. Just walked out?
Tribunal asked the Respondent why he said he was ashamed of the text message he
sent to Patient C and the Respondent gave the
following answer
(T396.22-397.1):
Q. Why is it that you're ashamed of it?
A. Because just the strong wording that I used. It's
just has been taken out of context with the intent that I had
initially anticipated
it to be. Like, how it's been it is
interpreted is certainly not something that the initial intent was
not to create this big
problem. I mean, I'm just regretful for sending it.
It's done no it's done no service to anyone. It's
probably I can't even
think of ever doing anything so silly. And,
yeah, I am very sorry for it. Very sorry.
Q. With the comments that [Patient C] made during your consultations
selfesteem, how
frequently do you say that she made those comments?
A. Not very frequently. There was only once or twice. Once in the first
couple of treatments, maybe maybe twice. I can say once.
she made a couple after I'd made my comment.
Q. She made a couple after you made your comment about her being the
elder sibling?
A. Yeah. So, from my recollections, three times, maybe four that she's
made. So, two on one treatment and then one or two right
back at the start and
that was it. So they weren't frequent, no.
Q. Are you able to recall the earlier comment? What was she saying about
A. I can't recall. I can't recall what that comment was. She made some
comment and I just sort of light heartedly gave her, you
lifting uplifting comment but there was nothing behind it. It
might've been the second treatment, possibly. Yeah. It's
long ago for these sorts of things.
in his evidence, in response to a question from the Tribunal, the Respondent was
asked to confirm that he had no intention that
was sexual or flirtatious in
nature when he sent the message to Patient C (as set out in Particular 7(iii)).
The following evidence
was given (T419.29-37):
A. Under oath, no, not at all. It was just very a very poor
way of going about lifting someone's selfesteem. I had no I have
very happy marriage, a very good marriage. I have no absolutely no
anticipation or no what's the word I had absolutely no
on pursuing any form of sexual relationship or otherwise with her. None
whatsoever.
Q. So the words "You're sooooo goddamn sexy and gorgeous" and the "so"
with five o's, that was not intended in any way
A. That was in order to lift her selfesteem.
Respondent was asked in re-examination to give evidence regarding the impact of
‘nervousness’ upon his ability to
(T431.27-39):
Q. You have also been asked about the use of the word "nervous" in the
text and you gave some other evidence today about nerves or
nervousness. Do you
recall that?
Q. Are you suggesting that the nervousness is something which impacts on
your capacity to practice as a chiropractor?
A. Not at all. If anything, it heightens my senses really and
nervousness is it creates a bit of an adrenalin response and, if
anything, heightens that acuity of the adjustment. I get nervous every time I
go to work of a morning. Every time, especially after
a weekend, on the way to
work on Monday morning I'm feeling nervous about the day ahead and feeling
nervous yeah, it's like this
nervous anticipation, I suppose, of what
lays ahead for the day.
relation to Patient A the Respondent stated that he had assumed that the breast
augmentation was only recent as she had raised
it in relation to her neck
complaint (T406-407).
respect to Patient B the Respondent stated that he would not have written
‘referral’ on her clinical records had
she told him that she had
already seen a doctor and had an appointment to see a specialist
the Respondent was given an opportunity to explain why so many patients had
formed the opinion that he had been ‘overly
personal’ with them the
Respondent gave a lengthy answer the essence being that he believed that there
was a degree of collusion
and the HCCC investigator had made a judgment about
the matter based upon the patient’s written statements (T415-416).
re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence about his
‘visual memory’ (T425.14-40):
Q. In relation to other matters, you've referred on a number of occasions
to visual memory?
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. Well, for me of past events I have the ability to play over in my
mind's eye memories. Like, when I was going through university,
when I was in
exam situations and I couldn't remember the word, I'd close my eyes and I could
actually picture, you know, the page
number and picture where on the page I
could almost read over in my mind's eye what I had learnt and answer the
question accordingly.
And I've got vivid memories of childhood events, but when
it comes to conversation I'm weak weaker in my recalling long term
conversations.
But when it comes to visual things, if I can visualise the face
of the patient often times it takes me a while to get their name
but if I can
visualise their face I can recall it. And, yeah, I can remember someone down
the street and I can't necessarily remember
their name but I can most certainly
remember their face many years later.
Q. On the occasions where you used the expression "I have a visual
memory", is that what you mean?
A. Yes, that's what I mean.
Q. That you actually picture in your own mind
A. I can picture, yeah
Q. the scene?
A. Yes. The scene's that before me, yes.
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the manner in which he provides
treatment (relevant to the evidence of Dr Kelly)
(T427.25-44):
Q. This is skipping ahead a little, but you were asked some questions
that you know had
had a breast augmentation. Do you say that your treatment of them is different
and, if so, why?
A. No. I don't have any but the way I adjust them is how I
would adjust anyone because the methods I use aren't going to be of
detrimental impact, in my opinion, toward their treatment.
Q. Dr Kelly referred to a woman with a breast augmentation lying
face down on the table, for example, and you'd have to be careful
amount of pressure being exerted?
A. Certainly. But my technique's always gentle for everyone. I don't
use forceful adjusting methods in relation to adjusting compared
to some. My
colleagues that I've seen over the years are certainly very much more firmer
with their adjustments than I am.
Q. But if you were aware of the fact of someone having had a breast
augmentation, would you take that into account in terms of your
adjustments or
treatments?
A. Certainly.
Peer Review evidence – Dr Engel and Dr Kelly
HCCC obtained a peer review report from Dr Roger Engel dated 12 January 2011
(exhibit 24). The report is framed on the basis that
the evidence of the
patients was true. In his oral evidence Dr Engel expanded to indicate that he
had not relied upon the summary
provided in the HCCC letter of instruction,
rather he relied upon the source material from the complainants and the
Respondent.
Respondent obtained a peer review report from Dr John Kelly. Dr Kelly’s
report is dated 3 March 2011. Dr Kelly notes that
he had not questioned the
Respondent or any of the witnesses. Dr Kelly stated that his report was based on
the Respondent’s
version of event being accurate and correct and noted
‘there is a considerable difference between the versions of events
as provided by the complainants’
(exhibit R2).
the second page of Dr Kelly’s report he noted that three of the
complainants were related to each other and that the fourth
was unrelated
‘but may be indirectly known to them as per her statement’
(R2 – page 2). At this point the Tribunal notes the evidence before
the Tribunal was that Patient D only became aware that there
complainants after she made her complaint. Similarly the three related
complainants only became aware of the other unrelated
complainant after they had
made their complaints.
Kelly was asked to comment upon the report of Dr Engel. Dr Kelly provided these
comments in a second report dated 8 March 2012
(also part of exhibit R2).
Engel and Dr Kelly gave evidence on the third and fourth days (respectively) of
the Inquiry.
Kelly gave evidence that the concept of ‘Yellow Flags’ came into
usage in Chiropractic in about 2004 as meaning signs
of non-organic issues such
as mood, their fears, their job satisfaction and
‘things surrounding
their psychology of their predicament’
which will affect the course of
the outcome of the patient’s condition (T337).
his report Dr Kelly was only asked to provide his view on the words
‘thank you, I appreciate your comment’
which he considered
had no clinical relevance nor was it unreasonable, inappropriate or contrary to
professional standards. Dr Kelly
opined that it
‘would simply appear to
be irrelevant’
(Page 3 – R2).
oral evidence Dr Engel stated that although it was dependent upon the context he
considered there would be rare circumstances where
embracing a patient was
appropriate (T207). In the context of the conversation described having preceded
the embrace Dr Engel did
not consider it to be appropriate. Dr Engel expressed
the view that it would not be appropriate for a chiropractor to initiate a
conversation about their own age and could not stop a patient from doing so. In
that circumstance it is then a question of how the
practitioner reacts to the
situation. Dr Engel stated he would not be critical of the Respondent’s
conduct if all that happened
was the Respondent saying thank you to Patient A
for commenting that she thought he looked younger than his years and then
her on the elbow.
cross-examination it was put to Dr Engel that if the
words ‘I love you.
were meant to convey
“Thank you for thinking
that I’m younger than I actually am’.
Dr Engel expressed the
‘The choice of words is appalling to portray that
(T210.43) when viewed in the context of these words being
said in a consultation between a patient and a practitioner. Despite extensive
cross-examination Dr Engel remained of the view that the conduct was
inappropriate and not professional (T212). While Dr Engel was
of the view that
‘Thank you – it means a lot’ was less likely to be
misinterpreted the practitioner should be aware
that certain language was much
more open to misinterpretation.
Particular 1(b)
Kelly was not asked to comment on this Particular in his report. Under
cross-examination Dr Kelly confirmed that he had provided
his opinions regarding
the conduct set out in Particular 1 on the basis of the Respondent’s
version of the events (T340).
Engel’s evidence regarding this Particular is set out
Particular 2
Engel was not asked to comment upon this Particular.
Engel expressed the view in his report that he considers it would be
unprofessional and inappropriate (as well as unnecessary and
demeaning) to pull
a patient’s bra straps up and down without warning or explanation. He was
further of the view that there
was nothing other than asking questions of
Patient A that was required to determine if the implants were a contributing
the neck pain i.e. there was no need to touch Patient A’s bra
in order to address the issue. Dr Engel expressed the view that
Respondent’s conduct of moving Patient A’s bra was a significant
departure from the standard expected and he was
mildly critical thereof (see
page 5-6 of report).
Kelly expressed the view (at page 2 of exhibit R2) that it would be
‘reasonable, appropriate and in accordance with professional
chiropractic standards then and now to make appropriate comments
to patients who
may be affected by these circumstances’
(being a reference to breast
augmentation). With respect to the circumstances when it may be clinically
appropriate to touch a patient’s
bra straps or area around the breasts
other than when related directly to treatment Dr Kelly provided the following
It would be appropriate to handle the shoulder straps of a patient’s
bra when demonstrating to them the effect this has on the
muscles of their
shoulder girdle (trapezius region) and the implications for their posture in
general in particular their thoracic
This demonstration could ideally take place in front of a mirror so that
the patient could see the impact that the suggested alterations
may make to the
patient’s posture and clinical symptoms. Because this demonstration would
be performed with the bra on, no
other additional precautions need be taken
other than ensuring that the patient understood what you were demonstrating.
his oral evidence Dr Engel stated that prior to undertaking any demonstration
the patient would have to be clear as to what was
going to occur with the bra
straps (T213). Dr Engel raises the question of why the Respondent had not
recorded anything in the clinical
notes regarding this examination if he thought
the weight of her breasts of clinical significance. He also noted that if the
in breast size occurred some significant amount of time earlier it
would unlikely to cause symptoms so many years later.
Cross-examination
of Dr Engel focussed on a number of issues including the fact that he left the
‘I’m 34’ off the
quotation that began “I love
You’. It was clear that Dr Engel had considered the context of the
statement comprehensively
when he gave his opinion. During cross-examination it
was suggested to Dr Engel that he had in effect overstepped the mark with
respect to making findings of fact rather than just providing an opinion based
on one version or the other. Dr Engel clearly stated
that he understood his role
was not to make findings of fact.
Particular 3(ii)
As indicated above in his report Dr Engel’s opinion is that there is no
need to move a patient’s bra for the purpose
of gauging their impact on
their neck condition. If a breast examination was clinically indicated then it
should have been performed
in accordance with the accepted standard, if indeed
the decision was made to undertake this examination practitioner (i.e. by
consent, uncovering the breast and not performing the examination
through clothing) rather than refer on to another appropriately
trained health
professional. Dr Engel expressed the view that the Respondent’s conduct
fell significantly below the standard
expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training and experience and invited his strong criticism
(page 6 -7 of exhibit
his second report Dr Kelly stated that he was of the view that there did not
appear to him to be any reason to examine the breasts
of Patient A (page 2). In
his oral evidence Dr Kelly stated he would not ‘feel compelled’ to
record in the clinical notes
the fact that a patient had had a breast
augmentation (T338).
his oral evidence Dr Engel expressed the view that if the Respondent had touched
Patient A’s breasts in the manner she described
that it would be
unprofessional (T217). Dr Engel set out the reasons why a chiropractor may
examine a patients breasts (T218).
cross-examination Dr Kelly stated that he considered a chiropractor would be
giving advice to patients who may have had a breast
augmentation where the
breasts had been made ‘significantly larger’ meaning a doubling in
size (T339-340). He added later
in cross-examination that he would prefer to see
a notation in the clinical records of the fact of this surgery if the patient
disclosed it (T346). In answer to a question from the Tribunal Dr Kelly
agreed that a valid reason for recording this information
in the notes was that
having that knowledge may cause a chiropractor to modify the techniques used for
re-examination Dr Kelly was asked in what circumstances may the fact of a breast
augmentation impact upon treatment. Dr Kelly stated
he would want to know when,
for example, the patient is laid face down on the table and pressure applied
directly onto the back from
the back to the front (T351).
Particular 4
Engel expressed the view in his report that prior to undertaking any examination
of Patient B the Respondent should have obtained
relevant history such as
information regarding her menstrual cycle and previous episodes of swelling in
that breast or the other.
Dr Engel notes that even on the Respondent’s
evidence the examination was cursory in nature. Further, if the Respondent had
felt it necessary and appropriate to examine the unexplained swelling under
Patient B’s right arm then, in Dr Engel’s
view, he should have
performed it properly rather than the hasty superficial manner in which he
appears to have done. Dr Engel expressed
the view that the Respondent’s
conduct fell significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level
of training and experience and invited his strong criticism
(pages 8-9 of exhibit 24).
on the circumstance of the Respondent informing Patient B
‘I am going
to check your armpit, can you show me whereabouts you are referring to?’
after Patient B advised the Respondent of her concern regarding a lump under
her arm and asked him to check it Dr Kelly in his report
expressed the view that
‘this would seem reasonable, appropriate and in accordance with
industry standards at the time’.
Dr Kelly qualifies this opinion by
stating that this would be on the assumption that the patient had alerted the
practitioner to the
presence of a lump and sought the practitioners’
opinion. Dr Kelly stated that in order to give this opinion the practitioner
would have to examine the area
‘visually and palpably’.
While an initial inspection may be performed through the clothing Dr Kelly
stated in his report that he would expect a closer examination
would warrant
direct skin contact to allow for the identification of discolouration or textual
changes over and around the lump.
The question asked of Dr Kelly by the
Respondent’s legal representative records the Respondent feeling a
swelling the size
of a marble in Patient B’s left arm pit and recommending
to Patient B that she seek medical attention. Dr Kelly notes, in the
context for
explaining why a closer inspection was not undertaken by the Respondent, that
Patient B was due to see a specialist regarding
the lump (page 4 – exhibit
R2). In his second report Dr Kelly repeated his view that any examination of a
breast lump could
not be performed through clothing.
Dr Kelly’s second report (dated 8 March 2012 – part of exhibit R2)
he notes that Dr Engel’s report indicated
that the Respondent examined
Patient B’s breast when
‘what was examined was an axillary lymph
node albeit in a cursory manner’.
The Tribunal notes at this point
that Dr Engel was accepting Patient B’s version of events was correct and
Dr Kelly was accepting
the Respondent’s version of events was correct.
Ultimately it is of course a question for the Tribunal to decide what
his oral evidence Dr Engel stated that he did not think it was necessary to go
under a bra strap to palpate a lump located under
an arm. He also stated that
such an examination should not be done through a patient’s clothing. The
lump needs to be looked
at and felt. One side may well need to be compared to
the other for example. If a chiropractor as a primary care provider takes on
role of examining the lump then the examination should be done properly and
reach some conclusion (T222).
was put to Dr Engel that Patient B had some ‘vague appointment’ with
her GP for the future. The Tribunal notes that
ultimately the Tribunal received
evidence that there was nothing vague about the appointment. Patient B saw her
GP on the same day
and was to see a specialist in the very near future.
Engel clarified part of his report by indicating that a swelling in the armpit
can descend down into the breast (T224). If that
had occurred then an
examination of the breasts may be required. Dr Engel also clarified that he was
critical of the Respondent for
undertaking an improper examination of the
region. He stood by his strong criticism of the Respondent’s conduct as he
performed the examination of the lump under the armpit in an appropriate
manner (T226).
Cross-examination
of Dr Engel returned to this Particular at T228. Dr Engel again confirmed that
he was critical of this examination
not just on the basis that it was performed
through clothing but also, for example because there was no apparent consent or
explanation
to the patient prior to it being undertaken. Dr Engel also pointed
to the apparent lack of preliminary questioning and failure to
undertake a
comprehensive examination beyond this one lump. Dr Engel maintained his high
criticism and notes the age of the patient
at the time of the examination as
another factor to be considered.
answer to questions from the Tribunal Dr Engel further clarified the steps he
that should be taken by a practitioner prior to examining
a lump under a
patient’s arm in the circumstances described (T248). Dr Engel gave
evidence that if the patient was under 16
years of age and her mother was in the
waiting room that he would inform the mother of the request to have the lump
examined and
seek the consent from the mother. Further, if he formed the view
that the lump required medical follow up he would inform the mother
Later in his evidence Dr Engel stated he thought it would be inappropriate to
undertake such an examination without parental
consent if the patient was 15
years of age (T252)
cross-examination Dr Kelly indicated that he was of the view that the
examination of the lump should have been undertaken visually
and directly on the
skin (T340- 341 & 349). A cursory examination through clothing would be
satisfactory in Dr Kelly’s
view as long as the chiropractor then referred
the patient on (T341). Dr Kelly expressed the view that time constraints should
be an issue determinative of the type of examination undertaken and if time
was the sole determinative factor then the cursory examination
would not be
appropriate. Later in answer to questions from the Tribunal Dr Kelly stated that
he after undertaking an examination
of the lump as thoroughly as they were able
to he would expect a chiropractor to refer a patient on as a chiropractor did
significant diagnostic skills with respect to sub dermal lesions and
lacked training in this area. It made him ‘nervous’
chiropractors wanted to go into such areas (T350).
re-examination Dr Kelly stated that if the practitioner were advised that the
patient already had an appointment with a specialist
organised that a cursory
examination would be all that would be done (T350).
Engel provides an opinion in his report regarding the lowering of Patient
B’s jeans to perform a psoas stretch. Dr Engel
notes that the psoas muscle
stretch is dependent upon there being unrestricted movement of the hip.
Therefore if the jeans created
a restriction on the hip movement then draping
should have been provided for modesty purposes. Dr Engel expressed the view that
Respondent’s conduct, in not providing draping, fell significantly
below the standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training
and experience and invited his strong criticism (page 9 of exhibit 24).
answer to a question regarding the manner in which the Respondent performed the
psoas stretch on Patient B Dr Kelly stated:
Access to the psoas muscle slightly above the inguinal ligament is
commonly required and skin contact is usually preferred. This requires
a shirt or blouse and loosening the trousers or slacks being worn. Pressure is
frequently applied by one hand in the region
above the inguinal ligament whilst
stretch is applied towards hip extension....under these circumstances it is
reasonable, appropriate
and in accordance with professional standards within the
Chiropractic profession to perform this technique.
Kelly was not asked in his 3 March 2011 report to provide an opinion about any
comments about Patient B’s tattoo.
his second report Dr Kelly provided the following comment regarding Dr
Engel’s criticism of the Respondent for not using
a towel to drape the
right inguinal region of Patient B (page 1 – report dated 8 March
Generally speaking a towel is not required for this examination based on
the fact that the clothing need only be minimally turned
back. It would
certainly be inappropriate to distract the jeans and underwear down to the upper
part of the leg.
oral evidence Dr Engel stated that if the clothing was going to be adjusted for
the purpose of applying the psoas stretch then
some means of modesty should have
been made available, particularly for a patient of this age. To effect this
stretch the clothing
may have needed to have been moved down to the attachment
point of the psoas muscle in the groin inguinal area (T227).
Cross-examination
returned to this Particular at T230. Dr Engel agreed that a towel or other
provisions for modesty was not always
required. Dr Engel stated that he would
not be strongly critical of the Respondent’s conduct if the clothing was
simply moved
sufficiently to allow access to the point required to undertake the
stretch provided this was not the first occasion on which this
stretch procedure
had been used.
cross-examination Dr Kelly gave evidence that if Patient B’s pants and
underwear were lowered for any other reason than
to effect to psoas stretch that
the conduct would be inappropriate (T342). Dr Kelly ageed that the clothing did
not have to be lowered
by very much to carry out the treatment.
Particular 6
Engel did not comment upon this Particular in his report. Dr Kelly gave the
opinion in his report based upon the premise that the
Respondent advised Patient
B that he intended on pulling down her jeans slightly to make contact with the
Particular 7(i)
Engel expressed the general view in his report that voicing personal opinions to
a patient always carries with it an element of
risk for the practitioner as such
behaviour has the potential to be misconstrued by the patient. With respect to
the conduct described
in this Particular Dr Engel expressed the view that the
Respondent had
‘certainly overstepped the boundaries of professional
Dr Engel expressed the view that the Respondent’s
conduct fell significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of
equivalent level of training and experience and invited his strong criticism
(page 14 of exhibit 24).
Kelly was only asked in his report to comment upon statements of the Respondent
‘you look good for your age’
etc. Dr Kelly answered
‘Yes’ to the question as to whether this was appropriate, reasonable
and in accordance with industry
standards at the time.
his oral evidence Dr Engel suggested that if the patient made comments regarding
how old they looked a positive comment could be
made and if the comments from
the patient continued that a chiropractor would consider suggesting they
‘see someone about those kind of thoughts’
(T230). Dr Engel
gave evidence that it was part of a chiropractors training to recognise low
self-esteem issues/behaviour and to
know what it means but not to treat it
Dr Engel was not necessarily critical of a chiropractor saying to a patient that
they looked like they were in good shape. Whether
it was appropriate or not
would depend upon whether the patient was made uncomfortable by such comments
which was a matter of professional
judgement and although this was not
‘taught’ to chiropractors professional boundaries were taught.
Engel suggested that rather than making comments such as
great for your age’
‘You’re not as bad as you
think you are’
‘Your back is in much better shape for your
‘I think you are doing OK’
appropriate. Dr Engel later expressed the view that the words used (being a
reference to the text message set out in Particular
7(iii)) had crossed the
professional boundary (T237).
not taken into consideration by the Tribunal with respect to any Particular of
Complaint the Tribunal notes the evidence of
Dr Engel that it is of concern if
by stating to Patient C
‘I get so nervous when I treat you
that the Respondent was in fact nervous about the decisions as to how to treat
the patient. If the chiropractor is getting
so nervous then they may not be
being objective in their clinical decisions and should no longer provide
treatment and does not instil
confidence in the patient (T232). This is a view
that the Tribunal shares with Dr Engel.
Tribunal asked Dr Engel to take into consideration the notation on the clinical
records held by the Respondent for Patient C that
she was taking a particular
medication. Dr Engel indicated that this knowledge would make a difference to
the manner in which a practitioner
would respond to self-deprecating comments
way of a general statement Dr Kelly gave evidence that he did not see anything
wrong with commenting upon a patient being ‘well
presented’ on a
particular day (whether it be clothing or hair) as long as
‘you thought
it was going to be complimentary’.
He was also of the view that
comments such as ‘you are in good shape’ are appropriate
particularly if they had lost weight
response to a question from the Tribunal Dr Kelly reiterated that he found it
hard to comment on them without being present or
understanding the full context
and he therefore felt constrained about commenting. Dr Kelly reiterated that he
did not see any advantage
in mentioning to a patient that treating them caused
nervousness but again felt constrained about commenting as he was not present
but he confirmed he would not do this himself (T346).
asked about recording when a patient made comments indicative of low self-esteem
Dr Kelly gave evidence in answer to questions
from the Tribunal that if these
comments continued he would be concerned that such stress may lead to the
problems receiving chiropractic
treatment returning and if it was persistent he
‘probably want to actually consider other ways of managing
such as referral for counselling (T347). In the meantime he would
continue to make positive, but not flippant or ‘gushy’,
the patient. Dr Kelly stated that the remarks should be
‘strong, firm,
well-meant’
and genuinely said. He considered comments like ‘you
look good for your age’ or ‘you have kept yourself in good
shape’ to be appropriate. When asked whether a comment such as
‘Don’t change anything about yourself, you look
great just the way
you are’ Dr Kelly indicated that he did not consider that this was
inappropriate but added that it would
depend upon the
‘tonal qualities
that are given when the communication’s made’
Particular 7(ii)
the description provided by Patient C Dr Engel assumes in his report that the
Respondent was performing a ‘standing wing
lift, axilla hold’
adjustment. Dr Engel expresses the view that
‘inherent in this
technique is the provision that, apart from the actual adjustment contact point,
the practitioner maintains
an adequate distance, at all times, between the
patient’s body and the practitioner’s body’
notes that he does not have an exact description of how this adjustment was
performed (eg whether a rolled up towel was
used). However, what was clear to Dr
Engel on the evidence of Patient C was that the Respondent did not maintain an
adequate distance
between his body and the patient’s body during the
procedure. Dr Engel expressed the view that the Respondent’s conduct
significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training and experience and invited his
strong criticism (pages 14 -15
of exhibit 24).
his second report Dr Kelly commented upon the view expressed by Dr Engel as
On page 14 of his report Dr Engel has emphasized the fact that contact
between the practitioners pelvis or leg against the posterior
surface of the
patient’s buttocks or leg is highly inappropriate and attracts his strong
criticism. I would completely disagree
with his opinion in this instance. In my
earlier report I have included images of the manner in which this technique is
by me and the authors of a Chiropractic technique textbook. Pelvic
almost daily for
the last 35 years I find the method with I have outlined in my earlier report
the most effective way to perform
the technique. It almost always involved some
degree of pelvic region or leg contact.
Engel was extensively questioned under cross-examination regarding the axilla
wing lift adjustment (T232-236). Further questions
were asked by the Tribunal
(T239 – 242). Dr Engel gave evidence that the degree and place of contact
between a practitioner
and a patient will change according to the level being
adjusted and the particular technique employed by the practitioner. Relevantly,
Dr Engel gave evidence that if the technique employed involved the dragging of
the patient backwards that the distance between the
practitioner’s lower
body and the patient’s lower body should increase. Further, if the
practitioner decided to perform
the adjustment in a different manner then this
had to be fully explained to the patient and consent obtained prior to the
adjustment.
answer to questions from the Tribunal Dr Kelly gave evidence that depending upon
the technique used for this type of adjustment
that the practitioner and the
patient may end up with a body contact from the low though to mid sternal region
re-examination Dr Kelly stated that the contact between the patient’s
buttock and the practitioner’s leg remains throughout
the lift process
Particular 7(iii)
respect to the conduct described in this Particular Dr Engel expressed in his
report the view that the Respondent had
‘certainly overstepped the
boundaries of professional conduct’.
Dr Engel specifically comments on
the use of text messages indicating that it is not inherently inappropriate
conduct to communicate
with patients this way. Rather, Dr Engel expresses the
view that any form of communication between practitioner and patient carries
certain boundaries. Turning specifically to the text message sent by the
Respondent on 31 May 2010 Dr Engel states
‘regardless of his stated
intention for sending the message, it is obviously inappropriate language for a
health practitioner.
As for the Respondent’s evidence that the text
message was sent as an attempt to boost Patient C’s self-esteem, Dr Engel
comments that self-esteem can play a role in the management of a number of
conditions, mostly related to psychological conditions
but may also arise in
aspects of pain management. There was nothing in the evidence to suggest that
Patient C was suffering from
a psychological disorder but the notes record that
she had been suffering from musculoskeletal pain for a number of years. Further,
if it was appropriate for the Respondent to be managing Patient C’s low
self-esteem none of the options should have included
strategies such as
complimenting Patient C on her appearance or sending her text messages claiming
that she was
‘so god dam sexy and gorgeous .... The perfect
Dr Engel expressed the view that the
Respondent’s conduct fell significantly below the standard expected of a
practitioner of
an equivalent level of training and experience and invited his
strong criticism (pages 14 -15 of exhibit 24).
his report Dr Kelly gave the opinion that mobile telephone, text and email
communications were extremely common in the community
‘not uncommon
within the profession’.
With respect to the text message
glad this treatment worked for you, I get so nervous when I treat you, it helps
to know it worked’
Dr Kelly gave the following opinion:
Whilst this communication would seem clinically unnecessary it would not
be unreasonable or inappropriate for him to express the fact
that he was pleased
it had worked.
respect to the text message set out in Particular 7(iii) Dr Kelly provided the
following opinion in his report (page 7 –
exhibit R2):
The wording of this text is completely inappropriate for a professional
chiropractor and it would seem a bizarre way to bolster the
self-esteem and his professional relationship with the patient.
I find the wording of the text very inappropriate and not in accordance
with chiropractic professional standards at the time.
Dr Kelly expressed his strong criticism for the Respondent’s actions
relating to this text. Dr Kelly stated that an
attempt to bolster the
patient’ self-esteem and his professional relationship with the patient
could have been achieved by
far more appropriate wording.
Kelly expressed the following view under cross-examination regarding the initial
text message sent by the Respondent to Patient
C (not subject of the
Particulars) (T343.13-27):
Q. At point 22 you indicate that you didn't think this communication
was clinically necessary or it would seem clinically unnecessary
but it didn't
appear to you to be inappropriate or unreasonable. What about that part of the
message which says, "I get so nervous
when I treat you"? Do you have any view
as to that particular part of the message?
A. No, I'm not taken aback by it; I don't find it to be offensive. I
don't know that it's something that I would say in a communication
patient, but it may be something you might say it would depend
entirely upon the circumstances if I was to I don't see any
in admitting to a patient that you get nervous when you're seeing them, but I
don't find it to be offensive or inappropriate.
Q. Would you agree sir, that whilst you don't find it offensive or
inappropriate that it's possible that a patient could do so?
A. I would have thought what it might have done to a patient is perhaps
make them nervous; I don't think it would offend them.
Particular 8(i)
his report Dr Engel sets out the three most common causes of chest pain –
cardiac, breast and musculoskeletal. Dr Engel stated
that given Patient
D’s age it would unlikely to be cardiac in nature and a series of simple
questions would have clarified
this possibility. Dr Engel also expressed the
view that breast pain was not uncommon as part of the normal menstrual cycle and
again a series of simple questions would have been sufficient. If as a
result of the answer to those questions the Respondent considered
that the pain
was originating from Patient D’s breasts then a breast examination was
appropriate. Prior to undertaking such
an examination the Respondent would need
to explain why it was necessary and what it would entail, obtain the patients
which may involve answering questions from the patient and then
making sure that the patient was comfortable with the examination
circumstances. Dr Engel states that the standard breast examination involves
both breasts being exposed and takes 3 to 5 minutes
to complete. If the answers
to the questions relating to breast pain did not indicate a breast problem then
the pain could be musculoskeletal
in origin. In this case an examination of the
rib cage and thoracic musculature would be reasonable. To undertake this type of
examination
the patient may be asked to remove loose clothing but there is
usually no need to remove the bra unless there is pain originating
from directly
under the bra in which case appropriate draping would be used to protect the
patient’s modesty. Dr Engel notes
that Patient D stated that the
Respondent merely asked her to point to where the chest pain was and without any
further questioning,
explanation or consent proceeded to undertake a breast
examination. Dr Engel expressed the view that the Respondent’s conduct
fell significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training and experience and invited his
strong criticism
(pages 21-22 of exhibit 24).
Kelly was asked to comment on the palpating of the sternum/costosternal joints
with a straight hand through a patient’s clothing.
In his report (exhibit
R1 – page 8) Dr Kelly provided the following opinion:
It would certainly be reasonable and appropriate to palpate be sternum and
associated rib joints in response to the patient’s
expression of pain in
that area. These joints would normally be palpated with the tips of the fingers.
However, manual adjustment
or mobilization of these joints may be performed with
the palm or heel of the hand and the palpation and mobilization may be performed
at the same time. These joints could be readily palpated through clothing.
his second report Dr Kelly commented upon the view expressed by Dr Engel as
On page 21 of Dr Engel’s report he indicated that a series of simple
questions would be sufficient for Dr Woods to clarify whether
the pain was or
was not originating from the breast. Whilst questioning may assist the discovery
process, nothing would replace the
value of palpitating the sterno-costal and
costochondral joints both of which are very common diagnostic issues for
anterior thoracic
his oral evidence Dr Engel clarified that a chest and a breast examination were
different. He gave the following evidence at T238.1-23:
Q. In terms of assuming she's been told what's going to happen, if there
is a complaint about generalised chest pain without anything
further and the
practitioner has determined to carry out an examination and has indicated that
it would be necessary for the patient
to remove her shirt and bra, that would,
you would expect, put the patient on some notice as to the fact that a breast
examination
is going to take place?
A. A breast and chest examination, they're different.
Q. A breast examination firstly?
A. Breasts don't generally cause general chest pains whereas
musculoskeletal structures can, so that's a chest examination as opposed
breast examination.
Q. If it's a musculoskeletal problem, there's really no need to examine
the breasts themselves; is that what you're saying?
A. Beyond the midline, which is not which you may come into
something else, yes.
Q. But if it's just a generalised complaint about chest pain, there would
be no problem with an examination of the breast tissue?
As you've indicated
earlier this morning, breast tissue can be examined by a chiropractor?
answer to questions from the Tribunal Dr Engel indicated the nature of the
questions he would expect to be asked of a patient complaining
of generalised
chest pain prior to any examination occurring (T238-9). Dr Engel stated that
there was nothing in the evidence of
Patient D that would provide a reason for a
breast examination as opposed to an examination of the chest wall. During this
examination he would not expect there to be much contact with the breast
tissue at all. A chest examination may have involved an
examination of the front
of the chest limited to the ‘middle under the breast bone and the rib
attachments’ (T242). When
the patient undertaking the slight build and
physical activity of Patient D mentioned generalised chest pain he would
initially think
of musculoskeletal strain (T244).
oral evidence in chief Dr Kelly indicated that when a patient complained of
chest pain he expected that they would indicate whereabouts
it was located. He
expected a chiropractor would then enquire as to how long the pain had been
there, the nature of the pain and
whether they knew what had caused it. Dr Kelly
stated that an examination of the breast would only be required if the pain was
to be actually behind the breast (T336). Dr Kelly expressed the view
that although it depended upon the exact nature of the examination
patient’s clothing would not have to be removed although they may often be
cross-examination Dr Kelly stated that he had based the comment regarding the
possibility that Patient D knew the other three patients
on the contents of
paragraph 18 of Patient D’s statement (T339). Dr Kelly also confirmed
under cross-examination that he would
expect that the costosternal joints of a
slight framed person such a Patient D would be readily palpated through clothing
If the patient had indicated that the pain was coming from their breast
then a number of questions would be asked to ascertain if
it was breast pain
which may lead to a breast examination but would lead to an immediate referral
to a general practitioner (T344).
Particular 8(ii)
Engel repeats his view in his report that text messages are not an inherently
inappropriate manner for a practitioner to communicate
with a patient, but
carries with it certain boundaries, as do all communications between patient and
practitioner. Dr Engel expressed
the view that if the Respondent was discussing
a non-chiropractic matter with the patient then both parties should know the
of what was being discussed. Dr Engel observed on the basis that the
Respondent thought the discussion was about purchasing a horse
for his daughter
whereas Patient D claimed this topic had never been discussed there was
something amiss. At the very least there
was a breakdown in communication. Dr
Engel considered that the Respondent’s choice of words made his message
very unclear if
the intention was to arrange for the purchase of a horse as a
surprise for his daughter. Dr Engel stated he found it difficult to
the Respondent’s text message with the explanation of its intended
meaning. Even if the intended meaning of the text
message was accepted Dr Engel
was of the view that the message was still inappropriate and he agreed with the
Respondent’s
own view of the matter – that it was
Dr Engel expressed the view that the Respondent’s
conduct fell significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of
equivalent level of training and experience and invited his strong criticism
(pages 24-25 of exhibit 24).
Kelly expressed moderate criticism of the text message detailed in this
Particular and provided the following comment in his report:
This text message seems unnecessary and inappropriate. There appears to be
nothing in the message of a clinical nature. There appears
to be nothing within
the message in relation to a horse.
The message could be construed to be inappropriately personal in nature.
cross-examination Dr Kelly stated that the reason he had been highly critical of
the 31 May text message (as opposed to moderately
critical of the 21 April text
message) was because of the content including the mention that the patient was
‘so god damned
sexy’. Dr Kelly explained his moderate criticism of
the 21 April text message on the basis that he was somewhat constrained
looking at the content rather than the context as he did not know the
relationship that existed between the Respondent and Patient
C. Dr Kelly did not
consider that the inclusion of an ‘X’ at the end of the 21 April
message increased his level of criticism.
way of a general observation regarding the evidence given by the two peer
reviewers that the Tribunal notes that the manner in
which an axilla or elbow
hold thoracic wing lift adjustment can be performed in a variety of ways.
Factors such as body size and
shape of both the chiropractor and patient on each
occasion of performing this adjustment and the level of the spine requiring
will inform the decision as to the method of application. Both peer
reviewers described the execution of this adjustment noting the
extent of body
the execution by the Respondent of
this adjustment, although it may have been
therapeutically effective, according to the evidence of the patients the
Respondent, breached
what would be considered appropriate physical contact
between them on the occasions which gave rise to the complaints.
Particular 8(iii)
specific comments were made by either peer reviewer regarding this text.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
written submissions of the HCCC dated 15 June 2012 was provided to the Tribunal.
HCCC supplemented these written submissions orally.
HCCC submissions in Reply addressed issues raised in the Respondent’s
submissions regarding the framing of the Particulars
of Complaint, the
‘forensic disadvantages’ the Respondent was placed in due to the
delay in making some of the complaints.
The submissions also addressed the
Particulars, summarised in part below.
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent handed up a written outline of submissions dated 29 June 2012.
Respondent made submissions regarding general matters.
Respondent submitted that while noting the brevity of the handwritten
‘statements’ of each of the patients as opposed
to the typed
statements that there were significant differences within each set of documents.
Where these differences are directly
relevant to the alleged conduct the
Respondent submitted that the Tribunal would not be satisfied of proof of the
allegations.
Respondent submitted that the evidence concerning each patient should be
considered separately citing, by way of example,
KRM V The Queen
[2001] HCA 11
206 CLR 221
(per McHugh J at [36]). The Respondent referred to the submission
made by the HCCC which invited the Tribunal to consider the question
would Patient A lie?’. The Respondent submitted that this question should
not be posed as it tends to reverse the
onus of proof as it creates the
implication that the Respondent should explain why the complainant would make a
false or mistaken
allegation citing
R v Jovanovic
42 NSWLR 520
the decision of Latham J in
Doe v the Queen
NSWCCA 203.
Respondent submitted that these authorities note that there are many reasons why
someone would lie and some of those reasons
may never be discovered.
Respondent submitted that none of the Particulars would constitute professional
misconduct, nor when conduct on a number of occasions,
considered together,
constitutes professional misconduct.
Respondent’s submissions note that both peer reviewers were strongly
critical of the second text message to Patient C (being
the subject of
Particular 7(iii)). There was moderate criticism from Dr Kelly and strong
criticism from Dr Engel for the text message
to Patient D (being the subject of
Particular 8(ii)). The Respondent submitted that such conduct is not in
accordance with chiropractic
standards and is significantly below the standards
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
The Respondent’s submission noted that neither peer reviewer
used the term unethical.
Respondent’s submissions regarding the text messages detailed in
Particular 7(iii), 8(ii) and 8(iii) was that they were
not intended to be
inappropriate ‘but fully accepts that the words used were ill-conceived
and open to be taken out of context’.
The Respondent apologised to Patient
C and Patient D for any
‘distress, angst or inconvenience that this has
caused to either
[of them]’.
Respondent submitted that an unfortunate experience wherein an adverse event
occurred (ultimately found to be unrelated to the
Respondent’s treatment)
with a patient after he had treated her neck may explain the Respondent’s
‘nervousness’
text message sent by the Respondent to Patient C which is not the subject of
Particular.
was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that even though he had been
practicing for a fairly short period of time there had been
no other complaints
of misconduct against the Respondent. Further, the text messages should be read
in the context of there being
evidence that he was enthusiastic about his work,
that patients describe him as competent and friendly, that he was concerned for
his patients overall well-being and his receptionist speaks highly of his
professionalism. His prior good character and professional
practice were
submitted as important considerations as it bears upon whether the Respondent
engaged in the conduct alleged and whether
he is being truthful in his evidence
Findings re Particulars
noted above, extensive evidence was given by a number of witnesses. An overview
of the evidence is set out above.
not dealt with specifically above the Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions in
reply as addressing the general submissions made
by the Respondent and will not
set these out in this document.
this section the Tribunal will set out other evidence relating to each
Particular raised in the submissions made by each party
and the Tribunal’s
finding with respect to that Particular after dealing with more general matters.
Tribunal has received evidence regarding the Respondent and his treatment of
four patients. While there is much that is not disputed
(eg. the fact that they
were each his patient, the general nature of the treatment provided, the nature
of the conditions that caused
the patients to seek treatment from the Respondent
etc) there are other areas where the evidence of the Respondent diverges
significantly
from that of the patients. The Tribunal has had the benefit of
hearing evidence from each of the patients and the Respondent. The
Tribunal has
also had the benefit of evidence of the contents of text messages which the
Respondent does not deny he sent to two
of the patients. The Tribunal does not
accept the Respondent’s account of the interpretation of these text
messages. His explanations
are not accepted by the Tribunal as they are
implausible in the extreme.
Tribunal notes that as a result of the perceived inaccuracies regarding dates in
the evidence of Patient A that the Respondent
sought to tender his appointment
books for the relevant periods. This material was allowed into evidence over the
objection of the
HCCC. The HCCC submitted that the Respondent had had the
benefit of having the statements of the patients and (T103) had not made
mention in his statement disputing or clarify dates. The HCCC also noted that
the Respondent was not refuting that the consultations
did not occur at all
(T105). Ultimately, the Tribunal was not able to resolve the issue of specific
dates on which some matters occurred.
However, the Tribunal has been able to be
reasonably satisfied as to the sequence of events and the general timing of
matters. It
was a feature of the evidence of Patient A, Patient B and to a
lesser extent Patient C that they were able to fix incidents in time
relative to
an event, incident or a time of year rather than being able to fix the specific
date or even year that something occurred.
While this is a matter that played a
role in weighing up the evidence it has not rendered the evidence unreliable as
the sequence
of events described is materially consistent.
Tribunal does not accept the submission made by the Respondent regarding the
consequence of there being significant differences
between the sets of
handwritten statements and the typed statements of each of the patients as
attenuated in their oral evidence.
The Tribunal does so for a number of reasons.
Firstly, the Tribunal notes, as does the Respondent, the brevity of the
handwritten
document. Inevitably there will be more detail in a lengthier
document. Second, the handwritten document is on a pro forma document
nature of formalising an initial complaint. The typed document is a statement
taken with the benefit of a HCCC investigator
and its purpose is to be a
comprehensive account of the issues. The difference in purpose also creates an
opportunity for divergence.
Third, the Tribunal is not of the view that the
points of divergence are of a magnitude that render them significant points of
inconsistency.
Tribunal does not accept the submission regarding the applicability of aspects
of the decision of McHugh J in
KRM V The Queen
[2001] HCA 11
(2001) 206 CLR 221
by the Respondent. The Tribunal makes the initial observations that this is not
a criminal jurisdiction. It is a protective
evidence do not apply. This is not to say that procedural fairness is not
afforded to the Respondent.
While the Tribunal has considered each incident by
reference to the evidence which applies to it, the use of a finding of one
as ‘propensity’ evidence in relation to other incidents
requires further exploration. In this regard the Tribunal has
relied upon the
principles explored in
Zaide v HCCC (1998)
44 NSWLR 82. In the matter
currently before the Tribunal there is the additional factor of having tangible
evidence in the form of
inappropriate text messages that takes the evidence over
and above the mere oral evidence of various witnesses. Further, the evidence
regarding the level of discussion between Patients A, B and C does not allow the
Tribunal to form a view that the evidence is so
tainted as to be unreliable. The
Respondent’s submission also ignores the evidence that Patient D did not
know of the other
complainants until well after she had made her complaint to
the HCCC and was not cognisant of the nature of their
complaints.
Tribunal also notes the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent regarding
the application of authorities such as
R v Jovanovic
42 NSWLR 520
Doe v the Queen
NSWCCA 203.
Extreme care must be taken when
attempting to transpose authorities from a criminal jurisdiction to a protective
underlying foundation for each jurisdiction is very different.
While both have an element of deterrence and public protection the
criminal jurisdiction is to punish a person for their criminal conduct. The aim
of this protective jurisdiction is to
protect the public safety and not to
punish the practitioner for their wrong doing. There are other fundamental
differences such
as the standard of proof applicable and the rules of evidence
not applying in the protective jurisdiction. While the Tribunal accepts
Respondent’s ultimate submission that the onus remains with the HCCC to
establish the allegations to the requisite standard,
this Tribunal will not
apply principles that are properly left in the criminal arena.
to the Respondent’s submission that there was a
‘considerable
amount of evidence before the Tribunal in the form of hearsay, gossip and
opinions from Patients A, B and C as
to their views’
of the Respondent
which is highly prejudicial to the Respondent the Tribunal accepts the
submission made by the HCCC as follows:
The respondent had the opportunity and in fact exercised that opportunity
to object to various parts of the Complainant’s documents
prior to the
hearing. No objection was raised about most of the hearsay and other statements
now complained about. It is too late
to now submit that those statements are
prejudicial should not be before the Tribunal.
6. The fact that patients A; B and C included hearsay; gossip and opinions
in their statements does not adversely reflect on their
credibility as witnesses
as asserted by the respondent. Patients A; B and C have told the tribunal what
they knew or thought or heard.
The fact that some of that information would not
or may not be admissible in some jurisdiction does not mean that they are not
Tribunal adds that some material in the nature of hearsay was struck from the
documents after consideration of the Respondent’s
objection thereto and as
to the balance the Tribunal is capable of applying and has applied appropriate
weight to evidence of different
been made by the parties despite their being an opportunity to do so.
Respondent made a submission as to the accuracy of the clinical records produced
by the Respondent (at paragraph 21 of the Respondent’s
submissions).
Whilst the Tribunal accepts that the accuracy of the records as to dates of
attendance and the like, the Tribunal notes
that the Respondent provided far
more detailed information than that contained in the clinical records in his
evidence by relying
‘visual memory’
for the submission that the Respondent was put at a forensic disadvantage due to
the delay in Patient A and Patient B making complaints
the Tribunal notes that
this is not an unusual circumstance, that the Respondent had retained the
clinical records and it was the
evidence of the Respondent that he had
‘visual memory’ and in his statement he stated:
that he could
clearly recall’
that a particular conversation had occurred
while Patient A was lying on the treatment table and that she was experiencing
spine issues (paragraph 10 – exhibit R1),
undertook the demonstration with her bra straps after he helped her up to a
sitting position,
direct speech account of the words said to Patient A that included the words
‘love you’,
the manner in
which he touched Patient A’s hair
that Patient A
mostly attended with her daughter, Patient B.
balance, the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the evidence given by each of
the patients is preferred to the evidence given
by the Respondent where the
evidence differs. The Tribunal has considered the evidence of each of the
patients individually in reaching
this view. However, the Tribunal is reinforced
in this view by the similarity of the evidence given by Patient A. Patient B and
C when considered with the evidence given by Patient D – an
unrelated person. Further, the evidence of all of the witnesses
indicates a
pattern of inappropriate conduct on the part of the Respondent. The Tribunal
finds comfort in the similarities of the
evidence of the patients despite there
being instances of a lack of clarity with respect to some aspects such as the
date on which
certain events occurred (see
Zaide v HCCC ibid
this careful examination the Tribunal is satisfied that it prefers the evidence
of each of Patient A, Patient B, Patient
C and Patient D to the Respondent where
that evidence differs.
Respondent’s submission regarding the HCCC’s submission that the
Tribunal would prefer the evidence of the patients
where it differs from the
Respondent’s on the basis of the authorities such as
Liberato v The
[1985] HCA 66
159 CLR 507.
The Tribunal accepts the submission made by the
HCCC that these cases are applicable in a criminal jurisdiction, and do not
in this protective jurisdiction. The Tribunal accepts that in a criminal
lays with the
Crown. It is not a matter of which ‘version’ is preferred by the
jury. In this jurisdiction the standard
of proof is commonly known as the
‘Briginshaw’
standard and the rules of evidence do not apply.
The Tribunal inquires into a matter and is able to form a view with respect to
evidence is preferred, to the requisite standard, where it is in conflict.
In this matter, the Tribunal has considered each occasion
on which the evidence
of each of the patients differs from that of the Respondent and has formed the
view that on each occasion the
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied with the
evidence of the patient and is not reasonably satisfied with the evidence of the
Respondent.
Particular 1
On or about September/October 2009, during a treatment session, the
practitioner,
(a) engaged in inappropriate physical contact with Patient A in that he
embraced Patient A and ;
(b) inappropriately said:
“I love you”
HCCC made the following submission regarding Complaint 1:
8.Patient A alleges that she became slightly concerned about the
respondent’s conduct in October 2009 when, at the end of a
session the respondent gave her a “bear hug” and said “I love
you, I’m 34” when she guessed
his age as being less than it actually
was. The respondent does not deny that a conversation about his age took place
at the time
alleged by Patient A, but he denies that he gave Patient A the bear
hug or any other type other type of embrace. He asserts that
he merely touched
Patient A on the elbow or arm with his hand and said words to the effect of
“god love you, I’m 34”.
9. Despite the best attempts of counsel for the respondent, Patient A was
steadfast in her evidence in respect of this incident. In
addition, the Tribunal
had the benefit of Patient A demonstrating what she called a “bear
hug” and on any fair assessment
what was demonstrated was clearly an
A was similarly steadfast in her allegation that the respondent said the words
“I love you...” rather than “god
love you”. She agreed
that she did not take the words “I love you...” to mean that the
respondent as expressing
some kind of romantic interest in her but nonetheless
these words were stated by the respondent at a time when he was embracing her
and she considered them to be inappropriate.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A in respect of this incident i.e. the
respondent embraced Patient A and said “I
love you...” the Tribunal
is directed to the evidence of Dr Roger Engel (T.210.41-212.3) and his comments
regarding the inappropriateness
of the language in the context of a
consultation. The importance of the context of a conversation or words used was
also emphasised
by Dr Kelly (albeit in relation to another particular) and it is
submitted that embracing a patient within the context of a consultation
only inappropriate it is both unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct.
Respondent submitted that this Particular had been framed without due regard to
the whole of the circumstances in which they are
said to have arisen (see
paragraph 30 of the Respondent’s submissions). The Respondent also
submitted that the Particular cannot
be proven and that the conduct alleged does
not amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Respondent details the
made by Dr Engel for the use of the words ‘I love you’
during a consultation on the basis that they are open to misinterpretation,
inappropriate and unprofessional. The Respondent then points to the evidence of
Patient A that she had not misunderstood the
Respondent rather she understood
that the words were meant to convey the Respondent’s appreciation for her
statement that she
thought he was younger than he actually was at the time. The
Respondent submitted that Dr Engel was not critical of the words
which are the words the Respondent recalled saying and
consistent with Patient A’s recollection that the Respondent was meaning
to convey a sign of appreciation and nothing more. Dr Kelly was not critical of
this form of words being used in a consultation.
relation to the physical contact detailed in Particular 1(a) the Respondent
submitted that the versions of Patient A’s statement
In her first statement (6 July, 2010, Tab 4) the patient states that
“...as we walked towards the door...he grabbed hold of
me, hugged me and
said ‘I love you. I’m 34.” In her typed statement (4 November
2010, Tab 5) the patient stated
that “...Paul stood at the door with his
arm around me and embraced me. He said, ‘I love you. I’m 34.”
respondent also notes that the additional information concerning blocking
the door has also been added to Patient C’s typed
statement – [31].
36.The respondent submits that the differences are of some moment. They
reflect different circumstances as to how events unfolded.
Reaching for a
sliding door is interpreted as blocking the doorway and is added in well after
37.Dr Woods denies hugging or embracing Patient A. He recalls that there
was some conversation about his age. However, he stated that
in response to
Patient A’s statement that he touched or held her elbow. If accepted, such
conduct does not amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
38.In all of the circumstances, it is submitted that the Tribunal cannot
be satisfied that the Commission has established that these
particulars have
been established. For the reasons listed above, the Tribunal cannot be satisfied
that the (differing) versions of
Patient A can be relied upon such that the
Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied that the events occurred as described by
Tribunal notes that the evidence of Dr Engel was that he considered words such
‘God love you’
were not well chosen. The Tribunal is of
the view that it is the potential for harm that is the question before it
fact what Patient A’s interpretation of the comments was at
the time. Just as an administration of an incorrect medication
may not result in
an adverse outcome it does not detract in any way from the seriousness of the
conduct. From the evidence of Patient
A she was made uncomfortable by the
comments and actions of the Respondent.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC and notes that with respect to
paragraph 9 the cross-examination of Patient
A by the Respondent’s counsel
would best be described as rigorous and extensive. Further, by saying the words
the Respondent opened up the possibility of
misinterpretation.
to the submissions regarding Patient A’s unreliability as to dates the
Tribunal notes that it was only when the dates were
matched to other events and
incidents was Patient A able to be more sure of dates. The exact date on which
an incident occurred is
not necessarily determinative of the question of whether
or not the evidence should be accepted. The first two examples provided
Respondent of Patient A’s unreliability are issues regarding dates. The
others are matters taken into consideration
by the Tribunal.
balance, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A as to the inappropriate
physical contact (the embrace) and inappropriate
statement (I love you) while
noting that the evidence is unclear as to when this occurred. The Tribunal notes
that the Respondent
conceded that a conversation on the alleged topic took place
in 2009 (see paragraph 14 – exhibit R1). In these circumstances
is the substance of the conduct rather than exactly when the conduct occurred
that is important as the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the conduct
detailed in Particular occurred the Tribunal finds this Particular to be
established. The Tribunal is
of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the
judgment possessed and care exercised by the Respondent in the practice of
chiropractic
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience. Further,
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct
relating to the practice of chiropractic. The establishment
of Particular 2 as
set out below adds to the seriousness of this Particular. However, if only
Particular 1 and 2 were considered
by the Tribunal, the Tribunal would not reach
the view that the conduct amounted to professional
misconduct.
Particular 2 - Patient A did not invite nor
consent to the hug, nor was there any legitimate clinical reason for the
Tribunal indicates that the inviting or consenting to a hug by a patient does
not make it clinically appropriate. The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of Patient
A with respect to the hug and notes the context within which it occurred. There
were words spoken
by the Respondent at the time of the embrace that leave no
room for any ‘exceptional’ circumstance when a hug may be
indicated. The Tribunal finds this Particular established and repeats the
comments made above regarding the characterisation
of the conduct.
Particular 3 - On or about 26 November 2009:
(i) during a treatment session, the practitioner, without obtaining the
consent of the patient, put his hands under Patient A‘s
clothing and
lifted her bra strap up and down.
(ii) during
the same treatment session referred to in (3) (i) above, the practitioner
inquired whether Patient A had breast implants
and commented that he had never
felt implants before. The practitioner then touched Patient’s A breasts.
At no time did the
practitioner explain the clinical purpose of his examination
of Patient A’s breasts.
HCCC made the following submissions regarding this Particular at paragraphs 12
to 22 of its submission (word processing errors
corrected):
12. As to the particulars pertaining to the respondent lifting the bra
straps and touching Patient A's breasts it is anticipated
that much will be
made by the respondent about the date that Patient A says this
13. In cross examination, Patient A freely conceded that she was not good
with dates. This is not surprising. Firstly the events in
question occurred 2-3
years ago and, unlike many of us, Patient A's life is not ruled by a paper
and/or electronic diary which not
only allows us to plan ahead but also to
verify our whereabouts retrospectively. She asserted, with appropriate caution,
statement to the HCCC that she believed the incident occurred in early
December 2009 and that it was the occasion when she swapped
an appointment with
a friend - [omitted]. In addition she also stated that this was the last
occasion she visited the respondent's
14. The respondent asserted in his statement and in his oral evidence that
he became aware of Patient A's breast augmentation in either
2006 or 2007 or
perhaps 2008. At no time did he assert or even imply that it was at any time in
2009. Notwithstanding the position
taken by the respondent in his evidence,
Patient A was subjected to repeated questions about her appointments in 2009.
The only basis
for this line of questioning appears to be the appointment book
for 2009 and a notation on the patient card for [Patient A’s
friend] that
she had swapped an appointment with an unnamed friend in February 2009. It will
no doubt be suggested by the respondent
that the Tribunal should conclude that
having linked the date of the incident to the swapped appointment with [Patient
friend] the incident complained about could not have occurred on the
occasion of the last appointment i.e. 26 November 2009, and
indeed, no such
incident occurred.
15. The problem for the respondent in asking the Tribunal to draw such a
conclusion is that Patient A's evidence regarding the last
appointment was
always cautiously expressed as to the date. In her statement she said at
paragraph 13- "I believe it was December
2009.....". There is no dispute that
Patient A's last appointment was in fact on 26 November 2009 and according to
the appointment
book, that appointment was scheduled for 12.20pm. It is
submitted that it simply impossible to tell from the appointment book whether
Patient A was substituted for another patient on 26 November or indeed on 26
February 2009. The only evidence before the tribunal
that provides some limited
support for the respondent's anticipated contention are the treatment cards for
[Patient A’s friend]
(Ex. R14) which confirm only, that she did not
attend a scheduled appointment at 3.30pm on 26 February 2009 and that this
appointment
was given away to a friend.
16. On this issue, it is submitted that it is open to the Tribunal to
conclude three possible scenarios from the evidence before it.
can conclude that Patient A has simply erred in linking the 26 November 2009
appointment with an occasion that she swapped
an appointment with
A’s friend]
Secondly it
could conclude that Patient A is correct about the appointment swap and the
date of the last appointment occurring
on the same day and that the records
(belatedly relied upon by the respondent) simply do not record the appointment
can conclude that Patient A is correct about swapping the appointment with
[Patient A’s friend]
on 26 February 2009 but wrong about the date
(i.e. 26 November 2009) of the incident which forms the
particulars.
17. It is respectfully submitted that on the balance of probabilities the
first and second possibilities are the most likely scenarios.
The third scenario
would require the Tribunal to either accept that Patient A continued to see the
respondent on 2 further occasions
after 26 February 2009, despite the incident
involving the respondent touching her breasts or, that Patient A has made a
allegation about the conduct of the respondent. The Tribunal is
reminded that although Patient A became confused, after sustained
examination about the dates of appointments, she did not at any time retreat
from the facts of her original complaint.
18. Further, it is clear from the evidence of the respondent that the
issue of Patient A's breast augmentation was an issue that at
some time came to
his attention. He says that he has been able to ascertain from Patient A's
treatment notes that this must have
been in 2006 or 2007 or perhaps 2008
although these same treatment notes make no reference to this apparently new
piece of clinical
information about Patient A. Given that the treatment notes
do not indicate any significant clinical difference between the treatment
in 2006, 2007, 2008 or 2009 it remains unclear how the respondent can be so
certain as to when this matter arose. It is of
course, very helpful for the
respondent, a point he conceded, to place the issue of Patient A's breast
augmentation arising during
the course of a treatment at a time prior to
February 2009 given the on-going attendance at the clinic after that date by
A and other members of Patient A's family without apparent concern. (see
T.309.29-37).
19. The Tribunal should note that as at 26 November 2009 Patient A had
been regularly attending for chiropractic treatment from the
respondent for more
than 5 years. She ceased to attend the respondent's clinic for any further
treatment after that date. At that
time, other than some general conversation
with her sister about the respondent being a bit "touchy feely" and the incident
earlier involving the embrace she had no significant concerns about
the respondent's conduct. That situation changed however on
that day when the
respondent, without obtaining the consent of the Patient A put his hands under
her clothing and lifted her
bra strap, up and down; and during the same
treatment session the respondent, after inquiring whether Patient A had breast
proceeded to touch Patient's A breasts.
20. It is not at all surprising that Patient A kept the events of 26
November 2009 to herself. She was taken aback - shaken by the
events of that
day. The conduct of the Respondent was unexpected and to the best of Patient A's
knowledge at that time limited to
herself. Her delay in telling anyone about the
events of that day may be regarded as unfortunate given the incidents involving
sister and Patient D subsequent to 26 November, but the delay does not
diminish the veracity of her complaint about the incident
that occurred that
21. If it is to be suggested by the respondent that Patient A concocted
the events of 12 October and 26 November 2009 the inevitable
question arises -
why? During the cross examination of both Patient A and Patient C it was
apparent that there was an attempt being
made by the respondent's counsel to
suggest some type of collusion had taken place between Patient A and Patient C.
While it is clear
from the evidence that both Patient A and Patient C have a
close sisterly relationship, it is equally clear from the evidence
of both these
persons that they live their day to day lives independently of each other. They
live some considerable distance from
each other with Patient C's residence
being on a farm some 75kms from
(T.160.22) and Patient A's
residence being on a farm some 30kms from
(T.17.31) and they
may or may not speak to each other by telephone once a week. It is respectfully
submitted that there is no evidence
before the Tribunal which would enable any
inference to be drawn that Patient A has fabricated or embellished her complaint
attempt to support Patient C nor is there any evidence before the
tribunal which would enable any inference to be drawn that Patient
A and Patient
C (and possibly Patient B) have colluded in their evidence.
22.The evidence before the Tribunal regarding the particulars of the
complaint as they relate to Patient A is such that the Tribunal
can conclude
that the conduct as set out in the particulars did take place and that on any
fair assessment such conduct must be
regarded as both unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct.
Respondent submitted that there was no dispute that the Patient A was treated by
the Respondent for cervical spine issues in 2006
and 2007 and that it was at
this time that he discussed with her the breast augmentation procedure. The
Respondent’s submissions
noted that Patient A also stated that the
incident occurred at a consultation where neck and shoulder pain were being
However, Patient A’s evidence was that this occurred during the
last two consultations. The Respondent submitted that her evidence
this occurred was at best vague - September 2009 and December 2009. The
Respondent’s submissions note that the last
two recorded appointments from
the clinical notes were 12 October 2009 and 29 November 2009 and the treatment
recorded for these
dates were general adjustments. The Respondent submitted that
the entry for 26 February 2009
‘neck, upper thoracic and low back pain
link Patient A’s complaint to the day of the swap (i.e. 26
February 2009). The Respondent’s submissions also note that
Patient A’s claim of concern regarding the actions of the Respondent in
December 2009 that she had an appointment scheduled
for 13 May 2010. The
Respondent’s submissions note that Patient A accepted that she had
difficulty with dates in general and
submitted that her unreliability extended
beyond dates to events as well eg. her recollection as to when the
Respondent’s receptionist
commenced working in the practice, when she
swapped an appointment with a friend who was also one of the Respondent’s
the presenting problem when she attended upon the Respondent, her
description of what occurred at her last consultation with the
Respondent, when
and what she knew of Patient C’s concerns about the Respondent and why she
had made an appointment for 13
respect to the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal notes that the
evidence of the Respondent as to when he became aware
of Patient A’s
breast augmentation was unclear and there was no clinical note made of this
matter that may have assisted the
Respondent. The Tribunal accepts the view of
the peer reviewer that this is an important matter to be recorded in the
clinical notes
as it has a bearing on the treatment provided and, as was common
ground in the evidence, may be a factor contributing to symptoms.
this Tribunal makes the observations that clinical records are not merely an aid
to recording the attendance of patients,
rather they should be sufficiently
comprehensive to assist, for example, another suitably qualified person to take
over the care
of the patient.
Tribunal notes that Patient A did not give evidence as to the exact date on
which this incident occurred and was frank regarding
her lack of ability to do
so. The Tribunal is unable to make a conclusion as to when the
‘swap’ appointment occurred
and does not consider this to be
relevant to the determination of the Particular. The Tribunal accepts the HCCC
submission that Patient
A did not at any time during her sustained and extensive
cross-examination retreat from the facts of her original complaint.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient A that the Respondent was in her view
really the only primary health care practitioner
for these issues ‘in
town’. The Tribunal notes it had the benefit of observing the demeanour of
Patient A in the witness
box. The submission made by the HCCC in paragraph 20
above accords with the observations of the Tribunal that Patient A was a very
reserved person. Further there are considerations to be made of the small
community in which the witnesses and the Respondent lived
referred to on numerous occasions by the Respondent.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC that there is no evidence before the
Tribunal to allow the inference to be drawn that
Patient A and Patient C (and
possibly Patient B) colluded in their evidence. The Tribunal is reinforced in
this view by the nature
of the evidence of Patient D. Her evidence regarding the
conduct of the Respondent towards her was very similar to that described
other patients in this case. Further, her complaint was made entirely
independently of the other three patients (and pre-dated
their complaints).
the reasons indicated above the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Patient A to
that of the Respondent and is reasonably satisfied
that the conduct detailed in
Particular occurred. The Tribunal finds this Particular to be established. The
Tribunal notes that there
is a legitimate clinical purpose for chiropractors to
touch the bra straps of female patients. For this to be done the practitioner
needs to explain to and obtain consent from the patient prior to taking any
action. Where the issue is one of clinical significance
it would be prudent for
a clinical record to be made of the issues and the examination. The Tribunal is
of the view that the conduct
demonstrates that the judgment possessed and care
exercised by the Respondent in the practice of chiropractic is significantly
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training and experience. Further, the Tribunal is of
the view that the
conduct is improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractic. The Tribunal therefore makes
a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The Tribunal has considered all of the Particulars that
relate to Patient A and
finds that the conduct of the Respondent is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
Respondent’s
registration. The Tribunal finds professional misconduct
with respect to Particulars 1, 2 and 3.
Particular 4 - On
or about 17 June 2004, during a treatment session, the practitioner purported to
conduct an examination of a swollen
lymph node under the right arm of Patient B
by placing his hand under the clothing of the patient and touching her breast.
The practitioner
failed to obtain a relevant history about the patient’s
complaint prior to conducting the examination; failed to advise the
the purpose of the examination (
and failed to obtain the patient’s
consent to the examination
– not pressed).
HCCC did not press the failure to obtain consent to examine the lump in light of
Patient B’s evidence that she advised the
Respondent that she was
concerned about it and asked him to have a look at it for her.
HCCC note in its submission that Patient B was 15 years old at the time of this
incident and was alone in the treatment room on
the day (her mother Patient A
having accompanied her on other occasions).
HCCC submission in relation to this incident included the
25. ...... Patient B was standing up at the time she asked the respondent
to examine the lump. The respondent did not ask Patient
B to show him where the
lump was located, nor did he advise how he was going to examine the lump; the
respondent's examination of
the lump involved him inserting his hand through the
neck opening of Patient B's shirt and feeling around her armpit and breast area.
Having felt the lump, the respondent advised Patient B that the lump was
probably a swollen lymph node and she should have it checked
out by medical
practitioner.
26. The respondent's evidence about the lymph node incident may be
summarised as follows: Patient B attended for treatment on 17 June
her mother (Patient A). Patient B asked him about a lump in her left arm-pit.
Patient B was on the examination table at
the time she made her request and
remained there for the duration of his examination which took place after he had
made certain inquiries
Patient B to show him where the lump was located by putting her hand on it and
he then explained that he would check the lump through her clothing by placing
his hand on that area in the arm-pit. At the end of
his examination he advised
Patient B that he thought the lump was probably a swollen lymph gland and she
should have it checked out
further by a medical practitioner.
27. The Tribunal cannot and should not accept the evidence of the
respondent in respect of this incident. The respondent has stated
that he has a
very good memory (Ex 23 p18; and T.273; T288) including his capacity to
"visually recall" events and he has been
aware since October 2010 that Patient
B's complaint has always related to the lump in her right arm pit. Despite
this information
and his claimed good memory, the respondent has repeatedly
erroneously stated that he examined the left arm-pit of Patient
23 at pages 13 and 14 and his written statement EX Rl).
Exhibit 28 confirms that the lump was a swollen lymph node and that the
lump was, as asserted by Patient B, located in the right arm
pit. The exhibit
also confirms that the lymph node was surgically removed on 25 June 2004. When
questioned by the Tribunal as to
how and when he came to record the lump as
being located in the left arm pit (T.383) the respondent gave evidence that
he recorded
the location of the swelling immediately after the examination and
it has now occurred to him, for the first time, that he must
have gotten his
left and right mixed up because he now recalls he was positioned on the left
side of the treatment table at the
time Patient B mentioned the lump. This
explanation by the respondent demonstrates that on this issue as with many
others, the
respondent's memory of events is not as clear or as accurate as he
Respondent made submissions regarding Patient B commencing in paragraph 52. With
respect to this Particular the Respondent submits
that there are significant
differences between the handwritten statement of Patient B dated 7 July 2010 and
the typed statement dated
4 November 2010 and points in particular to the
handwritten statement indicating that the incident occurred in ‘winter
whereas the medical records of both the Respondent and Patient
B’s medical practitioner record that it occurred in June 2004.
Respondent submitted at paragraph 54:
The records of Dr Woods, in particular, the diaries, confirm that Patient
A and Patient B both attended the practice on 17 June 2004
for treatment. The
diary records that the appointments were at 5pm and 5.10pm respectively.
Although Patient A claimed that she
was not within the treatment room at the
time that her daughter was treated, she did give evidence that to the effect she
the first few occasions, in the treatment room when her daughter was
treated. This was the first occasion that both were recorded
as being present
for a treatment on the same day. Importantly, Patient B did not say anything to
her mother about feeling uncomfortable
during the examination of the lymph node
by Dr Woods. There is no evidence that Patient B complained to any other
practitioner whom
she was seeing at the time about the conduct of Dr Woods.
Respondent’s submission continued as follows (paragraphs 55 –
differences between the handwritten statement and the typed statement are
highlighted at [6] of the typed statement, wherein Patient
B alleges that Dr
Woods did not ask her if he could touch “the lump” or tell her what
he was doing. As noted in the
Commission’s submissions, her evidence
of the particular has now been withdrawn.
respondent submits that the change affects more than just part of the
particular. The respondent submits that it shows that Patient
(i) does not have a clear recollection of events;
(ii) is prepared to make inaccurate statements; and
(iii) is, therefore, an unreliable witness.
As noted below, there are more discrepancies revealed in the evidence of
Patient B. Again, no complaint was made about these allegations
mother, or anyone else. In all the circumstances, Patient B’s evidence
cannot be relied upon for a finding
that Dr Woods’ conduct constituted
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
her handwritten statement, Patient B described what happened as: “He then
put his hand inside my shirt and starting feeling
under my arm and around the
area”. Her statement that Dr Woods “felt around the
area” stops short of any suggestion
that he came into contact with her
statement at Tab 8 provides many more details. On behalf of Dr Woods, it is
noted that it is curious that so many more details
would come to light
subsequent to the first statement. The differences
(i) not only did Dr Woods reach under her shirt, but he also reached
underneath her bra;
(ii) his hand was rubbing on the side of my breast;
(iii) he rubbed the lump;
(iv) he didn’t ask me if he could touch it or tell me what he was
suggestion by Patient B that Dr Woods reached inside her Polo t-shirt to access
an area under her arm does not make sense. That
problem is compounded by the
addition of the information that Dr Woods put his hand underneath her bra as
well. Such a suggestion
is bizarre and is of itself evidence which suggests
that Patient B ought not to be accepted of this aspect of her evidence.
Woods denies that he conducted the examination in either of the ways alleged by
Patient B. Dr Woods made a note of the examination
and that he suggested a
referral to a medical practitioner. Such conduct was entirely appropriate and
is consistent with the additional
evidence concerning the subsequent treatment
of the lump. The other medical records confirm that this course was,
apparently, already
being pursued.
respondent also notes [6] of the statement made on 4 November 2010. It is clear
that [6] appears because the investigator enquired
as to whether Patient B told
anyone about the incident.
Respondent also submitted that the recording by the Respondent of
‘left’ rather than ‘right’ in his clinical
notes should
not be the basis for rejecting the Respondent’s evidence. The Tribunal
notes that it is the evidence of the Respondent
that he makes a contemporaneous
record of his consultations and has a ‘visual memory’ that has
facilitated his recall
of many details regarding his consultations with each of
the patients.
Tribunal is not troubled by the misstatement of the year in which the incident
occurred recorded in Patient B’s handwritten
statement. Not only is there
little significance to whether it occurred in 2004 or 2005 such an error can be
explained by the effluxion
of time. While it is the case that Patient B could
have obtained a copy of her own medical records prior to providing the statement
this is indicative of a person doing their best to recall an incident that
happened some five or six years earlier. Similarly the
Tribunal is not troubled
by there being additional details in the typed statement for the reasons set out
elsewhere in this document.
to the Respondent’s submission that it would be bizarre for the Respondent
to place his hand under Patient B’s bra
strap inside of her polo shirt for
the purpose of examining the lump under her arm, it is equally bizarre for the
Respondent to undertake
the examination of the lump through Patient B’s
clothing (refer to paragraph 23 of R1). The evidence of both peer reviewers
detail the appropriate manner for such an examination to occur and visual
inspection of the area is essential.
Tribunal notes the discord between the Respondent’s clinical record that
he suggested a referral to a medical practitioner
when exhibits 28 and 29 record
that Patient B had already received treatment from her general practitioner and
was about to see a
specialist (who ultimately operated on the
set out above the Tribunal prefers Patient B’s evidence to the evidence of
the Respondent. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied
that the conduct as
detailed in Particular 4 occurred. The Tribunal finds this Particular to be
established. The Tribunal is of the
view that the conduct demonstrates that the
knowledge, skill and judgment possessed and care exercised by the Respondent in
the practice
of chiropractic is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training and
experience.
Further, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct is improper and unethical
conduct relating to the practice of chiropractic.
The Tribunal makes a finding
of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 5 - On or
practitioner pulled Patient B’s
jeans and underwear down to the top of her
legs so as to examine a tattoo on Patient B’s abdomen. Upon observing the
the practitioner inappropriately commented, “Oh that’s
nice”. There was no legitimate clinical reason for the practitioner
examine Patient B’s tattoo.
HCCC set out the evidence of Patient B regarding this Particular at paragraph 28
of its written submission. Noting that Patient
B gave evidence that she had a
tattoo on the lower left side if her abdomen the relevant section of the
submission is as follows:
....during the course of a treatment session on 28 February 2008 which
included the psoas stretch the respondent noticed the tattoo
and made a joke
to obtain a better view of the tattoo.
HCCC submission noted that the Respondent had conceded that he may have seen the
tattoo and that he may have made a joke about
it (exhibit 23) after initially
stating to the investigators that he had no such recall. The HCCC submission
notes that the Respondent
stated in paragraph 24 of R1 that he cannot recall if
Patient B had a tattoo and despite this refutes that he made a joke about the
tattoo with her. The submission notes that the Respondent also refutes that he
lowered Patient B’s clothing to look at her
tattoo although in
cross-examination he stated it was necessary to lower the trouser line slightly
to perform the stretch but had
no recollection of seeing the tattoo when he did
so. The HCCC submitted that the Respondent’s good memory appears to have
him and despite this he was able to refute certain actions associated
with the event without the benefit of any recollection of the
event. The HCCC
further submitted that the position adopted by the Respondent before the
Tribunal is a contradiction to the position
he took with the HCCC investigator.
HCCC submissions continued at paragraphs 30 to 32 as follows:
30. The respondent's claim that it is necessary to adjust the clothing
-lower the top of the trouser and raise the shirt, so as
to have his hand
touching the skin of the patient to perform the psoas stretch (T.282) is not
a view shared by Dr Engel (T.263).
The critical element of the procedure is
that the practitioner must have his hand in a particular location but this can
be done through
thin clothing- such as jeggings as worn by Patient B on the day
in question.
31. It is submitted that on the evidence it is open to the Tribunal to
infer that the location of the tattoo was such that would be
highly likely that
the respondent did see the tattoo when he lowered the trouser line of Patient B.
It is further open to the Tribunal
to conclude that the respondent did make a
joke about the tattoo and that he lowered Patient B's clothing without her
and further than was necessary to perform the psoas stretch so as
to get a better look at the tattoo.
32. The evidence before the tribunal regarding the particulars of the
complaint as they relate to Patient B is such that the
Tribunal can conclude
that the conduct as set out in the particulars did take place and that on
any fair assessment such conduct
must be regarded as both unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct.
Respondent’s submissions detailed a number of inconsistencies in Patient
B’s evidence. These included whether the
tattoo was visible prior to the
Respondent touching her ‘pants’, whether the Respondent pulled down
the front of her
pants to look at the tattoo, whether the Respondent lifted her
shirt for the purpose of looking at the tattoo which when taken with
B’s evidence that the tattoo was ‘quite low’ and under her
underpants line resulted in Patient B’s
evidence being inconsistent. This
inconsistency should be seen as compounded by Patient B’s evidence that
the Respondent pulled
her jeans and underwear down to the top of her leg. The
Respondent also notes the change from ‘jeans’ to
made by Patient B during her oral evidence. The
Respondent added to this submission by indicating the difficulty of undertaking
Patient B describes while she was in the supine position.
Respondent’s submission continued as follows (at paragraphs 66 to
are matters of some moment, especially given the seriousness of the complaints.
In summary, Patient B has changed her version
on two occasions in relation to
what she was wearing: pants, jeans, jeggings. Further, Patient B has added in
that not only did
Dr Woods pull her “pants” down, but he also pulled
her underwear down. Further, Patient B has changed her version from
“the front of my pants down to look at my tattoo” (which was located
on her lower abdomen) to pulling her jeggings
and underwear down to the top of
her leg – presumably to her groin. Given the location of the tattoo,
there was no reason
to lower her pants that far in order to view the tattoo.
the respondent submits that all of these inconsistencies cast real doubt upon
the version of events relayed by Patient B.
Without further, the Tribunal
cannot accept, to the requisite standard, that the conduct complained of by
Patient B in fact occurred.
submissions on behalf of the Commission regarding this aspect are of little
assistance. At [29], it is submitted that Dr Woods
conceded that he may have
seen the tattoo and he may have made a joke about it. That is not what he said.
He accepted that he may
have seen it but that he had no recall of so doing. The
Commission’s own submissions note that at page 25 of the interview
Woods refuted that he joked about the tattoo with Patient B.
is further submitted that because Dr Woods said that he may have seen it but
that he had no recollection of seeing a tattoo that
his evidence should not be
accepted. That simply does not follow as a matter of logic. The
Notwithstanding this memory lapse, he is
apparently able to refute certain actions associated with the event without the
any “recollection about the event.
It is unclear what is meant by this admission. Further, the suggestion
that Dr Woods has changed his position in relation to this
incident is completely wrong.
matters which raise doubts about the evidence of Patient B include the fact that
no immediate complaint was made, that no complaint
was made until conversations
with her mother and aunty occurred and that Patient B is someone who
participates in gossip about Dr
Woods [16]-[19] although she continued to attend
upon him. Given the uncertainty as to when this event is alleged to have
Dr Woods is at a disadvantage in that he is unable to ascertain, by
reference to his records, what took place on a particular day.
Indeed, it is
noted that Patient B did not recall the year that her mother told her about her
“incident” – Patient
B could only recall that she did not go
with other complaints by Patient A and by Patient B, Dr Woods is at a
disadvantage because the delay has meant that he is unable
to test, or to
positively assert, what occurred in and around the particular consultations, for
example, in relation to whether Patient
A and Patient B were in the rooms
together. Similarly, he is unable to obtain from
, or anyone else,
memories of what occurred on particular days.
these reasons, the Tribunal should not be satisfied that these particulars have
been established by the evidence. Alternatively,
even if one accepts that Dr
Woods’ hand may have come into contact with her breast during the course
of the examination that
is not sufficient to establish unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Similarly, even if one accepts that he looked at her
(by lowering her “trousers”) that is not sufficient to
establish unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Tribunal had the benefit of observing Patient B in the witness box. Patient B
presented as a young women with a timid rather than
assertive disposition. Once
again the inconsistencies between the handwritten document and the typed
document must be seen, in the
view of the Tribunal, in the context of the nature
of the documents, their purpose and the manner in which they were created. While
there was a significant degree of imprecision in the evidence of Patient B with
respect to the exact location of the tattoo and the
manner in which it was
revealed on this occasion, it is the firm evidence of Patient B that the
Respondent rearranged her clothing
for the purpose of performing the psoas
stretch and in so doing viewed her tattoo and commented upon it. This essence
accords with
the evidence given by the Respondent to the HCCC investigator
during the interview.
for the interchange between the evidence regarding jeans and jeggings the
Tribunal observes that it is likely that no comment would
be made if the terms
interchanged where, for example, trousers, slacks or pants. The term jeggings is
one which may be more commonly
used by a younger demographic than those involved
in the Inquiry process but this is not a reason to cast doubt upon the evidence.
the evidence of Patient B is accepted and she was wearing jeans in the nature of
jeggings then there would not be the logistically
difficulty of moving them down
to expose the top of the leg (and not necessarily the groin area as described in
the Respondent’s
submissions). The garment would be quite elastic enough
and Patient B’s build quite slim enough for this to be easily achieved.
lack of an immediate complaint and the engaging in gossip are not sufficient for
the Tribunal to conclude that this incident did
Tribunal is of the view that it is a matter for the individual practitioner to
decide whether or not contact with the patient’s
skin is required to
undertake a psoas stretch – taking into account whether the patient has
provided consent to the particular
manner proposed by the practitioner. In any
case it is the fact of commenting about the tattoo that is not professional.
Tribunal notes the oral evidence of Patient B clarified that the jeans she was
wearing during this consultation were jeggings.
For the reasons set out above
the Tribunal, on balance, accepts the evidence of Patient B as to what occurred
during the psoas stretch.
As an aside the Tribunal notes that the Respondent
recorded in his statement that Patient B ‘acquiesced’ when he
that he would have to move her belt down a little and press firmly to
undertake the adjustment. It is the Tribunal’s view that
something more
than acquiescence is required to obtain consent from a patient. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that the conduct
detailed in Particular 5 occurred and
therefore the Tribunal finds this Particular to be established. The Tribunal is
of the view
that the conduct demonstrates that the judgment possessed and care
exercised by the Respondent in the practice of chiropractic is
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training and experience. Further,
the Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct is improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractic. The Tribunal
therefore makes a finding of professional
misconduct.
Particular 6 - The practitioner failed to advise
the patient of any clinical reason for lowering both the jeans and the underwear
and failed to obtain the patient’s consent.
noted above the Respondent stated that Patient B acquiesced in when he informed
her that he would need to move down her belt and
apply firm pressure (to her
abdomen). For the reasons set out above the Tribunal accepts the evidence of
Patient B as to the failure
of the Respondent to advise as to the clinical
reason for lowering her jeans (jeggings) and underwear or to obtain her consent.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular
occurred and therefore finds this Particular to be established.
The Tribunal is
of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and judgment
possessed and care exercised by
the Respondent in the practice of chiropractic
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training and experience. Further, the Tribunal is of the
view that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct relating
to the practice
of chiropractic. The Tribunal finds Particular 6 amounts to professional
misconduct.
Particular 7(i) - On or about 31 May 2010, during
a treatment session the practitioner leant down and whispered into Patient
ear: “Of all the patients I
have and I have hundreds, no one
makes me feel the way you do. You make my heart race. I am not only attracted to
you physically
but I am attracted to your personality as well. I have never had
this happen to me before.”
HCCC submissions included the following summary what is alleged to have occurred
prior to the conduct detailed in this Particular
as follows (paragraphs 35 and
36 of the submission):
35. Patient C's evidence in respect of the period prior to 3 May 2010 may
be summarised as follows: she felt some discomfort about
the way the respondent
inter­acted with her from some time in 2010; she was unable to pin-point
when any specific act or acts
may have occurred but identified that these acts
included the respondent touching her arm and hair in a manner that caused her to
feel uncomfortable; she was also uncomfortable about the respondent telling her
that she looked good for her age and that she wasn't
to change anything about
herself (T.129). Patient C had no recollection of ever telling the respondent
that she was concerned about
her appearance, her age, or the way she looked.
Patient C was sufficiently concerned about the respondent's conduct that she
her husband to be in attendance during a treatment session in February
2010 so that he could assess whether there was anything
out of the ordinary
(T.121) and he concluded that there was not.
36. On 3 May 2010 Patient C attended the respondent for treatment. At some
point in the treatment session she made mention of the
fact that the treatment
she had received on 16 February had only lasted for about a week. The respondent
made some comment about
being remiss in not texting her after that appointment
to see how she was doing. About an hour after leaving the appointment on 3
Patient C received a text message from the respondent which read- "I hope this
treatment worked better for you, Paul." She replied
thanking him and advising
him that it felt much better. At about 6.00pm that evening she received a
further text from the respondent
which read: "So glad the treatment worked for
you. I get so nervous when I treat you, it helps to know it worked." Patient C
not respond to the second text message but was sufficiently concerned about
it to show it to her husband (T.148); her sister (T.146)
and a friend
(T.147-148) who assessed it as odd but innocuous.
HCCC submitted that Patient C did not falter at any time regarding her evidence
as to what occurred during the consultation on
31 May 2010 as set out in
Particulars 7(i) and 7(ii). The HCCC also submitted that while the Respondent
denied he had touched Patient
C inappropriately and was unaware that she was
uncomfortable during consultations he conceded that he did make comments about
good Patient C looked for her age. The HCCC submission noted that the
Respondent indicated this was in response to Patient C’s
negative comments
occasion when Patient C had made such
comments. The Tribunal further notes that
there were no notes made in Patient C’s clinical records to this effect
despite his
evidence that he records any complaint made by a patient.
HCCC submissions continued as follows (paragraphs 40 –
40. The respondent does not deny sending Patient C two text messages on 3
May and asserts, inter alia, that they were simply follow
ups to see if the
treatment had been beneficial. On this point however, the Tribunal is asked to
note that this practice of the respondent
sending such texts to patients appears
to have been limited (T.313) with patient C being the exception rather than the
41. The Tribunal is also asked to note that there really was no need for
the second of the two texts to be sent. The respondent's
explanation for second
text was that it was sent out of courtesy. As to the inclusion of the words in
the second text -"I get so
nervous when I treat you" the respondent stated that
this was a statement about how he was feeling at the time he treated Patient
(T.315). It remains unclear from the respondent's evidence why he considered it
either necessary or appropriate to share his "nervousness”
with Patient C
via a sms message.
42. As to the appointment of 31 May, the respondent’s evidence as to
what occurred is at odds with Patient C. He denies performing
the winged axilla
lift in such a way that Patient C could or did feel his penis against her back.
He denies saying the words as set
out in particular (i). He claims that during
the course of the treatment session he make some clumsy remarks about Patient
and that of her sister Patient A. He had assumed that Patient C was the
elder of the two sisters when in fact it she was the younger
of the two.
(T.318). On this point the Tribunal should note that the dates of birth for both
Patient A and C would have been known
to the respondent as they are clearly
recorded on the patient cards. Further, at the time of this consultation, the
Respondent had
been seeing Patient C for over 12 months but had not seen Patient
A for 6 months- her last appointment was in late November 2009.
complete lack of context for the comments the respondent alleges he made to this
patient on this day- a patient he claims
suffered from low self-esteem.
43. The respondent also claims that Patient C took his remarks about her
age "very hard" (T.327) and that she was insulted. Having
"put his foot in it",
he attempted to recover the situation without much success and hence the text
message that was sent about an
hour after the end of the consultation.
44. The respondent's evidence about what was said during the consultation
with patient C on 31 May 2010 should not be accepted by
the Tribunal. The
respondent does not deny sending Patient C the text message and there is a clear
and undeniable connection between
the text and what took place during the course
of the treatment session. It is submitted ‘that the words used in the
are totally incompatible with what he says he said to Patient C. Those
words, are however, highly compatible with what Patient C
says fell from the
respondent lips.
45. The Tribunal is reminded that the respondent could offer no
explanation as to why he used five "o's” in the word "so" in
the message,
nor could he explain why he stated “I mean that. I have never said that to
anyone before in my life", or "I'm
so jealous of your husband and hope he knows
how lucky he is", or "ps. I just had to get that off my chest". (T.328).
46. For reasons which remain unclear, the respondent told his wife about
the text message sent to patient C either on 31 May or shortly
thereafter (T.
330). The respondent and his wife decided that they would do nothing further in
respect of the text message sent to
patient C. Mrs Woods confirmed that she did
not see the text message until October 2010 (T.469) and although she agreed that
wording of the text was questionable she had no further discussion with her
husband about the matter they had already discussed it
47. Not surprisingly, both Dr Engel (Ex 24 pp. 22 and 23) and Dr Kelly
(Ex R 2 p 14) are highly critical of the text message sent
by the respondent to
Patient C. Dr Engel is also highly critical of the respondent's conduct as per
particular (i). Dr Kelly was
not asked to comment on this aspect of the
48. The evidence before the tribunal regarding the particulars of the
complaint as they relate to Patient C is such that the tribunal
can conclude
that the conduct as set out in the particulars did take place and that on any
fair assessment such conduct must be regarded
as both unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct.
Respondent made the following submission regarding this Particular (paragraphs
75 – 83, 85-88):
C alleges that after about the third visit (that is, after about 11 August,
2009), it may be later, she felt uncomfortable
complain to Dr Woods
complimentary to Patient C, but not in any unprofessional manner. Importantly,
Patient C conceded that she was, to an extent, self-deprecating – that she
could be hard on herself and that she “possibly”
conveyed such
feelings to Dr Woods. Contrary to what is stated by the Commission [42] it was
not suggested, nor stated, that such
comments were only made during the
consultation on 31 May, 2010.
C claims that she raised “these concerns” with Patient A in about
November, 2009: T 117.18 onwards. That is,
following her third attendance and
prior to her fourth attendance on 2 December, 2009. However, in her evidence (T
128.30), Patient
A stated that prior to 2 December, 2009 there was no complaint
of “unwarranted or inappropriate touching” – a complete
contradiction of her handwritten statement.
terms of the chronology given by Patient A, November, 2009 was fairly soon after
she alleges Dr Woods blocked her departure from
the surgery, said “I love
you” and hugged Patient A. Patient A did not reveal any of this to her
sister notwithstanding
that Patient A was, apparently, raising concerns she felt
she had about Dr Woods. If true, one would expect that Patient A would
said something to her sister if her sister did, in fact, raise such concerns
C’s husband attended upon Dr Woods on 24 December, 2009. Prior to that
appointment, Patient A still had not said anything
to Patient C about what she
alleged occurred in November, 2009: T 120.1. Next, Patient C and her husband
attended upon Dr Woods
together on 24 February, 2010. Patient C gave evidence
that she suggested to her husband that they attend together because “she
felt uncomfortable” (T 118.36), but she wasn’t sure whether it was
just her: T 118.42. Patient C claims that she did
not “arrange” for
her husband to observe Dr Woods, but accepts that he did just that. Patient C
stated [20] that her
husband “dismissed” her concerns and said to
her that she was being “overly sensitive” and that “of
Paul was a chiropractor, he had to touch me”: T 121.24.
respondent notes that the investigator did not take a statement from Patient
C’s husband. His absence as a witness is unexplained.
His evidence as to
the events about which Patient C asserts occurred would have been relevant to
the Tribunal’s determination
of the facts. Due to his absence, the
respondent is left with a limited capacity to test Patient C’s assertions
conversations with her husband. Did those conversations occur? The
prejudice to the respondent is that, in these proceedings, Patient
“conversations with her husband” improperly suggests some
corroboration of her own assertions as to “her
concerns”. (The same
submission is made in relation to Margaret Woods, [73], below) The prejudice to
the respondent is increased,
in the present circumstances because Patient C was
unable to recall many, if any, of the details of being overly touchy or when
inappropriate
things were said, that is, the bases of “her
concerns”: see T 126.43 – 128.16. Dr Woods denies any suggestion
that he inappropriately touched Patient C’s neck, hair or cheek.
C’s evidence concerning 2 December, 2009, when she related the statement
of the lady in her sixties from Moree, casts
doubt upon Patient A’s
(sic – Patient C’s)
assertions that she had concerns about
the “sexual connotations” in remarks made by Dr Woods. Although
quick to suggest
that Dr Woods’ comments to her were inappropriate because
they were “laced with sexual connotation” (T 130.5) (cf:
inappropriate and Dr Kelly, not inappropriate) Patient C was quite reluctant to
accept that her remark also contained a
sexual connotation. Patient C sought to
distance herself from passing on a remark with a sexual connotation (the
connotation belonged
to the lady in her sixties) and claimed that she raised it
as small talk because she was nervous. It is submitted that the only
the comment she made is that she, too, was being complimentary, even flattering.
In giving her evidence, Patient C appeared
anything but “nervous”.
Patient C’s preparedness to pass on the compliment belies the suggestion
that she was
uncomfortable because of anything that Dr Woods was saying or
doing. It casts doubt on her assertion as to Dr Woods’ reply.
3 May, 2010 Patient C was again treated by Dr Woods. The discussion included Dr
Woods speaking about whether he “did a good
job” on the previous
occasion. He was told that it was okay for a week, but that the pain returned.
Dr Woods said that he
should have sent a text. Following that treatment, Dr
Woods sent a text to Patient C inquiring about the treatment. Patient C
Later that day, Dr Woods sent a further text: “So glad this
treatment worked for you; I get so nervous when I treat you, it
how it worked.” Despite agreeing that her understanding was that the
messages were entirely related to the treatment
(T 144.7), Patient C nonetheless
showed the text to Patient A and to a friend,
[Patient C’s friend]
Again, the respondent notes that
[Patient C’s friend]
called and that this evidence is prejudicial to the respondent for the same
reasons as the evidence relating to Patient C’s
husband. Specifically in
relation to the events of 3 May, 2010, the respondent submits that Patient
(sic – Patient C’s)
evidence about those events,
including conversations, suggest a narrow understanding of what is unusual or
inappropriate.
Dr Engel’s view of the inappropriateness of statements like
“you’re in good shape” or “you look
good for your
age”, or “I get so nervous when I treat you” (cf Dr Kelly), it
is not asserted that such conduct
amounts to unsatisfactory professional
respondent submits that these matters undermine Patient C’s assertion that
the message sent on 31 May, 2010 was a repetition
of a sentiment expressed by Dr
Woods during the course of the consultation that day. Dr Woods denies that any
such conversation
occurred. The true context is that set out above in the
introductory paragraphs of these submissions. That is, that Dr Woods was
competent chiropractor, who usually informed patients about the treatment he was
was interested in their general
.....................
Patient C maintains that Dr Woods whispered the words alleged, it is submitted
that the Tribunal would not be satisfied that
this occurred. The respondent
accepts that if such conduct occurred it would be significantly below the
standard expected of a practitioner:
Dr Engel, p 14 and Dr Kelly.
Woods’ denies that it occurred and he denies the allegations contained
within [29] and [30] of Patient C’s statement.
It is submitted that it is
odd, as in unnecessary, that one would say such things, apparently very
privately, and then broadcast
a similar message. It is further submitted that
words within the text message itself (“I have never said that to anyone
in my life” and “I just had to get that off my chest”)
carry with them the implication that the text is the first
time that such
statements had been made.
C did not complain to
. Her reasons for not raising anything with
[Ms J] (T 130 – 131 and T 166) are anything but convincing.
respondent also relies upon Patient C’s concession to the Tribunal
(T165.13) to the effect that she was accepting of Dr
Woods’ conduct and
that the text messages made her “feel differently”. Dr Woods does
not dispute the inappropriateness
of the 31 May, 2010 text message. It is
submitted, however, that the fact that he did send the message should not be
relied upon
as some form of corroboration of assertions that he touched Patient
C inappropriately or that he spoke to her inappropriately during
the course of
consultations, including the consultation on 31 May, 2010.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent gave evidence that it was not his usual
practice to send text messages of this nature to his
patients. In passing the
Tribunal notes that if the ‘nervousness’ expressed by the Respondent
was as a result of the
previous adverse event that it would be professionally
inappropriate to inform a patient and it has the potential to damage the
relationship
of trust. Further, if there was a significant risk involved in the
adjustment then he should not have been performing it. The Tribunal
there is nothing in the clinical records of Patient C to support the
Respondent’s evidence regarding this patient
providing any particular
clinical risks or challenges.
Respondent’s position of sending the text as an attempt to make amends for
having potentially insulted or upset Patient
C by his comments is not accepted
by the Tribunal. The Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions as set out above in
this regard. While
the evidence given by the Respondent and his wife that the
fact of the text message was discussed on the day it was sent (31 May
shortly thereafter and a decision made not to do anything further but the
Respondent did not show the message to his wife
until October 2010 is curious it
does not have any bearing on the finding with respect to the Particular.
set out above the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Patient C to that of the
Respondent where that evidence differs. The Tribunal
also notes the similarities
in content between the conversation as alleged by Patient C (and accepted by the
Tribunal) and the text
message sent by the Respondent about one hour after the
alleged comment was made. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct
detailed in Particular 7(i) occurred the Tribunal finds this Particular to be
established. The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct
demonstrates that the
judgment possessed and care exercised by the Respondent in the practice of
chiropractic is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience. Further, the
Tribunal is of
the view that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct
relating to the practice of chiropractic. The Tribunal therefore makes
of professional misconduct.
Particular 7(ii) – On or
stretch with Patient
C in such a way that Patient C was able to feel the
practitioner’s penis touch her back.
Respondent made the following submission regarding this Particular (paragraph
84, 90, 91):
it is submitted that Patient C’s assertion about feeling “the
practitioner’s penis touch her back”
is not supported by her
..............
to particular (ii), Dr Woods’ denies that his penis came into contact with
Patient C. In support of his evidence it is noted
that Patient C stated in her
evidence that she could feel Dr Woods’ hip and what she thought was his
penis/pelvic region at
the same time. In particular, in answer to the Tribunal
(T 170), Patient C stated that it was not the relationship between the two
[sensations] that made her think it was her penis. What else she felt, besides
the hip, was something that felt different from a
hip. The respondent submits
that the whole issue in this regard has been clouded from the beginning. In her
handwritten statement,
Patient C stated “on one occasion” (and, it
is noted, she does not nominate her last visit) “he held me close enough
that I could feel his penis against me. Although I am unsure if this was
deliberate.” With respect, that should have been
the end of the matter.
In her typed statement, Patient C resiled from her original claim. Patient A
stated [32] “I believe
I felt his penis on my back...I wondered whether
this happened”.
addition to those matters, the respondent submits that there is such a lack of
clarity as to what Patient C said occurred that
the Tribunal could not be
satisfied that the particular has been established by the evidence. The
particular alleges that the patient
“was” able to feel his penis.
The assertion cannot be made out, especially when Patient C stated in her
original statement
that whatever happened “may not have been
deliberate”. Given the nature of the lift that is certainly possible,
unlikely. Again, on behalf of the respondent, it is submitted that it
would be impermissible to reason that the contents of the
31 May, 2010 text
message is evidence that supports a finding that the practitioner deliberately
allowed his penis to come into contact
with the patient’s back.
noted above the HCCC submitted that Patient C did not falter at any time
regarding her evidence as to what occurred during the
consultation on 31 May
2010 as set out in Particulars 7(i) and 7(ii). The HCCC further submitted that
at all times Patient C was
cautious about whether or not she felt the
Respondent’s penis during the wing axilla stretch but was confident that
able to distinguish between a thigh and a penis. She was also confident
in her evidence that the stretch was administered in a slightly
different way on
this occasion.
respect to Particular 7(ii) the Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient D that
she felt the Respondent’s ‘pelvis area’
on her back when he
was she was receiving an adjustment which – on the description of Patient
D appears to be a standing wing
lift. While there is clearly a dispute between
Patient C and the Respondent as to the positioning of the Respondent’s
with respect to Patient C’s body during this adjustment the evidence
of Patient D (paragraph 8 of exhibit 16 and T 180) accords
with the evidence of
Patient C as to there being contact between the patient and the
Respondent’s pelvic area during this type
of adjustment.
Tribunal has already indicated that it prefers the evidence of Patient C to that
of the Respondent. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the conduct
detailed in Particular 7(ii) occurred the Tribunal finds this Particular to be
established. The Tribunal
is of the view that in the context of the
Respondent’s conduct towards Patient C that this conduct demonstrates that
the judgment
possessed and care exercised by the Respondent in the practice of
chiropractic is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience. Further, the
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct is improper
and unethical conduct
relating to the practice of chiropractic. It places conduct that may be
inadvertent or an artefact of legitimate
treatment into a light that is open to
be interpreted as sexual in nature.
Particular 7(iii) - On
or about 31 May 2010, during a treatment session approximately 1 hour after the
treatment session referred
to, in (7)(i) and (ii) above, the practitioner sent
an inappropriate text message to Patient C that read:
“I hope you took
my comments as a compliment and that you are not offended. I just haven’t
had that happen before. I can’t
and gorgeous. I personally rate you as the perfect woman. I mean that and I have
that to anyone before in my life. I (sic) so jealous of your husband
and hope he knows how lucky he is. PS I just had to get that
Respondent made the following submission at paragraph 89:
Woods’ reason for sending the message was to bolster Patient C’s
self esteem. Mrs Woods’ unchallenged evidence
confirms that he told her
Dr Woods accepts that the
words he chose to do that were ill-conceived. He
accepts the criticism of his peers. He has apologised to Patient A
– Patient C’s)
. He does not challenge the suggestion that the
Tribunal will find such conduct is unsatisfactory professional conduct. Dr
evidence, and that of his wife, is that he immediately recognised
the inappropriateness of that conduct. The Commission submits
[46] that it is
unclear why he would do that. It is submitted that the answer is obvious
– he was concerned about what he
had done, he knew it was inappropriate
and he sought advice from his wife as to what he should do about it. Again, Mrs
not in any real sense challenged about this occurring.
Respondent submitted that the content of this text message was inappropriate
(paragraph 10 Respondent’s submissions) and
that the conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
is no explanation available to the Respondent that would allow parts of this
text message to be anything other than professional
misconduct. The fact that
the Respondent refuted that his intention was inappropriate or sexual is
demonstrative of his substantial
lack of insight into his conduct and general
denial of his lack of propriety and ethics. It is the view of the Tribunal that
Respondent’s attempt to explain away the contents of this message on
the basis of Patient C’s emotional state is not,
as suggested by the
Respondent, merely ‘ill conceived’ but opportunistic and insincere.
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied
that the conduct detailed in Particular
7(iii) occurred and finds this Particular to be established. The Tribunal is of
that the conduct demonstrates that the judgment possessed and care
exercised by the Respondent in the practice of chiropractic is
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training and experience. Further,
the Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct is improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractic. The Tribunal
is of the view that the conduct is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
Respondent’s
registration. The Tribunal finds professional misconduct
with respect to Particular 7(iii) standing alone.
Particular 8(i) - On or about 21 April 2010 during a
treatment session the practitioner requested that Patient D remove her T shirt
and pull down her bra exposing her breasts. The practitioner touched and felt
around Patient D’s breasts using the flat palm
of his hand. The
practitioner did not obtain the consent of Patient D to carry out an examination
in this manner and there was not
a legitimate clinical reason for such an
examination.
HCCC made the following submissions regarding Particular 8(i) and (ii)
(paragraphs 52 - 59):
52. Patient D's evidence about what took place during the consultations
leading up and including 21 April can be summarised as follows:
she identified
her occupation as being a horse trainer not a horse breaker; she has no
recollection of ever telling the respondent
that she trains either horses for
children or children for horses; at no time was there any conversation between
them about the
respondent wishing to purchase a horse for his daughter; she was
experiencing some recurring chest pain prior to the 21 April consultation
she advised the respondent of this pain during the consultation; the respondent
asked her to remove her bra and shirt and began
to touch and palpate her breast.
Approximately one hour after the consultation she received a text message from
the respondent- she
did not reply to this text and approximately 1 hour later
she received another text message from the respondent. The text messages
out above and there is no contest between the parties that the respondent sent
these messages. At approximately 5.00 pm Patient
D received an additional call
from a number she identified as the respondent's clinic ­ she did not
answer this call.
53. The respondent's evidence with regard to Patient D differs from that
of the patient in 3 key respects. Firstly, he asserts that
he had told Patient
D that he was considering the purchase of a horse for his daughter and that
this is what the text messages
related to. Secondly, he did not ask Patient D to
remove her clothing nor did she. Thirdly he did not make the call to Patient D
from the clinic's landline.
54. The Tribunal will recall that Patient D does not know any of the other
persons involved in these proceedings. None of the other
patients have any
involvement in the "horse world". There is no evidence to suggest any link
between them other than the fact that
they all attended the respondent's clinic
at one time or another.
When patient D made her complaint about the respondent's conduct of
21April, she did not know that any other complaints had been or
were likely to
55. It is submitted that there is clear link between the inappropriate
conduct of the respondent during the course of the consultation
subsequent text messages. The respondent's assertion that the text messages
related to Patient D assisting him to find a
horse for his daughter simply
cannot be believed. The words "horse" or "pony" or "purchase” do not
appear in the body of the
texts but despite this, the respondent asks the
tribunal to believe the text messages related only to this and a general inquiry
56. The explanations proffered by the respondent in cross examination
of credibility. He
could not explain why he ended the first text with the words "cheers, PS I
don’t know why 1 am sending you
this."(T.358) The respondent claimed that
the "x" at the end of message was not intended to denote a kiss but was in lieu
stop or some other signifier of the message having ended. (Compare
however the use of a smiley face symbol used to denote the end
of the text
message sent to Patient C on 31 May Ex 13 p.4). The respondent had used
uppercase to spell out the word "big" to emphasise
the impact on him of the
treatment he had administered but could not provide an explanation as to why he
considered it necessary
to share that information with Patient D and
similarly he was in a spin because of the treatment and had left out some words
in the text message. (T 360).
57. The explanation proffered by the respondent for sending the second
text message also lacks credibility. He asserted that he was
not concerned about
the content of the first text message but simply that “a" text message may
have caused some offence. (T.361&362).
58. As to who made the call to Patient D from the clinic’s land line
at approximately 5.00 on 21April 2010 there is no evidence
to suggest that
(the receptionist) had any instructions or reason to call Patient
D. She has no recollection of having made such a call. However,
's evidence about the clinic's phone system- a cordless portable system
with two handsets, it is submitted that it is open to
Tribunal to conclude
that the 5.00 call to patient D was in fact, made by the respondent despite
his denial of this act.
59. The evidence before the tribunal regarding the particulars of the
complaint as they relate to Patient D is such that the
Tribunal can conclude
that the conduct as set out in the particulars did take place and that on any
fair assessment such conduct
must be regarded as both unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct.
Respondent made the following submissions regarding Particulars 8(i) and
respondent submits that particular 8(i) has not been proved. The respondent
submits that the particular overstates the evidence
of Patient D and converts it
into something which it is not. Patient D attended the practice with a
“chest pain”. Patient
D indicated the area of the chest pain by
vaguely pointing to her chest. Even on her version, the patient wanted her
chest examined
and was aware that Dr Woods had determined to examine her chest.
On her version, she was asked to remove her bra which she did.
explained that Dr Woods palpated her around and on her breast and commented that
“he didn’t explain what he
was doing and was just talking about
general stuff”. The statement that he did not explain what he was doing
cannot be accepted.
It is contrary to all previous treatments. It is submitted
that on her version, the patient would have been aware that such an
examination
was an attempt to source the pain about which she complained. The examination
continued by Dr Woods putting more pressure
on the upper part of her chest. At
the end of the consultation, Patient D made a further appointment. No complaint
was made to
anyone until after she received the text
her version appears straight-forward, it is, again, noted that the version given
in evidence is markedly different from that
in her statement in relation to the
removal of her bra. Dr Woods denies that the bra was removed. He states that
it was moved in
order to allow access to that part of the sternum covered by the
bra. Patient D claims in her statement that she pulled her bra
down. It is
submitted that the description “pulled her bra down” is similar to
what Dr Woods said occurred. Later in
her evidence, however, she gave a
completely difference description of that event. According to this version, the
bra was not pulled
down. It was unclipped, she removed the straps from her arms
and, it seems, it lay across her abdomen (see T 198-200). In this
regard, it is
noted that the investigator spoke to Patient D and informed her about some of
the details of Dr Woods’ response
to the complaint. This should not have
occurred. It is possible that passing on such information caused the change in
the patient’s
evidence. It is also noted that nothing further was said
or whether any diagnosis was made about the problem. Further, it is submitted
by the respondent that the Commission has not
led any evidence which supports
the assertion that there was not a legitimate clinical reason for such an
examination.
respondent also notes the evidence concerning the requirement that a
practitioner should offer some form of cover to a patient
where such an
examination is to occur. There is no dispute about such requirements. The
respondent submits that the occasion for
such requirements did not arise,
because the examination did not take occur as suggested by Patient
Patient D, generally, appeared to give credible evidence, it is noted that she
was extremely defensive regarding conversations.
Notwithstanding her statement
at [10] that Dr Woods was just talking “general stuff”, with no
details provided, the
patient claims that she never spoke to Dr Woods about
matters personal to herself. The patient was, therefore, unable to explain
Dr Woods knew (see his interview) about the attendance at the Easter Show, that
she owned a truck and that she taught children
(T 184). As to the last matter,
Patient D agreed with the proposition that Dr Woods must have just wildly
guessed that she taught
children. And see also her concession that, in fact,
they did engage in general chit chat, content unspecified. It is also noted
that Patient D agreed that if one was seeking a horse, it was best to keep that
quiet, otherwise you would be inundated with offers.
Again, this was
confirmatory of what Dr Woods believed at the time.
it is submitted that these matters support the version of events relied upon by
Dr Woods. Conversely, they detract from
Patient D’s credibility generally
and in relation to her flat refusal to accept that there had been any discussion
and children, as stated by Dr Woods. Further, it is noted that Mrs
Woods confirms that her husband informed her about a patient,
whom he admired
because of the work that she did and who may be able to help find a horse for
their child and that this occurred
around the time of Patient D’s
attendance. Further, a horse was in fact purchased a short time later.
is submitted that the Tribunal could not be satisfied that the allegation set
out at particular 8 (i) had been proved. Again,
it is submitted that the
Tribunal should not reason that because of the text message inappropriate
conduct must have occurred during
the consultation.
respondent accepts that the text messages should not have been sent, worded in
that way. His full response is set out in [47]-[50]
of his statement. The
respondent accepts the criticism of his conduct by the peers. He has apologised
to Patient D.
behalf of the respondent it is submitted that the Tribunal should dismiss each
of the particulars which have been denied by Dr
Tribunal has set out above the reasons why it accepts the evidence of Patient D
over that of the Respondent where it differs.
Patient D should have been draped
for any examination of this type and should not have been required to remove her
bra. The Tribunal
is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in
Particular 8(i) occurred the Tribunal finds this Particular to be established.
The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the judgment
possessed and care exercised by the Respondent in the
practice of chiropractic
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
and experience. Further, the Tribunal is of the
view that the conduct is improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice
of chiropractic. The Tribunal therefore makes a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 8(ii) - On or about 21
April 2010 during a treatment session at 1.11pm, approximately 1 hour after the
treatment session
referred to in (8) (i), the practitioner sent an inappropriate
text message to Patient D which read:
“How is your treatment going? I
hope your (sic) not too sore because I had to do so much. You had a BIG effect
on me like I’ve
never had in practice before. I’m still in a spin
over you. Sorry to be so forward and if you can keep this between us would
much appreciated. Cheers PS I don’t even know why I’m sending you
Respondent submitted that this text message was inappropriate and that the
conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Tribunal in particular notes the extraordinary evidence of the Respondent
regarding the
‘incredible amount of cavitations’
(T359.30-31)
occurring when he was only contacting one spot on her spine from the bottom to
the top of her spine. The Tribunal notes
this was not recorded in Patient
D’s clinical records despite the Respondent giving evidence that this was
more cavitations
than he had experienced during the decade he had adjusted
thousands of spines. If the effect was as extreme as the Respondent’s
evidence indicated then it is a matter that would appropriately be noted in the
records or there would be notes indicating that the
Respondent took any steps to
vary the treatment regimen provided to her as a result of these clinical
observations.
Tribunal has set out above the reasons why it accepts the evidence of Patient D
over that of the Respondent where it differs.
The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 8(ii) occurred the Tribunal
finds this Particular to
be established. While the content of this text message
is not as overtly sexual as the message sent to Patient C the Tribunal notes
inappropriate content and also notes the tender age of Patient D at the time of
this incident. The Tribunal has evidence before
it of the distress caused to
Patient D by the Respondent’s conduct (see the statement of Patient
D’s sister) and this
is hardly surprising given the conduct of the
Respondent during the consultation, the content of the message and her age at
of the incident. The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct
demonstrates that the judgment possessed and care exercised by the
Respondent in
the practice of chiropractic is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training and experience.
Further, the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct is improper and unethical
conduct relating
to the practice of chiropractic. The Tribunal therefore makes a
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
8(iii) - On or about 21 April 2010 during a treatment session
at 2.18pm the practitioner sent Patient D another text message which read :
“ I hope I haven’t offended you at all.”
Respondent submitted that this text message was inappropriate and that the
conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Tribunal is of the view that that the conduct detailed in Particular 8 is of
such a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of the
Respondent’s registration. The Tribunal finds professional misconduct
with respect to Particular 8.
Findings re Complaints
general terms the Tribunal has not found the evidence of the Respondent to be
convincing in nature. In fact there were numerous
elements that were implausible
to the extreme. The Tribunal has preferred the evidence of Patients A, B, C and
D to that of the Respondent
where the evidence diverges.
Tribunal makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
each of Particulars 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7(i), 7(ii),
7(iii), 8(i) and 8(ii).
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in each of Particulars 1, 2
and 3 (considered together), 5, 6, 7 (noting that
the Tribunal considers 7(iii)
alone to constitute professional misconduct) and 8 to be of such a sufficiently
serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration. The Tribunal finds professional misconduct with respect to each
of these Particulars. The Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent
that the views of the peer reviewers would not allow
the Tribunal to be
satisfied that the sending of the text messages was conduct that was
sufficiently serious to warrant deregistration
or suspension (and therefore make
a finding of professional misconduct). The Tribunal notes that the peer
reviewers both expressed
strong criticism of the text message set out in
Particular 7(iii). While the peers differed in degree of criticism (moderate and
strong) regarding the text messages to Patient D the Tribunal is of the view
that the conduct warrants strong criticism for the reasons
set out above. The
Tribunal had the benefit of hearing the evidence of Patient D and ultimately the
question of the characterisation
of the conduct is a matter for the Tribunal.
The Tribunal also notes that neither peer expressed a view as to whether the
was improper and/or unethical.
Tribunal finds Complaint 2 established.
Tribunal reserves on the question of orders and costs until ‘phase
two’ of the Inquiry.
Publication
copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Chiropractic Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office)
5) The Chiropractic Council of New South Wales.
___________________
___________________
Sue-Ellen McKelvey
___________________
John Thompson
___________________
Sandra Everett
Annexure A – Index of Documents in evidence
Annexure B -
Schedule of Names Suppressed
HCCC v WOODS
TO THE DOCUMENTS OF
THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
FORMAL DOCUMENTS
(a) Formal Complaint
(b) Confirmation of Registration Status
Complaint from Chiropractic Council of NSW dated 28 July 2010 (attachments
are at Tabs 4, 7 and 10 to the HCCC documents)
Complaint from AHPRA dated 9 July 2010
DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PATIENT A
Handwritten complaint by Patient A to the Chiropractic Council dated 6 July
Statement of Patient A dated 4 November 2010
Patient records for Patient A
DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PATIENT B
Handwritten complaint by Patient B to the Chiropractic Council dated 7 July
Statement of Patient B dated 4 November dated 4 November 2010
Patient records for Patient B
DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PATIENT C
Handwritten complaint by Patient C to the Chiropractic Council dated 8 July
Statement of Patient C dated 4 November 2010
(a) HCCC Notices to Telstra Corporation - Authorisation and notification of
details of carrier and attached reply;
(b) HCCC Notice to Telstra and Information from Telstra re call charge
(c) Telstra Notice and call charge records for mobile telephone number of
Patient C between 30 May 2010 – 31 May 2010
Photo’s of text messages received on mobile telephone of Patient C
Patient records for Patient C
DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PATIENT D
Record of telephone interview between Patient D and HCCC assessment officer
Lisa Brandon dated 2 September 2010
Statement of Patient D dated 4 November 2010
(a) HCCC Notices to Telstra Corporation – Authorisation and
notification for access to information (re carrier and call charge
(b)Call charge records for mobile telephone number of Patient D between 20
April 2010 and 21 April 2010
Photo of text message received on mobile telephone of Patient D
Second statement of Patient D dated 24 November 2011
Statement of Ms D’s sister dated 26 November 2011
Patient records for Patient D
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL WOODS
Letter from HCCC to Paul Woods dated 8 October 2010
(a) Section 34a recorded interview between Commission and Paul Woods dated 11
November 2010
(b) Master disc containing audio of interview with Paul Woods dated 11 November
HCCC EXPERT
(a) Letter from HCCC to Expert, Mr Roger Engel dated 1 December 2010
(b) Expert report dated 12 January 2011 and attached Statement of personal,
financial and Professional Connection and CV of Expert
Section 40 letter to Paul Woods from Commission dated 24 January 2011
Section 40 response of Paul Woods dated 4 March 2011 and enclosed
(a) Medico-legal report by John Kelly dated 3 March 2011
(b) Statement of Ms J dated 23 November 2011
Hand-drawing of tattoo
INDEX TO THE RESPONDENT’SDOCUMENTS
Description
Statement by Paul Woods, respondent
Statement by Kate Holman
Statement by Jennifer Grant
Statement by David Taylor
Statement by Kiara Woods
Statement by Ms J
MEDICAL REPORTS
Report by Dr John Kelly
Report by Dr John Kelly
Letter of Instruction to John Kelly
Letter of Instruction to John Kelly
Letter of Instruction to John Kelly
MISCELLANEOUS
Photographs of the respondent’s clinic taken by Kiara Woods
On or about 17.02.12
Sketch plan of the respondent’s clinic drawn by Kiara Woods
On or about 17.02.12
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter