URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/258.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davies v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force [2025] NSWCATAD 258; (22 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Davies v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 258
Hearing Date(s):
15 August 2025
Date of Orders:
22 October 2025
Decision Date:
22 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
J Ledda, Senior Member
(1) The decision of the Respondent to refuse the Applicant’s
application for a Category AB firearms licence is affirmed.
Respondent’s application for costs is refused.
(3) Pursuant
ss 64(1)(c)
and (d) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
the contents of all paragraphs in these reasons marked “NOT FOR
PUBLICATION” are not to be published or disclosed
to the Applicant or the
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW — administrative review of refusal to issue
firearms licence under
Firearms Act 1996
(NSW) — whether applicant fit and
proper person or refusal in public interest — relevance of
applicant’s attitude
towards police — impact of previous Tribunal
COSTS — requirement for special circumstances
warranting order for costs — whether current case hopeless rerun of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions
Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Firearms Act 1996
Interpretation Act 1987
Industry Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Balle v Commissioner of Police
[2021] NSWCATAP 389
Camilleri v
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2024] NSWCATAD 62
Department of Fair Trading
[2019] NSWCATAP 199
Commissioner of Police v
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Davies
[2025] NSWCATAP 36
Constantin v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2013] NSWADTAP 16
Cseszko v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATAD 88
Cusumano v Commissioner of Police
[2001] NSWADT
Davies v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2024] NSWCATAD
Dubroja v Kabir
[2025] NSWCATAP 162
GGW v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2024] NSWCATAP 88
Gleeson v The Owners – Strata Plan No
[2018] NSWCATAP 204
Grabovsky v Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 192
Hovey v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAD 245
Kocic v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(2014) 88 NSWLR
[2014] NSWCA 368
Martin v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2017] NSWCATAD 97
Masterson v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATAP 206
Meacham v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP
New South Wales v Wojciechowska
[2025] HCA 27
NSW Self Insurance
Corporation v EEH
[2023] NSWCATAP 181
O’Neill v Commissioner of Police,
NSW Police Force
[2025] NSWCATAP 175
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR
Plunkett v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2009] NSWADT
Rial v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2023] NSWCATAP
Romani v State of New South Wales
[2023] NSWSC 49
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
(2008) 235 CLR 286
[2008] HCA 31
Sikka v Roads
and Maritime Services (No 2)
[2016] NSWCATOD 98
Slager v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force
[2025] NSWCATAD 20
Special Protection Services (NSW)
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force; Constantin v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police
[2015] NSWCATOD 112
Spuds Surf Chatswood Pty Ltd v
[2015] NSWCATAP 11
Stiles v Commissioner for Fair Trading &
[2017] NSWCATAP 44
Ungaro v Matijevic
[2025] NSWCATAP 163
Commissioner of Police
[2000] NSWADT 28
Webb v Commissioner of Police, New
South Wales Police Service
[2004] NSWADT 110
Texts Cited:
Council of Australasian Tribunals, Guide to Tribunal Practice (6th ed,
Principal judgment
Jarrod Davies (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(Respondent)
Representation:
Dr J Donnelly (Applicant)
P Sharp and A Richards
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Levitt Robinson Solicitors
(Applicant)
Lander & Rogers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00161303
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(c)
and (d) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), the contents of all paragraphs in these reasons marked
“NOT FOR PUBLICATION” are not to be published or disclosed
Applicant or the public
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an administrative review application (the Review Application) made by Mr
Jarrod Davies (the Applicant). He seeks an administrative
review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (ADR Act) of a decision of
the Commissioner of Police (the Respondent) to refuse the Applicant’s
application for a Category
AB firearms licence (the Licence Refusal Decision).
The decision was made under the
Firearms Act 1996
(NSW) (Firearms Act) by
a delegate of the Respondent.
Tribunal in
Davies v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAD 210
Davies No 1
) set aside a previous decision of the
Respondent to revoke the Applicant’s Category ABH firearms licence and
large calibre
pistol permit. The Tribunal remitted the matter to the Respondent
for reconsideration with the recommendation that the licence and
reinstated if the Applicant successfully completed a course in relation to his
obligations under the
Firearms Act
decision of the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
was set aside by the Appeal Panel
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Davies
[2025] NSWCATAP 36
Davies No 2
). The Appeal Panel decided the Tribunal could not remit the
matter to the Tribunal and, in substitution, the Panel affirmed the
Respondent’s
decision to revoke the licence and permit.
Applicant applied to the Respondent for the Category AB firearms licence earlier
this year. Before doing so, the Applicant completed
the course recommended by
the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
. The Respondent nevertheless refused the
Applicant’s application. The Applicant contends the Respondent was wrong
He contends that the correct and preferable decision is to issue him
with the licence.
made orders on the day of the hearing on 15 August 2025. The orders prohibit the
disclosure or publication of certain confidential
material to the Applicant, the
Applicant’s legal representatives and the public. The confidential
material was lodged with
the Tribunal by the Respondent. My reasons for making
the orders are set out below.
paragraphs in these reasons marked “NOT FOR PUBLICATION” refer to
material contained in this confidential material.
Consequently, I have decided
to make a further order under
and (d) of the
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act) to prevent the publication
or disclosure to the Applicant and the public of the contents of those
paragraphs.
the reasons given below, I have decided that the correct and preferable decision
is to refuse the Applicant’s application
for a Category AB firearms
licence. Accordingly, the Licence Refusal Decision must be
Applicant and his now former stepmother fell out at the beginning of 2023.
Incidents relating to, or resulting from, this falling
out provide some relevant
context for the Review Application.
is not necessary to detail all the incidents involved. However, I note the
(1) The Applicant’s stepmother was reported to have punched the
Applicant’s father in the face while he was in a hospital
bed recovering
from cancer surgery.
(2) It was also reported that the Applicant’s stepmother threatened the
Applicant’s father and tried to make him sign
a new will against his
(3) An apprehended domestic violence order was issued against the
Applicant’s stepmother to protect his father.
(4) The Applicant sought to enter his father’s property on several
occasions after the incident involving his father. Police
officers attended on
one of those occasions to prevent a breach of the peace.
(5) Members of the NSW Police Force (the NSWPF) applied in February 2023 for an
Interim Apprehended Domestic Violence Order against
the Applicant (the Interim
AVDO) to protect his stepmother and to prevent him from going to his
father’s property. This followed
an expression of concern from the
Applicant’s stepmother about her safety.
(6) In September 2023, the interim ADVO was withdrawn and the application for
the order was dismissed by the Local Court.
6 April 2023, solicitors acting for the Applicant and his wife wrote a letter to
the Commander of the Sutherland PAC (the Implied
Licence Withdrawal Letter)
concerning entry into the property of the Applicant and his wife (the Shared
Property). It stated:
(1) The Applicant and his wife withdrew from “all members of the NSW
Police Force and their agent/s” any implied licence
that existed under the
common law to enter the Shared Property
(2) Any member of the NSWPF or their agents who entered the Shared Property
without a lawful purpose and without their express invitation
committing the tort of trespass and may be sued in trespass.
(3) For abundant clarity “be aware that any entry upon the Property by a
member of the NSW Police Force or their agent/s, without
warrant is, from this
date forward, a trespass”. Also, entry by any member of the NSWPF or their
agents for the purpose of
conducting an “AVO compliance check” would
be a trespass.
(4) The recent NSW Supreme Court decision of
Romani v State of New South
[2023] NSWSC 49
was referred to for its statement of the current
common law about the implied licence to enter property.
(5) Additionally, the Applicant and his wife no longer wished to be directly
communication” from the NSWPF or their agents was to be directed to their
solicitor by email until further notice.
(6) The Applicant reserved the right, at any time and without further notice to
the NSWPF, to reinstate the implied licence under
the common law to enter the
Shared Property.
Applicant and his wife also erected a sign in the front yard of the Shared
Property (the No Trespassing Sign), which provided
as follows:
(1) It commanded “ATTENTION” by the NSWPF, including by the
Sutherland Police Station Local Area Command and a particular
police officer.
(2) It stated the Shared Property was Private Property and it would be a
trespass if persons entered without a warrant or admittance
by invitation and
that “Penalties Apply”.
(3) In smaller print at the bottom of the Sign next to the heading “LEGAL
NOTICE”, it stated:
“To all persons and entities including Police/Undercover Police &
Informants/Government/Sheriff/Bailiff/Process Server/council
/RSPCA/ Private
Investigator/Corporations”
“TRESPASS DAMAGES shall apply upon one step onto the private property at
“Minimum Penalty AUD $10,000.00”
(4) It referred, again in smaller print at the bottom of the Sign, to the
High Court decision in
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635.
note that in
at 647, Gaudron and McHugh JJ said (with the cited
cases omitted):
“A person who enters the property of another must justify that entry by
showing that he or she either entered with the consent
of the occupier or
otherwise had lawful authority to enter the premises ..
Except in the
cases provided for by the common law and by statute, constables of police and
those acting under the Crown have no special
rights to enter land ... Consent to
an entry is implied if the person enters for a lawful purpose ...
However, the licence may be withdrawn by giving notice of its withdrawal. A
person who enters or remains on property after the withdrawal
of the licence is
a trespasser.”
late 2023, the Applicant held a Category ABH licence and large calibre pistol
permit. However, on 28 November 2023 a delegate
of the Respondent decided to
revoke the licence and permit because the Applicant was no longer a fit and
proper person to hold the
licence and permit and because it was no longer in the
public interest for him to do so. The reasons on which the Respondent relied
the revocation included:
(1) There had been two apprehended domestic violence orders in place following
disputes between the Applicant and his stepmother.
(2) There had been several interactions between the members of the NSWPF and the
Applicant and his wife that the NSWPF labelled “hostile”,
in relation to the service of the interim ADVO on the Applicant.
(3) The Applicant and his wife sent the Implied Licence Withdrawal Letter.
(4) The Applicant and his wife had arranged for the erection of the No
Trespassing Sign in the front yard of the Shared Property.
decision to revoke the licence and permit was affirmed on 9 January 2024 by an
internal review. The internal review decision
occasioned the administrative
review application that was determined by the Tribunal in
29 July 2024, the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
decided to set aside the
decision to revoke the Applicant’s licence and permit and remitted the
matter to the Respondent for
reconsideration with a recommendation that the
licence and permit be reinstated if the Applicant completed a course concerning
obligations under the
Firearms Act
. The Tribunal purported to do so using
the power conferred on the Tribunal by s 63(3)(d) of the ADR Act. That provision
enables the
Tribunal to determine an administrative review application by
setting aside the decision under review and remitting the matter for
reconsideration by the decision-maker in accordance with any directions or
recommendations of the Tribunal. The Tribunal reasoned
as follows at
“84 ... I note that the Applicant’s solicitor has asserted that
there was no intention to restrict access by police to
carry out inspections and
to ensure compliance with the Act. However, concerns remain in regard to the
Applicant’s understanding
of the obligations of a licensee because of the
lack of evidence from the Applicant in regard to the intention of the [No
Trespassing
Sign] and the [Implied Licence Withdrawal Letter] to the
Respondent’s Area Commander and the wording of the signage and the
85 In my view, there remains a risk to the public if licensees do not understand
their obligations under the Act and the need to
comply with other aspects of the
firearms legislation. The Applicant will need to address this issue before he
should be permitted
to again have access to firearms.
86 In my view, the Applicant would need to take steps to remove any basis for
these concerns before I would be comfortable that there
is virtually no risk to
the public if he is to be reissued with a firearms licence. This could be
achieved by completing a course
in relation to a licensee’s obligations in
regard to compliance with the Act. The Applicant should be given the opportunity
to take that step.
87 With the exception of the concern that I have expressed in relation to the
signage and the April 2023 letter, I do not consider
that there are any other
issues of fitness and propriety or the public interest that would prevent the
reissuing of a firearms licence
to the Applicant.
88 In the circumstances, it is my view that the decision under review should be
set aside, and the matter should be remitted for
redetermination by the
Respondent, taking into account the views that I have expressed above”.
“89 If the Applicant completes a course in relation to his obligations
under the Act successfully, I recommend that the category
ABH firearms licence
and large calibre pistol permit be reinstated.”
29 August 2024, the Applicant successfully completed an “Advanced
Course” of study on firearms ownership, possession
and use (the Completed
Firearms Course). Firearm Safety and Training Council Limited (FTSC) provided
the course. In a statement dated
1 November 2024, Mr Timythie Featonby (who is
the CEO of FTSC) stated:
(1) FSTC is a Registered Training Organisation that is approved by the NSW
Firearms Registry for the delivery of the Firearms Pre-licence
Qualification
course, which is a mandatory course for all NSW firearms licence holders.
(2) The course provided by FSTC is designed to improve the general knowledge of
firearms laws in NSW and covers a firearm licence
holders’ responsibility
as to matters including safe storage, transportation and the
use/carriage/possession of firearms.
(3) The course undertaken by the Applicant with FSTC included an examination of
the issues that gave rise to the revocation of the
Applicant’s firearms
licence and the knowledge and measures necessary to prevent any recurrence.
Respondent does not appear to dispute what Mr Featonby says.
20 February 2025, the Appeal Panel in
Davies No 2
set aside the decision
of the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
and made a substitute decision to affirm
the Respondent’s decision to revoke the Applicant’s licence and
permit. After
considering the effect of comparable provisions in the now
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) along with
relevant cases and commentary on those provisions, the Appeal Panel concluded at
“27 Similarly,
and (d) of the [ADR Act] empower the Tribunal to
set aside the decision and do one of two things. Under
, the Tribunal
may make a decision in substitution for the decision set aside. In that case,
the Tribunal exercises and exhausts the
powers of the administrator.
Alternatively, under
, the Tribunal has power to remit the matter to
the administrator for reconsideration. But the Tribunal may only do so where it
‘unable to make’ or is ‘not in a position to
formulate’ a decision in substitution for the decision set aside.
will be the case where there is ‘some residual function to be performed by
the primary decision maker involving the exercise
of the relevant statutory
power’. Examples include where a requirement or condition must be
satisfied before a decision can
be made or where a calculation needs to be made
which the Tribunal is not in a position to make”.
“28 In this case, the Tribunal was satisfied that it was not in the public
interest for Mr Davies to continue to hold the licence
or permit. At that point
in the decision making process, the Tribunal was in a position to make a
decision in substitution for the
decision set aside. There was no residual
function to be performed by the administrator involving the exercise of the
relevant statutory
power. The correct decision was to affirm the
Commissioner’s decision.”
20 February 2025, the Applicant made an application to the Respondent for a
Category AB firearms licence. On 21 March 2025, a delegate
of the Respondent
initially decided to refuse the application.
Applicant then sought an internal review of this initial decision to refuse the
application. On 23 April 2025, the internal reviewer
decided to affirm this
initial decision. The reviewer gave the following reasons for doing
“By way of background, the Notice of Refusal dated 28 November 2023 and
Internal Review Statement of Reasons dated 9 January
2024 that outline details
of the events that have given rise to concerns regarding your access to firearms
and to your various submissions.
I believe it would serve no purpose to discuss
all those details again in this document.
On 19 January 2024 you lodged an application for external review of the decision
to revoke your licence and permit. On 29 July 2024
the Decision of the Tribunal
found that it was not satisfied that you posed virtually no risk to public
safety if given access to
a firearm and recommended that you complete a course
in relation to your obligations under the Act, prior to you being
a firearms licence. At that time, the Tribunal set aside
the decision to revoke your licence and permit and remitted the matter for
redetermination, on the provision of successful completion of a course in
relation to your obligations under the Act.
An appeal against the Tribunal’s Decision was lodged and following a stay
application on 18 September 2024, the Appeal was
granted. On 29 November 2024
the Appeal Panel found that the Tribunal had fallen into error, finding that the
Tribunal exceeded its
powers under
Administrative
Decisions Review Act 1997
. The Appeal Panel accepted that the Tribunal made a
decision in a purported exercise of power when that power was not available.
In this regard the Appeal Panel found that the Tribunal was satisfied that it
was not in the public interest for you to continue
to hold a licence or permit.
At that point the Tribunal was in a position for the affirmation for the
decision set aside. There was
no residual function to be performed by the
administrator involving the exercise of the relevant statutory power and that
the correct
decision was to affirm the Commissioner’s decision. On 20
February 2025 the Appeal Panel set aside the Decision of 29 July
2024 and in
substitution affirmed the decision to revoke your Category ABH firearms licence
and your large calibre pistol permit.
Despite your legal representative’s submissions, the Tribunal’s
recommendation for you to undertake a firearms course
did not affect any of the
Tribunal’s findings that you did not have sufficient knowledge of your
obligations under the
Firearms Act
and that there remained an extant risk in you
holding a firearms licence. It was found that there remained a risk in you
a firearms licence and that it was not in the public interest for you to
hold a licence”.
“Accordingly, I find that the refusal of your firearms licence application
is the correct and preferable decision.”
Applicant lodged the Review Application in April 2025. The hearing was held
before me on 15 August 2025.
Legislation regulating
Firearms Act
expressly states that one of the underlying
principles of the Act is that firearm possession and use is a privilege that is
conditional
on the overriding need to ensure public safety. This principle makes
it clear that the community’s interest in public safety
must prevail over
an individual’s personal interest in possessing or using a firearm.
principle is to improve public safety by imposing strict controls on the
possession and use of firearms and promote the safe
and responsible storage and
use of firearms:
Firearms Act
powers conferred by the
Firearms Act
, including the power to issue licences for
firearms, must be exercised in a way that promotes these principles:
v Commissioner of Police
[2001] NSWADT 50
makes it an offence for a person to possess or use a firearm unless the
person is authorised to do so by a licence or permit.
Section 7(1)
similar offence with respect to the possession or use of a pistol or prohibited
firearm without the authority of a licence
Firearms Act
gives the Commissioner various functions. The Commissioner is
defined to mean the Commissioner of Police:
Firearms Act
(definition of
“Commissioner”). The Respondent is the Commissioner of Police.
Respondent may delegate the Respondent’s functions under the
Firearms Act
or the regulations for the Act to an authorised person:
Firearms Act
delegated function that is duly exercised by a delegate is to be taken to have
been exercised by the delegator:
Interpretation Act 1987
There is no suggestion that the function of making the Licence Refusal Decision
was not duly exercised by a delegate of the Respondent.
Accordingly, the
Decision should be treated as being the decision of the Respondent.
Firearms Act
empowers the Respondent to issue firearms licences
subject to certain restrictions. It provides as follows:
General restrictions on issue of licences
(1) The Commissioner may issue a licence in respect of an application, or refuse
any such application.
(2) A licence must not be issued until after the end of the period of 28 days
following the day on which the application is made.
(2A) Subsection (2) does not apply if the application is for the renewal of
a licence (including the renewal of a category A or B
licence that involves the
addition of either of those licence categories to the previous licence).
(3) A licence must not be issued unless—
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person
and can be trusted to have possession of firearms
without danger to public
safety or to the peace, and
(b) in the case of a person who has never held a licence (including a firearms
licence under a previous Act), the applicant has completed,
to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner, such firearms training and safety courses as are prescribed
by the regulations in respect
of the licence concerned, and
(c) the Commissioner is satisfied that the storage and safety requirements set
are capable of being met by the applicant, and
(d) the Commissioner is satisfied that the person to whom the licence is to be
issued is a resident of this State or is about to
become a resident of this
(3A) Despite subsection (3) (b), the Commissioner may require an applicant for a
licence to complete such firearms training and safety
courses as are approved by
the Commissioner in relation to the category of licence concerned.
(4) Without limiting the generality of subsection (3) (a), a licence must not be
issued if the Commissioner has reasonable cause
to believe that the applicant
may not personally exercise continuous and responsible control over firearms
because of—
(a) the applicant’s way of living or domestic circumstances, or
(b) any previous attempt by the applicant to commit suicide or cause a
self-inflicted injury, or
(c) the applicant’s intemperate habits or being of unsound mind.
(5) A licence must not be issued to a person who—
(a) is under the age of 18, or
(b) has, within the period of 10 years before the application for the licence
was made, been convicted in New South Wales or elsewhere
of an offence
prescribed by the regulations, whether or not the offence is an offence under
New South Wales law, or
(c) is subject to an apprehended violence order or interim apprehended violence
order or who has, at any time within 10 years before
the application for the
licence was made, been subject to an apprehended violence order (other than an
order that has been revoked),
(c1) is subject to a serious domestic abuse prevention order or who has, at any
time within 10 years before the application for the
licence was made, been
subject to a serious domestic abuse prevention order, other than an order that
has been revoked, or
(d) is subject to one of the following in relation to an offence prescribed by
the regulations—
(i) a good behaviour bond, whether entered into in New South Wales or
(ii) a community correction order imposed in New South Wales,
(iii) a conditional release order imposed in New South Wales, or
(e) is subject to a firearms prohibition order, or
(f) is a registrable person or corresponding registrable person under
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
(5A) A licence must not be issued to a person if the Commissioner is of the
opinion, having regard to any criminal intelligence report
or other criminal
information held in relation to the person, that—
(a) the person is a risk to public safety, and
(b) the issuing of the licence would be contrary to the public interest.
(5B) The Commissioner is not, under this or any other Act or law, required to
give any reasons for not issuing a licence on the grounds
referred to in
subsection (5A).
(6) Except in the case of a firearms dealer licence or where the
applicant’s genuine reason is business or employment, a licence
be issued to a person who is not a natural person.
(7) Despite any other provision of this section, the Commissioner may refuse to
issue a licence if the Commissioner considers that
issue of the licence would be
contrary to the public interest.
(8) The regulations may provide other mandatory or discretionary grounds for
refusing the issue of a licence.
Respondent places particular reliance on
and (7) in support of the
Licence Refusal Decision.
Section 11(3)(a)
—Fit and proper
person test
Firearms Act
imposes a duty on the Respondent (as indicated by
the phrase “must not” in the introductory words) by reference to a
fit and proper person test.
Section 11(3)(a)
provides that a firearms licence
must not be issued unless the Respondent is satisfied that the applicant is a
fit and proper person
and can be trusted to have possession of firearms without
danger to public safety or to the peace.
only by the language actually employed by Parliament rather than the language
imputed to it by precedent, the use of the conjunction
“and” between
“fit and proper person” and “can be trusted to have possession
without danger to public
safety or to the peace” might suggest the
Respondent needs to be satisfied that an applicant has both characteristics.
in this way, it would be clear that there is a duty to refuse an
application for a licence even if the Respondent is satisfied that
an applicant
has only one, but not both, characteristics.
Kocic v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(2014) 88 NSWLR 159
[2014] NSWCA 368
) at [35], Basten JA (with whom Leeming JA agreed)
considered that the conjunction “and” should be read as
so as to yield the composite characteristic of “a fit
and proper person who can be trusted to have possession without danger
safety or to the peace”. Basten JA said (at [35]) that this construction
treats the concept of fitness as limited
by the relevant purpose of the
Respondent’s assessment. As a consequence, Parliament should be understood
as allowing “possession
and use of a firearm only by a person who is
‘fit’ in the sense of one who can be trusted to have a firearm
danger to the public safety or to the peace’”:
at [36]. I approach the application of the fit and proper person
test with this in mind.
of the relevant principles for deciding whether the fit and proper person test
is satisfied were usefully summarised by Principal
Member Ransome recently in
Slager v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2025] NSWCATAD 20
“15 It is generally accepted that what is fit and proper needs to be
determined by reference to the activities in issue and
is to be gauged in light
of the nature and purpose of the activities that the person will undertake:
AJO v Director-General of Transport
[2012] NSWADT 101
v Commissioner for Fair Trading & Commissioner of Police
[2016] NSWCATAP
16 The determination of whether an applicant is a fit and proper person is not
merely an assessment of an applicant’s character
but also an assessment of
their conduct, likely future conduct, community confidence that improper conduct
will not occur, and knowledge
of the duties and responsibilities of the licence
Metleg v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2023] NSWCATAD
. Fitness and propriety is a question of fact to be determined
objectively, taking into account all the evidence:
Smith v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAD 184
17 Furthermore, in the context of firearms licensing, the Tribunal is required
to form a positive state of satisfaction that an applicant
‘is a fit and
proper person and can be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger
to public safety or to the peace’:
Commissioner of Police v EMB
[2021] NSWCATAP 63
Ward v Commissioner of Police
[2000] NSWADT 28
President Hennessy said at [27]–[28]:
“27 One of the objects of the [Firearms] Act, as set out in
‘to confirm firearm possession and use as being a privilege that is
conditional on the overriding need to ensure public
safety.’ In
determining whether Mr Ward is a fit and proper person to hold a licence
consideration must be given to the circumstances
surrounding his conviction for
assault. The question for the Tribunal is whether, based on all the evidence, it
would have confidence
that Mr Ward would not pose a risk to public safety if he
had access to firearms.
28 The Tribunal could never be totally satisfied that a person would not pose
any risk to public safety if they were given access
to a firearm. However, in
the context of the Act, the Tribunal must be satisfied that there is virtually
was a decision of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (the ADT) at
first instance, the requirement for the Tribunal to be satisfied
that there is
“virtually no risk” to public satisfy has been applied countless
times in this Tribunal in connection with
the fit and proper person test.
However, it has been said that the risk to public safety must be a real and
appreciable risk rather
than simply a minimal, fanciful or theoretical risk:
Webb v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
GGW v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAP 88
is important to remember that this requirement should not be applied with
unthinking rigidity. As the Tribunal noted in
Martin v Commissioner of
Police, New South Wales Police Force
[2017] NSWCATAD 97
“The question of risk [to public safety] is therefore not viewed as
requiring an applicant to discharge the almost impossible
burden of proving a
near absolute negative, but, in a nuanced way, taking account of all the
circumstances, including attitudes,
character and prior conduct, but with an
overriding focus on public safety.”
the Appeal Panel in
Rial v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2023] NSWCATAP 162
) said at [32]:
“The question of risk is not, however, to be approached in an absolute or
mechanistic way, but in a nuanced way, taking account
of all the circumstances,
including attitudes, character and prior conduct, with an overriding focus on
public safety:
Martin v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
[2017] NSWCATAD 97
Laing v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force
[2017] NSWCATAD 315
question is whether there is in all the circumstances a real and appreciable
risk to the public:
Kavalieratos v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAD 117
Kopco v Commissioner of Police,
New South Wales Police Force
[2018] NSWCATAD 124
recognise that the “attitudes” of an
applicant, along with the applicant’s character and prior conduct, can be
a relevant when taking this nuanced approach to assessing the degree of
the attitudes that can be relevant is where an applicant has an attitude towards
police that could adversely impact the applicant’s
ability to cooperate
with police:
Camilleri v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAD 62
. In this regard, the observations of Judicial Member
Montgomery (as he then was) in
Plunkett v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2009] NSWADT 104
are particularly relevant for this
“The Applicant gave oral evidence and was cross-examined. There is clearly
considerable animosity between the Applicant and
some members of the Police
force. It is equally clear that the Applicant has adopted an attitude of
non-cooperation with the Police.
In my opinion, this attitude is not compatible
with responsible firearms ownership.”
Section 11(7)
—Public interest test
Firearms Act
confers a discretion (as indicated by
the verb “may”) on the Respondent by reference to a public interest
O’Neill v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2025] NSWCATAP 175
enables the Respondent to refuse to issue a firearms licence
“despite any other provision of [s 11]” if the Respondent
that the issue of the licence “would be contrary to the public
an often-cited passage from
Commissioner of Police v Toleafoa
), the Appeal Panel of the ADT said at
“The ‘public interest’ is an inherently broad concept giving
the appellant the ability to have regard to a wide
range of factors in choosing
whether to exercise a discretion adversely to an individual. As the possibility
of refusing an application
on the ground of character is dealt with elsewhere in
the same section, it is reasonable to infer that the Parliament intended that
the public interest discretion operate in areas to which the character ground
was not relevant or, possibly, in circumstances where
an objection on character
grounds would not be sufficient in its own right to warrant refusal.”
decision in
concerned the use of the term “public
interest” in the
Security Industry Act 1997
(NSW). Nevertheless,
the quoted passage is also applicable to discerning the public interest for the
purposes of the
Firearms Act
: see, for example,
Balle v Commissioner of Police
[2021] NSWCATAP 389
(with whom White JA agreed) said at [84]:
“... [Section] 11(3) and
Firearms Act
are both substantive.
Each is a qualification upon the general power to issue a licence conferred by
subsection 11(1).
Subsection (3) imposes a further precondition to the exercise
of the power to issue a licence; it amounts to a mandatory ground for
Subsection (7) creates an additional discretionary ground for refusal, and it
follows from its opening words that even if
none of the grounds for mandatory
refusal in the section apply, the discretionary power to do so remains
available, if the Commissioner
considers that the issue of the licence would be
contrary to the public interest.”
JA also said at [52] that “the matters that can be taken into account in
making an assessment of the public interest
pursuant to
are not limited
to matters not otherwise dealt with by
the interrelation between the fit and proper person and public interest tests,
the Appeal Panel in
Stiles v Commissioner for Fair Trading & Anor
[2017] NSWCATAP 44
“34. We agree with the submission for the Commissioner that a finding that
a person is not of fit and proper character to hold
the type of licence under
notice would necessarily also mean that it would be contrary to the public
interest to allow the person
to hold the licence.
35. Equally there can be cases, and this is an example of that kind, where the
material might be problematic in relation to the question
of fitness but strong
in relation to the public interest. A person may not be so lacking in fitness as
to warrant the conclusion
that he or she is not a fit and proper person to hold
the relevant licence. But nonetheless there may be matters in the material
considered in that regard that properly found a case for denial of the licence
in the public interest. There is no problem, as we
see it, in an administrator
(or the review tribunal) differentiating in that way.
36. It does not follow that because a person is ‘fit’ to hold a
licence, that therefore it must also be in public interest
for the person to
hold the licence. The ‘public interest’ enables a range of factors
some of which may be specific to
the person (personal associations, health
considerations, and so on) and others of which may be external to the person
more licences in a particular geographical area, number of licences
already held, risks of penetration by criminal elements, and
so on) that might
militate against grant of a licence.”
concerned the tattoo parlours licensing scheme, the passage above
is a statement of general principle that is also relevant to the
legislative scheme. It has, for example, been cited in
Hovey v Commissioner
of Police, NSW Police Force
[2023] NSWCATAD 245
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATAD 88
public interest test permits the Respondent (and the Tribunal on an
administrative review) to take into account concerns going
applicant’s character and can include concerns about public protection,
public safety and public confidence in the
administration of the firearms
licensing system:
Constantin v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2013] NSWADTAP 16
. I note that it has been held that the requirement
that the Tribunal must be satisfied there is virtually no
risk to public safety also applies to the public interest test:
Masterson v
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales
[2017] NSWCATAP 206
Tribunal has such jurisdiction and functions as may be conferred or imposed on
it by or under the NCAT Act or any other legislation:
NCAT Act, s 28(1). Its
Tribunal has administrative
review jurisdiction if enabling legislation provides
that a person may make an application to the Tribunal for an administrative
review under the ADR Act of a decision of an administrator: ADR Act, s 9: NCAT
Act, s 30(1).
Relevantly,
Firearms Act
75 Administrative reviews by Civil and Administrative Tribunal of certain
(1) A person may apply to the Civil and Administrative Tribunal for an
administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
of any of the following decisions—
(a) the refusal of or failure by the Commissioner to issue a licence or permit
(other than a permit in respect of a prohibited firearm)
to the person ...
55(3) of the ADR Act generally requires an application for an internal review of
decision to be duly made, and for the internal
review to be finalised, before an
application for an administrative review of the decision can be made to the
is the duty of the Tribunal to be independently satisfied that it has
the matter:
Grabovsky v Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 192
and [105(1)]. I am satisfied that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal
with the Review Application because: (1) the Licence Refusal
Decision is a
decision caught by the terms of
Firearms Act
; and (2) an
internal review was finalised before the Application was made to the
determining an administrative review application, the role of the Tribunal is to
decide what the correct and preferable decision
is having regard to the material
then before it, including any relevant factual material and any applicable
written or unwritten
law: ADR Act, s 63(1). For this purpose, the Tribunal may
exercise all the functions that are conferred or imposed by any relevant
legislation on the decision-maker: ADR Act, s 63(2). In making the
determination, the Tribunal effectively stands in the shoes of
decision-maker who made the decision under review:
NSW Self Insurance
Corporation v EEH
[2023] NSWCATAP 181
63(3) of the ADR Act provides that the Tribunal may determine an administrative
review application by:
(1) affirming or varying the decision under review; or
(2) setting the decision aside and making a decision in substitution; or
(3) setting the decision aside and remitting the matter to the administrator for
reconsideration.
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence when it conducts an
administrative review: NCAT Act, s 38(2). However, as the Appeal
Panel noted in
Meacham v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 107
“54 Despite not being bound by the rules of evidence, the Tribunal is
required to base its findings of fact on ‘logically
material’, and not on ‘mere suspicion or speculation’, as a
corollary of its obligation to act reasonably:
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
(1980) 44 FLR 41
68 (Deane J);
[1980] FCA 85
Sullivan v Civil Aviation Authority
22 FCR 555;
[2014] FCAFC 93
’) at [5]−[8],
[15]−[17] (Logan J). It is an error of law for the Tribunal to make a
finding of fact with no evidence,
or no probative evidence, to support it.
81 Section 140 of the Evidence Act [1995 (NSW)], which sets out the standard of
proof in civil cases to which that Act applies, is
for Tribunal guidance only,
and ordinarily a party seeking administrative review of government action is not
required to establish
its case on the balance of probabilities:
Bronze Wing
Ammunition v SafeWork NSW (No 2)
[2016] NSWSC 988
Bronze Wing International Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2017] NSWCA 41
82 Rather, in an administrative review case, the parties put on such evidence as
they wish and, in a matter of this kind involving
the exercise of a discretion,
it is a matter for the Tribunal to properly consider all relevant materials and
ignore all irrelevant
matters in exercising the power of the relevant
administrator in review proceedings. This is especially the case where a
has been taken on a discretionary basis in light of the public
83 Proof of matters which are asserted is required in a practical sense, and a
party asserting a fact is generally required to provide
evidence to substantiate
it. As noted above, the Tribunal is required to base its findings of fact on
‘logically probative
at [5]−[8], [15]−[17].”
dealing with an administrative review application, the Tribunal is required to
consider the matter afresh, with neither party
bearing an onus of proof except
for a practical onus on the party who asserts a fact to prove its existence:
Collins v Department of Fair Trading
[2019] NSWCATAP 199
requirement for the Tribunal to make its own decision having regard to the
material then before it means that the evidence to
which the Tribunal may have
regard is not limited to the evidence before the decision-maker:
Migration Agents Registration Authority
(2008) 235 CLR 286
[2008] HCA 31
−[38], [45]−[46] (Kirby J), [99] (Hayne and Heydon JJ), [143]
(Kiefel J).
Material before Tribunal
Confidential Material
49(2) of the NCAT Act enables the Tribunal, either of its own motion or on the
application of a party, to order that a hearing
be conducted wholly or partly in
private if it is satisfied that it is desirable to do so by reason of the
confidential nature of
any evidence or matter or for any other reason.
64(1) of the NCAT Act enables the Tribunal to make orders (confidentiality
orders) prohibiting or restricting any of the following
if the Tribunal is
satisfied that it is desirable to do so by reason of the confidential nature of
any evidence or matter or for
any other reason:
(1) the disclosure of the name of any person (whether or not a party to
proceedings in the Tribunal or a witness summoned by, or
appearing before, the
(2) the publication or broadcast of any report, including a sound recording or
transcript, of proceedings in the Tribunal;
(3) the publication of evidence given before the Tribunal, whether in public or
in private, or of matters contained in documents
lodged with the Tribunal or
received in evidence by the Tribunal;
(4) the disclosure to some or all of the parties to the proceedings of evidence
given before the Tribunal, or of the contents of
a document lodged with the
Tribunal or received in evidence by the Tribunal, in relation to the
proceedings.
Respondent applied for confidentiality orders to prevent the publication of
certain confidential material it lodged with the Tribunal
Respondent’s Confidentiality Application).
of the material is subject to confidentiality orders made in
Davies No 1
There is, however, additional material for which the Respondent also seeks a
confidentiality order in the the Respondent’s
Confidentiality Application.
I will refer to this material collectively as “the Confidential
Applicant opposed the continuation of the existing, or the making of further,
confidentiality orders. He also applied to have
the existing orders set aside
(the Applicant’s Confidentiality Application).
Applications came before me for determination at the hearing.
heard the Respondent’s submissions concerning the Confidential Material in
a closed session at the beginning of the hearing.
The Applicant, his legal
representatives and the public were excluded pursuant to an order I made under s
49 of the NCAT Act.
the hearing resumed following the closed session, the Respondent also sought a
confidentiality order concerning the address and
mobile phone number of a police
officer mentioned in the Affidavit of Jarrod Mark Davies dated 29 July 2025
lodged with the Tribunal
(the First Davies Affidavit). The Applicant consented
to the making of the order. I agreed that it was appropriate to make such an
order in order to prevent the disclosure of personal information about a police
also considered that it was appropriate to make new orders to protect the
Confidential Material. Although it was strictly unnecessary
for me to make
orders that are still subject to previous confidentiality orders, I thought that
it would be appropriate to make fresh
orders because the Confidential Material
now includes additional material. A perusal of all the material satisfies me
that confidentiality
orders are necessary because the information concerned is
subject to the duty imposed on the Tribunal by
Firearms Act
may also reveal information concerning confidential sources. I have some
sympathy with the Applicant’s submission that
to deny him access to the
Confidential Information would involve procedural unfairness because he is
unable to defend himself against
it. However, s 64 of the NCAT Act clearly
contemplates that the right to procedural fairness must give way in appropriate
the need to keep information confidential.
completeness, I set out the orders I made on 15 August 2025:
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NCAT Act), the hearing insofar as it relates to the confidential material
lodged by the Respondent (the Confidential Material)
be conducted in the absence
of the Applicant, his representatives and the public (the closed session of the
(2) Pursuant to s 64(1)(c) of the NCAT Act, until further order of the Tribunal:
(a) the publication of the Confidential Material, or matters contained in the
Confidential Material, is prohibited; and
(b) the publication of the following information (the Personal Information) set
out in the Affidavit of Jarrod Mark Davies dated
29 July 2025 is, with the
consent of both parties, also prohibited:
(i) the address mentioned in paragraph [17] of the Affidavit;
(ii) the mobile phone number mentioned in paragraphs [44] and [46] and the same
mobile phone number to the extent it is mentioned
in Exhibit JMD2 annexed to the
Affidavit at pp 111−119.
(3) Pursuant to s 64(1)(d) of the NCAT Act, the disclosure of the Confidential
Material is restricted to the Respondent, the Respondent’s
representatives and the Tribunal.
(4) Pursuant to s 64(1)(d) of the NCAT Act, the disclosure of the Personal
Information is restricted to the parties, their legal
representatives and the
Tribunal for the purposes of these proceedings only.
(5) Pursuant to s 64(1)(b) and (c) of the NCAT Act, until further order of the
Tribunal, the publication or reporting of the closed
session of the hearing is
prohibited.
as I noted in the Overview, I will make an additional order under s 64(1)(c) and
(d) of the NCAT Act to prevent the disclosure
or publication to the Applicant or
the public of the contents of any paragraphs of these reasons marked “NOT
FOR PUBLICATION”
because they set out material contained in the
Confidential Material.
Other documentary material
the beginning of the hearing, I asked counsel for each of the parties to
identify the documents on which they rely.
Applicant relies on the following material lodged with the Tribunal:
(1) The Applicant’s written submissions.
(2) The Applicant’s statement dated 17 June 2025.
(3) The First Davies Affidavit.
(4) The Affidavit of Jarrod Mark Davis dated 4 August 2025 (the Second Davies
Affidavit).
(5) The Affidavit of Matthew Michael Wilson dated 4 August 2025 (the Wilson
Affidavit).
(6) The oral submissions made for the Applicant at the hearing on 15 August
have already mentioned that the Respondent objected to certain paragraphs in the
First Davies Affidavit to the extent that they
revealed personal information
paragraphs either because of
their form or because they contained hearsay
statements. I noted during the hearing that because the Tribunal is not bound by
rules of evidence, these objections were relevant to the weight (if any)
that I should give to the evidence concerned rather than
to its admissibility:
NCAT Act, s 38(2);
Englebrecht v Pryor
[2023] NSWCATAP 278
Allen v TriCare (Hastings) Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP 216
approached the impugned paragraphs with this in mind.
addition to the Confidential Material, the Respondent relies on the following
material lodged with the Tribunal:
(1) The Affidavit of Mandy Chow dated 17 July 2025, which includes as Exhibit
MC—1 a recording of a radio interview on 24 April
2025 between Mr Chris
Smith and a person calling himself “Mark” (the April 2025
Interview).
(2) A transcript of the April 2025 Interview handed up at the hearing without
objection from the Applicant, along with a recording
of the Interview.
(3) The initial bundle of bundle of documents lodged under s 58 of the ADR Act
entitled “Brief of Documents” received
by the Tribunal on 28 May
2025 (the Initial s 58 Bundle).
(4) A supplementary bundle of documents lodged under s 58 of the ADR Act
entitled “Supplementary Brief of Documents”
received by the Tribunal
on 28 July 2025 (the Supplementary s 58 Bundle).
(5) The Respondent’s written submissions.
(6) The oral submissions made for the Respondent at the hearing on 15 August
completeness, I note that counsel for the Respondent indicated at the hearing
that the Respondent did not seek to rely on the
Affidavit of Rodney Smith dated
15 July 2025.
Oral evidence of Applicant
the hearing, the Respondent sought to call the Applicant for cross-examination.
The Respondent also sought to call Mr Matthew Wilson
for cross-examination on
the Wilson Affidavit.
the Applicant was present at the hearing, I allowed his cross-examination.
However, Mr Wilson was not present at the hearing because
it appeared that the
Respondent did not ask for him to attend for cross-examination. There was ample
time before the hearing for
the Respondent to ask for Mr Wilson to attend. Given
these circumstances, I decided that it was inappropriate to adjourn the hearing
to allow for Mr Wilson to be called for cross-examination.
evidence given by the Applicant on cross-examination by the Respondent’s
counsel includes the following:
(1) The Applicant said he felt that he and his wife were unfairly targeted and
harassed by the NSWPF. He said his fears about this
were ongoing.
(2) The Applicant said he was falsely accused of making violent threats towards
police, including in records from the Computerised
Operational Policing System
(COPS) used by the NSWPF. However, he conceded that there was nothing in the
documents (including a letter
in the Initial s 58 Bundle at p 245) presented to
him that expressly said so.
(3) The Applicant agreed that he was the “Mark” referred to in the
April 2025 Interview.
(4) The Applicant said he thought that he was the victim of police corruption,
although he conceded that there was no conspiracy.
He said that people were
often unjustly convicted because of police corruption.
(5) The Applicant admitted that he had engaged an international security firm to
the Shared Property who he said
were stalking him and his wife. He said he had evidence of this stalking.
(6) The Applicant claimed that police officers froze the Applicant and his
wife’s bank accounts. As a result, his wife lost
(7) The Applicant conceded that his wife had made complaints about police
conduct. However, he said he had not read all her complaints.
The Applicant was
given a copy of an email by his wife dated 27 May 2025 that was cc’d to
all members of the NSW Parliament
(see Supplementary s 58 Bundle at p 13). The
email appends various allegations of police misconduct. The Applicant said he
know about the email, but he agreed with what his wife had written.
(8) The Applicant said that he was not resentful of police conduct. Rather, he
was simply trying to defend himself. He said he was
fearful rather than
(9) The Applicant conceded that he had not attempted to reinstate the implied
consent for police officers to enter the Shared Property
that was withdrawn by
the Implied Licence Withdrawal Letter.
(10) The Applicant said the No Trespassing Sign was erected on legal advice. He
said the Sign was made by a signage company and was
lit at night-time.
(11) The Applicant said that the No Trespassing Sign was taken down on the day
Davies No 1
was published. He said that he did not take down the sign
simply to get back his firearms licence. However, he conceded that the
not been destroyed and was still in the possession of the Applicant and his
(12) The Applicant conceded that he had surveillance devices in his home. He
also conceded that a “surveillance sweep”
was done of his vehicle,
but it had not revealed that any surveillance device had been placed in the
(13) The Applicant rejected the allegation put to him that he had told a police
officer “to fuck off” when he received
a phone call from the officer
while he was on the M7 freeway (the Police Phone Call).
(14) The Applicant rejected the allegation put to him that he was paranoid about
the police. He said that he had never been diagnosed
with a mental illness.
Applicant gave the following evidence on re-examination by his
(1) The Applicant identified the nature of the harm he faced as the fear of the
(2) The Applicant again rejected the allegation that he had told a police
officer to “fuck off” during the Police Phone
Call. He said he
remembered the phone call because it was on the day of his 50th birthday. He
said that Mr Wilson was in the car
with him and Mr Wilson answered the call and
put it on loudspeaker. I note Mr Wilson states that this was the case in the
Affidavit. He also states in the Affidavit that he did not hear the
Applicant say what the Respondent alleges. However, I must also
note that, for
the reasons given earlier, I denied the Respondent’s request to
cross-examine Mr Wilson.
(3) The Applicant said he needed a firearm for feral pest animal control. He
said that it was not for personal protection. Nevertheless,
he reiterated that
he lived in fear of the police.
April 2025 Radio interview
addition to the transcript being handed up at the hearing, a recording of the
April 2025 Interview was played for me during the
hearing. The transcript, which
I followed while the recording was played, accurately transcribes the contents
of the recording.
April 2025 Interview was a phone interview with the Applicant (who, as I
mentioned, adopted the pseudonym “Mark” for
the interview). It was
conducted by Mr Chris Smith for his talkback radio programme. The Applicant said
the following during the
(1) The Applicant claimed his was a story that “ends with the absolute
corruption within the NSW Police force”.
(2) The Applicant noted that his former stepmother had been kept away from his
father and that an apprehended domestic violence order
had been made against
(3) The Applicant said that “[u]nbeknownst to me”, his former
stepmother had a relative who was a senior police officer
confidentially orders I have made, I will not identify this officer or state his
precise relationship with the Applicant’s
former stepmother. I will,
instead, refer to him as the “Named Police Officer”.
(4) The Applicant accused the Named Police Officer of having engineered false
criminal charges against him, but that the charges
were quashed because of his
“brilliant criminal lawyer”. The Applicant said that neither he nor
his wife had ever committed
(5) The Applicant said that the Named Officer had been caught on cameras he
installed both on the Shared Property and coming down
the Applicant’s
street. He alleged the Named Police Officer used a Wi-Fi jammer while driving
down the Applicant’s street
to harass him. He also said he had footage of
a “Rapter car” that pulled up in his driveway to take photographs of
Shared Property.
(6) The Applicant claimed that court documents revealed that the NSWPF had
recorded in their systems that he was a violent threat
to them (which was never
proven). He said this information would be displayed to Highway Patrol police
officers accessing the system
whenever he was pulled over.
(7) The Applicant also claimed that the NSWPF froze the bank accounts of both
the Applicant and his wife.
(8) The Applicant alleged that the Named Police Officer’s superior called
his solicitor and threatened him if he did not tell
the Applicant and his wife
to stop complaining.
(9) The Applicant claimed to have complained about the police conduct to the Law
Enforcement Conduct Commission, the Independent
Commission against Corruption,
the NSWPF and his local members of Parliament (both State and Federal). However,
he said nobody has
(10) The Applicant also said that he and his wife had to employ the services of
an international security consultant because nobody
in Australia would help
them. He said that the Named Police Officer was still harassing them and that
the Applicant had “the
number plates of both of his private cars”.
Interview concluded with Mr Smith offering to meet up with Applicant because
“I have a feeling we’re on to something
here” so that
“we’ll work out where we go from
Submissions
addition to the written submissions of each party that I have read, I was also
greatly assisted by the comprehensive oral submissions
made at the hearing by
counsel for each of the parties. These oral submissions make it possible to
summarise respective submissions
of the parties as
Applicant’s submissions
Applicant submits the following:
(1) The Applicant satisfied the fit and proper person test. It is also not
against the public interest to issue him with a firearms
(2) The Applicant provides six major reasons for this:
(a) The Applicant has a longstanding history of responsible firearm ownership.
He held licences for a firearm for some 27 years without
(b) The Applicant does not have a criminal history. There is evidence of his
good character. He is honest, reliable and responsible.
(c) The Applicant took voluntary corrective action to take down the No
Trespassing Sign. It was not in response to the Tribunal’s
decision in
Davies No 1
(d) Although there was evidence of conflict with the Applicant’s former
stepmother, the Applicant no longer has a relationship
with her. The interim
ADVO was withdrawn. It would not have been withdrawn if there was any basis for
(e) Looking at the whole of the evidence, there is no evidence of safety issues,
unlawful firearms use or apprehended violence orders
obtained by the police or
any other party (apart from the withdrawn interim ADVO).
(f) The Applicant’s fears about the police do not of themselves satisfy
the statutory tests under the
Firearms Act
. The Applicant was just trying to
defend himself, largely through his wife. There is nothing unlawful in doing so.
There is no evidence
of bad faith or an unlawful purpose on the part of the
(g) It would be wrong to treat the Applicant’s conduct as evidence of
paranoia. There is no expert evidence to that effect.
The Tribunal should not
draw that inference based on lay evidence.
(3) In reply to the Respondent’s written submissions, the Applicant
(a) The Respondent’s reliance on criticisms of the police made by the
Applicant is not evidence of hostility to police. The
Applicant is entitled to
voice his criticisms and disagree with the police. There is no evidence that the
Applicant has threatened
physical violence to the police.
(b) The Applicant’s media and public comments are a lawful exercise of his
freedom of expression. It is not evidence of his
inability to comply with the
firearms legislation.
(c) The Respondent’s claims that the Applicant would not comply with
police concerning his firearms is merely speculative.
The Tribunal should take
account that the Applicant undertook the Completed Firearms Course.
(d) The withdrawal of the interim ADVO means that the fact that it was issued is
of diminished probative value. There is no evidence
of other apprehended
violence orders being made against the Applicant or of criminal convictions
being recorded against him.
(e) Raising allegations of police misconduct, even if unsubstantiated, does not
of itself establish paranoia or indicate that the
Applicant cannot safely hold a
firearm. The Respondent has not established that these allegations are
incompatible with public safety.
Respondent’s submissions
Respondent submits the following:
Section 19(2)
Firearms Act
makes it a condition of a firearms licence
for the licensee to permit inspection by a police officer of the
licensee’s facilities
in respect of the storage and safe keeping of the
firearms in the licensee’s possession. The evidence suggests that the
would not cooperate.
(2) The Tribunal must be satisfied an applicant for a firearms licence is a fit
and proper person and can be trusted to have possession
of firearms without
danger to public safety or to the peace. The caselaw requires the Tribunal to be
satisfied that there would be
“virtually no risk” to public safety
if an applicant is issued with a firearms licence. The Tribunal could not be
of these matters because of the Applicant’s prior conduct and
his attitudes and beliefs.
(3) In relation to the Applicant’s prior conduct and his attitudes and
beliefs, the Respondent submits:
(a) The erection of the No Trespassing Sign (and its dismantling but not
destruction) demonstrates that the Applicant would be uncooperative
with police.
The Tribunal should take account of the fact that the Sign was taken down on the
Davies No 1
was published. The fact that it was taken down is
not evidence of a reformed attitude.
(b) The Applicant conceded in cross-examination that he had not revoked the
withdrawal of implied consent for police officers to
enter the Shared Property
as stated in the Implied Licence Withdrawal Letter. This, together with the
continued storage of the No
Trespassing Sign, enables the Tribunal to infer that
the Applicant continues to have an attitude towards police that is inconsistent
with the ongoing licensing obligations that the Applicant would have if he were
issued with a firearms licence.
(c) The Tribunal should also take into account the Applicant’s public
campaign against the police as evidence that he would
not be cooperative.
(d) There is no positive evidence from the Affidavits lodged by the Applicant
to carry out safety
inspections if he were issued with a firearms licence.
(4) The Tribunal could not be satisfied that there was virtually no risk to
public safety if the Applicant were issued with a firearms
licence because of
the Applicant’s heightened fear concerning the police and his troubling
obsession with the Named Police
Officer (which includes knowing the
officer’s address, mobile phone number and personal number plates).
(5) The Respondent is not asking the Tribunal to attach a label to the Applicant
concerning his mental health. That would be beyond
the Tribunal’s
suggests that the Applicant might
resort to violence in retaliation for what he
considers to be persecution and harassment by police. In this regard, the
should take into account that the Applicant has installed surveillance
equipment on the Shared Property to protect against unwanted
intrusions by the
(6) The Tribunal should note that the Applicant conceded in cross-examination
that police documents did not say he had made violent
threats to police. Rather,
it was the opposite.
(7) Employing an international security firm to protect against police intrusion
was inconsistent with the Applicant being a fit
and proper person who could be
trusted with a firearm.
(8) Issuing a firearms licence to the Applicant would increase the risk to
public safety if the Applicant perceived its issue as
justifying his beliefs
(9) Finally, the Respondent seeks costs for the Administrative Review
Application if the Application is unsuccessful. The Respondent
submits the
Applicant’s case was a hopeless rerun of his earlier case and was
misconceived. The Respondent also submits the
Applicant has not dealt with the
concerns expressed by the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
and was bound to fail.
reply to the oral submissions made by counsel for the Respondent, counsel for
the Applicant submitted the following:
(1) The erection of the No Trespassing Sign was consistent with legal advice.
The Applicant was not acting on his own volition. He
was acting in a responsible
manner to protect his legal rights.
(2) There is no positive evidence to support the Respondent’s case of
unfitness. The Respondent neglects to mention that the
Applicant held a firearms
licence for almost three decades without incident.
(3) It was wrong to say that the Applicant was fixated or obsessed with the
Named Police Officer. The Officer was known to the Applicant
because the Officer
was related to his former stepmother. The Applicant says he got the
Officer’s address from his father.
(4) It would be improper for the Tribunal to find that the Applicant did not
satisfy the fit and proper person test because of evidence
that he had lawfully
exercised his legal rights.
(5) The Applicant points to evidence (see First Davies Affidavit at [34]) about
a COPs event dated 23 February 2023 where it states
that police did not believe
it was necessary to seize the Applicant’s firearm “as Police do not
have reasonable grounds
to believe a domestic violence incident has
(6) In relation to the Respondent’s application for costs, it cannot be
said that the Applicant’s case was a hopeless
rerun of his earlier case.
The Applicant undertook the Completed Firearms Course to overcome the concerns
expressed by the Tribunal
Davies No 1
. It was reasonable for him to
assume that undertaking the Course would make a difference. Also, the
“goalposts have moved”
Davies No 1
. The Respondent now
relies on different reasons and additional evidence to justify the Licence
Refusal Decision.
Issues for determination and impact of previous Tribunal decisions
regard to these submissions, the two substantive issues for the Tribunal to
determine are:
(1) Issue 1:
Is the Applicant a fit and proper person who can be trusted
to have possession of firearms without danger to public safety or to
(2) Issue 2:
Alternatively, should the Applicant be refused the firearms
licence he seeks because it would be contrary to the public interest
I turn to a consideration of these two issues, it is necessary to say something
of the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
and the Appeal Panel in
Davies No 2
(the Previous Tribunal Decisions) on
my ability to make findings for the purposes of the Review Application.
the hearing, I raised with counsel for each of the parties whether I would be
bound by any of the findings already made in the
Previous Tribunal Decisions on
the basis of
res judicata
or issue estoppel or, alternatively, on the
grounds that it would be an abuse of process to allow the same findings to be
re-litigated.
Counsel both submitted that there was no obstacle to me making my
own findings. They both pointed particularly to the new evidence
before me that
was not before the Tribunal or Appeal Panel when they decided the Previous
Tribunal Decisions.
agree with the parties that the Previous Tribunal Decisions do not prevent me
from making my own findings.
is important to note that the Tribunal is not exercising judicial power when
conducting an administrative review under the ADR
Act of a decision of the
Respondent under the
Firearms Act
. The Tribunal must decide for itself what the
correct and preferable decision is and, for that purpose, may exercise all the
of the Respondent. As a result, the Tribunal stands in the shoes of
the Respondent. Recently, the High Court in
New South Wales v
Wojciechowska
[2025] HCA 27
recognised that the Tribunal is not exercising
judicial power when it conducts an administrative review even if it is empowered
legislation to award the additional remedy of damages (which is not a power
available to me here).
principles of
res judicata
and issue estoppel are applicable to decisions
made by the Tribunal involving the exercise of judicial power:
[2025] NSWCATAP 162
. The Appeal Panel in
Gleeson v The
Owners – Strata Plan No 48226
[2018] NSWCATAP 204
conveniently summarised those principles:
“18 The relevant principles appear in Halsburys (online version) at
[190–45] and following. We summarise and paraphrase
those principles as
(1) res judicata is the principle of law which prohibits a party from bringing a
further action in respect of a subject matter raised
and determined in a prior
final judgment before a competent tribunal between the same parties or their
privies litigating in the
same capacity; if made out, res judicata is a complete
bar to the claim;
(2) res judicata is founded on the necessity of avoiding re-agitation of issues
and of preventing the raising of issues which could
have been and should have
been decided in earlier litigation;
(3) res judicata is not restricted to courts of record. It applies to judicial
decisions of a final nature of any court or tribunal
upon any matter over which
it has jurisdiction to give a final judicial decision, including arbitral
tribunals and a consumer claims
Maganja v Arthur
[1984] 3 NSWLR
(4) in order to establish a plea of res judicata, it must be shown that the
cause of action in the later proceedings is the same
as that which was litigated
in the former proceedings. “Cause of action” means (i) the series of
facts which the plaintiff
must allege and prove to substantiate a right to
judgment, (ii) the legal right which has been infringed, and (iii) the substance
of the action as distinct from its form:
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
(5) res judicata applies where there is an identity of parties. This occurs
where the parties are literally the same or there is
privity of interest or
capacity. The determination of identity between litigants for the purpose of
establishing privity is a question
of fact. There are three classes of privies,
blood, title and interest.
19 As to issue estoppel, the principle is that a final judgment by a competent
tribunal creates an issue estoppel in that it forever
binds the parties and all
those who claim through them in respect of any issue of fact or law which was
legally indispensable to
that decision. For the doctrine of issue estoppel to
apply in a second set of proceedings:
(1) the same question must have been decided;
(2) the judicial decision which is said to create the estoppel was final;
(3) the parties to the judicial decision or their privies were the same persons
as the parties to the proceedings in which the estoppel
is raised or their
20 The parties are bound in the sense that they are precluded in subsequent
proceedings from asserting, as against other parties
to the judgment, to the
contrary of any issue fundamental to the judgment. The issue in the subsequent
proceedings must be precisely
the same as that decided in the earlier
proceedings. However, unlike res judicata, the plea of issue estoppel may
succeed although
the causes of action in the two cases are entirely different
(see Halsburys at [190–100]).”
is, however, doubt about whether the principles of
res judicata
estoppel can apply to decisions of a tribunal exercising administrative power:
Council of Australasian Tribunals,
Guide to Tribunal Practice
2025) (COAT Practice Guide) at [6.6.2.2]. In my view, this doubt is well
founded: cf
Spuds Surf Chatswood Pty Ltd v
[2015] NSWCATAP
Special Protection Services (NSW) Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Police, NSW Police Force; Constantin v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2015] NSWCATOD 112
Sikka v Roads and Maritime Services
[2016] NSWCATOD 98
so, an attempt to re-litigate the same issue before a tribunal exercising
administrative power that the tribunal has already
finally decided may
constitute an abuse of process: COAT Practice Guide at [6.6.2.4]. The Tribunal
has power to dismiss proceedings
for an abuse of process: NCAT Act, s
essence, the focus of the principles of
res judicata
and issue estoppel,
as well as the prevention of abuses of process involving attempts to re-litigate
issues that have already been
finally decided, is whether the tribunal or court
concerned is being asked to decide the same thing as an earlier court or
based on essentially the same evidence.
the Previous Tribunal Decisions, the Tribunal and the Appeal Panel were asked to
decide whether the Commissioner’s decision
to revoke the Applicant’s
Category ABH firearms licence and large calibre pistol permit was the correct
and preferable decision.
However, I am being asked to decide whether the
Respondent’s decision to refuse the Applicant’s application for a
licence for a different category of licence was the correct and
preferable decision.
the Tribunal and Appeal Panel were asked to make the Previous Tribunal Decisions
without the benefit of oral testimony from
the Applicant. However, I had the
benefit of such oral testimony, which was given under affirmation and subject to
both cross-examination
and re-examination. I have also had the benefit of
observing the Applicant’s demeanour while he gave his testimony. In
the Tribunal and Appeal Panel did not have before them the additional
affidavits lodged by the parties and the April 2025 Interview.
these differences, I am satisfied that I am not being asked to decide the same
issues as in the Previous Tribunal Decisions
based on essentially the same
Accordingly,
I can approach the issues I have identified for the Tribunal’s
determination based on my own assessment of the
evidence currently before
Consideration
Issue 1: Is the Applicant a fit and proper person who can be trusted to
have possession of firearms without danger to public safety
regard to what was said in
, I must be satisfied that the Applicant
is a fit and proper person
can be trusted to have possession of
firearms without danger to public safety or to the peace. Moreover, in reaching
that state of
satisfaction, I must be satisfied that there is “virtually
no risk” to public safety. Also, if there is a risk, it must
be a real and
appreciable risk rather than simply a minimal, fanciful or theoretical risk. I
now turn to the evidence with these
principles in mind.
held beliefs about persecution and harassment
was quite clear from the Applicant’s oral testimony that he feels very
strongly that he and his wife are being subjected
to police persecution and
harassment which they attribute to corruption. The Applicant said on several
occasions during his testimony
that he was trying to “defend”
himself and his wife from police misconduct and that they lived in
Further evidence of these very strong feelings is provided
by the April 2025 Interview.
Lack appreciation of the need to
cooperative with the police
am not satisfied that the Applicant truly appreciates the need to cooperate with
the police in accordance with the obligations imposed
on licensees by the
Firearms Act
. This is despite him undertaking the Completed Firearms Course. In
this regard, I note the Applicant’s concession during his
testimony that
he had not revoked the withdrawal of the implied consent for police to enter the
Shared Property. In addition, he
also conceded that the No Trespassing Sign
remained in his and his wife’s possession. The fact that the Sign remains
possession suggests that the Applicant is willing to use it again if
necessary. It also suggests that the decision to take in down
the Sign (which
only occurred on the day
Davies No 1
was published) should not be
regarded as probative of a change of attitude.
Applicant submits that he was acting on legal advice in seeking to prevent
police officers from entering the Share Property without
lawful authority and
that he was legally entitled to do so. I agree that the Applicant had a lawful
entitlement to withdraw the implied
licence police officers would otherwise have
had to enter the Shared Property. However, the Implied Licence Withdrawal Letter
more than withdraw the licence to enter. It also requires “all
communication” from the NSWPF with the Applicant and his
through the intermediary of their solicitor. The tenor of both the Sign and
Letter, which also include threats of lawsuits
and warning that “Penalties
Apply” for trespass, suggests a fundamental unwillingness to cooperate
with police officers.
This is inconsistent with responsible firearms
Heightened security measures
heightened security measures adopted by the Applicant and his wife involving an
international security firm suggest a deep distrust
of police which compels them
to constantly monitor and record police activities.
Respondent seeks to rely on the complaints of police misconduct made by the
Applicant and his wife, both to relevant government
agencies and publicly (which
includes the April 2025 Interview). I accept, as the Applicant submits, that he
and his wife have a
perfect right to make complaints concerning police
misconduct. I agree that this an exercise of their right to freedom of
expression,
which is central to any democratic system of government.
Nevertheless, the making of these complaints about police misconduct also
provides evidence of the deep distrust that the Applicant has concerning the
Relevance of allegations of police misconduct for
Applicant’s attitude
Applicant has sought to justify his attitude towards the NSWPF on the basis that
he and his wife are being unfairly persecuted
and harassed by police.
Respondent denies this and, as I have mentioned, put to the Applicant during his
cross-examination that he was “paranoid”.
The Respondent points to
the following evidence in the Confidential Material to show why the conduct of
the NSWPW was justifiable.
FOR PUBLICATION]
FOR PUBLICATION]
FOR PUBLICATION]
FOR PUBLICATION]
FOR PUBLICATION]
FOR PUBLICATION]
this evidence, I consider it both inappropriate and unnecessary for me to decide
whether the conduct of the NSWPF was justifiable
or constituted misconduct.
is inappropriate for me to decide whether there has been police misconduct
because the Tribunal is not an anti-corruption body.
Questions about police
misconduct are for agencies such as the Law Enforcement Conduct Commission to
examine using the panoply of
coercive powers that they have to get at the truth.
The Tribunal’s role when conducting an administrative review of a firearms
decision of the Respondent is strictly limited to deciding what is the correct
and preferable decision.
is also unnecessary for me to decide whether there has been police misconduct
because the central question for me to decide is
whether the Applicant’s
attitude towards the NSWPF poses a real and appreciable risk to public safety if
he were to be given
access to a firearm. In my view, the answer to this question
does not depend on whether the Applicant has, or does not have, legitimate
grounds to justify his attitude. The question must be answered by focusing on
the Applicant’s actual attitude and the risks
(if any) posed by it
regardless of whether this attitude is soundly based.
evidence before me demonstrates that the Applicant has a deeply held animosity
and distrust directed at the police because of
their conduct towards him and his
wife. The forthright and uncompromising way in which the Applicant gave his oral
testimony concerning
his perception of this conduct does not assuage my
concerns; it heightens them. The Applicant has such a fundamental distrust of
the police that he feels a need to “defend” both himself and his
wife from further persecution and harassment. I cannot
be satisfied that this
need does not pose a real and appreciable risk to public safety or the peace. In
particular, I cannot be satisfied
that there is virtually no risk of an
encounter with police at the Shared Property escalating into a violent
confrontation if the
Applicant feels that he or his wife are being wrongfully
targeted or threatened. Even if the Applicant’s animosity towards
were only to manifest itself as a continued unwillingness to cooperate with
police, such an unwillingness would still be incompatible
with responsible
firearm ownership.
Applicant’s submits that I should take into account that he held a
firearms licence for almost three decades without incident.
The difficulty with
this submission is it that relies on conduct that occurred almost exclusively
before the time when the Applicant
developed his animosity and distrust about
the police following the incidents concerning his father. I must look to the
Applicant’s
current attitude. It is this attitude and the risk it poses
that cause my concerns.
Finding concerning fitness and
all these reasons, I cannot be satisfied that the Applicant is a fit and proper
person who can be trusted to have possession of
firearms without danger to
public safety or to the peace.
Issue 2: Alternatively, should the
Applicant be refused the firearms licence he seeks because it would be contrary
to the public interest
to issue it?
mentioned above, a failure to satisfy the fit and proper person test necessarily
means it would not be in the public interest to
give the Applicant a firearms
at [34]. Consequently, it is not necessary for me to
consider whether the Applicant should be refused a firearms licence because
would be contrary to the public interest to issue
Conclusions
all the reasons given above, I have decided that the correct and preferable
decision is to refuse the Applicant’s application
for a Category AB
firearms licence. As the Licence Refusal Decision was correct, it must be
I have already mentioned, the Respondent applied during the hearing for an order
for costs in relation to the Review Application
if the application was
unsuccessful. Initially, the Respondent also applied for an order for costs in
relation to the Applicant’s
Confidentiality Application on the ground that
the Respondent had not been notified that the Applicant intended to press the
Application.
However, this was abandoned before the end of the hearing when it
became clear that the Respondent had in fact been notified.
is no dispute that s 60 of the NCAT Act governs the question of whether costs
should be awarded. The section provides as follows:
(1) Each party to proceedings in the Tribunal is to pay the party’s own
(2) The Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before it only if it
is satisfied that there are special circumstances
warranting an award of
(3) In determining whether there are special circumstances warranting an award
of costs, the Tribunal may have regard to the following—
(a) whether a party has conducted the proceedings in a way that unnecessarily
disadvantaged another party to the proceedings,
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the time
taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties, including
whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or law,
(d) the nature and complexity of the proceedings,
(e) whether the proceedings were frivolous or vexatious or otherwise
misconceived or lacking in substance,
(f) whether a party has refused or failed to comply with the duty imposed by
section 36(3),
(g) any other matter that the Tribunal considers relevant.
(4) If costs are to be awarded by the Tribunal, the Tribunal may—
(a) determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid, and
(b) order costs to be assessed on the basis set out in the legal costs
legislation (as defined in
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Application Act 2014
) or on any other basis.
(5) In this section—
(a) the costs of, or incidental to, proceedings in the Tribunal, and
(b) the costs of, or incidental to, the proceedings giving rise to the
application or appeal, as well as the costs of or incidental
to the application
and (2) make it very clear that parties are expected to bear their own
costs with the only exception being if the Tribunal is satisfied
that there are
special circumstances warranting an award of costs.
departs from the usual rule applicable in courts hearing civil proceedings
that costs follow the event. The rationale for this departure
may be found in s
3 of the NCAT Act, which states that one of the objects of the Act is to ensure
the Tribunal is accessible and
responsive to the needs of all of its users. A
rule requiring parties to bear their own costs absent special circumstances
undoubtedly
promotes accessibility to the Tribunal.
general principles applicable to determining whether to award costs under s 60
were recently summarised by the Appeal Panel in
Ungaro v Matijevic
NSWCATAP 163
“The following general principles apply to the determining whether to
award costs under s 60:
(1) Circumstances are special circumstances if they are out of the ordinary, but
they do not need to be extraordinary or exceptional:
Edwards v Commissioner
for Fair Trading, Department of Customer Service (Costs)
[2019] NSWCATAP 249
Megerditchian v Kurmond Homes Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 120
Cripps v G & M Dawson Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 81
(2) Whether there are special circumstances involves a value judgment requiring
a comparison between what is not “special”
and what is
Alexander James Pty Ltd v Pozetu Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2016] NSWCATAP 75
(3) The party asserting that there are special circumstances must prove that
special circumstances exist:
The Owners – Strata Plan No 63731 v B
& G Trading Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] NSWCATAP 273
(4) Even if the Tribunal is satisfied that there are special circumstances, the
presence of these circumstances merely enlivens the
discretion to award costs
but does not mandate an award of costs: Al-
Aaraj v Commissioner of Police,
NSW Police Force (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATAP 166
. The Tribunal must still
be satisfied they are circumstances “warranting an award of costs”:
B & G Trading
(5) If the discretion is enlivened, it must be exercised judicially and not
capriciously:
eMove Pty Ltd v Naomi Dickinson
[2015] NSWCATAP 94
Oshlack v Richmond River City Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
(6) An award of costs is intended to be compensatory and not punitive:
v The Owners-Strata Plan No 52399
[2022] NSWCATAP 91
general principles contemplate a two-step process.
first step is to decide whether there are special circumstances to enliven the
discretion to award costs against one of the parties.
If such circumstances are
present, the second step is to decide whether the circumstances are sufficient
to warrant exercising the
enlivened discretion to award costs against that
relation to the first step, s 60(3) sets out a non-exhaustive list of relevant
considerations. As noted in
at [96], the focus of these
considerations is the nature and impact of the conduct of the party against whom
costs are sought. Despite
not being exhaustive, these considerations
nevertheless provide guidance about when circumstances are relevantly
have already summarised the submissions made by both parties: see [81(9)] and
[82(6)] above. In essence, the Respondent’s
principal submission is that
the Applicant’s case was a hopeless rerun of his case in
and, for that reason, raises the consideration mentioned in s 60(3)(e) of
the NCAT Act. That is, the Review Application was frivolous
or vexatious or
otherwise misconceived or lacking in substance. The Applicant submits that no
special circumstances have been proven
by the Respondent and that the
Applicant’s case was not a hopeless rerun of his case in
agree with the Applicant.
was not unreasonable for the Applicant to assume that if he completed the course
recommended by the Tribunal in
Davies No 1
, this would be sufficient to
dispel the concerns about him expressed by the Tribunal. It is true the Appeal
2 overturned the decision of the Tribunal. However,
the basis for overturning the decision was that the Tribunal could not remit
it was not satisfied that the Applicant was a fit and proper person because
there was no residual function left for the Respondent
to perform on the
remittal. The Appeal Panel did not say (and it was unnecessary for it say)
whether the Applicant completing the
recommended course would make a difference
for any future application he made for a firearms licence.
as the Applicant submits, the reasons and evidence that are now relied on by the
Respondent to deny the Applicant a firearms
licence are different to those
relied on in
Davies No 1
. Given these different reasons and evidence, it
was not unreasonable for the Applicant to seek to challenge both by testing them
in further proceedings.
these circumstances, I am not satisfied that the Review Application was such a
hopeless rerun of the Applicant’s case in
Davies No 1
frivolous or vexatious or otherwise misconceived or lacking in substance. The
Respondent has not pointed me to any other
special considerations.
the absence of special circumstances, it follows that the discretion to award
costs has not been enlivened. Accordingly, the Respondent’s
application
for costs must be refused.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The decision of the Respondent to refuse the Applicant’s application
for a Category AB firearms licence is affirmed.
(2) The Respondent’s application for costs is refused.
(3) Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(c)
and (d) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW), the contents of all paragraphs in these reasons marked “NOT
FOR PUBLICATION” are not to be published or disclosed
to the Applicant or
the public.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (457 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter