URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/123.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Coastal Nursing Care Pty Ltd v Tynan Motors Pty Ltd t/as Tynan Motors Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATCD 123; (29 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Coastal Nursing Care Pty Ltd v Tynan Motors Pty Ltd t/as Tynan Motors Pty
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 123
Hearing Date(s):
13 May 2025
Date of Orders:
29 August 2025
Decision Date:
29 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
H Woods, Senior Member
(1) The first and second respondents are to pay the applicant
the sum of $4,475.00 within 28 days.
(2) In respect of
(a) If any party wishes to seek an order in
respect of costs other than each party is to pay its own costs, it is to file
submissions and any evidence in support of its application for costs
within 14 days.
(b) Any submissions or evidence in
response are to be filed and served within a further 14
(c) Any submissions in respect of costs are to
state whether the party consents to the question of costs being determined on
papers, and if not why.
(d) If there is no
application for costs, then there will be no order as to costs, which the intent
that each party pay its own
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW — Enforcement and remedies — Action for damages
— Measure of damages – Supply of goods pursuant
to settlement of
earlier proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Lam v Steve Jarvin Motors Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWCATAP
Flight Centre Travel Group Limited T/A Aunt Betty v Goel
[2021] NSWCATAP
Matumaini v Automobile Industries Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP
Principal judgment
Coastal Nursing Care Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Tynan Motors Pty Ltd trading as
Tynan Motors Pty Ltd (First Respondent)
Mitsubishi Motors limited Australia
trading as Mitsubishi Motors Limited Australia (Second Respondent)
Representation:
Self-represented - M Gatt, Director (Applicant)
Self- represented - L
Tink, employee (First respondent)
Self-represented – F Islam, employee
(Second respondent)
File Number(s):
2024 /00457385
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
dispute concerns a Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire 2.5 L CVT 2WD 75 My 22 vehicle
(the Original Vehicle) which the applicant purchased
new from the first
respondent, Tynan Motors (Tynans) in 2022, and an agreement reached between the
applicant, Tynans and the second
respondent, Mitsubishi Motors Limited Australia
trading as Mitsubishi Motors Limited Australia (Mitsubishi Motors), to settle
proceedings in respect of the Original Vehicle, which settlement
required Tynans and Mitsubishi Motors to provide the applicant with
replacement vehicle.
applicant had previously filed an application against the respondents, being
case number 2023/00368517 (the 2023 Application)
in respect of the Original
Vehicle. The named applicant in those proceedings was Michelle Gatt, but that
was changed by the Consent
Orders referred to below to Coastal Nursing Care Pty
Ltd, the applicant in this matter.
8 July 2024, the Tribunal made the following orders and / or notations by
consent in respect of the 2023 Application (Underlining
1. By consent, the name of the applicant Michelle Gatt, is
amended to Coastal Nursing Care Pty Ltd.
2. By consent, the application is withdrawn.
3. The Tribunal notes the agreement of the parties that:
a. The applicant shall return the Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire
2.5 LCVT 2WD 75 MY22 vehicle to the first respondent (Original Vehicle).
b. On or before 16 August 2024, the Respondents will provide
the Applicant with a replacement vehicle that has the following specifications
(Replacement Vehicle):
i. Mitsubishi MY22 Outlander Aspire motor vehicle;
ii. Model No: ZM4P46;
iii. VIN: JMFXTGM4WNZ000130;
iv. Colour: White diamond;
v. Trim: Black suede with leatherette;
vi. approximately 20,000 kms;
vii. up-to-date service history at an authorised Mitsubishi
dealership;
viii. overall good condition both interior and exterior, with
no pre-existing damage.
b. The First and Second respondents agree that the Replacement
Vehicle will be provided to the Applicant with:
i. A Mitsubishi 10 year 200,000 kilometre warranty; and
ii. Mitsubishi 10 year 150,000 kilometre capped price
to the same effect as that provided to the Applicant with the Original vehicle,
save that the 10 year period referred to in sub paragraphs
(a) and (b) shall
expire on 7 October 2032.
c. Prior to the Replacement Vehicle being delivered to the
Applicant, the First and Second Respondents shall remove from the Original
Vehicle the “non-genuine dealer fitted accessories” listed in the
purchase order dated 10 November 2022 (Accessories)
and instal them on the
Replacement Vehicle at their own cost. If in removing any of the Accessories
from the Original Vehicle, any
of them become damaged in any way, the First and
Second Respondents shall instal new and undamaged accessories of the same card
the Replacement Vehicle at their cost.
d. Prior to the Replacement Vehicle being delivered to the
Applicant, the First Respondent will remove the wheels from the Original
and install them on the Replacement Vehicle, at its own costs.
e. Prior to the Replacement Vehicle being delivered to the
Applicant, the Respondents shall arrange for the Replacement Vehicle
registered in New South Wales for a minimum period of 6 months from the date on
which the Replacement Vehicle is to be transferred
to the Applicant.
f. All costs associated with registering the Replacement
Vehicle and transferring its ownership to the applicant (including, but
limited to registration fees, compulsory third party insurance, stamp duty etc)
shall be met by the Respondents with the intention
that there be no cost to the
g. The Respondents agree to:
i. co-operate in the transfer of the number plates from the
Original Vehicle to the Replacement Vehicle; and
ii. reimburse the Applicant for the cost incurred by the
Applicant in transferring the number plates from the Original Vehicle
Replacement Vehicle (if any) within seven days of the presentation of an
invoice/receipt to them by the Applicant.
h. The parties agree that all steps necessary to provide the
Applicant with the Replacement Vehicle in accordance with this Settlement
Agreement are to be completed by 16 August 2024.
4. The Tribunal further notes the agreement of the parties
i. On the Applicant returning the Original Vehicle to the first
Respondent and entering into a Loan Vehicle Agreement with the
Respondent, the Second Respondent shall provide the Applicant with a loan
replacement vehicle of the same or larger size to
the Original Vehicle until
such time as the Replacement Vehicle is transferred to the Applicant;
ii. The provision of the loan replacement vehicle shall be at
the Second Respondent’s cost, with the intention that there
be no cost to
the Applicant for the use of the loan replacement vehicle;
iii. The second respondent shall not require the applicant to
incur any burden to pay an excess, or to pay any such excess, in
relation to the
loan replacement vehicle for the period in which it is in the Applicant’s
possession;
iv. To the extent that there is any inconsistency between the
terms of the Loan Vehicle Agreement and the settlement agreement
these orders, the terms of the settlement agreement set out in these orders
shall prevail.
v. The loan replacement vehicle shall be ready for the
Applicant’s collection from the First Respondent’s premises
12:00 noon on 9 July 2024.
5. The Tribunal further notes the agreement of the parties set
out in these orders represents a full and final settlement of all
claims arising
from the matters which are the subject of the Application.
effect of the 8 July 2024 orders and / or notations (the July 2024 Order)
includes that the Tribunal:
(1) notes, by consent, that the Original Application is withdrawn
(2) Notes and provides a written record of the terms of an agreement made
between the applicant and the respondents on or about 8
July 2024 to settle the
Original Application (the Settlement Agreement); and
(3) notes that the Settlement Agreement is in full and final settlement of all
claims arising from matters which are the subject
of the [Original Application].
present application was filed on 9 December 2024.
(1) sought the following orders:
Full refund of original vehicle cost [48,500.00].
Fair Trading Act
Guarantee as to acceptable quality,
Section 62:
Guarantee as to supply by
description,
Section 64:
Remedies for breach of Guarantee. Motor dealers Act
Section 54:
Dealers obligation to ensure vehicles are roadworthy,
Section 58:
Duty to comply with tribunal orders.
(2) identified the following reasons for the orders sought;
In July 2024, a consent order was made by NCAT, Mandating the replacement of my
defective car, with a replacement car. The replacement
car must comply with the
orders, and Tynan and Mitsubishi Motors were to adhere to these orders. Despite
these, both companies have
failed to fulfil their obligations. Incorrect vehicle
delivered, Replacement car agreed upon must be a 2022 model, a 2021 model was
delivered. Failure to meet the delivery time and date, the agreed delivery
details were not honoured. Accessory issues, accessories
that were supposed to
be installed onto the replacement car were either faulty, partially installed or
required additional work and/or
replacement. Defective wheels and brakes,
immediate safety concerns of replacement vehicle, withheld and incomplete
documentation,
the condition of the vehicle on delivery, delays and poor
communication. I would ask that we can please forgo the conciliation process,
I have already attempted to do this properly and to no avail. Both companies
have had many chances to rectify the issues, however,
chose to be non-compliant,
and obstructive.
summary, the present dispute arises because the applicant contends that
following the return of the Original Vehicle, the Replacement
Vehicle the
respondents provided to the applicant did not accord with the requirements of
the Settlement Agreement.
THE HEARING AND THE PARTIES’
Michelle Gatt, the director of the applicant appeared for the applicant.
Tink, a group service manager employed by Tynans, appeared for Tynans.
Islam, a senior manager for legal and risk employed by the Mitsubishi Motors,
appeared for Mitsubishi Motors.
applicant relied on a 185 page bundle of documents filed with the Tribunal on 4
March 2025 which was marked Exhibit A. It included:
(1) A chronology;
(2) An 8 page document with headings identifying 6 Points of Claim and a summary
of the dispute (Points of Claim);
(3) A copy of the July 2024 Order;
(4) Insurance records identifying an agreed value for the Replacement vehicle
from 29 August 2024 to 20 August 2025 of $46,816.00
and the Original Vehicle
from 20 November 2023 to 20 November 2024 of $55,200.00 (Insurance Records).
(5) Various records, emails and photos in relation to the Original Vehicle and
the Replacement Vehicle;
(6) A vehicle inspection report prepared by John Stakos of “State
Roads” / “ww.stateroads.com.au” dated 21
February 2025 (the
Vehicle Inspection Report);
(7) Documents that had been filed in the 2023 Application proceedings.
relied on a bundle of documents filed with the Tribunal on to April 2025 which
was marked Exhibit B. It included a 9 page summary
responding to the applicants
claims including copies of emails, records, a repair order, photos of the
Replacement vehicle and a
statement of its workshop controller, Trent
also relied on the submissions and documents filed by the second
respondent.
relied on an indexed bundle of documents filed with the Tribunal on 3 April
2025 which was marked Exhibit C. It included:
(1) Points of Defence;
(2) Various price range records for various MY22 Outlander vehicles,
manufactured in 2021 or 2022;
(3) Price Guides for a 2021 manufactured MY22 Outlander Aspire AWD and a 2022
manufactured MY22 Outlander Aspire 2WD,
(4) An email dated 21 August 2022 described as “Handover Summary”
(Handover Summary);
(5) Lost logbooks and service records or the Replacement vehicle;
IDENTICATION OF ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED
parties agree, and I am satisfied, that:
(1) the applicant provided the Original Vehicle to the respondents; and
(2) subject to considering whether it was provided in accordance with the
Specifications and the terms of Settlement Agreement, the
Replacement Vehicle
was provided to the applicant, all be it about 4 days late.
main compliant raised by the applicant is that:
(1) mindful that the Original Vehicle was manufactured in 2022, the
Specifications in the Settlement Agreement, by requiring the
delivery of an MY22
vehicle, required the vehicle to be an MY22 vehicle manufactured in 2022,
(2) what was delivered by the respondents was a MY22 vehicle that had been
manufactured in 2021; and
(3) that the difference in value between an MY22 vehicle manufactured in 2021
and an MY22 vehicle manufactured in 2022 is between
$10,000.00.
Applicant raised several other matters, including tat:
(1) The Replacement Vehicle was delivered late;
(2) There had been a failure to transfer accessories including wheels and tyres
from the Original Vehicle to the Replacement Vehicle
in accordance with the
Settlement Agreement;
(3) The number plates were not transferred;
(4) Log books and service records were not provided with the Replacement
Vehicle, although they were provided later; and that
(5) The condition of the Replacement Vehicle did not accord with the
Specification which required it to be in good condition, inside
respondents agree that the Replacement Vehicle was manufactured in 2021 but
contend that it doesn’t matter because the Settlement
Agreement specified
an MY 22 vehicle, which the Replacement vehicle is, and that in any event, even
if the Replacement Vehicle was
to be an MY22 vehicle manufactured in 2022, there
is no difference in the value between the vehicle supplied and that required to
be supplied.
respondents otherwise:
(1) contend that although the Replacement Vehicle was delivered late, it was
only about 4 days late, and that wit as not their fault,
because the transfer of
finance was pending;
(2) agree that there was an issue with transferring the wheels and tyres and
other items to the Replacement Vehicle, but that it
was generally remedied at no
cost to the Applicant, but that some wheels/ tyres were left on the Replacement
Vehicle because they
were in better quality than the wheels on the Original
(3) agree that the service records and log books were not provided until October
(4) deny that the condition of the Replacement Vehicle did not accord with the
Specifications; and
(5) deny the applicant’s claim.
also contend that the obligation to supply the Replacement Vehicle was with
Mitsubishi Motors, and that Tynans was only required
to swap the accessories
from the Original Vehicle to the Replacement Vehicle which was to be supplied by
Mitsubishi Motors.
applicant agreed that although several issues were raised as to why the terms of
the Settlement Agreement had not been complied
with, the outstanding issues were
with respect to the year of manufacture and the general condition of the
Replacement Vehicle, and
by the time of the hearing, although the applicant
relied on all matters as relevant to the conduct of the respondents in complying
with the Settlement Agreement, the primary or real issues with respect of the
Replacement Vehicle were:
(1) whether it was required to be manufactured in 2022, rather than 2021 and,
(2) having regard to the Inspection Report whether it was in “over all
good condition both interior and exterior, with no pre-existing
issues for consideration were therefore:
(1) Whether the Replacement Vehicle was required to be manufactured in 2021;
(2) Whether the Replacement Vehicle was in accordance with the condition
required by the Settlement Agreement that it, be in “
overall good
condition both interior and exterior, with no pre-existing damage
(3) Subject to (1) and (2) whether one or other or both respondents breached the
Settlement Agreement with respect to the supply
of the Replacement Vehicle;
(4) Subject to (3), the relief, if any that ought to be ordered; and
(5) To the extent any relief if is ordered, whether the orders should be made
against one or other or both respondents.
JURSIDICTION
looked at in that light, and having regard to the evidence:
(1) the applicant is a consumer with respect to the supply of the Replacement
Vehicle pursuant to the Settlement Agreement; and
(2) in so far as the application seeks the refund of the cost of the Original
Vehicle, the claim is misconceived because any claim
in respect of the supply of
the Original Vehicle has been resolved by the parties entering the Settlement
Agreement and it is in
respect of that Settlement Agreement that a claim can now
(3) notwithstanding what was stated in the Application for the orders sought,
the claim does not concern a failure to comply with
guarantees implied by the
Australian Consumer Law (ACL) including that Replacement Vehicle was not of
acceptable quality (s 54 Australian
Consumer Law (ACL)), as that term is defined
in the ACL, or not reasonably fit for a disclosed purpose (s55 ACL); and
(4) as noted below, in my view, the claim can be considered a consumer claim in
under the FTA in respect of the supply of the Replacement
Vehicle under the
Settlement Agreement.
am satisfied that:
(1) mindful that neither respondent contended that the applicant was not a
consumer, that the applicant is a consumer for the purposes
Trading Act 1987
(NSW) (FTA)
(2) the Replacement Vehicle was provided in and the Settlement Agreement made in
New South Wales;
(3) mindful that the Replacement Vehicle was supplied in 2024, the claim was
lodged within three years of the cause of action occurring
(S70L FTA);
(4) the claim is a consumer claim within the meaning of S79E FTA because it
involves a claim for the payment of a specified sum of
money arising out of the
supply of goods (being the Replacement Vehicle) or the intended supply of goods
in New South Wales, and
(5) the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine the dispute and to make
orders pursuant to S79N or 79O of the FTA.
that the FTA however does not create a cause of action, Jurisdiction is
conferred on the Tribunal by reference to the general
the consumer (
Lam v Steve
[2016] NSWCATAP 186)
, and a cause of action is predicated upon
the existence of causes of action that arise independently from Part 6A
Flight Centre Travel Group Limited T/A Aunt Betty v Goel
[2021] NSWCATAP
[18] to [19];
v Automobile Industries Pty
[2017] NSWCATAP 93
[97]), here, the cause of action concerns a
breach of the Settlement Agreement with respect to the supply of the Replacement
note, that because the matter is being considered as a consumer claim under the
FTA, in the making of any order, I am required pursuant
to s 79U of the FTA to
be satisfied that the orders will be fair and equitable to all
CONSIDERATION
July 2024 Order noted that the Replacement Vehicle was to be a Mitsubishi MY 22
Outlander Aspire motor vehicle, but d id not state
whether it was required to be
manufactured in 2022
to the dispute as to whether the Settlement Agreement required the Replacement
Vehicle to be a 2022 manufactured MY22 vehicle
or whether it could be a 2021
manufactured MY22 vehicle, the applicant’s evidence included extracts of
what was said at the
hearing before the Tribunal when the July 2024 Order was
made, including the following statements by one or other of the respondents
respect of the Replacement Vehicle to be provided:
“same model, slightly fewer kilometres,”
“the same model and year”
“the VIN number is in essence the same ...”
“the only difference is a two-wheel drive versus a four-wheel
(1) the July 2024 Order noting that the Replacement Vehicle was to be an MY 22
(2) the objective background fact as to what was stated at the hearing when the
Settlement Agreement was made;
(3) the Respondents not stating to the effect that the Replacement Vehicle was
or could be manufactured in 2021; and
(4) the fact that the Original Vehicle that was to be replaced by the
Replacement Vehicle, was manufactured in 2022;
in my view, either:
(a) it is to be inferred, on a proper construction of the Settlement Agreement,
that the Replacement Vehicle was to be a 2022 manufactured
MY22 vehicle; or
(b) it was an implied term of the Settlement Agreement as necessary to give
business efficacy to it, that the Replacement Vehicle
was to be manufactured in
am therefore satisfied that, in breach of the Settlement Agreement, a 2021
manufactured MY22 Mitsubishi Outlander, rather than a
2022 manufactured MY 22
Mitsubishi Outlander, was supplied to the applicant.
to whether the Replacement Vehicle was in “overall good condition both
interior and exterior, with no pre-existing damage”
the applicant relies
on the Vehicle Inspection Report.
Vehicle Inspection Report was prepared following an inspection on 21 February
2025, about 6 months after the Replacement vehicle
was supplied, and noted
(underlining added):
(1) In respect of “Vehicle Details”:
Build date: 8 – 21
Odometer: 35,434
(2) In respect of “Engine Condition”:
Battery efficiency low, requires charge / test. Electronic diagnostic scan
showed several faults recorded and will need further workshop
assessment and
fault clearing/repairs. Engine has plastic covers/shields fitted which limit
view of components. No coolant or co2
leakage was detected...No Engine bay oil
leakage found... (Ex A p 84).
(3) In respect of “Steering, Brakes & Suspension”:
Some wear visible at suspension and bushes etc but consistent for age in
kilometres”.
(4) In respect of “Chassis, Body & Panels”:
No major damage visible at body shell however has minor dents / scratches /
marks – cosmetic, attention may be needed to improve
overall appearance.
Vehicle has had panel and paint repairs to various panels – no evidence of
any chassis or ....
(5) In respect of Interior:
Interior showing wear and tear – consistent with age or kilometres.
(6) At the Inspection Report Summary – applying the Orange colour
coding used for fair / average, compared to Red for poor and
Green for good,
that the Body and Interior rating were:
Fair / Average – comparing this to similar vehicles we have inspected, it
is showing greater wear and tear than others –
needing various items
serviced or repaired / replaced as noted in the report.
respondents relied on the Handover Summary. It is an internal email,
contemporaneous with the handover of the Replacement Vehicle
which identifies,
amongst other matters, issues raised by the applicant and the response of the
Mitsubishi Motors at the handover
representative.
matters, items or issues identified on the Handover Summary, include:
Replacement Vehicle was not a 2022 manufactured vehicle.
applicant’s insurance company will value the vehicle for less that if it
was manufactured in 2021.
That Mitsubishi
Motors representative informed the applicant that the Replacement vehicle was an
AWD not a 2WD.
Whether the
wheels from the original vehicle had been swapped over.
Whether a full
size spare was missing and ought to have been provided.
A missing carpet
The accessories
that were to be swapped from the Original Vehicle.
The audio unit,
apple car play and wireless charging.
When the next
service would be.
does not appear to me that it records any discussion as to any panel damage or
whether the Replacement Vehicle was in a good condition
inside and out.
was however no evidence of an inspection being performed of the Replacement
Vehicle by one or other of the respondents before
or at the time of
mindful that the Replacement Vehicle had been driven for over 10,000.00 km from
supply to the date of the Inspection report,
in the absence of any evidence from
which it could be inferred that the condition of the Replacement Vehicle had
deteriorated from
good to fair had occurred between hand over in August 2024 to
February 2025, I am satisfied that when the Replacement Vehicle was
supplied to
the applicant in late August 2026, it was generally in the condition identified
in the Vehicle Inspection Report.
of what is stated in the Vehicle Inspection report, I am therefore satisfied,
that in breach of the Settlement Agreement,
the Replacement Vehicle was in fair
to average, rather than good condition inside and out.
the Vehicle Inspection Report states that it had “panel and paint repairs
to various panels”, I am also satisfied
that it had had previously had
some damage, but that the damage had been repaired and that at the time of the
inspection, there “there
was no major damage visible”
found that the Replacement Vehicle was not in accordance with the Settlement
Agreement because it was manufactured in 2021
rather than 2022 and was in fair /
average rather than good condition inside and out, the applicant is entitled to
is damages to
reflect the difference in value between what was supplied, being a
2021 manufactured vehicle in fair condition, and what was required
supplied, being a 2022 manufactured vehicle in good condition. inside and
my view the proper measure of the damages to be awarded is the difference in
market value between the 2021 vehicle supplied and
the 2022 vehicle that was
required to be supplied.
complicating feature however is that the Replacement Vehicle was all-wheel drive
(AWD) whereas the original vehicle was a two-wheel
drive vehicle.
understanding is that an AWD vehicle was supplied because that was what the
Mitsubishi Motors had available and not because that’s
applicant relies on her insurance records which show that the Replacement
Vehicle was insured for the period August 2024 to August
2025 for an agreed
value of $46,816.00 whereas the Original Vehicle was insured for the period
November 23 to November 24 i.e. about
12 months earlier, for an agreed value of
$55,200.00.
also note that the Insurance Records for the Original Vehicle show that
“Last year’s agreed value (being 2022 to 2023)”
$48,500.00.
difficulties I have with the Insurance Records are:
(1) They identify an agreed, rather than a market value;
(2) One is for the 2023/ 2024 whereas the other is for 2024 / 2025;
(3) It is not clear to me why the agreed value went from $48,500.00 for 2022 to
2023 to $55,200.00 for 2023 to 2024.
therefore place little weight on the Insurance Records to assist me in
determining the difference in value and therefore the damage
to be ordered.
respondents rely on the results of on line searches for the price range of
Mitsubishi Outlander vehicles manufactured in 2021
my view, because that the Replacement Vehicle was to replace the Original
Vehicle, being an MY 2022 Mitsubishi ZM Outlander Aspire
2WD manufactured in
2022, I should ignore the fact that an AWD vehicle was in fact delivered, and
calculate the damage on the basis
of the difference in value between:
Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire ZM auto 2WD drive vehicle manufactured in 2022 in
good condition; and
Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire ZM auto 2WD drive vehicle manufactured in 2021 in
fair to average condition.
that light, the most relevant sales records are for:
(1) the second vehicle at page 9 of Exhibit C, showing the price range for a
2021 manufactured Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire ZM auto
two wheel drive MY22, of
$26,650.00 to $33,800.00; and
(2) the vehicle at page 17 of Exhibit C, showing the price range for a 2022
manufactured Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire ZM auto two
wheel drive MY22, of
$27,700.00 and $35,000.00.
the best I can, I find:
(1) The value of a 2022 manufactured Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire ZM auto MY22 in
good condition would be at the upper end of the
$27,700.00 to $35,000.00 range,
and mindful that the range is for a vehicle with 45,000 to 75,000km, whereas the
Original Vehicle
had and the Replacement Vehicle was to have and had in the
order of $20,000.00 to 22000 km, say $35,000.00.
(2) The value of a 2021 manufactured Mitsubishi Outlander Aspire ZM auto MY22 in
fair to average condition would be towards the middle
the $26,650.00 to
$33,800.00 range, say $30,225.00.
(3) The difference in value and the damage to which the applicant is entitled is
therefore $4,775.00
first respondent says that it should not be responsible in respect of any relief
that is granted because it was only required
to exchange some parts over. The
I have with that is the July 2024 Order notes that the
Settlement Agreement required that the respondents provide the Replacement
order should therefore be against both respondents and not just the second
respondent.
of s 74U of the FTA, I am satisfied that an order that the respondents pay the
applicant $4,475.00 would be fair and equitable
to all parties.
therefore order that the first and second respondents are to pay the applicant
the sum of $4,475.00 within 28 days.
respect of costs:
(1) If any party wishes to seek an order in respect of costs other than each
party is to pay its own costs, it is to file and serve
submissions and any
evidence in support of its application for costs within 14 days.
(2) Any submissions or evidence in response are to be filed and served within a
further 14 days.
(3) Any submissions in respect of costs are to state whether the party consents
to the question of costs being determined on the
papers, and if not why.
(4) If there is no application for costs, then there will be no order as to
costs, which the intent that each party pay its own costs.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (294 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter