URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Toll Transport Pty Ltd v Smith [2021] NSWWCCPD 7 (5 February 2021)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Toll Transport Pty Ltd v Smith
[2021] NSWWCCPD 7
Toll Transport Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
David Smith
Toll Holdings Limited
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Mr P Sweeney
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
23 September 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
5 February 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Whether the incapacity for work resulted from the pleaded injury –
Kooragang Cement Pty Limited v Bates
10 NSWCCR 796
considered; alleged error of fact –
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
Shellharbour City Council v Rigby
[2006] NSWCA 308
[2003] HCA 22
214 CLR 118
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr J Pinder, solicitor
Minter Ellison
Ms E Grotte, counsel
Gerard Malouf & Partners
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
name of the appellant (the respondent below), wherever it appears in these
proceedings and in the proceedings below, is amended
to read “Toll
Transport Pty Ltd.”
Certificate of Determination dated 23 September 2020 is
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
David Smith (the respondent) was employed by Toll Transport Pty Ltd (the
appellant) as a driver. The respondent suffered a number
of injuries both prior
to and in the course of his employment with the respondent. Relevantly, the
respondent was injured in a motor
vehicle accident on 5 April 2019, in which he
claimed injury to his neck, left shoulder, left thumb and low back. The
appellant accepted
liability for the injuries.
respondent had no capacity for work for a period of time and was then certified
as fit for work on suitable duties. At times,
suitable duties were not made
available. The respondent was then certified fit for pre-injury duties on a work
trial from 17 July
2019. The respondent commenced those duties and, on 19 July
2019, suffered significant neck and left shoulder pain while attempting
tighten a ratchet on the chain around a load. The respondent was again certified
as having no capacity for work.
respondent returned to work on 15 August 2019 after having requested a return to
truck driving duties and providing a certificate
indicating that he was fit for
pre-injury duties. The appellant provided the respondent with
administrative/office duties as a precautionary
measure. On 2 September 2019
(which was a Monday), the respondent reported that he was unable to work because
of significant neck
and shoulder pain which was associated with migraine
headaches. The respondent did not cite a particular precipitating event, but
appears that the onset occurred when the respondent was reaching out to his
grandchild.
respondent was again put off work and his employment was terminated in October
2019. The appellant disputed liability from 9 November
2019, asserting that, by
the time of the incident on 19 July 2019, the respondent had recovered from the
effects of the injury on
5 April 2019 and any symptoms from which the
respondent suffered were not referrable to the accepted injury.
respondent brought proceedings in the Commission in respect of the injury on 5
April 2019 (the pleaded injury), seeking weekly
payments of compensation from 9
November 2019 and treatment expenses. The matter was unable to be resolved and
proceeded to arbitration
on 21 September 2020. Arbitrator Sweeney delivered an
oral decision on 22 September 2020, in which he found in favour of the
(the applicant in those proceedings) and awarded the respondent
(applicant) ongoing weekly payments and treatment expenses. The Certificate
Determination encapsulating the orders made was issued on 23 September 2020.
appellant appeals the decision.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the
Commission is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in
connection with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this
Act without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content to have the matter determined on
the basis of the documents and written submissions
and that the matter does not
require an oral hearing.
have had regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties indicating
that the appeal can be
determined on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed ‘on
the papers.’
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
A PRELIMINARY MATTER
the documents lodged with the Commission, the name of the appellant (the
respondent in the proceedings below) was variously described
(a) Toll Global Logistics, Industrials Port Kembla;
(b) Toll Global Logistics, and
(c) Toll Holdings Limited.
Direction was issued by a delegate of the Registrar on 26 November 2020,
directing the parties to advise of the correct name of
the legal entity of the
3 December 2020, the appellant advised that it was instructed that the correct
name of the appellant was “Toll Transport
Pty Ltd,” of which Toll
Logistics was a business division. The appellant advised that “Toll
Holdings Pty Ltd” was
the name of the self-insurer of the appellant.
appellant sought to have the name of the appellant (the respondent below)
amended to “Toll Transport Pty Ltd.” The
respondent consented to the
amendment. Accordingly, the name of the appellant (the respondent below),
wherever it appears in these
proceedings and in the proceedings below, is
amended to read “Toll Transport Pty Ltd.”
THE EVIDENCE
The respondent’s statements
respondent provided a statement dated 20 May
He gave details of his
employment with numerous employers as a truck driver prior to commencing
employment with the appellant in
January 2015. The respondent said that prior to
commencement with the appellant, he was fit and healthy and passed a medical
examination
in which he was certified as fit to perform the work required of him
by the appellant. The respondent said that his hours of work
with the appellant
varied between 8 to 12 hours per day and he worked up to six days per week. He
said he always accepted any overtime
that was offered. He reported to Mr Stephen
Smith, the Logistics Manager, and Mr John Owen, the Senior Manager.
respondent stated that he mainly drove a prime mover pick up and delivered loads
to various places. He said he also conveyed steel
in large trucks called
“tugs” within the boundaries of the depot. The respondent said that
part of his duties required
him to secure about 5 chains per load that weighed
occasionally
he would drive a forklift.
respondent described prior injuries in the course of his previous employment,
including a lower back injury in 2011, following
which he was off work for about
one week, and a “whiplash” injury to his neck in 2014 when a
tarpaulin rope snapped causing
him to be off work for two days.
respondent referred to an injury with the appellant on 10 July 2015. He said he
was operating a ratchet to secure a load when
the equipment either slipped or
missed a link. He was thrown backwards and jolted, injuring his right arm and
shoulder. He had a
period off work and during that period, Dr Mark Haber,
orthopaedic surgeon, performed surgery on his right shoulder. He returned
suitable duties and was certified fit for full duties in May 2016, which he was
able to manage despite some continuing symptoms
in that shoulder.
respondent described being involved in a motor vehicle accident while being
driven home from work by a co-worker on 9 September
2016, in which he hit his
head and suffered a “whiplash” injury to his neck and a further
injury to his right arm. The
respondent indicated that the following day he
experienced a very sore neck and right shoulder, but not in the same area as the
he had experienced previously. He did not consult a doctor until December
2016 and an x-ray of the cervical spine did not show any
abnormality. He said
the pain settled and he was able to perform his usual duties at work.
respondent described other minor injuries at work which are not relevant to this
appeal. He then stated that his most recent injury
occurred on 5 April 2019,
when he was driving a “tug,” carrying red-hot steel. He said that
the truck, together with
the tug, weighed about 125 tonnes. He said he was
driving the tug before dawn and in minimal lighting along a road which had a
surface. Parts of the road were under water because of recent heavy rain.
The respondent said that he hit two large potholes, which
caused a large jolt.
He said he felt a little pain in the neck but when he drove a further 10 metres
to where the steel was to be
unloaded, he experienced pain similar to an
electric shock shooting up his left arm and into his neck. The respondent
advised that
the pain travelled from the back of his skull through to his back
and he had pins and needles on his face and torso, as well as both
respondent reported that paramedics were called to the scene and his neck was
placed in a hard collar. He was taken to Wollongong
Hospital where x-rays were
performed. The respondent said he was discharged nine hours later by which time
he was experiencing severe
headaches and mostly pain around the neck region. On
Monday 8 April 2019, the respondent attended Dr Carmel Mason, general
practitioner,
who was not aware of his previous history of injuries. The
respondent said he was able to subsequently consult his usual general
practitioner of the same practice, Dr Benjamin. Dr Benjamin certified him as
being unfit for work and referred him to Nowra Physiotherapy,
where he was
treated by Mr Lachlan Chisholm, physiotherapist.
respondent described his injuries as a “whiplash” injury to both
sides of his neck, injury to the back, radiating
left leg pain and severe pain
in his left thumb caused by wrenching of the thumb on the steering wheel when he
hit the potholes.
He was certified as unfit for work.
respondent provided a supplementary statement dated 9 April
The respondent disputed
various assertions made by the appellant in relation to the speed he had been
travelling when the pleaded
injury occurred, as well as the respondent’s
knowledge of the presence of potholes in the road. He referred to his prior
and stated that towards the end of 2017 or the beginning of 2018, he
had completely recovered from the injuries sustained in the
earlier motor
vehicle accident and his general practitioner had certified him as fit to return
to full duties. He performed those
duties without restriction for over a year.
The respondent said that he was working 12–14 hours per day and on some
six days per week, during which time he had absolutely no problems
with his neck, left shoulder or thumb.
respondent described the treatment he received following the pleaded injury. He
reported pain similar to an “electric shock”
and felt severe pain in
his left shoulder and thumb. He said his symptoms deteriorated following
cessation of treatment after the
appellant declined liability for ongoing
compensation.
respondent reported that he suffered a further aggravation of his injuries on 19
July 2019. He said he had just received a clearance
to return to pre-injury
duties and was using his right hand to throw six chains over a load. While using
a ratchet to tie the load,
he felt a “popping” sensation between his
left shoulder and his neck, travelling into his neck and jaw. He said the
were similar to those sustained in the pleaded injury, and his general
practitioner downgraded his duties to lighter work, working
15 hours per week.
Those duties required him to collect the mail in the morning and otherwise sit
in the television room and watch
the television, which he did for a few months.
The respondent said that he would have to move around every five to ten minutes
of severe cramping and pain in his neck and left shoulder. He said he
asked for other duties but was told there were none and in
October 2019 he was sent home because there was no work to do.
respondent said that, although he was certified fit to work 15 hours per week by
his general practitioner, he found it difficult
to work in any environment
because he was not receiving treatment. The respondent asserted that he had no
office, administrative
or computer skills, or experience in sales work, and
could not work in areas in which he was experienced, or in process work, because
of his physical limitations. He considered he could perform light courier work
or taxi driving for 15 hours per week without lifting
heavy items such as
luggage. The respondent felt that there was no suitable work in the open labour
market that he could perform.
respondent described significant ongoing pain and limitations in the neck, left
shoulder and left thumb. He said he was keen to
as possible.
The general practitioners’ evidence
Timothy Benjamin, the respondent’s treating general practitioner, provided
a report directed to the respondent’s legal
representatives dated 2
December 2019.
Dr Benjamin noted
that, following the injury involving the respondent driving the tug over
potholes in the road, the respondent had
initially been seen at the practice by
Dr Carmel Mason, general practitioner. Dr Benjamin advised that the respondent
had previously
been seen in the practice, having last attended on 8 October
2018. Dr Benjamin said that the respondent had not consulted the practice
respect of neck, back, left thumb, left wrist or left shoulder pain before the
pleaded injury, although there had been a neck
x-ray on 27 February 2017 and a
lumbar x-ray on 29 June 2011.
Benjamin reported that the respondent was certified fit for suitable duties,
four hours per day, two days per week from 1 June
2019, increasing to five hours
per day, three days per week from 18 June 2019. Dr Benjamin noted that no
suitable duties were available,
and the respondent was eventually certified fit
for pre-injury duties from 13 July 2019, with restrictions recommended which
recorded on a certificate of capacity. Dr Benjamin advised that on 19 July
2019, the respondent re-injured the shoulder and neck
area and was subsequently
certified fit to work five hours per day, three days per week, with
restrictions. Dr Benjamin added that,
without appropriate treatment, the
respondent would be unlikely to return to full duties. Dr Benjamin reiterated
that opinion in
a hand-written response directed to the appellant dated 19 June
Benjamin’s clinical records were also in
On 8 April 2019, the
respondent consulted Dr Mason of the same practice, who recorded a consistent
history of the injury occurring
three days prior to the consultation and the
subsequent complaints of severe pain in the neck, with pain in the left
shoulder. Dr
Mason examined the respondent, discussed a return to work on
suitable duties and issued a certificate of capacity.
Benjamin recorded the next consultation on 12 April 2019. Dr Benjamin noted pain
in the respondent’s back, neck stiffness
and muscular pain in both
shoulders. The respondent continued to consult Dr Benjamin and, on 31 May 2019,
Dr Benjamin recorded that
the respondent felt he was improving and was ready to
upgrade to suitable duties. On 14 June 2019, Dr Benjamin noted that the
had not provided suitable duties and the respondent was remaining at
thumb and wrist
pain, pain in the left buttock and a stiff neck. Over the following
consultations, Dr Benjamin noted some improvement
in the respondent’s
symptoms and on 12 July 2019, the respondent advised him that he was prepared to
trial a return to pre-injury
25 July 2019, Dr Benjamin noted:
“Was feeling confident to get
Had a work place assessment by the OT
On the 19/07/19
while trying to tighten the ratchet felt a sharp pain in his left shoulder
and neck area.
Could not continue the work, saw another doctor in Wollongong for
Vincent Au, general practitioner from the same practice, noted that on 15 August
2019, the respondent was again ready to go back
to pre-injury duties. The same
doctor noted on 2 September 2019 that the respondent had been back at work
for two weeks and his neck
pain had been worse over the past few days doing
duties that Dr Au considered would likely exacerbate the neck pain. Dr Au
the hours the respondent was able to work.
Benjamin saw the respondent again on 12 September 2019, noting the respondent
was performing office duties and had suffered an
exacerbation of pain ten days
earlier. The respondent continued to consult Dr Benjamin, complaining of ongoing
symptoms. Dr Benjamin
referred him to Dr Haber for specialist review of his
shoulder and neck pain. On 22 November 2019, Dr Benjamin noted that the
continued to complain of shoulder pain, which showed little
improvement after a cortisone injection. He also noted that the appellant
denied liability for ongoing treatment.
Benjamin provided certificates of capacity from 31 May 2019 to 28 June 2019,
indicating that the respondent had some capacity to
work and set out the
restrictions.
On 12 July 2019, Dr
Benjamin issued a certificate stating that the respondent “is fit for
pre-injury work ... trialling pre-injury
Dr Benjamin recorded
in that certificate that the factors preventing recovery were neck stiffness and
sciatic like pain down the
15 August 2019, Dr Au issued a certificate indicating that the respondent was
fit for pre-injury duties.
Benjamin also provided a number of certificates of capacity covering the period
from 10 October 2019 to 5 June 2020, in which the
respondent was certified
as having capacity to work five hours per day, three days per week with
restrictions. In each certificate,
Dr Benjamin commented that there had
been an exacerbation of the respondent’s previous injury to the left
shoulder and neck
on 19 July 2019 when trying to tighten a rachet.
Dr Benjamin nominated the date of the injury as 5 April 2019. He advised
respondent was suffering from neck stiffness and shoulder
The Nowra Physio Sports and Rehabilitation records
records compiled by Mr Lachlan Chisholm, physiotherapist, were in evidence and
confirmed that the respondent consulted that practice
from 23 April
Unfortunately, the entries
in the notes did not record the dates of attendance and are therefore of little
assistance, although the
contents of those notes appear to reflect the history
and observations recorded by Mr Chisholm in reports directed to Dr Benjamin.
number of reports by Mr Chisholm directed to Dr Benjamin were included with
those documents. On 30 April 2019, Mr Chisholm confirmed
that the respondent
initially presented on 23 April 2019 in relation to a “whiplash”
injury to the cervical spine and
lower back. Mr Chisholm considered that
the lower back symptoms were discal in nature with referred leg pain and he
opined that the
respondent was not fit for
In a report dated 2 May
2019, Mr Chisholm reported to Dr Benjamin in relation to the respondent’s
left thumb and wrist, advising
that he had placed the left thumb in a brace. Mr
Chisholm also reported that the respondent’s neck was steadily improving
that the lower back symptoms were responding more slowly to treatment. Mr
Chisholm again considered that the respondent was not fit
23 May 2019, Mr Chisholm wrote:
“I have been treating David
Smith for work related discy back injury, grade 2 whiplash and L thumb ligament
injury now for several
weeks. David's neck injury is progressing well and he has
restored most of his ROM but still has pain the last 20 degrees of rotation
dysfunctional movement patterns. His thumb is still in a brace in the protection
phase but has a significant decrease in grip
strength and pain levels ... His
lower back injury is progressing, however slowly it is still following a discy
pattern with significant
pain and spasm in the glutes and responding well to
movement but is aggravated by sustained positions and manual therapy so our
to treating this is with exercises and
Chisholm opined that the respondent was ready for “light duties” for
four hours per day, two days per week and listed
the required restrictions,
which included no repetitive or sustained neck movements.
a further report dated 27 June 2019, Mr Chisholm reported that the
respondent’s neck injury was progressing well but had
plateaued with
continuing restriction and dysfunction of movement. The respondent’s lower
back was progressing slowly but was
being aggravated by sustained positions and
manual therapy. The left thumb was still in a
Mr Chisholm recommended
an upgrade in suitable duties to four or five hours per day, three to four days
per week, with restrictions,
Chisholm again reported to Dr Benjamin on 8 July 2019. Mr Chisholm advised
(a) the injury to the neck had initially progressed well but
had plateaued, with some dysfunction on movement and residual restriction
(b) the brace on the left thumb had been removed, but there was some
continuing pain;
(c) the lower back injury was progressing well, and
(d) he considered that the respondent was ready to upgrade to suitable duties
for four to five hours per day, three to four days per
week, with restrictions
including only occasional repetitive or sustained neck
Chisholm next reported to Dr Benjamin on 1 August 2019. In that report Mr
Chisholm noted that the respondent’s neck injury
had settled “since
his aggravation at work” but the respondent was still suffering with pain
and had the same degree
of limitation on rotation and dysfunctional movement as
reported in his previous report. He observed that the lower back injury had
resolved, but the respondent continued to have issues with the left
last report of the respondent’s progress was dated 12 August 2019. Mr
Chisholm informed Dr Benjamin that:
“[The respondent’s]
arm and neck has settled well since his aggravation on light duties. He has
progressed well with his
exercise and activity program in regards to all three
In clinic today, I put [the respondent] through a mini functional assessment
in regards to his injuries, he passed with minimal difficulties.
I feel he is
ready to return to his pre-injury duties.
[The respondent’s] neck injury has settled but still has some pain at
EROM rotation and minor dysfunctional movement patterns
but he is improving with
a conscious effort. We are continuing to work to correct this with exercises for
motor pattern, strength
[The respondent’s] thumb has also settled well his grip has returned to
46.3kg R 46.6kg and reports only slight p [sic] on very forceful
gripping. [The respondent] will continue with his strength and mobility
His back has returned to pre-injury levels, however, he is still continuing
with his exercises program.
Assuming all goes well, I would like to review [the respondent] 2-3 more
times on his return to full duties to ensure no flare-ups
and keep him on track
with his exercise program, then discharge him to ongoing
self-management.”
Dr Andrew Porteous, occupational physician
Andrew Porteous was asked to examine the respondent and provide a medico-legal
opinion in respect of these proceedings. Dr Porteous
provided his opinion in a
report dated 5 February
Dr Porteous recorded the
history of the incident on 5 April 2019, when he reached to disconnect the
trailer from the vehicle, following
which the respondent noticed the onset of
pain in the left arm, shooting suddenly from the left hand to the left neck and
The pain was associated with a headache, and the respondent also
experienced pain in the left thumb. Dr Porteous noted that the respondent
complained of, not only neck, left shoulder and arm pain, but also an onset of
lower back pain when he awoke on the Sunday morning,
which was two days after
the incident.
Porteous further noted that the respondent was off work for three weeks and then
returned to work on restricted duties, then felt
that he was able to return to
normal duties on 17 July 2019. Dr Porteous observed that on 19 July 2019 the
respondent was required
to secure a load by throwing five heavy chains over it
and, when tightening the fourth chain, experienced significantly increased
in the left shoulder and could not move his neck. Dr Porteous said that the
respondent was then off work for a further three
weeks and then returned to work
five hours per day five days per week. Dr Porteous recorded that the respondent
was performing office
work that involved prolonged sitting which increased his
low back and left leg pain, so his duties were reduced to three days per
until he was made redundant on 28 October 2019.
Porteous noted that, at the time of the consultation, the respondent was
suffering from chronic neck and left shoulder pain, shooting
down the left arm
and into the thumb, with moderate aching of the left thumb. He also suffered
from chronic lumbar and left buttock
pain. Dr Porteous described the
difficulties experienced by the respondent with everyday activities. He also
noted the numerous injuries
the respondent had suffered prior to April 2019 and
the respondent’s assertion that he had fully recovered from those
so that he was able to perform full duties at work until the pleaded
injury on 5 April 2019.
Porteous performed an examination of the respondent, noting extensively reduced
range of motion in the left shoulder, the cause
of which he could not explain
without further investigation. He formed the view that the respondent had
suffered an aggravation of
degenerative changes in the cervical spine, lumbar
spine and in the base of the left thumb. Dr Porteous confirmed that the
reported left shoulder pain since the pleaded injury and he diagnosed
a mild soft tissue shoulder strain. Dr Porteous opined that
there was a
consistent history of the onset of symptoms in the cervical spine, left
shoulder, left thumb and lumbar spine as a result
of the pleaded injury. Dr
Porteous noted that five months earlier, Dr Anthony Smith, orthopaedic surgeon,
found normal range of movement
in the left shoulder, which was in contrast with
Dr Porteous’ findings of substantially reduced range of movement. Dr
considered that further investigations were required in order to
establish whether the reduced range of movement was due to the pleaded
Porteous confirmed his opinion that, in the incident on 5 April 2019, the
respondent had suffered an aggravation of degenerative
changes in the cervical
spine, lumbar spine and in the base of the left thumb and there was no evidence
that the aggravation had
ceased. He considered that, because of the cervical
spine, lumbar spine and left thumb injuries, the respondent was not fit for work
requiring static positions, heavy lifting, pushing, pulling or carrying. He was
also not fit for use of the left arm above shoulder
height because of the
shoulder strain injury which occurred in the incident on 5 April 2019. Dr
Porteous felt, however, that the
respondent had some capacity for work as a
truck driver in selected duties and at a reduced level but considered that he
difficulty in securing work.
Porteous commented that, although Dr Smith was of the view that the injuries had
resolved, he was of the opinion that the aggravation
had never stopped since the
pleaded injury. He said the aggravation had clearly not resolved. Dr Porteous
proceeded to assess the
respondent’s whole person impairment.
Dr Anthony Smith, orthopaedic surgeon
appellant arranged for the respondent to be medically examined by Dr Anthony
Smith. Dr Smith provided a report dated 5 September
He took a history of the
pleaded injury, noting that the respondent suffered pain in the neck, shoulders,
shoulder blades, low back
and jaw pain with pins and needles “all
over”. Dr Smith recorded that just less than a month previously, the
returned to work on “light duties” using a computer for
eight hours each day. His duties were then reduced to five hours
per day because
of neck and left shoulder pain. Dr Smith noted that there was still discomfort
around the base of the left thumb
but that the respondent’s lower back was
no longer a problem, except for occasional buttock pain. Dr Smith referred to
prior injuries, including the neck injury in the motor vehicle accident
in 2014, following which the respondent had no time off work.
Smith took the history that the respondent was certified fit to work by his
general practitioner a little over three weeks previously
but was not fit for
truck driving.
Smith reviewed the radiological evidence of the cervical spine, left wrist and
left thumb. He performed an examination of the respondent
(a) neck movements were reduced to 80% of normal range and
rotation to the left was weaker than the right;
(b) both shoulders had no loss of range or rhythm;
(c) there was global power loss of movement in both upper limbs, left worse
than right;
(d) there was a reduction of range of movement of both thumbs;
(e) extension, flexion and rotation of the lumbar spine was unremarkable,
(f) there was no lower leg deficit.
Smith diagnosed spinal degenerative disease as well as bilateral thumb base
arthritis and said that the respondent was likely to
have a number of other
co-morbid conditions. He considered that the respondent could have easily
exacerbated the cervical and spinal
degenerative disease in the incident on 5
April 2019 and also aggravated the left thumb base osteoarthritis. Dr Smith was
opinion that, on the basis of the examination that day, the respondent
had recovered from the aggravations. He remarked that the
respondent’s
presentation was inconsistent with any organic illness which could support the
pattern of weakness the respondent
conclusion, Dr Smith expressed the view that the respondent had recovered from
his injuries and would be as fit for his usual occupation
as he was in March
Mr Steve Williams, Master of Work Health and Safety
Williams was asked to provide a report to the respondent’s legal
representatives in relation to any potential occupational
liability for the
respondent’s pleaded injury and the exacerbation on 19 July 2019. In his
report dated 4 July 2020,
Williams expressed the view that the work allocated to the respondent just two
days after his return to full duties in July 2019
was inconsistent with
occupational standards for managing musculoskeletal
Dr Andrew McIntosh, biomechanics and ergonomics expert
McIntosh was asked by the appellant to provide an expert report in relation to
the mechanism of the pleaded injury. He provided
a report dated 5 August
After assessing the
evidence in detail, Dr McIntosh provided his opinion that, in the circumstances
of the incident in question,
the jarring mechanism was unlikely to have caused
an intervertebral disc injury to a healthy spine because the truck was
at a low speed. He further opined that the injuries suffered by the
respondent could be attributed to the incident as an aggravation
respondent’s pre-existing musculoskeletal condition, where the
pre-existing condition was unrelated to the incident.
McIntosh noted that the respondent was deemed fit for full duties in July 2019,
which he considered was consistent with his knowledge
of recovery times from
“whiplash” type motor vehicle accidents, where there are similar
cervical and lumbar disorders.
He concluded that the injuries suffered by the
respondent resolved within three to four months. Dr McIntosh indicated that he
with the opinion of Mr Williams.
Other relevant documentation
19 July 2019, the respondent completed an Incident Report Form, referring to
neck pain occurring that morning. The respondent
“previous injury preventing me from securing load of
plate ... neck pinching pain ... not being able to pull myself into truck
without major discomfort
19 July 2019, Ms Tina Chandra, Injury Management Advisor to the appellant, wrote
to Dr Maria Salinas, general practitioner at Sonic
Health Plus, advising
that the respondent had commenced a trial of his pre-injury duties on 17 July
2019 and had experienced a “flare
up” of his neck and shoulder
injury on the morning of 19 July 2019. Ms Chandra requested a medical
examination of the respondent.
Stephen Smith wrote to Ms Chandra and Ms Margaret Layt (the respondent’s
Case Manager) on 21 August 2019, advising that he
had told the respondent that,
although his doctor had issued a certificate indicating that he was fit for
pre-injury duties, the
appellant was focussed on the respondent’s welfare
by not re-aggravating the respondent’s injury. He told the respondent
he would remain on suitable duties until at least 5 September 2019, when a
functional assessment would be undertaken.
2 September 2019, Mr Smith again wrote to Ms Chandra and Ms Layt, informing them
that the respondent had sent a text message indicating
that he was unable to
work due to neck stiffness and associated migraines. Mr Smith commented that
“Luckily the BU made a decision
not to let [the respondent] trial any PID
and has not done any physical
responded, indicating that she had spoken with the respondent, who advised her
that there was no precipitating event in
the past seven days which would explain
the symptoms.
On 2 September
2019, Dr Au downgraded the respondent’s capacity to five hours per day,
five days per week.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator delivered oral reasons for his decision on 22 September
The Arbitrator noted that
the respondent was a truck driver who was employed by the appellant to drive
heavy vehicles, which was
arduous work and required the respondent to secure
loads with chains, involving at least moderate physical exertion. The Arbitrator
described the incident on 5 April 2019 and noted the respondent’s account
that he felt a huge jolt and was thrown around. The
Arbitrator said that the
injuries suffered by the respondent were accepted by the appellant, however, the
appellant disputed that
the respondent continued to suffer from the effects of
the injury after 7 November 2019. He observed that the denial of liability
predominantly based on the opinion of Dr Smith. The Arbitrator referred to the
passage from Dr Smith’s report in which
Dr Smith accepted that the
respondent’s disease conditions would have been aggravated in the
incident, but that Dr Smith considered
that the respondent had recovered from
those aggravations. The Arbitrator commented that Dr Smith also doubted the
reliability of
the respondent’s ongoing complaints and considered that the
respondent was fit to engage in his usual occupation as a truck
Arbitrator observed that the appellant also relied on other evidence in its
submissions at arbitration, which included:
(a) the opinion of Dr
McIntosh, who expressed the same view as Dr Smith, and
(b) the respondent’s treating practitioners’ clinical records,
which were said to show that the respondent’s symptoms
no longer related
to the pleaded injury but were referrable to later events.
Arbitrator summarised the appellant’s submissions
(a) after the period of treatment for the pleaded injury, the
respondent was certified fit for pre-injury duties;
(b) the respondent suffered the further injury to the neck and left shoulder
when tightening the ratchet, which rendered him unfit
for work and required
further treatment, and
(c) following a substantial recovery, the respondent suffered a further
injury at home in September 2019 when reaching out to his
grandchild, which
caused an increase of pain in his left shoulder and neck.
Arbitrator observed that, following the September incident, the respondent was
referred to Dr Haber for specialist review. He
proceeded to summarise the
respondent’s submissions, which were that, after the pleaded injury, the
respondent was never symptom
free in the back, neck or left shoulder, and that
the Court of Appeal decision in
Secretary, New South Wales
of Education v Johnson
which dealt with supervening injuries, applied in this case.
Arbitrator reviewed the factual history, noting the injuries prior to the
pleaded injury and the events thereafter, as well as
the various certifications
in respect of the respondent’s incapacity. He noted that the
respondent’s evidence was that
his symptoms in the neck, back and left
shoulder persisted ever since the pleaded incident. The Arbitrator observed that
the reliability
of the respondent’s evidence was critical to the
determination of whether the effects of the injury continued in the context
Dr Smith’s view about the respondent’s significant pain behaviour.
The Arbitrator reasoned that he would be reluctant
to make an adverse finding as
to the reliability of the respondent’s evidence if it were solely based on
the opinion of a medical
practitioner who had examined the respondent on one
occasion only. The Arbitrator remarked that the appellant did not directly
the reliability of the respondent’s evidence, but argued that there
were factual matters that Dr Benjamin and Dr Porteous failed
to take into
Arbitrator said that it could readily be inferred that both Dr Porteous and Dr
Benjamin were of the view that the respondent’s
neck and back symptoms
continued at various degrees since the time of the pleaded injury. The
Arbitrator was of the view that Dr
Porteous clearly understood that to be the
case and had access to the full account of the medical history recorded by Dr
The Arbitrator concluded that the appellant’s criticism of the
history recorded by Dr Porteous was not borne out. The Arbitrator
noted that Dr
Benjamin recorded the history of both subsequent incidents relied upon by the
appellant in defence of the case. Dr
Benjamin referred to the shoulder and neck
symptoms precipitated by the July 2019 incident in the letter of referral to Dr
The Arbitrator said that he was satisfied that both Dr Benjamin and Dr
Porteous had a reasonable history, with the exception of the
history of the left
shoulder condition.
Arbitrator concluded that, on the whole of the evidence, he accepted that the
respondent continued to suffer from the injuries
to the respondent’s back
and neck sustained in the incident on 5 April 2019. He reasoned that it had not
been established that
the pleaded injury had no role to play in the subsequent
incidents in July and September 2019 and those incidents did not constitute
novus actus interveniens
in circumstances where the symptoms in the back
and neck persisted to some degree since the time of the pleaded incident.
Arbitrator considered that the exception in relation to the left shoulder was
that it was not as clear that the left shoulder
symptoms related to the pleaded
injury. The Arbitrator referred to the evidence of Dr Porteous, in which Dr
Porteous observed that
on 8 April 2019, Dr Mason, at the same practice as
Dr Benjamin, recorded a very good range of movement of the left shoulder. He
that Dr Porteous also referred to subsequent consultations, usually with
Dr Benjamin, where it was recorded that the respondent had
a very good range of
movement in the left shoulder.
Arbitrator observed that, since the incident in July 2019, the
respondent’s shoulder had deteriorated significantly and
there was a
degree of inconsistency on examination in later consultations. The Arbitrator
compared the findings on examination recorded
by Dr Smith and those
recorded by Dr Porteous. The Arbitrator formed the view that it was not evident
to him that the respondent’s
current symptoms in the left shoulder
(shoulder pain) related to the pleaded injury. The Arbitrator said that the
earlier examination
conducted by the general practitioners suggested that the
symptoms were better explained as referred pain from the respondent’s
neck, although it was possible that the respondent had developed a
“frozen” shoulder. Noting that the respondent had
been referred to a
shoulder surgeon, who he was yet to see, the Arbitrator elected not to make a
finding in relation to the nature
of the injury to the shoulder which occurred
in the pleaded injury. The Arbitrator proposed to discount the restriction of
in the left shoulder in his consideration of the respondent’s
capacity for work.
Arbitrator reiterated that, on the basis of the evidence before him, the
respondent suffered an injury by way of an aggravation
of a pre-existing
asymptomatic condition of the cervical spine, lumbar spine, back, neck and right
[sic, left] thumb.
Arbitrator proceeded to determine the question of the respondent’s
capacity for work. He noted that there was a consensus
on the medical evidence
that the respondent was fit for some work but that the respondent asserted that
on the basis of his symptoms
and limited training, he effectively had no
capacity for work. The Arbitrator observed that the current legislation provides
in a claim for weekly compensation, if there was no real job the
respondent was able to perform, he was considered to have no current
for work. He noted that Dr Benjamin had certified that the respondent was fit to
work five hours per day, three days per
week. He further noted that Dr Porteous
was of the opinion that the respondent could potentially work longer hours but
that the respondent
would be disadvantaged in the marketplace and was unlikely
to find suitable work. The Arbitrator considered that Dr Smith, who held
view that there were no restrictions on the respondent’s employability,
was the “odd man out.” The Arbitrator
said that the evidence of the
treating general practitioner was always important. He thought that, in the
light of the respondent’s
previous attempts to return to work, the
respondent’s neck, back and thumb symptoms would pose a real difficulty
for the respondent
to perform full time work. He said, however, that after
discounting the left shoulder restrictions (as he was required to do), in
view the respondent could probably work for longer periods than those certified
by Dr Benjamin and that this view was more consistent
with the opinion of
Dr Porteous.
Arbitrator concluded that it was likely that the respondent could perform a real
job such as courier work, driving an Uber, or
light process work on a part-time
basis, of between 22 and 25 hours per week. He acknowledged that those
jobs would pay far less
than the respondent’s pre-injury earnings, which
included his overtime rates. The Arbitrator concluded that the respondent
be able to earn $500 per week, which was more than he would have found if the
respondent had been able to establish that the
left shoulder restrictions
resulted from the pleaded injury.
Arbitrator noted that the parties had agreed that 80% of the respondent’s
pre-injury average weekly earnings was $1,388.12,
which entitled the respondent
to an award of weekly payments pursuant to
Workers Compensation
(the 1987 Act) at the rate of $888.12 per week. The Arbitrator
indicated that he would make the necessary orders in a Certificate
Determination, which he issued on 23 September 2019.
Certificate of Determination issued on 23 September 2019
“The determination of the Commission in this matter
is as follows:
applicant suffered injury arising out of and in the course of his employment on
5 April 2019 to his cervical spine, lower back,
left thumb, and symptoms in his
left shoulder.
a result of these injuries the applicant was totally or partially incapacitated
for work until 8 November 2019 and paid wages or
compensation.
9 November 2019 the applicant has been incapacitated for his pre-injury duties
by reason of injury to the cervical spine and
low back but had a current work
capacity as that phrase is used in section 37 of the 1987 Act.
is agreed between the parties that the applicant’s PIAWE is $1735.14 and
that 80% of that figure is $1388.12
suitable employment as that phrase is used in section 32A of the 1987 Act the
worker has been capable of earning the sum of $500
for the applicant pursuant to section 37 at the rate of $888.12 per week from 9
November 2019 to date and continuing until same
is suspended or terminated in
accordance with the provisions of the 1987 Act.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant alleges the Arbitrator erred on the following
(a) in finding that as a result of the injuries to the
respondent’s cervical spine, lower back, left thumb and the symptoms
the left shoulder, the respondent was totally or partially incapacitated for
work until 8 November 2019 (Ground One);
(b) in finding that from 9 November 2019 the respondent was incapacitated for
his pre-injury duties by reason of injury to the cervical
spine and lower back
(Ground Two);
(c) in entering an award in favour of the respondent pursuant to s 37 of the
1987 Act from 9 November 2019 to date and continuing
(Ground Three);
(d) in his fact-finding process, including the facts found which underpinned
his orders (Ground Four);
(e) by failing to provide sufficient reasons
(Ground Five), and
(f) by finding that the opinion of Dr Porteous was of sufficient weight to
support the respondent’s case of incapacity (Ground
SUBMISSIONS
The appellant’s submissions
appellant, contrary to the requirements of the Commission’s Practice
Direction No 6, does not address each ground of appeal
separately but instead
submits on the first four grounds together. This approach is not satisfactory
and can result in the appeal
being rejected for non-compliance. As a consequence
of the appellant’s approach, the respondent also made combined submissions
in respect of all four grounds. For convenience, I have summarised the
submissions made by both parties on the same basis.
Grounds One to Four
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the pleadings in which the respondent claimed weekly
compensation as a result of the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or
deterioration of a disease occurring on 5 April 2019. The appellant reproduced
the description of the injury from
Part 4 of the ARD. The appellant maintains
that its position remained the position set out in the notice issued pursuant to
of the 1998 Act, which was that the injuries sustained by the respondent in
that incident had resolved by September 2019. The appellant
says that it drew
support for that position from the evidence of Dr Smith, Dr McIntosh and the
contemporaneous records of the general
practitioners and the
physiotherapist.
appellant points out that the Arbitrator noted the appellant’s position.
The appellant says that the respondent’s
position was that the symptoms
flowing from the pleaded injury never resolved.
appellant describes as “critical” the Arbitrator’s finding
that he accepted that the appellant’s injuries
to the back and neck
continued because it had not been established that the pleaded injury had no
role to play in the subsequent
incidents in July and in September 2019. That is,
the Arbitrator found that they did not constitute a
novus actus
interveniens
in respect of those body parts. The appellant includes the
passage from the Arbitrator’s oral reasons in which the Arbitrator
that the respondent had suffered an injury in the form of an aggravation of a
pre-existing asymptomatic condition in the neck
and back on 5 April 2019 but
left open the question of the nature of the injury to the left shoulder. The
appellant submits that
those findings were not open to the Arbitrator on the
evidence and were in error.
appellant concedes that there was contemporaneous evidence of the injuries
having been sustained in the incident in the general
practitioners’
clinical records and it was not disputed that the respondent suffered some
incapacity flowing from that event.
The appellant asserts that the
respondent’s condition gradually improved, was re-aggravated and then
totally resolved. The
appellant submits that there is clear evidence to that
effect in the general practitioners’ clinical notes and the
physiotherapist’s
appellant pointed to the evidence that:
(a) from the beginning of
May 2019, the respondent’s condition improved with physiotherapy, and this
improvement was continuing,
as recorded on 27 June 2019 and 8 July 2019;
(b) Dr Benjamin noted on 31 May 2019 that the respondent felt he was
improving and on 28 June 2019 observed that there was improvement
(c) on 2 July 2019, Dr Benjamin explained to the respondent the expected time
frames for recovery from musculoskeletal injuries and
noted that the respondent
was occupying himself by doing housework;
(d) the respondent was keen to return to work by 12 July 2019 and then
suffered an aggravation at work on 19 July 2019;
(e) on 1 August 2019, the respondent reported to Dr Benjamin that he felt
good after physiotherapy but afterwards experienced back
pain. However, he was
keen to return to some work, and
(f) on the same day, Mr Chisholm advised that:
“[the respondent’s] neck injury has settled since his aggravation
at work back to his previous level he still has pain
the last 10 degrees of
rotation and dysfunctional movement patterns but he is improving with a
conscious effort ...
[the respondent] is still reporting ongoing issues with his thumb ... His
pain has improved over the last week but not his strength.
His lower back injury seems to have resolved however he is still continuing
with his exercises program.
At this stage I think [the respondent] is ready to upgrade light duties with
the following capacity
appellant further quotes from Mr Chisholm’s report dated 12 August 2019,
in which Mr Chisholm observed that the respondent
had experienced minimal
difficulties during a mini functional assessment. He felt that the respondent
was ready to return to pre-injury
duties but after a return to full duties would
like to review the respondent to ensure there were no flare-ups of his
appellant points to the entry made by Dr Au in the general practitioners’
clinical notes on 2 September 2019 in which Dr
Au recorded that the respondent
suffered an exacerbation of his neck pain performing office duties. The
appellant submits that the
subsequent entry recorded by Dr Benjamin on 12
September 2019, in which Dr Benjamin took the history that the exacerbation
when the respondent was reaching out and when he was using the
“physio band”, cast doubt on the reliability of Dr Au’s
record. The appellant also refers to the respondent being examined by Dr Smith
on 5 September 2019.
appellant acknowledges that s 352 of the 1998 Act requires that an appeal from a
decision of an arbitrator is limited to a determination
of whether the decision
was affected by an error of fact, law or discretion, and refers to the
applicable principles discussed by
Roche DP in
Raulston v Toll Pty
The appellant also
Northern NSW Local Health Network v
as authority
for the proposition that a Presidential member is not entitled to interfere with
an arbitrator’s decision simply
because the member considers a different
outcome would be preferable.
appellant maintains that the Arbitrator was in error to find that the
respondent’s pain continued because it was contrary
to the opinions of Dr
Au and Mr Chisholm and further erred in fact by finding an incapacity which
warranted the making of an award
of weekly compensation from 5 April 2019 on an
ongoing basis. The appellant submits in the alternative that the Arbitrator
in attributing any ongoing symptoms to the pleaded injury and not an
intervening event. The appellant asserts that the Arbitrator’s
of the evidence from the general practitioner’s clinical notes and the
physiotherapy notes was not consistent with
his observation that the general
practitioner’s evidence was important.
appellant submits that the Arbitrator’s observation that the history of
the respondent’s return to work would lead
him to suspect that the neck,
back and right [sic, left] thumb alone would pose a real difficulty in the
respondent’s ability
to perform full time work.
appellant asserts that the opinions of Dr Smith and Dr McIntosh, together with
the general practitioners’ clinical notes
and the evidence from Mr
Chisholm, support a finding that the respondent was not incapacitated for work
beyond August 2019. The appellant
submits that, in the alternative, the weight
of the evidence that there was no ongoing incapacity far outweighed the opposite
found by the Arbitrator. The appellant asserts that the Arbitrator
should not have been satisfied that the respondent’s symptoms
were ongoing
and certainly should not have been satisfied that there was an ongoing
incapacity.
appellant submits that, while it might be said that the report of Dr Benjamin
dated 2 December 2019 was evidence supportive of
the Arbitrator’s
findings, when giving that evidence closer consideration, it is of no
assistance. The appellant says that
Dr Benjamin does not deal with the clearance
to return to work given by Dr Au, which Dr Au gave after having examined the
respondent,
or the view taken by Mr Chisholm following the mini functional
assessment. The appellant submits that Dr Benjamin’s answers
provided in
the report must be understood in the context of the questions that were asked of
him, and those questions were not in
appellant refers to the opinion of Dr Porteous and says that it relies on its
criticism of the opinion in respect of Ground Six
of the appeal and submits that
the opinion should not have been accepted. The appellant submits that the result
is that the only
remaining evidence (that of Dr Smith, Dr McIntosh and the
treating practitioners’ records) supports the appellant’s contention
that there was no medical basis to support the respondent’s case of
ongoing symptoms and incapacity.
appellant submits that the caution expressed in both
Container Terminals
Australia Ltd v Huseyin
Mason v Demasi
respect of dealing with clinical notes of a treatment provider does not apply in
the circumstances of this case because both Dr
Au (in a medical certificate) and
Mr Chisholm (in his report) expressed separate but consistent views in relation
to the respondent’s
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that he was motivated to return to work despite the fact that
the effects of the pleaded injury continued.
The respondent refers to the
entries in the general practitioners’ clinical notes made on 30 April
2019, 2 May 2019, 23 May
2019 and 27 June 2019 and asserts that those entries
recorded an improvement in the low back and neck conditions, but that by the
of June 2019 the respondent was performing light duties, with some dysfunction.
The respondent adds that the notes disclose that
on 28 June 2019, he was
experiencing ongoing neck pain and pain shooting into his left shoulder.
respondent refers to Dr Benjamin’s reply to questions raised by the
respondent’s legal representatives dated 2 December
2019, in which Dr
Benjamin advised that the respondent was certified fit for suitable duties on a
graded return to work until 13
July 2019, when he was cleared for pre-injury
duties because there were no light duties available. The respondent submits that
certification should not be taken at face value and should be understood in
its true context, which was that the return on pre-injury
duties was on a trial
basis only and instigated because there were no suitable duties available. The
respondent refers to the appellant’s
letter to him in which he was advised
that he was to be “trialled” for pre-injury duties from 12 July 2019
2019. The respondent says that this evidence was an acknowledgment
that the return to work was to be on a trial basis.
respondent further refers to the entry in the general practitioners’ notes
made on 3 July 2019, which recorded that the
appellant said that there was still
no work available that was in accordance with the previous certification of
capacity. The respondent
says that the same clinical note recorded that the
respondent continued to suffer some neck restriction, was happy to trial
duties, and should return to see Dr Benjamin for review of his
capacity if there were any issues. The respondent points to the entry
general practitioners’ clinical notes dated 16 July 2019, when Dr Benjamin
referred the respondent to the physiotherapist
because of ongoing symptoms in
the thumb. The respondent notes that on 19 July 2019, after having felt
confident of returning to
full duties, he returned to see Dr Benjamin
because of the onset of sharp pain in the shoulder and in the neck while
tightening a
ratchet, which rendered him unable to continue to work.
respondent submits that the evidence shows that this incident was not one that
“broke the chain of causation” and
could not constitute a
actus interveniens
because at the time of the incident, the respondent was
continuing to experience the effects of the injury. The respondent asserts
the incident was an aggravation or exacerbation while he was performing selected
duties. The respondent describes the heavy
nature of his pre-injury duties.
respondent points to the entry in the clinical notes recorded by Dr Au on 2
September 2019, in which Dr Au noted that the respondent
had been performing
office duties for two weeks, which activities would be likely to exacerbate the
respondent’s neck pain.
Dr Au recommended a reduction in the
respondent’s working hours and thereafter the respondent was certified as
having some
capacity for 5 hours per day, three days per week.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the incident in which
the respondent was reaching out to his grandchild
novus actus
interveniens
. The respondent points out that this incident occurred at the
same time as he was performing restricted duties in the office, which
noted involved computer work for lengthy hours, exacerbating the
respondent’s neck condition. The respondent submits
appellant’s assertion that the “reaching out” incident
constituted a
novus actus interveniens
ignores the material contribution
to his neck injury and incapacity made by the office duties.
respondent points out that his attempt to return to work on office duties had a
deleterious effect on his neck injury and he had
continued problems with his
thumb. The respondent submits that this evidence discloses that the pleaded
injury caused ongoing restrictions
in his capacity, he had attempted to return
to pre-injury duties prematurely and, as a result, exacerbated his
respondent submits that the Arbitrator’s decision was based on all of the
evidence before him and that the Arbitrator gave
clear reasons for accepting
that the neck and back injuries continued to cause a degree of incapacity. The
respondent points out
that the Arbitrator was unable to satisfy himself as to
whether the symptoms in the left shoulder resulted from the pleaded injury
ultimately did not include the left shoulder restrictions in his assessment of
the respondent’s capacity.
respondent refers to the reservations expressed by the Arbitrator in determining
the reliability of the respondent’s evidence
solely on the opinion of Dr
Smith, who had only examined the respondent on one occasion, in the context of
the appellant having not
cross-examined the respondent or otherwise challenged
his evidence. The respondent submits that it was open to the Arbitrator to
that he was not persuaded by Dr Smith’s opinion and he could not accept
that evidence over all of the other evidence about
injury and capacity. The
respondent points to the Arbitrator’s reasons, in which the Arbitrator
explained that:
“it can readily be inferred, however, from the
applicant’s medical case that the doctors were of the view that the
at least in the applicant’s back and neck, had continued to one
degree or another since the time of the
respondent asserts that the Arbitrator dealt with the appellant’s
submission in relation to the incidents in July 2019 and
September 2019, and
noted that:
(a) the respondent’s doctors were apprised of all
of the relevant evidence and the histories;
(b) the doctor’s opinions were based on all of the relevant material,
(c) those opinions conformed with the standard required of expert evidence.
respondent submits that the Arbitrator’s conclusion that the
respondent’s neck and back injuries continued was based
upon the whole of
the evidence referred to and was a finding that was open to the Arbitrator. The
respondent further submits that
it was open to the Arbitrator to discount the
left shoulder symptoms on the basis of the inconsistent findings recorded by Dr
and Dr Porteous when assessing the respondent’s incapacity.
respondent further submits that, on the basis of the evidence before the
Commission, it was open to the Arbitrator to determine
that the respondent had a
capacity to earn in the order of $500 per week, after discounting the left
shoulder condition from that
consideration.
respondent contends that:
(a) it was open to the Arbitrator to
prefer the respondent’s evidence;
(b) having preferred one view of the evidence, it was open for the Arbitrator
to draw inferences from that evidence;
(c) it is not sufficient that a different decision maker might draw a
different inference or have a different view of the evidence,
if both views are
open on the evidence;
(d) no material facts were overlooked and no particular evidence was given
undue or too little weight, and
(e) the Arbitrator did not overlook any relevant considerations or take into
account any irrelevant considerations.
respondent refers to
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
as authority for those
propositions and submits that, for those reasons, the decision was not affected
Ground Five
The appellant’s submissions
appellant quotes at length from the discussion by McColl JA (with Ipp JA and
Bryson JA agreeing) in
Pollard v RRR Corporation Pty
in which her Honour set
out what is required in relation to the giving of adequate reasons and observed
(a) a judge does not have to spell out every detail in the
process of reasoning;
(b) the reasons for resolving a critical issue between the parties must be
exposed, and
(c) the reasons must do justice to the issues posed and explain why the
arguments put were either accepted or rejected.
appellant submits that the whole of the decision is to be taken into account and
that the reasons need not be lengthy or elaborate,
in accordance with the
principle enunciated in
Beale v Government Insurance Office
Further, the focus
ought to be on the substance of the
The appellant says
that while the Arbitrator did broadly identify the issues between the parties,
he did not sufficiently set out
his path of reasoning so that the parties could
understand why he made a number of key findings and rejected the
appellant’s
submissions.
appellant refers to the Arbitrator having rejected the opinion of Dr Smith about
the respondent’s lack of reliability because
that opinion was based solely
on the one occasion when Dr Smith examined the respondent. The appellant asserts
that there was no
explanation as to why the Arbitrator formed that view and
cited no authority in support of that conclusion. The appellant submits
this was required in circumstances where he formed a view about the reliability
of the respondent’s evidence when the
respondent was not cross-examined.
The appellant refers to the decision of Roche DP in
JB Metropolitan
Distributors Pty Ltd v
The appellant
adds that Dr Smith formed his adverse view of the respondent on the basis of
objective medical signs, which reinforces
the need for the Arbitrator to give
detailed reasons for rejecting Dr Smith’s opinion.
appellant further refers to the Arbitrator’s finding that it could be
inferred from the respondent’s medical case
that the doctors held the view
that the respondent’s back and neck symptoms continued to some extent from
the date of the pleaded
injury and that Dr Porteous clearly understood that
to be the case. The appellant submits that, on the basis of the medical evidence
from the general practitioners and the physiotherapist, the Arbitrator was
required to explain why that inference could be drawn
and why he preferred the
submissions of the respondent in relation to that material.
appellant adds that there was no explanation provided by the Arbitrator for his
observation that he would be reluctant to accept
the view of a doctor who had
only examined the respondent on one occasion. The appellant says that this was
apparent from the Arbitrator
having failed to explain the conclusion reached in
the face of the opinions of Dr McIntosh and Dr Smith. The appellant asserts
the evidence of Dr McIntosh was not challenged by other expert evidence.
Further, the Arbitrator did not explain why he did not accept
opinion that the respondent was likely to have had restrictions on his capacity
for a closed period only. The appellant
submits that this hypothesis was
entirely consistent with the evidence from the general practitioners and the
physiotherapist.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Arbitrator’s reasons for rejecting Dr
Smith’s opinion on the reliability of the respondent’s
evidence were
cogent and rational. The respondent says that the reasons were based on the
evidence and the Arbitrator’s preferred
view of the evidence and his
reasons were sufficient to assist the parties to understand the outcome. The
respondent maintains that
the Arbitrator made findings on material questions of
fact by reference to the evidence upon which those findings were based. Further,
he applied the correct legal principles.
conclusion, the respondent submits that, in order to establish error on the part
of the Arbitrator by failing to give adequate
reasons, the appellant must
demonstrate that the inadequacy amounted to a failure on the part of the
Arbitrator to exercise his statutory
The respondent submits
that the Arbitrator carried out his duty comprehensively and there was no
The appellant’s submissions
appellant asserts that, contrary to the Arbitrator’s finding, it is
apparent from the face of the document that the opinion
of Dr Porteous was
arrived at without having regard to the respondent’s actual history. The
appellant submits that this failing
rendered Dr Porteous’ opinion as
having no probative value and could not be relied upon to support a finding of
incapacity,
and there was no other evidence that the respondent had an
incapacity.
appellant refers to the decision in
AP v NSW Police
in which Roche DP
reviewed the considerations as to whether an expert’s opinion could be
accepted. Roche DP observed that the
expert must identify the facts and
reasoning process which justifies the expert’s opinion. The appellant also
refers to the
Court of Appeal authority of
Hancock v East Coast Timber
Products Pty Ltd
Beazley JA (as her Honour then was) observed that, although the Commission is
not bound by the rules of evidence, the expert
must provide a satisfactory basis
for their conclusion. Further, the acceptance of that evidence is a matter of
weight, not of admissibility.
appellant says that Dr Porteous listed the documents provided to him and that
list did not include the records from the physiotherapist
and the extent of the
treatment received from the physiotherapist was not recorded in Dr
Porteous’ report. The appellant submits
that it is apparent that the
history recorded by Dr Porteous, which was obtained during the consultation, did
not include very relevant
aspects of the history from the general
practitioners’ records and those of the physiotherapist. The appellant
points to Dr
Porteous’ apparent lack of awareness that the respondent was
certified fit for pre-injury duties by two separate experts in
August 2019
before he went off work again. The appellant contends that, in the absence of
that information, Dr Porteous did not have
a fair climate in which to base his
appellant adds that Dr Porteous formed the view that he could only conclude that
the incident was the substantial cause of the
respondent’s cervical
thoracic and left thumb symptoms on the basis that there was an unbroken
temporal association with the
reported incident. The appellant also refers to Dr
Porteous’ opinion that it was more likely than not that the ongoing neck,
lumbar and thumb conditions were caused by the pleaded incident because there
was no evidence that the temporal association had been
appellant submits that the general practitioners’ records and the records
of the physiotherapist clearly show that it was
not the case that there had been
a clear and unbroken temporal relationship between the symptoms and the incident
on 5 April 2019.
The appellant further submits that this observation by Dr
Porteous gives rise to the unavoidable inference that Dr Porteous was not
of the respondent’s situation in August 2019.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent contends that the Arbitrator did not simply rely on the opinion of Dr
Porteous. The respondent submits that Dr Porteous’
opinion was part of a
matrix of medical opinion which the Arbitrator found persuasive in relation to
the respondent continuing to
suffer incapacity as a result of the injuries to
the back and neck. The respondent says that the Arbitrator explained at length
he preferred the opinion of Dr Porteous over that of Dr Smith. The
respondent asserts that the Arbitrator was satisfied that Dr Porteous
account of the relevant histories and that Dr Porteous’ opinion was based
upon a solid foundation.
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the appeal upheld and an award in its favour in respect
of the respondent’s entitlements to compensation
beyond 2 September 2019,
or, in the alternative, that the matter be remitted for re-hearing.
respondent submits that the appellant has failed to establish error of fact, law
or discretion as required by s 352(5) of the
1998 Act and that the appeal ought
to be rejected. The respondent seeks to have the Arbitrator’s decision
One to Three of the appeal assert error on the part of the Arbitrator in finding
the respondent was not fit for his pre-injury
duties during the period up to 8
November 2019 and from 9 November 2019, and awarding the respondent a continuing
weekly payment
of compensation pursuant to s 37 of the 1987 Act. The
appellant’s submissions in support of these grounds are largely reliant
upon the proposition that the effects of the pleaded injury had resolved, and
any symptoms and incapacity resulted from new events
in July 2019 and/or
September 2019. The fact-finding process adopted by the Arbitrator which
resulted in the award of weekly payments
is challenged in Ground Four of the
appeal. It is convenient therefore to deal with Ground Four before turning to
the first three
grounds of appeal.
Ground Four
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator erred in his fact-finding process that led
to his conclusion that the effects of the pleaded
injury continued, which
resulted in the respondent being entitled to weekly payments of compensation.
Firstly, the appellant submits
that there is evidence from the general
practitioners’ notes that, after the pleaded injury, the
respondent’s condition
gradually improved, was re-aggravated, and then
totally resolved. The appellant relies on the clinical notes of Dr Benjamin,
recorded improvement in the respondent’s symptoms between May 2019
and 12 July 2019 and a re-aggravation on 19 July 2019.
appellant refers to:
(a) the evidence of Mr Chisholm that on 1
August 2019, the respondent reported that his neck symptoms had “settled
aggravation at work back to his previous
and that the back
injury appeared to have resolved;
(b) Mr Chisholm’s observation on 12 August 2019 that the respondent had
minimal difficulties completing the mini functional
assessment and was ready to
(c) Dr Au’s entry in the clinical notes on 2 September 2019 that the
respondent suffered an exacerbation of his neck pain performing
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator erred in rejecting the evidence in the
clinical notes made by the general practitioners
and the evidence of Mr
Chisholm. It appears that the respondent is referring to those entries
summarised above. The appellant says
that in doing so, the Arbitrator acted
contrary to his own observation that the evidence of the general practitioner
was important.
entry made by Mr Chisholm on 1 August 2019 that the appellant’s neck
symptoms had settled to the level experienced prior
to the work related
aggravation is clearly a reference to the work related aggravation occurring in
July 2019 when the appellant
had attempted to return to pre-injury duties. This
entry cannot be read as evidence that the neck pain consequent upon the pleaded
injury had resolved prior to the aggravation in July 2019 or at any time
thereafter. In fact, it is implicit that the entry confirms
that the respondent
experienced neck pain in the pleaded injury, which had improved to an extent,
was re-aggravated, but again settled
to the level of pain experienced after the
pleaded injury and before the re-aggravation.
entry recorded by Mr Chisholm on 1 August 2019 included a reference to the
respondent’s back condition appearing to have
resolved. That entry must be
read in the context of the entry of the same date made by Dr Benjamin that the
respondent felt better
after physiotherapy but subsequently experienced back
pain. Although Mr Chisholm suggested an upgrade in the respondent’s
duties at that time, that upgrade was not to the level of pre-injury
fact that the respondent had minimal difficulties during a mini functional
assessment does not demonstrate that the respondent
was fit to perform the
sustained full-time heavy work he had undertaken pre-injury.
is notable that the appellant never returned to pre-injury duties after the
pleaded injury, except for the few days in July 2019
which resulted in an
aggravation of his injuries. The letter from Ms Chandra dated 19 July 2019
confirms that the return to pre-injury
duties was on a trial basis only, and the
outcome was that it was unsuccessful. It is also notable that the certificate
July 2019, which certified that the respondent was fit for pre-injury
duties, was issued at the request of the respondent who, on
a proper assessment
of the evidence, appeared highly motivated to return to work. Dr Benjamin
recorded on 12 July 2019 that the respondent
expressed his willingness to trial
a return to work. The certificate of capacity dated 12 July 2019 expressed that
the pre-injury
duties were to be a trial and noted that the factors affecting
recovery were neck stiffness and sciatic pain down the left leg. Further,
letter from Mr Stephen Smith dated 2 September 2019 confirmed that the
respondent’s return to pre-injury duties in late
August 2019, which never
eventuated, was also to be on a trial basis. The pre-injury duties certificate
issued by Dr Au on 15 August
2019 also recorded that neck stiffness and sciatic
pain down the left leg were factors preventing recovery.
evidence, when read together, undoubtedly supports the Arbitrator’s
finding that the symptoms consequent upon the pleaded
injury had not resolved
before the aggravation in July 2019 or the aggravation in late August 2019. The
medical evidence thereafter
also supports the notion that the respondent’s
incapacity resulted from the pleaded injury, with the exception of the opinion
of Dr Smith.
Smith examined the respondent on 5 September 2019, shortly after the respondent
had returned to work performing lengthy hours of
computer work and aggravated
his neck condition. Dr Smith diagnosed degenerative disease in the cervical and
lumbar spine, which
he accepted could have been exacerbated in the pleaded
injury. Dr Smith formed the view that the respondent had recovered from the
effects of the injury and, in respect of the neck condition, arrived at that
conclusion on the basis of his physical examination
of the respondent. Dr
Smith’s conclusion was to the effect that the pattern of weakness in the
neck and left shoulder demonstrated
on examination was not anatomically
consistent with the mechanism of injury and was not caused by any “organic
Dr Smith did not
provide any explanation as to why he formed the view that the aggravation of the
lower back degenerative condition
had resolved.
appellant says that on the one hand, Dr Au’s clinical note recorded on 2
September 2019 could not be considered reliable
because it was inconsistent with
Dr Benjamin’s subsequent note that the onset of neck pain was caused by
“reaching out”
and using a physiotherapy band. On the other hand,
the appellant submits that the Arbitrator erred in finding that the
respondent’s
pain continued because it was contrary to the opinions of Dr
Au and Mr Chisholm. These apparently contradictory submissions are unconvincing
in terms of establishing error on the part of the Arbitrator.
Arbitrator’s task was to evaluate that evidence in order to reach a
factual conclusion as to whether he was satisfied that
the aggravation to the
respondent’s degenerative condition in the neck and lower back continued.
Arbitrator weighed the evidence of Dr Smith against the contemporaneous clinical
records, the opinion of Dr Benjamin and the opinion
of Dr Porteous. The
probative value of the opinion of Dr Porteous is discussed below in relation to
Ground Six of the appeal.
the respondent’s incapacity resulted from the pleaded injury must be
determined on the facts of this case. In
Kooragang Cement Pty Limited v
Kirby P (as his
Honour then was) made the following relevant
observations:
“The result of the cases is that each case where
causation is in issue in a workers’ compensation claim, must be determined
on its own facts. Whether death or incapacity results from a relevant work
injury is a question of fact. The importation of notions
of proximate cause by
the use the phrase ‘results from’ is not now accepted. By the same
token, the mere proof that certain
events occurred which predisposed a worker to
subsequent injury or death, will not, of itself, be sufficient to establish that
incapacity or death ‘results from’ a work injury. What is
required is a common sense evaluation of the causal chain.
As the early cases
demonstrate, the mere passage of time between a work incident and subsequent
incapacity or death, is not determinative
of the entitlement to compensation. In
each case, the question whether the incapacity or death ‘results
from’ the impugned
work injury (or in the event of a disease, the relevant
aggravation of a disease), is a question of fact to be determined on the
of evidence, including where applicable expert opinions. Applying the second
principle which Hart and Honore identify, a point
will sometimes be reached
where the link in the chain of causation becomes so attenuated that, for legal
purposes, it will be held
that the causative connection has been snapped. This
may be explained in terms of the happening of a novus actus. Or it may be
in terms of want of sufficient connection. But in each case, the judge
deciding the matter, will do well to return, as McHugh JA
advised, to the
statutory formula and to ask the question whether the disputed incapacity or
death ‘resulted from’ the
work injury which is
Parker ADP observed in
Le Twins Pty Ltd v
conditions are the result of multiple factors. The question is always whether
the facts as found satisfy the statutory
criterion for causation.”
Arbitrator’s finding that the effects of the pleaded injury continued was
a finding of fact which had a sound basis in the
evidence. It is well settled
that the acceptance or rejection of evidence and the weight to be afforded to
particular evidence is
a factual exercise and generally a matter that falls
within the province of the primary decision
Findings of fact will not
normally be disturbed on appeal if they have rational support in the
Arbitrator’s finding that the effects of the pleaded injury continued was
open to him on the evidence. The appellant has
provided no convincing submission
upon which to found its allegation of error on the part of the Arbitrator in his
fact finding process
and this ground of appeal fails.
Grounds One, Two and Three
appellant alleges that the Arbitrator erred in finding that, as a result of the
injuries to the respondent’s cervical spine,
lower back, left thumb and
the symptoms in the left shoulder, the respondent was totally or partially
incapacitated for work until
8 November 2019, from 9 November 2019 and
erred in entering a continuing award.
Arbitrator did not find that the respondent’s capacity for work was
compromised by the left shoulder injury. The Arbitrator
found that the
respondent’s injuries to his neck and back affected his capacity for work
to varying degrees at all times from
5 April 2019. As was pointed out in Ground
Four, the respondent never returned to his pre-injury duties, except for the few
during which he trialled his usual duties and suffered a further
aggravation of his condition. For the reasons set out in respect
of Ground Four,
it was open to the Arbitrator to find that the effects of the pleaded injuries
to the neck and back continued. The
appellant’s submissions that the
Arbitrator was in error in finding that the respondent lacked capacity for work
the argument that the pleaded injuries resolved. That argument
failed. The overwhelming evidence, referred to in my consideration
Four, supports the respondent’s claim that he suffered a continuing
incapacity. The appellant does not challenge
the Arbitrator’s finding as
to the extent of the respondent’s capacity for work, the quantum of the
entitlement to weekly
payments, or the application of s 37 of the 1998 Act. The
appellant has failed to identify error on the part of the Arbitrator in
determination.
those reasons, Grounds One, Two and Three of the appeal also fail.
Ground Five
Five of the appeal asserts error on the part of the Arbitrator in that the
Arbitrator failed to give an explanation, or adequate
(a) rejecting the opinion of Dr Smith about the reliability of
the respondent’s evidence;
(b) inferring that the respondent’s doctors were of the view that the
respondent’s symptoms were referrable to the pleaded
incident in the back
and neck continued;
(c) considering that Dr Porteous clearly understood that the doctors were of
(d) observing that he would be reluctant to accept the opinion of Dr Smith
because Dr Smith had examined the respondent on only one
occasion, when Dr
Smith’s view was supported by that of Dr McIntosh, and
(e) failing to accept Dr Smith’s opinion that the respondent’s
capacity for work was restricted for a closed period only.
ADCO Constructions Pty Ltd v
Deputy President
Fleming set out the approach to be taken in assessing the adequacy of
The Deputy President made the following observations:
standard by which the ‘adequacy’ of an Arbitrator’s reasons
will be determined is relative to the nature
and context of both the decision
made and the decision-maker. The decision to refuse to allow the filing of a
Reply, in the context
of the Commission’s informal and expeditious
process, does not require lengthy, detailed written reasons. The Commission is
not a court (
Fuentes v Standard Knitting Mill Pty Limited & Anor
[2003] NSWCA 146)
and is obliged to act according to equity and good conscience
and the demands of the instant case. The purpose of giving reasons
is to enable
the parties to understand why the decision has been
Arbitrator’s conclusion in relation to whether the left shoulder symptoms
resulted from the pleaded injury has not been
challenged in this appeal, so that
it is not necessary to deal with that aspect of the medical opinions. The
Arbitrator considered
that the reliability of the respondent’s evidence
was critical to the acceptance of Dr Smith’s opinion. He contrasted
opinion with the opinions of Dr Benjamin and Dr Porteous. The Arbitrator
reviewed the respondent’s medical evidence which
he considered supportive
of the notion that the symptoms referable to the pleaded injury in the back and
neck had, to various degrees,
continued. The Arbitrator did so on the basis that
both Dr Benjamin (as a treating doctor) and Dr Porteous (who had access to and
reviewed the clinical material produced by the respondent’s general
practitioners) were informed of the respondent’s
progressive complaints.
It was a logical conclusion that those doctors were in a better position to
assess the respondent’s
reliability than Dr Smith, who did not identify
what documentation was provided to him by the appellant for review or considered
by him, other than:
(a) the letter from Mr Chisholm dated 30 April
2019, which did not mention the left thumb injury;
(b) an x-ray report of the left wrist dated 30 April 2019 and an MRI dated of
the left wrist on 26 June 2019, and
(c) details of an MRI scan of the neck undertaken on 3 July 2019.
fact that Dr McIntosh came to the same view as Dr Smith is of little value in
determining the medical issue before the Commission.
Dr McIntosh is not
medically qualified and has never examined the respondent. His evidence is
limited to the general theory of whether
the ergonomic forces involved in the
pleaded injury would be likely to have a prolonged effect. The appropriately
qualified medical
experts are in a better position to opine whether the
respondent’s symptoms are referrable to the pleaded incident.
Arbitrator’s reasons for rejecting Dr Smith’s evidence were logical,
sound and sufficiently clear. The extent and
scope of a trial judge’s duty
to give reasons depends upon the circumstances of the individual
The Arbitrator is not
required to give lengthy reasons. When giving consideration to the adequacy of
the Arbitrator’s reasons,
the decision must be read as a whole, and not
with an eye attuned to find
that context, the reasons provided by the Arbitrator for the rejection of Dr
Smith’s opinion were adequate. It follows that
Ground Five of the appeal
this ground of appeal the appellant asserts that the Arbitrator erred by finding
that the opinion of Dr Porteous was of sufficient
weight to support the
respondent’s case of incapacity. The appellant submits that it is clear on
a plain reading of Dr Porteous’
report that Dr Porteous did not have
regard to the respondent’s actual history when forming his opinion.
his report, Dr Porteous listed the documents which he said he had received,
reviewed and considered, which were:
(a) the notice issued by the
appellant pursuant to s 78 of the 1998 Act;
(b) the application made by the respondent to ILARS “with
annexures”;
(c) the general practitioners’ clinical notes;
(d) the report of Dr Benjamin dated 2 December 2019, and
(e) the respondent’s statement.
Porteous recorded a detailed account of the pleaded injury. He included a
thorough review of the respondent’s treatment thereafter
and his capacity
for work. He noted that the respondent returned to restricted duties and then
felt sufficiently well enough to attempt
normal duties on 17 July 2019. Dr
Porteous provided an account of the incident on 19 July 2019 and said that the
respondent complained
of “substantially increased left shoulder
and an inability to
move his neck. Dr Porteous noted that the respondent had a further three weeks
off work and returned to office
duties on reduced hours. Dr Porteous recorded
that the respondent complained of an increase in lower back, left buttock and
leg symptoms as a result of the constant sitting involved in those duties.
Dr Porteous said that the respondent’s hours and
days of duties were
further reduced, before being made redundant in October 2019.
Porteous exhaustively detailed the respondent’s past injuries and noted
that the respondent “stated
categorically”
that he had
fully recovered from those past injuries and was able to return to his full
duties prior to the pleaded injury. Dr Porteous
also recorded a lengthy
description of the tasks required of the respondent in his pre-injury duties and
his findings on examination
of the respondent.
matters identified by the appellant which it asserts were very relevant were
(a) Dr Porteous did not have available to him the
physiotherapist’s notes, and
(b) Dr Porteous had an apparent lack of awareness that the respondent was
certified as fit for pre-injury duties by both his general
practitioner and his
physiotherapist in August 2019, before he went off work for a further time.
his report, Dr Porteous advised that he had “received, reviewed and
considered” the documents provided to him. Those
documents included the
notice issued by the appellant pursuant to s 78 of the 1998 Act. In the reasons
for disputing liability, the
notice made clear reference to the certificate of
capacity issued by Dr Au dated 15 August 2019. The notice also referred to the
record of the physiotherapist having stated that he had undertaken a mini
functional assessment of the respondent, which the respondent
had passed with
little difficulty, resulting in the physiotherapist concluding that the
respondent was ready to return to his pre-injury
duties. Dr Porteous also said
he had reviewed and considered the general practitioners’ clinical notes.
is abundantly clear that Dr Porteous was well aware of the respondent’s
“actual history.” Having reviewed the
notice issued pursuant to s
78, which made clear reference to the certificate issued, as well as the general
practitioners’
clinical records, it was most likely that Dr Porteous was
well aware of the contents of the certificate of capacity issued on 15
2019 and at least the opinions of Dr Au and Dr Benjamin that the respondent was
fit for a trial of pre-injury duties.
the respondent submits, the certification referred to must be considered in the
context of all of the evidence. Dr Porteous formed
the view that there was no
evidence that the aggravation of the respondent’s condition in the neck
and lower back had ceased.
The evidence about the respondent returning to
“pre-injury” duties was that the respondent advised Dr Benjamin that
would be prepared to trial full duties. Mr Stephen Smith referred to the
duties as a “trial.” In that context, it was
open to Dr Porteous to
consider that there was a continuing relationship between the appellant’s
fluctuating but ongoing symptoms
and the pleaded injury.
appellant’s assertion that Dr Porteous’ observation that there was
an unbroken temporal association with the pleaded
injury leads to the inference
that Dr Porteous was unaware of the respondent’s situation in August 2019
is not made out. As
a consequence, Ground Six of the appeal fails.
appellant has failed to establish error on the part of the Arbitrator and the
Certificate of Determination dated 23 September
2020 is confirmed.
Certificate of Determination dated 23 September 2020 is
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
5 February 2021
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp 213–222.
Reply to Application to
Resolve A Dispute (reply), pp 50–52 and 56–57.
Transcript of reasons,
22 September 2019 (T),
Smith v Toll Transport Pty Ltd
(3886/20, 23
September 2020).
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
[2013] NSWCA 255
12 DDCR 95.
[2008] NSWCA
[2009] NSWCA
[2009] NSWCA
, [56]–[59].
48 NSWLR 430
Roncevich v Repatriation Commission
[2005] HCA 40
[2016] NSWWCCPD 17
NSW Police Force
[2009] NSWWCCPD 75
[149]–[151].
NSWWCCPD 11
80 NSWLR 43
Report of Dr Smith,
reply, p 459.
10 NSWCCR 796
NSWWCCPD 52
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
84 ALJR 369
266 ALR 367
Shellharbour City Council v Rigby
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
214 CLR 118
[2003] NSWWCCPD
Mifsud v Campbell
(1991) 21 NSWLR 725
, 728 per Samuels JA (with whom
Clarke JA and Hope AJA
Report of Dr Porteous,
Report of Dr
Porteous, ARD, p 3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter