URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CAA [2013] NSWGT 32 (26 July 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 32
(26 JULY 2013)
END OF TERM REVIEW OF A GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Review Concerning:
Guardian at time of hearing:
Public Guardian
Date and place of hearing:
26 July 2013 at Armidale
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Mr Malcolm Schyvens (President)
Professional Member:
Dr Jean Hollis
Community Member:
Dr Margaret Spencer
Guardianship – review of guardianship order
–guardianship order for person aged 16 years – dissociative identify
disorder - subject person did not participate at initial hearing –
procedural fairness - separate representative appointed
- order renewed –
coercive authorities – who should be appointed – suitability of
guardian – parent sought
appointment – conflict between parent and
person under guardianship – best interests that an independent guardian be
appointed – Public Guardian reappointed – six month order.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 26 July 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal reviewed the previous guardianship order for Miss CAA. The Tribunal
determined to renew and vary the guardianship order
for a period of six (6)
months. The Public Guardian’s appointment was continued with the authority
to make decisions for Miss
CAA about her accommodation (including coercive
powers), healthcare, and to advocate generally for Miss CAA.
CAA is 16 years of age. The Tribunal understands that Miss CAA usually resides
with her mother, Ms EDD in private accommodation
in regional NSW.
3 June 2013 the Tribunal received an application seeking the appointment of a
guardian and a financial manager for Miss CAA. The
applicants were Miss
CAA’s mother and her grandparents, Mr TFG and Mrs KFG. In the application
it was stated that Miss CAA
has a multiple personality disorder as a result of
which she is unable to manage her financial affairs or to make decisions
her lifestyle.
14 June 2013 the Tribunal determined, of own motion, to appoint a separate
representative for Miss CAA for all proceedings before
the Tribunal.
or about 20 June 2013 the Tribunal was contacted by Ms EDD advising that Miss
CAA had left home and had not been able to be located
despite police efforts. As
a result, the applications were dealt with on an urgent basis and the matters
were heard on 21 June 2013.
Tribunal determined at that hearing to appoint the Public Guardian as Miss
CAA’s guardian for period of four (4) weeks with
the authority to make
decisions as to her accommodation (including coercive powers). In the reasons
for decision for the order of
21 June 2013 the Tribunal stated
the Tribunal decided to make an order for one (1) month because it
had been made on an urgent basis due to risk and Miss CAA had not
participated
in the hearing. The Tribunal decided that the order should be very short to deal
with the situation at hand, but allowing
a more complete analysis of the
circumstances when the order is reviewed
Tribunal also consented to the applicants’ request to withdraw the
financial management application.
The hearing
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate.
Tribunal on this occasion, in comparison to the previous hearing, had the
benefit of the attendance of Miss CAA who clearly represented
her views on the
proceedings to the Tribunal together with the assistance of a separate
representative. Whilst the hearing proceeded
in a conciliatory fashion, as there
were significant differences in opinion as to how the matter should be
determined between Miss
CAA and her mother and grandparents, the matter was
unable to be resolved by way of settlement.
Tribunal have to decide?
questions which have to be decided by the Tribunal are:
Is Miss CAA
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she continues to have
a disability which prevents her from being
able to make important life
Tribunal make a further guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is Miss CAA someone for whom the
Tribunal could make a further order because she continues to have a disability
which prevents her
from being able to make important life decisions
Guardianship Act 1987
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that he/she is “a
person in need of
a guardian.” A person in need of a guardian is “a
person who because of a disability is totally or partially incapable
of managing
his or her person”
(section 3(1)
Guardianship Act 1987
). A person
with a disability is a person who is:
(a) intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act 2007
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation
(section 3(2)
Guardianship Act 1987
the context of the urgent hearing that was conducted on 21 June 2013, the
Tribunal placed significant weight upon the evidence
of Ms PLE, psychologist,
who the Tribunal understands has been engaged in the treatment of Miss CAA since
February 2011.
the reasons for decisions for the order of 21 June 2013 the Tribunal notes that:
“Ms [PLE] said in her views Miss [CAA]’s condition
renders her unable to make lifestyle decisions because she might be
in places or
do things as a result of one of the personalities and would lack judgement and
understanding to negotiate such situations.
She said the personalities do not
communicate with each other and it is possible that Miss [CAA]’s core
personality could make
a decision that the other personalities could overrule.
It is also possible that Miss [CAA] could be somewhere and not know how she
there, or why.
Taking into account the evidence of Ms [PLE], the Tribunal was satisfied
that Miss [CAA]’s condition does render her unable
to participate in life
activities including planning her actions and making lifestyle decisions and
that as a result she is at least
partially unable to manage her person. She is
therefore a person for whom the Tribunal could make an order.”
Tribunal now had the benefit of a written report from Ms PLE dated 25 July 2013
which provides as follows:
“Miss [CAA] was referred to me
by her GP, Dr [XLE], on February 17
, 2011, because she had memory
problems which were affecting her capacity, however, emotional problems were
obstructing her memory
and awareness and she was diagnosed with Dissociative
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (DDNOS). Miss [CAA] was diagnosed with
Dissociated
Identity Disorder (DID) by her psychiatrist, Dr [WLK], on November
Miss [CAA] has about six partial personality states, and switches between
them rapidly, and, sometimes, very briefly. Her family has
reported that she
switches between well behaved and very angry, aggressive (physical and/or
verbal) behaviour, which has been very
distressing and frightening for them. At
times, she has also played with fire, stolen and lied. Last year she began to
ways which placed herself at particular risk, including publishing
sexually provocative photos on Facebook, and engaging in sexually
provocative
written communication with males on web sites (since then her family has tried
to limit her access to the web). She has
also shoplifted and run away from home.
In October 2012, Miss [CAA] alleged physical abuse against her maternal
grandmother: at the
time she was very anxious and feeling unsafe, however,
investigation at that time indicated that this had not occurred. At least
of these behaviours seem to have occurred when an alternative personality had
taken over. Like many who have a severe disorder
of this type, Miss [CAA] often
has little awareness of the changes in her behaviour, and may not realise she
has lost time, particularly
when it is very brief. This would affect
others’ perceptions of her and her relationships with them. She puts in a
lot of effort
to seem ‘normal’, and often denies that she has
difficulties beyond normal teenage ones.
Like most who have Dissociative Identity Disorder, Miss [CAA] has
intermittent memory loss, struggles with emotional regulation, and
reacts impulsively. She has difficulties with social interaction and can miss
indicators that others have a different agenda
to that which indicate that her
judgement is not as well developed as is needed for her to make appropriate
decisions and manage
her behaviour in a way which keeps her safe.
Miss [CAA] needs continuous, reliable, sensitive care and guidance,
sufficient supervision for her to be safe, and an emotionally
and physically
safe environment. She also needs ongoing psychological therapy.”
Tribunal notes that the diagnosis of DID was prescribed to Miss CAA by her
psychiatrist, Dr WLK in Nov 2012. Unfortunately the
Tribunal was not apprised of
any direct evidence from Dr WLK. Ms PLE indicated that she had attempted to
obtain a report from Dr
WLK for the purposes of the hearing but had been
unsuccessful. In any event, the Tribunal was advised that Miss CAA had not seen
Dr WLK since December 2012.
CAA advised the Tribunal that she believed that she “
did have DID at
, however, she felt that she had not had any
memory problems for at least 2 months now”
and indicated
that with the assistance of Ms PLE, she had developed “
strategies.
PLE sought to comment on Miss CAA’s views. She agreed that Miss CAA had
progressed well in recent months, but wished to highlight
to the Tribunal that
DID does not just disappear, but it can wax and wane.
advised that Miss CAA had been very consistent with her accounts of how she
sometimes feels that she has experienced significant
memory gaps and behaviour
EDD was of a firm view that her daughter had DID and informed the Tribunal of
numerous events and behaviours which she stated confirmed
the difficulties her
daughter was experiencing. She described events of shoplifting, making false
accusations against Mrs KFG of
engaging in assaults upon her, and teaching
young ones to sextext.”
Tribunal ultimately concluded that it could find that Miss CAA continued to be a
person for whom the Tribunal could make a guardianship
order. It should be noted
that Miss CAA presented to the Tribunal as an articulate and intelligent young
woman. She provided cogent
responses to many propositions put to her.
remains unclear to the Tribunal as to whether Miss CAA does indeed have the
condition known as DID as diagnosed. Rather than focus
upon the apparent
diagnosis, the Tribunal was satisfied that Miss CAA has indeed suffered from
significant memory lapses and behavioural
changes from time to time. There was
sufficient evidence before the Tribunal to conclude that Miss CAA has a
psychological impairment
to some degree which, when viewed in light of her age,
persuaded the Tribunal that Miss CAA continues to have a disability to a
degree that such disability impacts upon her decision making
Should the Tribunal make a further guardianship order
and what order should be made?
the last occasion, the Tribunal concluded that a guardianship order was needed
to assist Miss CAA to make decisions on her behalf,
as required, in relation to
her accommodation.
to the issue as to whether the order needed to continue, Miss CAA advised that
“I am not completely against a guardianship order but I am not sure
that it is necessary.”
of the evidence the Tribunal received on this point related to Miss CAA’s
accommodation needs and proposed future arrangements.
The Tribunal noted that on
the occasion of the last hearing Miss CAA had left home and her family was
unaware of her whereabouts.
On enquiring of her as to how this had all
transpired, Miss CAA advised the Tribunal that she had had a serious
disagreement with
her mother. She stated that her mother accused her of not
working hard enough at school, of engaging in inappropriate behaviour on
Facebook, and that these events in turn led her mother to
“go through
her room and her belongings.”
This made Miss CAA
“so mad that
I went to a friend’s place for three (3) nights.”
CAA advised the Tribunal that she hoped to move out of home and find her own
place as soon as possible. When asked how she might
achieve this, she stated
that she would pack up over the next week and then share with a friend for a
while whilst she looked at
options to get employment whilst stay at school. At
the prompting of Ms EDD, Miss CAA stated that she would share with her
19-year-old
friend ‘Tom’. Ms EDD expressed her grave concerns as to
the thought of her school age daughter residing with a male in
share house given
her daughters cognitive issues. Ms PLE also expressed concerns with any plan
whereby Miss CAA would reside in any
form of accommodation which did not provide
routine and stability and she advised a lack of same could well amount to
triggers for
her memory and behaviour changes.
CAA’s grandfather, Mr TFG supported the continuation of the guardianship
“Miss CAA does not make wise decisions
indicated that a guardian is needed to ensure that Miss CAA resides where the
guardian decides. He stated that he was
not so concerned as to where she resided
so long as she was living in a safe environment.
principal guardian with the Public Guardian, expressed the view that current
circumstances suggested that an ongoing guardianship
appointment was probably
warranted due to not only conflict between Miss CAA and other members of her
family as to where she should
reside, but also, due to their being, in her
“significant gap in what accommodation was currently best
for Miss CAA and what was currently available.”
Tribunal concluded that there was an ongoing need for the appointment of a
guardian to assist Miss CAA and make substitute decisions
on her behalf if
required. Miss CAA is of a young age with a level of psychological impairment.
This renders Miss CAA vulnerable.
The evidence available to the Tribunal was
clear. Irrespective of cause, Miss CAA has, in recent times, exhibited
unhappiness with
her living arrangements and evinced an intention to make other
arrangements. The Tribunal was also satisfied on the evidence that
she is indeed
a person who requires, particularly at this stage of her life, the most stable
and supportive accommodation possible.
guardian continues to be required to assist Miss CAA, given her vulnerability,
to ensure that she receives the advocacy and support
required, whether this is
in terms of her accommodation needs, her educational needs, or her health and
wellbeing generally. A guardian
with the requisite function could also be of
assistance to Miss CAA in assisting in seeking an independent assessment of her
psychological
impairments to date so that a greater understanding can be
achieved by both Miss CAA herself and her family as to what environment,
treatment and support can best allow her to develop her full life
opportunities.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal decided to continue the appointment of a guardian for Miss CAA with
the same powers in relation to accommodation
as previously granted, together
with the additional functions of healthcare and advocacy.
should be the guardian?
Tribunal had previously decided that the Public Guardian should be appointed as
Miss CAA’s guardian. At that time, Ms EDD,
Mrs KFG and Mr TFG, originally
proposed that they be jointly appointed as Miss CAA’s guardian but later
withdrew that proposal.
The Tribunal made the following comments in the reasons
for decision relating to the Public Guardian’s appointment at that
“The Tribunal did not reach any conclusions about the
suitability of Ms [EDD] or Mrs [KFG] as carers for Miss [CAA]. However
into account that on their own evidence there have been allegations of neglect
and assault made against them, the Tribunal
was not able to be satisfied that
they have a relationship with Miss [CAA] that could be said to indicate
compatible personalities.
The Tribunal also took into account that its primary focus must be on the
welfare and best interests of Miss [CAA]. A separate representative
ordered to represent Miss [CAA]’s best interests. In the absence of that
representative and lacking independent advice
on the best interests of Miss
[CAA], the Tribunal was reluctant to appoint as guardians persons who have been
accused of neglect
or assault of Miss [CAA].
In any case it was decided by the applicants that the appointment of an
independent guardian would be most appropriate under the circumstances
[CAA] is likely to resent any decision that is made about accommodation,
especially if it is implemented using the Police
or Ambulance
this occasion, Ms EDD sought appointment as her daughter’s guardian.
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements in accordance with
of the Act.
He/she must:
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship:
have no undue
conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person; and
be able and
willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
Guardianship Act 1987
(per Windeyer J in
S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public Guardian
(unreported)
NSW Supreme Court 29 November 1999).
EDD advised that she was motivated to seek the appointment
believe the principal guardian of the Public Guardian has been difficult to
The principal guardian acknowledged there had been some
communication delays but also noted that Ms EDD had been referred to the
availability of the duty guardian of the Public Guardian.
EDD told the Tribunal that she would approach all guardianship decisions, if
appointed, calmly and rationally, and said that she
was the best option for
appointment as she understood her daughter “
voice an attitude and had a strong belief that “
she should be at home
in a strong stable environment.”
She described her and her daughter as
compatible 80% of the time.”
CAA told the Tribunal that if she were to be subject to a further guardianship
“I would prefer the Public Guardian as every parent wants to
see their child remain at home until they reach an age............we
compatible all of the time and often she (Ms EDD) doesn’t listen to me or
she doesn’t want to understand me.”
of Miss CAA’s grandparents indicated to the Tribunal that it would most
likely be best if an independent guardian, in the
form of the Public Guardian be
appointed, primarily due to the “
involved in dealing with the current circumstances.
Tribunal concluded that it was required to appoint the Public Guardian to comply
of the Act. There was clear evidence that Miss CAA was regularly in
conflict with her mother, irrespective of cause, on many topics
but particularly
on the topic of accommodation which the Tribunal concluded was the primary
reason for the ongoing need for a Guardian.
This brought into question Ms
EDD’s current compatibility to be appointed. Similarly, whilst clearly
willing to perform the
role of Guardian for her daughter, the Tribunal was not
suitably confident that she could currently able to perform the role as required
of the Act. The Tribunal could not be satisfied that Ms EDD was currently
likely to take appropriate account of her daughter’s
views when exercising
functions of guardianship, a primary duty of any appointed guardian.
there was no other private person seeking appointment as Miss CAA’s
guardian, the Tribunal determined to continue the appointment
of the Public
How long should the order last?
guardianship order made on review can be made for a period of up to three (3)
years from the date on which it was made.
Tribunal decided to make an order for six (6) months on the basis that this
would hopefully allow a sufficient period for decisions
to be made in relation
to Miss CAA’s future accommodation, whether that be with her family or
elsewhere, and to determine whether
she has an ongoing need for advocacy support
to promote her best educational advancement whilst permitting her developing
independence.
Such period will also hopefully permit the guardian an opportunity
to exercise the healthcare function to assist Miss CAA in obtaining
further and
independent assessment of her psychological impairment to determine its true
nature and best course for recovery or stability.
CAA is clearly a young woman of gifted intelligence and a natural desire for
independence and advancement. The Tribunal is ever
mindful of its obligation in
determining matters to be least restrictive and to permit all persons that come
before it to experience
the “dignity of risk”. At this point in
time, the Tribunal was particularly persuaded to continue the guardianship order
due to Miss CAA’s youth in combination with her psychological impairment
(irrespective of the label attributed to that impairment).
After a further
period of guardianship to provide support and advocacy the Tribunal would be
most hopeful that further orders could
be alleviated.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter