URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EAJ [2013] NSWGT 29 (14 October 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 29
(14 OCTOBER 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
14 October 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
The Hon. Jennifer Boland
Professional Member:
Ms Tony Ovadia
Community Member:
Ms Leonie Manns
Guardianship – application for guardianship
order - Schizoaffective disorder - Drug addiction - Risk of homelessness -
an involuntary patient – person the subject of the application
did not attend hearing – procedural fairness - order made
due to risks to
person – Public Guardian appointed with coercive accommodation, service,
health care, medical or dental consent
and section 46a override objections to
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 14 October 2013
What the Tribunal decided
the conclusion of the hearing conducted at Balmain, NSW on 14 October 2013, the
Tribunal made an order under
Guardianship Act 1987
(“the Act”), appointing the Public Guardian as guardian for Ms
EAJ (“Ms EAJ”). The order is for a period
of twelve months. The
Public Guardian may make decisions for Ms EAJ in respect of accommodation, with
coercive powers, services and
health care, and may give any necessary medical or
dental consents. The guardian is authorised under
of the Act to override
Ms EAJ’s objection to necessary medical or dental treatment.
are the Tribunal’s reasons for the order made.
applications and issues identified
application in respect of Ms EAJ, who is aged 59, was lodged with the Tribunal
by Ms DWS (“Ms DWS”) on 12 September
2013. Ms DWS is a Mental
Health Case Manager with a public hospital. She has been involved with Ms
EAJ’s welfare since May
EAJ has a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder complicated by opiate
dependence. She participates in a methadone program at the
public hospital.
She has also been diagnosed with benzodiazepine dependence. She has other
physical ailments including chronic
obstructive airways disease secondary to
smoking. Her health is said to have deteriorated markedly in the last 12
months, and she
has frequently attended the emergency department at the public
hospital. Ms DWS is concerned that, without a guardianship order,
become homeless, and be at risk of harm and “at times a public nuisance
due to her behaviour”. She seeks
that the Public Guardian be appointed as
Ms EAJ’s guardian.
the time Ms DWS filed her application Ms EAJ was initially an involuntary
inpatient at the public hospital. However her status
became that of a voluntary
patient and she was discharged from hospital on 4 October 2013. At the date of
the hearing she was living
in Housing NSW accommodation, a single bedroom unit
at inner-city Sydney. She receives support from Community Organisation A.
EAJ’s very poor state of health is of concern to many involved in the
provision of services to her including the NSW Trustee
and Guardian. Although
the Tribunal was satisfied the Notice of Hearing and documents relevant to this
application had been served
on her, she did not attend the hearing. As she does
not have a telephone the Tribunal was unable to contact her by telephone.
the issues requiring determination by this Tribunal were primarily whether or
not Ms EAJ suffers a disability, whether or not
a guardian should be appointed,
and the functions the guardian, if appointed, should have. It was not suggested
that there is a
suitable family member who could be her guardian, and
accordingly if an order was made the guardian would, of necessity, be the Public
following matters, unless noted by us to be an assertion, were accepted as
relevant facts established on the evidence before us.
EAJ was born on 26 August 1954. Little is known about her family. Her mother
lives in Regional NSW, but contact details for her
are unknown. She is asserted
to have had little involvement with Ms EAJ during recent years. Ms EAJ has told
Ms DWS that she has
EAJ’s estate is subject of a Financial Management Order appointing the NSW
Trustee and Guardian (“the NSW Trustee”)
as her financial manager.
The order was made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal on 19 June 2009 (noted
in error in a letter from
the NSW Trustee on 30 September 2013 as made by this
earlier noted, Ms EAJ lives in Housing NSW accommodation at inner-city Sydney.
She commenced her tenancy on 29 June 2009. Ms
Z, Senior Client Service Office,
Specialist (“Ms Z”) in a letter dated 27 September 2013 notes that
Ms EAJ has received
support from Community Organisation B, a community health
team, a public clinic, Community Organisation C and medical professionals.
is asserted by Ms Z to have exhibited antisocial behaviour in 2009 when she
became subject of orders under the provisions of
Mental Health Act
(NSW). Her tenancy is reported to have expired. Ms Z notes
“Housing NSW will take action if necessary against Ms EAJ’s
through the Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal”.
Organisation A has provided support to Ms EAJ since May 2013. Initial visits by
Community Organisation A were once or twice
per week. Towards the end of July
visits were increased to daily visits. Ms EAJ is reported to be unable to
attend to activities
of daily living because of increased breathlessness on
exertion. She is reported to be socially isolated. In June 2013 Community
Organisation A noted that Ms EAJ was incontinent at times and observed her
mattress, lounge and dress were “visibly wet”.
EAJ regularly presents at the emergency department at the public hospital. Dr
Y, Emergency Staff Specialist (“Dr Y”)
wrote to the Tribunal on 8
September 2013, and after noting her diagnosis of Ms EAJ, reported that she had
presented five times in
June, seven times in July and 23 times in August. Dr Y
noted “There are concerns from her community medical and psychiatric
health providers that she is not coping at home alone and no longer has the
mental capacity to make decisions and care for herself.”
application to the Mental Health Review Tribunal for a Community Treatment Order
has been scheduled for hearing in late October
2013. Ms DWS was unaware of the
precise date of the hearing but thought it was 24 October
The Hearing
hearing was conducted at the Tribunal’s premises at Balmain. Ms DWS
participated by telephone. She explained that she
had served Ms EAJ with the
application and documents, and had seen her with the documents in a local
DWS confirmed that Ms EAJ does not have a telephone, and that she would not come
to the hearing. Ms DWS relied on the extensive
written material filed in
support of the application.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. There
was no dispute that the Tribunal had
that Ms DWS had
the requisite standing as an applicant.
was no real issue, having regard to the medical evidence, about whether Ms EAJ
suffers a disability as defined in s 3 (2) of
the Act. However, as Ms EAJ was
not present and the Tribunal was unable to speak with her, we were unable to
achieve a settlement
of this matter.
What did the Tribunal
have to decide?
issues that had to be decided independently by the Tribunal in relation to
guardianship were:
does Ms EAJ
suffer a disability (as defined in the Act);
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made;
who should be
the guardian; and
how long should
the order last.
Is Ms EAJ someone for whom the Tribunal
could make an order because she has a disability which prevents her from being
able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal may make a guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that
a person who because of a disability is totally or
partially incapable of managing his or her person.” Section 3(2) of the
Act defines “disability”. A person with a disability is a person
(a) intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled,
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation.
Tribunal had the benefit of Dr Y’s comprehensive report dated 8 September
2013. Dr Y noted Ms EAJ has multiple medical
problems including:
obstructive airways disease secondary to smoking;
poly-substance abuse – currently on the Methadone program;
Gastro-oesophageal
reflux disease (GORD);
Hypertension;
Schizoaffective
Tribunal had no hesitation in accepting Dr Y’s evidence. Her reporting of
Ms EAJ’s diagnosis is corroborated by the
report of Ms DWS and Ms X,
registered nurse, of the public hospital (“Ms X”) and Ms W of the
Community Organisation A
Tribunal found, on balance, having regard to all the medical evidence before us
that Ms EAJ’s present health constitutes
a disability and we were
satisfied, to the requisite civil standard, it fulfils the criteria defined in
(2) of the Act. Further we were satisfied that disability affects Ms
EAJ’s ability to make life-style decisions. We were
accordingly satisfied
that Ms EAJ is a person for whom a guardianship order could be
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order and what
order should be made?
provisions of the Act are relevant to whether or not an order should be made.
, which section contains the overarching principles, which the
Tribunal must observe in dealing with any application under the Act,
provisions contained in
overarching principles in
include the following considerations of relevance
in this matter:
that the welfare
and interests of Ms EAJ be given paramount consideration;
EAJ’s freedom of decision and freedom of action should be restricted as
little as possible;
that Ms EAJ
should be encouraged, as far as possible, to live a normal life in the
the views of Ms
EAJ should be taken into account ;
the importance
of preserving Ms EAJ’s family relationships should be recognised as should
her cultural and linguistic environments;
Ms EAJ should be
protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation.
requires the Tribunal to have regard to the views of Ms EAJ, and any person
who has had the care of her. The section also stresses
the importance of
preserving existing family relationships, the importance of a person’s
particular cultural and linguistic
environment, and the practicability of
services being provided to the person without the need for the making of a
guardianship order.
The reasons now address the relevant matters under these
Evidence relevant to the welfare and interests of Ms
noted above, the Tribunal had the benefit detailed reports from Dr Y, Community
Organisation A (Ms W), and Ms X. Each report discloses
that Ms EAJ’s
health is very poor, and that she is in need of substantial assistance.
W opined, perceptively in our view, that:
Although Ms EAJ has stated
to us that she is not averse to the possibility of supported accommodation, the
potential reduction in
available funds, perceived unsuitability of accommodation
on offer and/or restriction of personal liberty may lead her to change
her oral evidence Ms DWS explained that on occasions Ms EAJ is co-operative and
pleasant to her. But at other times she is abusive
and rude and does not accept
direction. By way of example Ms DWS explained that on her last hospital
admission Ms EAJ had breached
rules by not complying with a direction not to
leave the ward. Ms DWS displayed a very commendable level of care and concern
DWS submitted that, in her view, many of Ms EAJ’s presentations to the
emergency department are because she is frightened
of dying alone in her
Tribunal was very much assisted by a letter provided by Ms BAH, Client Service
Office, Clarence Street, NSW Trustee (“Ms
BAH”). The Tribunal takes
this opportunity to record its gratitude to Ms BAH in being pro-active to bring
to the Tribunal’s
attention the NSW Trustee’s staff concerns about
Ms EAJ’s declining health and welfare issues. Ms BAH’ report,
seeks an urgent hearing by the Tribunal, notes “the staff have observed
her declining physical health with great concern
over recent months”. The
report goes on to note that staff have observed Ms EAJ “to be increasingly
frail and unwell”.
Ms BAH reports:
Despite the diligent
efforts of her support team, it has not been possible to secure treatment for Ms
EAJ’s serious medical
issues. Our client is not consistent in her insight
into the need for treatment and is paranoid at times about the motivation of
support staff.
Ms EAJ struggles with patience and concentration and the lengthy public
hospital assessment and admitting processes work against her
securing treatment.
Her opposition behaviour also impedes efforts to effectively treat her.
BAH’s report is entirely consistent with the other reports before the
Tribunal. We had no hesitation in accepting it in
its entirety.
Tribunal also had no hesitation in accepting Dr Y’s evidence in her
report, or Ms DWS’ evidence that Ms EAJ is inconsistent
in following
through with medical treatment or remaining in the emergency department for
sufficient time for her to be properly assessed.
noted above the Tribunal was unable to obtain any views from Ms EAJ.
Notwithstanding we did not have the benefit of discussing
the application with
her personally, her comments to Ms DWS and Community Organisation A indicate she
accepts she needs support and
assistance, and that her present housing is
unsuitable. Her complex diagnosis and current health are such that the Tribunal
determined,
in her best interests, we should proceed with the application in her
absence notwithstanding she has not had the opportunity to present
directly to the Tribunal.
The effect of an order on Ms
EAJ’s family relationships/cultural or linguistic environment
was nothing before us which indicated that appointing a guardian for Ms EAJ
would have an adverse impact on family relations.
No professional involved with
Ms EAJ has any concrete information about her son, and her mother has not
actively been involved in
her welfare for some time.
decisions which need to be made by a guardian?
heard the oral evidence of Ms DWS and read written material, including the
reports referred to above, the Tribunal found there
was a need for the
appointment of a guardian to make decisions for Ms EAJ.
decision making functions should be attached to the order?
was no dispute that the major issue requiring determination for Ms EAJ is in
respect of suitable accommodation. Closely linked
to that is necessity of her
receiving appropriate medical care.
Tribunal found the report of Ms W about Ms EAJ’s likelihood of refusing
suitable accommodation when offered to be insightful.
We therefore found that
the accommodation function should have coercive powers. The Tribunal was also
satisfied that Ms EAJ’s
diagnoses demonstrate a pressing need for services
and healthcare. We were also satisfied that, given Ms EAJ’s refusal to
have proper medical assessment, authority for the guardian to override her
objection to medical and or dental treatment must be included
Who should be the guardian?
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed
That section
has been interpreted to mean, that the Public Guardian should not be appointed
in circumstances in which an order can
be made in favour of
another person (see
[2003] NSWSC 1170
(2003) 59 NSWLR 220).
White J, set aside a guardianship order appointing the Public
Guardian in circumstances where the Tribunal was found to have erred
failing to make necessary findings that a family member could not be properly
appointed in the best interests of the person
needing a guardian. His Honour
cited, with approval, Windeyer J’s decision in
paragraphs 25 and 26.
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements. He/she must
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship,
have no undue
conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person and
be able and
willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accord with the principles set
of the Act (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public
(unreported per Windeyer J 29.11.99)).
Unfortunately,
as there is no family member who is available to undertake the role of guardian,
the Tribunal found the Public Guardian
should be appointed as Ms EAJ’s
How long should the order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it is made. However, an order of
up to three years can be made,
if the person the subject of the order has permanent disabilities, is unlikely
to become capable of
managing his or her person and there is the need for an
order longer than one year.
Tribunal determined to make an order for a twelve month period when it will be
reviewed. If Ms EAJ can be provided with appropriate
supported accommodation
and is accepting of other services all the functions now included in the order
may not be needed.
the conclusion of the hearing the Tribunal spoke with the Duty Guardian and
advised her of Ms EAJ’s fragile health and complex
needs, as well as
details of the Guardianship Order made.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (150 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter