URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Shannon Johnston [2010] NSWDRGC 3 (1 September 2010)
of New South Wales
R v Shannon JOHNSTON
[2010] NSWDRGC 3
Shannon JOHNSTON (Offender)
FILE NUMBER(S) :
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive
CATCHWORDS:
Meaning of Eligible Person :- report of multi-disciplinary team –
provision of confidential information – claim of public
interest immunity
by Commissioner of Corrective Services – provision of open and
confidential affidavits – balancing
the public interests – access to
information by offender and/or the court – good order and security in
correctional centres
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
Evidence Act 1995
CASES CITED:
Nicopoulos v Commissioner for Corrective Services
[2004] NSWSC 562
(2004) 148 A Crim R
Cain v Glass (No 2)
(1985) 3 NSWLR 230
D v National Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children
[1977] UKHL 1
[1977] 1 All ER 589
DPP v Smith
A Crim R 308
DATES OF HEARING:
1 September 2010
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
1 September 2010
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
R Atkins, Director of Public Prosecutions
R Bhalla, Commissioner of
Corrective Services
W Tuckey, Legal Aid Commission (Offender)
1. The offender, Shannon
Johnston, was sentenced in the Sydney District Court for the offence of Robbery
in Company. He was sentenced
to a non-parole period of 3 years and a total term
of imprisonment of 5 years. The sentencing judge referred him to the Drug Court
for the consideration of a Compulsory Drug Treatment Order (CDTO).
There is no dispute that he is an “eligible convicted offender” as
Drug Court Act 1998
(“the Act”). The
Court must now decide as to whether he is a “suitable” person for a
CDTO, and therefore whether
such an order should be made under
of the Act. The Court must not make such an order without first referring an
offender to the multi-disciplinary team for assessment,
and having regard to its
contents. That assessment has been provided.
3. In its report, the
multi-disciplinary team (MDT) made certain findings and recommendations, the
effect of which was that Mr Johnston
was assessed as
being a suitable
person for compulsory drug treatment. Essentially, the MDT raises the concern
that Mr Johnston committed an assault
against a prisoner with a current CDTO,
and there is what is described as an “inactive non-association
alert” from that
incident in 2007.
4. Mr Johnston has instructed
his solicitor that he denies any such assault, and sought details of the
allegation so he could respond
to it. At an earlier mention hearing of this
matter the Court asked as to whether further information about the incident
provided, so as to allow Mr Johnston to respond to the allegation, and
to also allow the Court to make an assessment as to his suitability
for a CDTO.
5. The Commissioner of Corrective Services has been granted leave to
appear in these proceedings in relation to the question of providing
information requested.
6. In general terms, the Commissioner seeks to
inform the court of information concerning Mr Johnston, but strenuously opposes
Johnston having any access to that information. Indeed, if the court were to
rule against the Commissioner in relation to allowing
Mr Johnston access to the
material, the affidavits would be withdrawn.
7. The Commissioner seeks to
provide the information on a confidential basis to the presiding Judge alone, on
two bases: that the
exercise that the Court is undertaking is administrative in
nature, and the rules of procedural fairness have elided to nothing or
nothing; or, in the alternative, that the principles of public interest immunity
mean that it would be injurious to the public
interest for the information
requested to be disclosed beyond the presiding Judge.
8. On the last
occasion the matter was before the Court, Mr Tuckey, for Mr Johnston, conceded
the public interest immunity (PII) argument,
subject to still seeking an
opportunity for Mr Johnston to reply, even without any confidential information
having been disclosed
to Mr Johnston. Mr Bhalla, who appeared for the
Commissioner, was content to rely on the PII argument alone. Therefore I do not
to determine the first argument, that is, the nature of the proceedings
before the Drug Court, and thereby the extent to which they
administrative in nature, and thereby make findings as to the scope of
Drug Court Act
on this issue.
grateful to Mr Tuckey for his well-founded concession regarding PII. Despite
that, there is a need to set out some findings
on the issue.
affidavits have been provided to the court, two of which are confidential. The
first affidavit is the confidential affidavit
of Dr. Astrid Birgden, the
Director of the CDTCC, and the others are an open affidavit and confidential
affidavit of Rosemary Caruana,
the Regional Executive Director of the
Metropolitan Region of Corrective Services.
11. Mr Johnston has written
two letters, which essentially deny any assault which would see him unable to do
the program, his distress
as to a lack of success in recovery from drug
addiction in the past, and expressing his commitment and motivation to address
addiction, and to becoming a good father to his children.
interest immunity
12. The Commissioner claims public interest
immunity over the information contained in Dr Astrid Birgden’s
confidential affidavit.
The basis for the claim is that the release of the
information would prejudice the good order and security of the Compulsory Drug
Treatment Centre.
13. As Mr Bhalla noted, a claim of public interest
immunity is usually a form of objection to evidence being adduced or to the
of documents sought, however in this case the Commissioner asks the
Court to uphold the PII claim, and either receive Dr Birgden’s
into evidence or, at least have regard to her affidavit when coming to its
decision. The Commissioner also relies upon
the affidavits of Rosemary
14. Public interest immunity is immunity from the production of
documents or disclosure of information, where such production or disclosure
would be against the public interest. There is no dispute that the Commissioner
is a person who may seek such immunity. As Mr Bhalla
submitted, the common law
principles of public interest immunity have now found statutory expression in
Evidence Act 1995
which is of course relevant, even though
this Court is not bound by the rules of evidence in some proceedings.
I agree with Mr Bhalla’s submission that, in determining whether or not to
allow a claim of public interest immunity (whether
at common law or pursuant to
, the Court must balance the public interest in withholding the
disclosure of information or the production of a document, against
interest in ensuring that courts performing the functions of justice (including
the parties before the courts) have access
to relevant evidence.
Bhalla, in my view correctly, argues that there is a three stage process to be
followed: first, determining whether the evidence
sought to be obtained is
material; second, establishing that there is a sound basis for the claim of
immunity; third, the balancing
exercise. In this case, it is of course argued by
the Commissioner that the information or evidence is material—it is he who
seeks to adduce it.
17. The court’s attention has been drawn to
the decision in
Nicopoulos v Commissioner for Corrective Services
[2004] NSWSC 562
148 A Crim R 74
, where the Supreme Court recognised that it is possible for a
claim of public interest immunity to be upheld, but for the court to
regard to the evidence over which the claim was made. In that case a solicitor,
Mr Nicopoulos, was prevented by the Commissioner
from entering any correctional
centre. Mr Nicopoulos sought to have that decision reviewed, and the court held
that the Commissioner
could rely on secret intelligence, and that the court
could both receive and consider confidential evidence.
Maintenance of
order and security in correctional centres
18. Mr Bhalla argues that
the information that this Court is presently concerned with is such that, if it
were released, it would
be liable to adversely affect the good order (and
therefore security) of the facility in question. He argues that the courts have
recognised that there is a particularly strong public interest in protecting the
identity of informers, and that the reasoning behind
what has come to be known
as the “informer rule” was explained by McHugh JA in
Cain v Glass
(1985) 3 NSWLR 230
at 247—248:
“The justification for the exalted position of the informer rule in the
spectrum of public interest immunity is that, unless
the anonymity of informers
is protected ‘the flow of intelligence about planned crime or its
perpetrators’ will stop:
D v National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children
(at 232) per Lord Simon of Glaisdale.
Although the need to protect the safety of informers may have played a part in
creating the
principle, the existence of a threat to the informer is not a
condition precedent to its operation.
The paramount position of the informer rule produces the result in civil
proceedings that the identity of an informer in a criminal
case is not
admissible in any circumstances ...
... The rule is absolute and is relaxed only ‘where upon the trial of a
defendant for a criminal offence disclosure of the identity
of the informer
could help to show that the defendant was innocent of the offence.”
Evidentiary issues
this matter, the court is being asked to consider confidential evidence in the
form of a confidential affidavit which is provided
for the perusal of the judge
alone. Mr Bhalla has drawn this courts attention to the decision of the Court of
DPP v Smith
(1996) 86 A Crim R 308
, and the established
procedure whereby confidential affidavits provide detailed evidence and also
advance reasons in support of the
Conclusions
20. Having considered the written and
oral submissions, and the letters provided by Mr Johnston, the following
decisions and orders
will be made:
1) The material provided is relevant to the question to be decided by the court
and is important information regarding the issues
as to whether Mr Johnston is a
suitable person for a CDTO. All appropriate steps should be taken to ensure
correctional centres are
as safe as possible for all involved. Further to that,
the CDTCC has been established as a program which promotes a non-violent
correctional
facility, and is not physically structured to accommodate violence
or threats of violence between participants. For example, the
availability of
separate cells is severely limited, and there are no provisions for prisoners to
be on “protection” from
one another.
2) The material provided can be and should be considered by the court on a
confidential basis. PII is conceded, and the application
that the Judge alone
consider the information is upheld. In my view it would be very difficult for
the Court to come to the affirmative
view required in
Section 18D(1)(b)
Drug Court Act 1998
that Mr Johnston was a suitable person if the Court knew
that there was (allegedly) important relevant information available, but
chose to turn its back to knowing what that information was.
3) The Court must balance the competing interests of justice in this matter, and
in my view the balance lies in not disclosing the
information to Mr Johnston. It
would not assist in the maintenance of good order and discipline in the gaol
system as a whole if
it was disclosed, and its disclosure could place others,
including staff, in danger.
4) Further, I do not propose to provide Mr Johnston with any opportunity to give
oral or other evidence today. The only live issue
before the Court is the issue
revealed in the confidential information, and Mr Johnston has maintained
throughout that he does not
know anything of such an incident. There is no
purpose in bringing him to the witness box to say that. Further, the Court has
received Mr Johnston’s letters wherein he expresses his motivation
and commitment towards the opportunity of a place at the
5) The matter will be determined to finality today. There was a suggestion that
the issue could be left until next year to allow
the principal issue of concern
to resolve itself by virtue of the other prisoner leaving the CDTCC. However I
am of the view, after
considering the MDT report and the confidential
information, that Mr Johnston is not a suitable person for the CDTCC in any
He has a significant history of violence in both his criminal history and
his custodial history. His history of violence starts at
a young age, and
involves serious violence, including using a weapon to prevent lawful detention.
His violent behaviour in custody
is not limited to the matter which was the
focus of the PII application.
21. Given the
evidence before this Court, I cannot be satisfied that Mr Johnston is a suitable
person for a CDTO, or that it is appropriate
in all the circumstances that his
sentence be served by way of Compulsory Drug Treatment Detention.
that “[t]he Drug Court is not bound by the rules of evidence, but may
inform itself on any matter in such manner as
it considers
appropriate.”...)
[1977] UKHL 1
[1977] 1 All ER 589
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (26.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter