URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPYT/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) V MARGIOTTA [2007] NSWPYT 1 (31 August 2007)
PHYSIOTHERAPISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
MATTER NUMBER: 1/2007
PY: 0063445
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 100
Physiotherapists Act 2001
IN THE MATTER OF
EZIO MARGIOTTA
FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Margiotta
[2007] NSWPYT
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr G Farmer of Counsel instructed by Ms K Parouchais.
Mr Ezio Margiotta
(Respondent)
represented by
Mr B Brassil, solicitor, Baker Ryrie Rickards Titmarsh.
REGISTRATION
NUMBER: PY 0063445
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Ms Ruth Perrott (Physiotherapist Member)
Mr Ken Raupach (Physiotherapist Member)
Dr Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 23 April 2007
DATE OF DECISION: August 2007
(re Complaints)
DATE OF ORDERS: August 2007
ORDERS(summary): The Respondent is reprimanded, is suspended from the
Register for six months and thereafter has conditions placed
upon his practice.
Costs awarded in favour of the HCCC.
CATCHWORDS: physiotherapy - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – conviction for criminal offences
dishonestly obtaining money by deception – failure to notify registration
board of conviction - character.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Physiotherapists Act 2001
, Schedule 5 – Clauses 1 & 6, s93C
Entitlements Act 1986 (Cth), s178BB of the
Crimes Act 1900
CASES CITED:
Bannister v Walton
- unreported, Court of Appeal,
30 April 1992;
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Wentworth v New
South Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR 239
; Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The
Medical Practitioners Act (1966)
67 SR (NSW) 448
at 475 - 476;
Association
[2006] NSWADT 97
Association
[1999] NSWCA 404
McBride v Walton
(unreported -15 July 1994 NSW Court of Appeal);
Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(1957) 97CLR 279;
Galli v NSW
State Parole Authority
[2006] NSWSC 206
Desai v Rodgers (Court of
Appeal 29 July 1981); In Re Davis
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
REASONS FOR DECISION
A Physiotherapists Tribunal
(the Tribunal) convened in accordance with the
Physiotherapists Act 2001
Act) held an Inquiry into a Complaint made by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of
Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC)
dated 12 September 2006.
This Complaint was amended, in a minor fashion with the consent of the
Respondent, at the commencement of
the Inquiry (to remove the duplicitous nature
of the wording of Complaint Two). The Complaints substantially relate to the
convictions
of the Respondent for criminal offences involving false claims for
payments of professional
2. The Respondent, Ezio Margiotta, being a physiotherapist
registered under the Act,
COMPLAINT ONE
has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 25 of the Act in that the practitioner has engaged
in conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the physiotherapist in the practice
of physiotherapy is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
or experience and/or has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct
in the course of the practice of physiotherapy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
i) On 2 November 2004 the practitioner was convicted at the Downing Centre
Local Court of five (5) offences under section 93C
Entitlements Act 1986
of the Commonwealth of making a false statement used
in connection with a claim for payment under Part V of the
Entitlements Act 1986
ii) The practitioner failed to notify the Board within 7 days after being
convicted of offences at the Downing Centre Local Court
on 2 November 2004
giving details of the conviction and any penalty imposed for the offences in
breach of section 22(1) of the Act.
iii) On 13 September 2005 the practitioner was convicted at the Chief Industrial
Magistrates Court at Sydney of thirty four (34)
offences under section 178BB of
Crimes Act 1900
of New South Wales of dishonestly obtaining money by
deception by claiming payment for physiotherapy services that had not been
in relation to workers compensation claims.
COMPLAINT TWO
has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of sections 25
and 26 of the Act in that the practitioner has engaged
in conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the physiotherapist in the practice
of physiotherapy is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
or experience and/or has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct
in the course of the practice of physiotherapy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
i) On 2 November 2004 the practitioner was convicted at the Downing Centre
Local Court of five (5) offences under section 93C of
Entitlements Act 1986
of the Commonwealth of making a false statement used
in connection with a claim for payment under Part V of the
Entitlements Act 1986
ii) The practitioner failed to notify the Board within 7 days after being
convicted of offences at the Downing Centre Local Court
on 2 November 2004
giving details of the conviction and any penalty imposed for the offences in
breach of section 22(1) of the Act.
iii) On 13 September 2005 the practitioner was convicted at the Chief Industrial
Magistrates Court at Sydney of thirty four (34)
offences under section 178BB of
Crimes Act 1900
of New South Wales of dishonestly obtaining money by
deception by claiming payment for physiotherapy services that had not been
in relation to workers compensation claims.
COMPLAINT THREE
has in New South Wales been convicted of offences, and the circumstances of the
offences are such as to render the physiotherapist
unfit in the public interest
to be registered as a
physiotherapist
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
i) On 2 November 2004 the practitioner was convicted at the Downing Centre Local
Court of five (5) offences under
section 93C
Entitlements Act 1986
of the Commonwealth of making a false statement used
in connection with a claim for payment under Part V of the
Entitlements Act 1986
ii) On 13 September 2005 the practitioner was convicted at the Chief Industrial
Magistrates Court at Sydney of thirty four (34) offences
under section 178BB of
Crimes Act 1900
of New South Wales of dishonestly obtaining money by
deception in connection by claiming payment for physiotherapy services that
not been provided in relation to workers compensation claims.
COMPLAINT FOUR
is not of good character
PARTICULARS
OF COMPLAINT FOUR
i) On 2 November 2004 the practitioner was convicted at the Downing Centre Local
Court of five (5) offences under
section 93C
Entitlements Act 1986
of the Commonwealth of making a false statement used
in connection with a claim for payment under Part V of the
Entitlements Act 1986
ii) On 13 September 2005 the practitioner was convicted at the Chief Industrial
Magistrates Court at Sydney of thirty four (34) offences
under section 178BB of
Crimes Act 1900
of New South Wales of dishonestly obtaining money by
deception in connection by claiming payment for physiotherapy services that
not been provided in relation to workers compensation claims.
Appearances
The Respondent attended the
hearing accompanied by his wife and was legally represented by Mr B Brassil,
solicitor of Baker Ryrie
Rickards Titmarsh. The HCCC was represented by Mr G
Farmer of Counsel, instructed by Ms K Parouchais of the
Suppression Order
The Tribunal made an order in
accordance with Schedule 5 of Clause 6 of the Act that the names of any of the
patients treated by the
Respondent not be published. A schedule containing the
identities of the patients is attached to this original Reasons for Decision
document (and marked with the letter G) and the copies that are forwarded to the
parties. This schedule should not be reproduced
if copies of this Reasons
document are made for any purpose other than to provide it to an appeal court,
and it should be marked
accordingly by the parties. The names suppressed appear
in Exhibit 35 and 36 (documents tendered by the Respondent) and in documents
produced under summons from the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) that
came into evidence.
Both the Respondent and his
wife, Mrs Cristina Margiotta, gave
Claim for Client Legal
A claim of client legal
privilege was made on behalf of the Respondent over documents produced under
summons addressed to the Respondent.
Two bundles of documents were produced by
the solicitors acting for the Respondent in answer to this summons. One bundle
placed into a sealed envelope by the solicitors and a claim for
privilege made over them. The claim was determined on the first day
Hearing. Both parties made submissions in relation to this claim, which was
substantially heard by the Chairperson, in the
absence of the other Tribunal
members. It should be noted that the determination of legal questions is a
matter for the Chairperson.
Further, it became evident that the submissions may
reveal, at least to some degree, the content of the documents and hence the
Chairperson
decided it would be best done in the absence of the Tribunal
Client legal privilege is a
basic and substantive legal doctrine. The Tribunal is of the view that the
privilege may be claimed in
this jurisdiction in the appropriate circumstances.
As noted in a recent Issues Paper entitled ‘Client Legal Privilege and
Federal Investigatory Bodies’ (Issues Paper 33 – April 2007)
published by the Australian Law Reform Commission, the privilege
has been held
to be extended beyond curial proceedings to investigative and administrative
proceedings. Further it has evolved from
a ‘sole purpose’ to a
‘dominant purpose’ test (the ‘purpose’ being the purpose
for which the
document was created). The Issues Paper goes on to note that the
privilege operates in substantially the same way under the common
law and the
Uniform Evidence Acts.
8. It should be
noted at this point that the provisions of Schedule 5, Clause 1 of the Act
– Proceedings before the Tribunal
In proceedings before it, the Tribunal is not bound to observe the rules
of law governing the admission of evidence, but may inform
itself of any matter
in such manner as it thinks fit.
The Tribunal has the power to
call upon documents (or witnesses) of its own accord and to lay further (or
alternate) complaints.
In summary, it was argued on
behalf of the Respondent that the documents over which privilege was claimed
were either used by his
solicitor to provide legal advice to the Respondent in
relation to his criminal prosecution on the charges relating to the DVA claims
or were communications between the solicitor and the Respondent. The Respondent
and the HCCC both submitted that communications between
the Respondent and his
solicitors should attract the protection of client legal privilege. The
Chairperson accepted this submission.
As there was little probative value in the
Tribunal also having access to the letters that passed between the solicitors
Respondent and the Commonwealth Department of Public Prosecutions (CDPP)
these documents were also not received into evidence by
the Tribunal.
The remainder of the bundle
significantly comprised a number of statements made by various employees of the
DVA regarding their investigation
of this matter, and in particular contained
records of interviews between officers of the DVA and the Respondent. They had
been provided
to the solicitors acting for the Respondent by the CDPP during
negotiations regarding the settling of the Agreed Statement of Facts
tendered at the hearing of the criminal charges. One may speculate that had the
Respondent not pleaded guilty these documents
would have been tendered and
sought to have been relied upon by the CDPP.
Whilst it is clear that
these documents were prepared for the dominant purpose of the CDPP preparing
their prosecution of the Respondent
(which may attract the ‘litigation
privilege’ limb of client legal privilege) or even in the first instance
for the purpose
of allowing the CDPP to prepare advice for the DVA in relation
to the conduct of the Respondent (which may attract the ‘advice
privilege’ limb of client legal privilege) the question of whether or not
the CDPP could validly claim privilege over these
documents (in these
circumstances) was not a question before the Tribunal.
The question before the
Tribunal was whether or not client legal privilege (in either of its guises) can
be claimed by the Respondent
in these proceedings. Although ‘litigation
privilege’ may extend to communications between a legal adviser, client
third party (provided the dominant purpose test is met), the circumstances
of this matter are not, in the Tribunal’s view,
such that the privilege
extends to the balance of the documents in the bundle produced by the solicitors
for the Respondent.
In any case this privilege
would be available for the DVA to claim and not for the Respondent to claim. It
should also be noted at
this point that after reading the bundle of documents
initially served by the HCCC the Tribunal had questioned the availability of
statements regarding the DVA investigation and the exact nature of the
‘self-reporting’ assertion made by the Respondent
to the DVA. The
matter of ‘self-reporting’ is taken up later in this
The Tribunal allowed the
statements and other documents provided to the Respondent by the DVA (and
produced under summons directed
to the Respondent) into evidence. Further, the
probative value of these documents outweighed any prejudice to the Respondent.
hearing proceeded on the basis of these rulings.
Documentation
The parties tendered
numerous documents that came into evidence as Exhibits 1 – 39 (see
schedule at Annexure F).
Relevant Law
Unsatisfactory professional
misconduct and professional misconduct
Section 26 of the Act
relevantly defines ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’
‘26 For the purposes of this Act, "unsatisfactory professional
conduct", in relation to a registered physiotherapist, includes
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the physiotherapist in the
practice of
physiotherapy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
physiotherapist of an equivalent level of
training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the physiotherapist of a provision of this Act or
the regulations or of a condition of the physiotherapist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the physiotherapist to comply
with a direction by the Board to provide information with
respect to a complaint
under this Part against the physiotherapist,
(d) a failure by the physiotherapist to comply with an order made or a
direction given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the physiotherapist of section 34A (4) (Power of
Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of
Care Complaints Act
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a physiotherapist in the
course of the practice or purported practice of physiotherapy.’
“Professional
misconduct” is defined in the section 25 of the Act as being:
‘25 For the purposes of this Act, "professional misconduct", in
relation to a registered physiotherapist, means unsatisfactory
professional
conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
of the physiotherapist’s registration.’
Standard of proof required
The standard of proof
required to establish this Complaint is the civil standard, however it is well
settled that due to the seriousness
of the allegations and the gravity of their
consequences, the Tribunal is required to be comfortably satisfied that the
have been established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J said at
‘The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of
an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue
has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion
is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction
which in a civil issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily
affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
Nature of the jurisdiction
The jurisdiction exercised
by this Tribunal is protective, not punitive (see
Wentworth v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
(1992) 176 CLR
at 250-251). The object is not to punish the practitioner but to protect
the public and to maintain proper standards in the profession.
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High
Court said:
‘Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order
is in no sense
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection
of those who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
privilege.’
The Tribunal not only has to
protect the public but it is in the community interest that the profession of
physiotherapy should retain
and be entitled to retain the respect and high
regard in which it is held. Deterrence is also a relevant
When looking at the issue of
improper and unethical behaviour, one of the matters to which the Tribunal will
have regard is any relevant
Code of Conduct. There is no Code currently
published by the Physiotherapists Registration Board of New South Wales (the
The Australian Physiotherapy Association (APA) has from time to time
published a Code of Conduct, two versions of which were in evidence
Tribunal. One chapter from the APA Accreditation Manual regarding ethical
principles was also in evidence. These ethical
standards documents are discussed
Section 27 (2) of the Act
‘(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a complaint
may be made that a registered physiotherapist:
(a) has, either in or outside New South Wales, been convicted of or made
the subject of a criminal finding for an offence, and the
circumstances of the
offence are such as to render the physiotherapist
unfit in the public
to be registered as a physiotherapist, or
(b) is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct, or
(c) is not competent to practise physiotherapy, or
(d) suffers from an impairment, or
(e) is not of good character.’ (Emphasis added).
of Good Character
In this matter the conduct
is alleged to have occurred in the practice of physiotherapy and relates to the
Respondent’s practice
as a physiotherapist, although it is not a complaint
regarding the quality of the treatment provided to his patients. In
Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners Act
67 SR(NSW) 448
475-476, Holmes JA said:
‘The Act provides for the circumstances in which the name of a
registered medical practitioner may be removed from the register
expression 'infamous conduct in a professional respect' has been used to define
such conduct. 'Good character' is not a summation
of acts alone, but relates
rather to the quality of a person. The quality is to be judged by acts and
motives, that is to say, behaviour
and the mental and emotional situations
accompanying that behaviour. However, character cannot always be estimated by
one class of act. As much about a person as is known will form the
evidence from which the inference of good character or not of
good character is
Bannister v Walton
(30 April 1992 – Court of Appeal – unreported) Mahoney JA
‘The right to practice [medicine] affords to a practitioner
privileges and opportunities which are not available to others.
He is expected
to maintain a relationship with patients who are affected by his character. The
relationship is one which touches
matters such as trust, confidence,
confidentiality and right conduct. Clinical capacity is by no means the only
consideration to
which regard is to be had in determining whether a person is
appropriate to practice medicine. It is necessary that the public be
against those who, through having the appropriate skills do not have the
character for the opportunities and privileges
which the right to practice
In general, the decision in
NSW Bar Association v Hamman
(1999) NSWCA 404
provides some assistance to
the Tribunal in relation to the law in this area. Consideration is given by the
Tribunal to the fact
that this matter related to the conduct of a legal
practitioner rather than a health care professional. For the purpose of this
the Tribunal considers that the obligation for honesty is the same for
both professional groups.
Background material
The Respondent
The Respondent (D.O.B. 9
February 1961) was first registered as a physiotherapist on 25 January 1983 and
is currently registered until
31 December 2007. In 1982 the Respondent graduated
with a Bachelor of Applied Science (Physiotherapy) Degree from the Cumberland
College of Health Sciences. He completed a number of Post Graduate Certificates
in the 1990’s. He worked in the public health
system from 1982 to 1998
(with several long breaks for trips overseas) and then commenced his private
A Pre-Sentence Report
prepared by the Probation and Parole Service on 12 September 2005 noted that the
physiotherapist conducted his
practice from two locations. This was confirmed by
the Respondent in his oral evidence. For two and a half days a week he works out
of his own rooms at Miranda (from premises that he owns). For the balance of his
working week, the Respondent works in partnership
with two other
physiotherapists in a practice located in Leichhardt.
The CV provided by the
Respondent to the HCCC in 2005 indicates the Respondent has had some teaching
experience, has undertaken some
research to develop a new product which he hopes
to patent and received a few awards.
The Respondent was convicted
on 2 November 2004 of 5 counts of knowingly make false/misleading statement
section 93C
Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986
(Cth) for which
he received a two year good behaviour bond and fined the amount of $500. These
offences had been committed over the
period 12 February 2001 to May 2002. On 13
September 2005 the Respondent was convicted of 34 counts of make false statement
money under section 178BB (Crimes Act 1900) for which he received a
section 12 Bond with a 6 months suspended term of imprisonment.
He was also
ordered to pay the prosecution costs in the amount of
The Respondent was a member
of the APA up until the time of his first conviction. After his conviction he
allowed his membership to
lapse rather than declare the fact of his conviction
as required by the renewal form. He has not informed the APA of his
convictions.
Background to the
In exhibit 10, at paragraph
22, (being the transcript of the submission made by the WorkCover Authority of
New South Wales to the
Chief Industrial Magistrate), there is a statement to the
effect that the conduct of the Respondent was not brought to the attention
the authorities voluntarily but rather was detected. It was further submitted
that the introduction of any more stringent requirements
(for the payment of
health services) may disadvantage people who require urgent treatment; the
honesty of the participants in the
scheme was the basis of the scheme. The
submissions further noted that the conduct was no mere temporary “dipping
till” but was a course of conduct that lasted for a period of
eighteen months (March 1998 to September 1999).
However, in exhibit 18 Chief
Industrial Magistrate Hart comments that the Respondent had stopped his criminal
conduct in 2000 after
guilt...’ and then he contacted the DVA in
The Board was first notified
of the conviction of the Respondent on 28 April 2005 when a facsimile
transmission was received from
the DVA. After preliminary investigation the
Board notified the HCCC of the conviction (and provided a letter dated 11 May
the Attorney-Generals Department confirming the conviction and a
letter dated 16 June 2005 from the Respondent) by letter dated 5
For clarity, it should be
noted at this point that the criminal proceedings in relation to the earliest
offences in relation to monies
obtained via WorkCover were prosecuted after the
offences in relation to the DVA.
The Tribunal has been
provided with two editions of the Code (exhibit 17) and one edition of the APA
Ethical Principles. The Ethical
Principles were published in 1994. The first
Code was published in 1999 and a revised version of the Code was published in
The 1999 Code was published after the commencement of the
Respondent’s criminal conduct. The Tribunal has given no weight to
contents of these Codes in reaching the findings in this matter; however as the
Respondent was a member of the APA at the relevant
time, the 1994 Ethical
Principles are of assistance to the Tribunal. In particular, Ethical Principle 3
includes the following statements:
‘A physiotherapist shall not
knowingly be involved in any practice arrangement which is legally and
unethically
physiotherapist shall not allow professional practice to be prejudiced by
‘Professional
fees or remuneration received as a physiotherapist shall not be gained by
dishonest means.’
Exhibited Documents
Exhibit 3 is the Certificate
of Conviction for the proceedings before the Local Court in relation to the DVA
matters; a copy is annexed
hereto and marked with the letter A. Exhibit 8 is the
Certificate of Conviction for the proceedings before the Chief Industrial
(sitting as a Local Court Magistrate), a copy of which is annexed
hereto and marked with the letter B.
Exhibits 5 and 9 are the two
statements of fact that were tendered in the Local Court proceedings; they are
annexed hereto and marked
with the letters C and
At exhibit 6 there is a
transcript of the Local Court proceedings. These proceedings dealt with the
matters relating to DVA payments.
Three character/personal references were
tendered on behalf of the Respondent – one from a referring medical
practitioner,
another from the Respondent’s accountant and the third from
a superannuation and life insurance consultant who had known the
Respondent for
a long time in both a professional and private capacity. The wife of the
Respondent was also called to give evidence
during these proceedings. She gave
evidence that she had taken over the management of the business records of her
practice. Her husband had continued to carry out work for DVA
patients and had not issued any bills for this work. The unbilled work
to $5,496.20. (At the Inquiry before the Tribunal Mrs Margiotta gave evidence
that this unbilled work now amounted to $8,090.70.)
The Magistrate remarked
that the offences did not represent a ‘one off’ event but comprised
offences disclosed by a
number of entries on three separate vouchers. The
Magistrate was of the view that it was not a result of bad organisation of the
business but deliberate acts on the part of the Respondent. There was no
evidence before the Magistrate of dire financial circumstances
Respondent appeared to her to be a successful man from a good family, with good
references and character.
Exhibit 7 is a letter from
the National Fraud Control Unit of the DVA to the HCCC dated 20 September 2005.
The letter reports that
the Respondent had forged the signature of veterans on
some payment vouchers and entered false dates on other vouchers. During the
course of the investigation undertaken by the DVA some veterans were
interviewed. The Respondent was also interviewed and gave the
explanation that
the matters were a result of ‘tardy accounting practices’. During a
further interview with a representative
of the DVA the Respondent explained his
actions as a ‘compression’ of patient accounts. The amount of
$13,423 was subsequently
repaid by the Respondent to the
Exhibit 10 is a copy of the
prosecutor’s submissions on sentence to the Chief Industrial Magistrate.
These submissions note
that the Respondent pleaded guilty to 34 charges brought
pursuant to section 178BB
Crimes Act 1900
of obtaining money by false or
misleading statements by claiming payment for physiotherapy services that had
been provided in relation
to workers compensation claims. The amount defrauded
by making claims for services not provided amounted to $17,057. The submission
goes on to discuss the relationship of trust between the insurer and the
‘medical industry’ where there is an expectation
that any bills
rendered to an insurer are correct and reasonable. It was submitted that the
Respondent was therefore in a position
of trust when he committed the offences.
In a number of cases it has been stated that this type of fraudulent behaviour
is difficult
to detect because of the level of trust involved in the
transaction. The prosecutor’s submission accepts that the Respondent
shown a significant degree of contrition and had pleaded guilty to the charges.
He had paid restitution, had no prior offences
and was previously of good
character, however the offences had continued over the period of March 1998 to
September 1999.
Exhibit 18 is the transcript
of the proceedings before the Chief Industrial Magistrate. These offences relate
to claims made on three
insurance companies under the umbrella of the Workers
Compensation Scheme in this State. The matters were prosecuted by the WorkCover
Authority of NSW. The transcript indicates that the Respondent was convicted of
these offences and that the Court imposed a custodial
sentence of six months
that was suspended upon the Respondent immediately entering into a two year good
behaviour bond. The Respondent
was ordered to pay the prosecutor’s cost in
the agreed sum of $5,000. The Magistrate made remarks that it was extremely
to formulate the appropriate sentence in the matter. He noted in
favourable terms the fact that it was the actions of the Respondent
least indirectly, led to the detection of the crime, that the Respondent had
ceased the behaviour and been punished by his
own conscience. At page 9, line 13
of the transcript there is the following
‘In the view of the court a man with such a conscience must be a
good man who made a terrible mistake. He should be treated
accordingly.’
For each of these Local
Court proceedings a pre sentence report formed part of the evidence considered
by the Magistrate. Exhibit
19 is the report dated 2 November 2004 prepared for
the Local Court by a Probation and Parole Officer. It stated that the Respondent
had self-reported the conduct to the DVA as he could not live with the burden of
it and was shocked when criminal charges followed.
The report states that the
Respondent could not explain his conduct but said perhaps it had been influenced
by seeing others ‘getting
away with it’. As his wife had taken over
the accounting duties for his practice she would ensure that all future billings
were correct. During the interview with the Probation and Parole Officer the
Respondent appeared distressed and emotional, very ashamed
of his behaviour and
was aware of the harm he had caused to his wife, family and reputation. The
Probation and Parole Officer was
of the view that the Probation and Parole
Service was unlikely to be of benefit to the Respondent as there were no
underlying issues
that the Service could
Exhibit 20 is a Community
Offenders Report dated 12 September 2005 prepared by a Probation and Parole
Officer for the later Local
Court proceedings. It contains the following
‘Mr Margiotta agreed with the facts. He said that he committed the
offences in 1999 as he was experiencing financial difficulties,
in his words he
“did what was expedient rather than what was right”. He claimed that
he “felt sick about it and
stopped” and had not offended
The Respondent maintained
that he had reported his conduct to the DVA and that this had precipitated the
two sets of criminal charges.
The Probation and Parole Officer stated that the
Respondent presented (on this later occasion) as anxious, stressed, remorseful
ashamed of his conduct. Further, he had repaid all the monies and had
changed his accounting procedures (again indicating that his
wife took care of
all the accounting at one of his practice locations and stated he employed a
bookkeeper at the other).
The Report of Mr
Peter Ashkar
Mr Ashkar is a registered
psychologist who prepared a report at the request of the Respondent’s
solicitor. Mr Ashkar saw the
Respondent the day before the commencement of the
Inquiry into this matter. The report should be read in it’s entirety,
the conclusion reached by Mr Ashkar was that the Respondent’s
offending behaviour is anomalous to his disposition and that
he would benefit
from treatment ...‘that promotes adaptive strategies to manage the
difficulties associated with his style
of personality functioning’. This
opinion is relevant to the Orders made herein (see
The Respondent
The Respondent wrote a
number of documents that came into evidence including a letter to the Registrar
of the Board dated 16 June
2005 (exhibit 2.1), a letter to the HCCC dated 13
September 2005 (exhibit 12) which included a CV and professional development
record, a letter to the HCCC (Director of Proceedings) dated 26 May
2006 (exhibit 15) and another to the HCCC dated 31 May 2006 (exhibit
In the letter of 13
September 2005 (exhibit 12) the Respondent advised the HCCC that he contacted
the DVA regarding his conduct and
that the DVA had in turn notified WorkCover.
WorkCover then conducted an audit of about 70 patients treated by the Respondent
found that three patients had been ‘incorrectly billed’. He went
on to apologise for his behaviour and said that he had
taken steps to correct
matters. Further, he did not consider himself to be a ‘threat’. The
Respondent explained that
at the time of these incidents he had lost his two
main sources of work as his ‘two referring surgeons had a falling
and left the rooms out of which the Respondent practised. As this
occurred in his second year of private practice he found himself
with a large
mortgage, a dependent wife, a new child and his income reduced by 70-80%. He
went on to say:
The financial pressure was oppressive and overwhelmed me and
severely clouded my judgement.’
In the letter at exhibit 16,
the Respondent stated that since July 2002 he has continued to treat
‘...any and all...’
veterans referred to him, however he has not
billed the DVA for any of the treatment. The fact that he has not charged the
any services post July 2002 was also mentioned in his letter of 13
September 2005 (exhibit 12). The letter expresses deep regret
for his previous
conduct. He acknowledged that he had let himself, his family, the community and
the profession down. The Respondent
stated that he did not wish to minimise his
errors and that his behaviour was ‘wrong and stupid’. He also stated
he had found his position so difficult to live with that he had telephoned
the DVA in August 2002 to report his conduct and to attempt
to set the matter
straight. The Respondent also stated that he was the person who informed the
HCCC of the WorkCover ‘judgement’.
The Respondent gives assurances
that he was no longer involved in the financial side of his practice as he had
handed this responsibility
over to ‘secretarial support’. He was now
only responsible for preparing his list of patients and the clinical work.
Respondent provided assurances that the conduct would not ever occur again in
the future and that he had learnt a ‘poignant
and painful lesson’.
The Respondent expressed a desire to continue working as a physiotherapist to
enable him to support his
wife and four dependant children. The letter is signed
‘Yours remorsefully, Ezio Margiotta’.
In his letter to the Board
dated 16 June 2005 (exhibit 2.1), the Respondent apologised for not having
notified the Board of his conviction,
stating that he was unaware that he had an
obligation to do so within 7 days of the conviction (as required by the Act),
thought the obligation arose at the time of renewal of his
registration. The letter goes on to say that he made no attempt to ‘defend
or resist’ the charges brought by the DVA and he asked the Board what it
‘required to rectify matters’. He states
that he ‘fully and
frankly’ acknowledged his error and repaid the ‘five claims for
payment’ within 5 days.
The Respondent explained that he had been working
in ‘multiple clinic locations, renting sessions without dedicated
secretarial
staff’ and he had therefore failed to keep proper records. The
Respondent stated that he had signed on behalf of patients on
some occasions if
they had either not attended or if they had failed to sign on the day. Regret
was expressed by the Respondent for
his ‘stupidity’ and he provided
an apology and assurance that the situation would not occur again as he had
altered his practice and removed himself from the billing procedures.
He advised that the Court imposed a two year good behaviour
Oral Evidence
Mrs Cristina
Mrs Margiotta’s
evidence was consistent with both the documentary evidence tendered in this
matter and the evidence of her husband.
She stated that the first time she
became aware of the criminal conduct of her husband was when she attended an
interview with Mr
Brassil when he was preparing the defence for the Respondent
in his criminal prosecutions. She gave evidence that since that time
provided an increased level of assistance to her husband in his practice and had
taken over management of all the accounts.
She also frequently attended the
rooms from which the Respondent was practising, whether it was his own rooms at
Miranda or the partnership
practice located at Leichhardt. Further, she had
taken over managing the family budget.
Mrs Margiotta also gave
evidence that she had supervised a Patient Satisfaction Survey by asking the
Respondent’s patients to
complete a survey form. She was present while
they completed the survey forms and the patients placed their names on the
forms. These
surveys were not de-identified when they were placed into evidence
(but those names are subject to a Suppression Order). The survey
forms indicate
that the Respondent has broad clientele who generally considered the service of
the Respondent to be ‘outstanding’
with only a small percentage of
responses rating it at the level of ‘very good’ (being the top two
of a five point rating
Mrs Margiotta gave evidence
that since the time of the discovery of the criminal conduct the Respondent had
not charged any DVA patients
that he had treated and that currently this
unbilled work amounted to $8,090.70.
This witness gave evidence
in a quiet, yet direct, fashion. The Tribunal finds her evidence to be reliable.
The Respondent
The oral evidence of the
Respondent was consistent with the other evidence in this matter and
particularly so as it demonstrated the
real reluctance on the part of the
Respondent to come to terms with his conduct and make full and frank admissions.
On numerous occasions
Mr Brassil had to prompt the Respondent to provide an
explanation or a more detailed account of his conduct and to keep his voice
an audible level. The manner in which he gave evidence is also consistent with
the evidence that the Respondent had displayed
a great deal of shame to both
officers from the Probation and Parole Service and before the Local Courts.
The summary provided by the
HCCC under the heading ‘Background’ in their submissions is accepted
by the Respondent as
an accurate account of the evidence. There was nothing in
his oral evidence, or indeed in any of the evidence in this matter to suggest
that the Respondent’s skills as a physiotherapist was anything other than
It is clear from the
Respondent’s evidence that he realises he was fortunate not to have been
incarcerated as a result of his
criminal convictions. The demeanour of the
witness also allows the Tribunal to form the view that it is extremely unlikely
Respondent will re-offend in the
Submissions
Submissions made by the HCCC
The HCCC provided a
comprehensive written submission in accordance with the Directions made by the
Tribunal at the conclusion of the
evidence in this matter. In summary, it was
submitted that the conduct of the Respondent should be viewed in context. One
factor of significance being the lack of full and frank disclosure to
the DVA during the initial investigation. Initially, the Respondent
that there were errors in the documentation he had provided to the DVA but
suggested that these were a result of ‘tardiness’
accounting procedures and he did not take the opportunity to admit to forgery
and false claims until some considerable time
later. It was further submitted by
the HCCC that the evidence from the Respondent demonstrated that he only
admitted his wrongdoing
when he was faced with a DVA audit and he had not been
accurate when he stated that he had brought his offending to the attention
the authorities. Remarks on Sentence in September 2005 made by the Chief
Industrial Magistrate indicate that the Court was under
the impression that the
Respondent’s conscience had moved him to draw the attention of authorities
to his conduct. Further
it was submitted by the HCCC that the admissions made by
the Respondent should be viewed in the context of his evidence being given
the Tribunal admitted into evidence exhibits 25 - 34. and the tender of these
documents having been vigorously opposed on behalf
Respondent.
The HCCC also points to the
fact that the Respondent received a conviction for his first offence as an
indication of the criminality
of the conduct. The Respondent failed to advise
the Board of his conviction within the statutory time (section 22 provides that
registered physiotherapist has a period of 7 days to notify the Board of a
conviction). The Respondent’s evidence on this point
was that he had
“never read the Act” (exhibit 2.1). The Respondent’s oral
evidence that he was under the impression
that he was only required to disclose
such matters upon renewal of his registration. The HCCC noted that the
Respondent did not renew
his APA membership after his first conviction as the
form required disclosure of the conviction. He gave evidence that he would have
been too ashamed and humiliated to have reported his conviction in the
The HCCC also points to the
content of the letter of June 2005 from the Respondent to the Board (after the
DVA related conviction)
which omitted to mention the fact that he was about to
repay WorkCover monies falsely obtained (which he did in July 2005) and that
was facing additional criminal charges in relation to these monies (to which he
pleaded guilty in September 2005). The letter
did however inform the Board of
the earlier conviction and stated ‘these problems have never occurred
since then and never
will again’ which, given the timing of each group of
offences, may well be technically correct but it was, at the least, a
significant omission given the position he was in with respect to the WorkCover
investigation/prosecution.
The HCCC also points to the
conduct of the Respondent in relation to his current business partnership. Since
2003 he has conducted
a part-time practice in partnership with two other
physiotherapists without disclosing the fact of his two criminal convictions to
Submission was made by the
HCCC regarding the fact that the Respondent has not sought any treatment or
counselling in relation to
the conduct apart from an assessment undertaken by a
registered psychologist (Mr Ashkar – see above) the day before the
Hearing commenced. The Respondent gave evidence that he did not
appreciate the ‘greatness’ of his conduct until he consulted
solicitor in 2004.
The HCCC submitted that each
complaint had been established. It further submitted that the conduct was of
such a serious nature that
it may warrant the removal of the name of the
Respondent from the Register and therefore amounted to professional misconduct.
conduct is submitted to reveal a lack of knowledge and judgment and conduct
that is improper and unethical. The HCCC relies on a
Court of Appeal decision in
the matter of
Desai v Rodgers
(29 July 1981 - NSW Court of Appeal)
wherein the court stated:
The appellant’s fraudulent abuse of the system was limited in
time and extent, but it stopped only upon discovery and was quite
inconsistent
with and involved a repudiation of her responsibility as a medical practitioner.
Medical benefits schemes depend upon
the integrity of medical practitioners.
Without that integrity, the schemes must fail or become a burden on the
community. Moreover,
it is critical that members of the medical profession
should be aware of the need for and importance of that integrity. The conviction
of the appellant for 27 offences involving fraudulent intent necessarily
involved her having adopted a fraudulent course which contradicted
basic and obvious requirement.’
The HCCC submission
highlighted the facts in this matter relevant to the application of the above
principle. Although the criminal
conduct occurred over two periods of relatively
short duration, the total duration of that criminal activity extended over a
year period and involved a considerable amount of money. The criminal
conduct consisted of multiple acts of making false records
that included forgery
of the signatures of patients. A considerable period of time elapsed before the
conduct came to the attention
of authorities and the Respondent has been slow to
admit his full involvement. It is further submitted by the HCCC that the
misled the Magistrates about the self-disclosure of the conduct.
Although it may appear to be
an obvious matter given the criminality of the conduct the HCCC submitted that
the conduct is a breach
of both the Code of Conduct and the Statement of Ethical
Principles of the APA (1994).
In relation to Complaints 3
and 4, the HCCC noted that although the convictions occurred in 2004 and 2005
the actual conduct occurred
some considerable time previously. The judgment as
to character made by the Tribunal must be made at the time of the hearing of the
complaint. In the matter of
Ex Parte Tziniolis
(at 461) Walsh JA
‘Reformations of character and behaviour can doubtless occur, but
their occurrence is not the usual, but the exceptional. One
cannot assume that a
change had occurred merely because some years have gone by and it is not proved
that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has exhibited
serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct and his attitudes, it must
require clear
proof to show that some years later he has established himself as
a different man.’
Paragraphs 34 -36
(inclusive) of the HCCC submissions read as
34. In Davis (sic)
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
at 416, Latham CJ stated:
“Immediately recent and more distant behaviour may be taken into
account. It is not possible to draw a line at some point of
time and to prevent
the court from looking behind that line ... When a considerable period of time
has elapsed, past facts should
be considered in the light of the lapse of time,
and weight should be given to the subsequent behaviour of the person
concerned.”
35. Similarly, in Healthcare (sic) Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
41 NSWLR 630
, the Court of Appeal stated:
“The lapse of time since the events giving rise to a complaint ...
may ... be relevant in determining whether the doctor has undergone a
reformation of character and behaviour, or whether the incidents
can be viewed
as isolated or passing departures from proper professional standards attributed
to youth or inexperience ...”
36. In McBride v Walton (unreported) 15 July 1994, NSW Court of Appeal, the
Court approved of a number of tests regarding character:
“To determine whether a finding of proven misconduct should be followed
by a consequential finding that the practitioner is
not of good character in the
context of fitness to practice medicine, one must consider:
(i) whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment, rather than a defect of character;
(ii) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness to practice
(iii) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and
hence a typical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner’s
normal qualities
of character;
(iv) the motivation that may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct;
(v) the underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
misconduct; and,
(vi) whether the practitioner’s conduct post the proven episode of
misconduct demonstrates that public and professional confidence
may be reposed
in him to uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required of a
medical practitioner.”
HCCC submitted that the conduct of the Respondent was not an error of judgment
but rather reveals a defect in his character and
that the above authorities
would ordinarily result in a finding that the Respondent was unfit to practice.
The conduct was not isolated,
it was motivated by greed and was easy to achieve.
The HCCC submitted that the Respondent also stated to the Probation and Parole
Service that he had seen others offending in a similar fashion. It is noted the
Respondent also gave evidence that the conduct does
not represent the person he
actually is. Some of the matters submitted as relevant to Complaints 1 and 2 are
also relied upon by
the HCCC in relation to Complaints 3 and 4. The
Respondent’s inability to make a full and frank disclosure of his conduct
so entrenched that he was unable to prevent misleading evidence going before
the Local Courts. This is a matter that must, in the
Tribunals view go to the
question of whether or not the public and the Respondent’s professional
colleagues can be confident
he will uphold the high standards expected of a
registered physiotherapist.
The HCCC notes that the
Tribunal is entitled to take the charitable work of the Respondent into account.
The Respondent has not charged
the DVA for any treatment provided to clients
covered by this service since the discovery of his conduct. It is submitted that
significance of this charitable work is diminished by the lack of candour of
the Respondent particularly in his dealings with the
Registrar (of the Board),
the HCCC and the Tribunal. The decision in the matter of
Association
[2006] NSWADT 97
at 90-99 is referred to as
support for the submission that the conduct of the Respondent is such that it
does not demonstrate that
public and professional confidence can be reposed in
him to maintain the high standards expected. It is further submitted that there
is no independent evidence before the Tribunal attesting to good
Relevantly, in relation to
protective orders, the HCCC submitted that if the Complaints 3 and 4 are proved
then deregistration follows
as it should if Complaint 2 is proved. The HCCC
submitted that the Respondent should be deregistered and not be entitled to seek
review of that decision for a period of one to two years. The HCCC does not seek
a prohibition order but seeks costs in accordance
with Schedule 5, Clause 13 on
the basis of the Respondent’s conduct.
Submissions made by the Respondent
The Respondent admits the
factual matters set out in the HCCC submissions under the heading of
‘Background material’.
A period of 5 years has now elapsed since any
offending behaviour and there has been no challenge to the evidence that all of
money repaid was repaid from funds obtained from a mortgage over the equity
in his home (the monies dishonestly obtained had been
used to meet his ordinary
outgoings). Since the last of the offending behaviour Mrs Margiotta had taken
over the administration of
the accounts with the result that he had not been
involved in the administration of the accounts at all.
It was submitted that the
records of the DVA indicate that from the time of the first telephone call to
the Respondent on 26 August
2002 the DVA treated the response of the Respondent
as an admission of ‘wrongdoing’. The submissions acknowledge that
the Respondent did not admit to any fraudulent practices and went on to say
‘but his limited confession was clearly the impetus
for further detailed
investigation of the Respondent leading to his prosecution for the offences
which bring him before [the Tribunal].’
It is further submitted that the
records of the DVA indicate that the Respondent admitted to conduct raised
during the subsequent
interviews ‘particularly the false signatures on
patient records’. It was submitted that without these admissions some
all of the forged signatures may not have been detected.
It was also submitted that
no weight should be placed on the submission made by the HCCC regarding what
should be made of the objection
of the Respondent to the documents produced
under summons from the DVA on the basis that objection to access of some of the
made by the Respondent was upheld by the Chairperson of the Tribunal.
It is submitted that the exercise should be seen as the Respondent
availing himself of the appropriate legal
In relation to the
submissions made by the HCCC regarding character the Respondent submits the
following at paragraph 7:
The evidence in the proceedings supports the submission that the
Respondent is not the same person today and would not compromise
The Respondent agreed that
the question of character relates to the time at which the Tribunal is
considering the matter but commented
that the remarks made by Walsh JA in
Parte Tziniolis
appear somewhat cynical and were made without the assistance
of ‘more recent studies of the incidence of recidivist conduct
reliability and validity of psychological personality testing’ that is
available today (that matter having been decided
The penultimate sentence of
paragraph 8 of the Respondent’s submissions
‘The Respondent’s submission is not that the
Respondent’s change of behaviour is exceptional, but that the offending
behaviour was out of character for him, brought on by unusual circumstances and
for the Respondent amounts to a major lesson in his
life which he will never
fail to remember or to take intro (sic) account in his future
In response to the HCCC
submission concerning the principles in
McBride v Walton
whether a finding of proven misconduct should be followed by a finding of not of
good character, the Respondent submits
that it is a matter of opinion rather
than fact which can be derived from the evidence in the matter.
The Respondent then makes
submissions regarding the matter of
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279.
A quote from Fullagar J is
reproduced in the submission as follows ‘and a court to which an appeal
comes as of right is bound
to examine the whole position with meticulous
care.’ The submission goes on to say ‘In the spirit of giving
care to the whole position, the Psychological report of Mr Peter
Ashkar was tendered on behalf of the Respondent.’ It is submitted
this report ‘provides an opportunity to inform the Tribunal of the results
of testing of the personality of the Respondent
in a scientific framework using
tests that produce consistent and reliable
The submission then
highlights a number of the comments made by Mr Ashkar and submitted that the
report ‘provides proper foundation
for the view that the actions of the
Respondent which led to the present proceedings sprang from an error of judgment
and not a defect
of character.’
The submissions then move on
to acknowledge that the Respondent was slow to frankly and fully admit his
involvement in these offences.
The case of
NSW State Parole
[2006] NSWSC 206
is referred to as authority for the principle
that admission of guilt should not alone be a basis for refusing bail as shame
prevent some people from making admissions. It was submitted that the
Respondent’s conduct post-offending demonstrates that
he has been
significantly shamed by his involvement with these offences and that the public
and the profession can be confident that
the Respondent will uphold and observe
high standards for the rest of his career. It is further submitted however that
shame suffered by the Respondent that prevented him from approaching
people to obtain written attestations as to his character. It
was submitted that
the provision of free physiotherapy services to DVA clients should be viewed as
an honourable contribution made
by the Respondent. The Tribunal was also asked
to take into account the Respondent’s prior good record, his
voluntary/charitable
contribution and the ‘glowing’ patient survey
The Respondent submits that
it is not necessary for the protection of the public for an order for
deregistration on the basis that
the Respondent undertakes to comply with all
conditions imposed on him and that the Tribunal would not be satisfied that
3 is made out (as he is not now unfit) nor that Complaint 4 is made
out (as he is not now of bad character). If only Complaint 1
is made out the
Respondent submits that the relevant conditions would be for further education,
supervision or mentoring and annual
reporting as to the progress he makes. The
Respondent made no submission as to
HCCC Submissions in reply
As with the two sets of
submissions set out above, this Reasons document only provides a brief summary
of the actual submissions made
and their entirety is considered by the Tribunal
to the same degree as those submissions as discussed herein. Indeed this
only provides a summary of the evidence in this
The HCCC submitted that the
reports of the DVA investigators evidence that they had interviewed DVA patients
and ascertained the fact
of ‘false entries’ including ‘false
signatures’ before putting these matters to the Respondent in the July
2003 interview (exhibit 32). The admissions of the Respondent should be viewed
in that context.
The HCCC submission in reply
also raises the submission made by the Respondent regarding why legal officers
present during the criminal
proceedings allowed misstatements in the Probation
and Parole reports (regarding the ‘self-reporting’ by the
Respondent)
to pass without objection. They submit that the important element is
the evidence that the Tribunal can be satisfied that the Respondent
knew at the
relevant times that the reports contained a misstatement. Further, the
Respondent then picked up these misstatements
and repeated them to the Registrar
of the Board. The HCCC submits that the failure of the Respondent to correct the
misstatement
and to adopt it in his own correspondence is a matter that is a
relevant consideration to the question of character over and above
the criminal
convictions.
In relation to the weight
that should be accorded to the report of Mr Ashkar, the HCCC submitted that
little weight can be given to
his opinion. This submission was made on the basis
that Mr Ashkar was not made aware of the misleading conduct of the Respondent
making the statements regarding ‘self-reporting’ (to the Probation
and Parole Service) and the Respondent’s
subsequent failure to correct
that record when dealing with the Courts, the HCCC and the
Further difficulties with
this report as it was submitted were presented
The statement made in the report by
Mr Ashkar that the Respondent’s conduct ‘does not reflect a
disregard for his professional
code of ethics’ when the conduct
demonstrates a clear disregard for ethics.
The statement that the
Respondent’s actions were a ‘desperate response...not motivated by
greed’ when it was submitted
to the Courts and accepted by the Respondent
in evidence to the Tribunal that his actions were motivated by greed. It is
the HCCC that the ‘desperate’ circumstances of the
Respondent were only present during the first period of offending
but not the
The assertion by Mr Ashkar that
the offending is anomalous to the Respondent’s disposition but that he
requires treatment to
assist him in managing difficulties with his personality
functioning. The HCCC suggests that this opinion indicates a conclusion
there is a defect in the Respondent’s
When considering the effect
of the effluxion of time, the HCCC points to the need to have something more
than the uncorroborated assertions
of the Respondent in light of the offences,
the false statements to the Probation and Parole Service which were perpetuated
out above. It is submitted that these factors support the submission that
the Respondent still suffers from a defect of
Regarding the submission
made by the Respondent relying upon the matter of
submitted that this case is not of assistance as the Respondent misled the Court
and others as to how the offending came
to light (and this is demonstrated by
the documents in evidence from the DVA).
Finally the HCCC submitted
that if the Tribunal imposed a condition in relation to the auditing of the
practice of the Respondent
then it should be undertaken by an independent person
appointed or approved by the Board and that, such person should be required
report directly to the
Tribunal’s Findings of Fact
– the Particulars
Between March 1998 and
September 1999 the Respondent obtained the amount of $17,057 through the
WorkCover scheme by making false or
misleading statements. Between February 2001
and May 2002 the Respondent obtained the amount of $3,578.55 from the DVA by
false or misleading statements. As a result of these actions the
Respondent was convicted of criminal offences.
Having regard for all the
evidence in this matter, particularly the Certificates of Conviction, the
Tribunal finds all of the Particulars
of Complaint proven. Indeed the Respondent
did not submit that the Tribunal should not find any of the Particulars made
Tribunal’s findings in
relation to the Complaint
It is difficult to give
significant credence to the Respondent’s submission that it was his
actions that drew his conduct to
the attention of the relevant authorities in
view of the evidence in this matter (see exhibit 7). The Tribunal had the
of observing the conduct of the Respondent throughout the hearing and
the benefit of hearing evidence from the Respondent. The Tribunal
reservations about the frankness and insight of the Respondent. The course of
conduct engaged upon by the Respondent during the
two periods of time is such
that consideration of how the matters came to light really only assist the
Tribunal in making appropriate
orders rather than appropriate findings. The
Tribunal accepts the submissions of the HCCC regarding the circumstances
surrounding
the discovery of the forged
signatures.
The Tribunal can put
extremely little weight on the reference dated 24 April 1997 from Dr John
Edmonds (exhibit 38) when considering
the matters before the Tribunal. There are
many reasons for this. The reference was addressed ‘To whom it may
and was written before the commission of the offences subject of
the two convictions. The reference does provide solid evidence that
Respondent is a skilful physiotherapist with particular skills in rheumatology
and that he was a respected member of the staff
at St George Hospital whilst he
was employed there. No further reference came from Dr Edmonds to the Tribunal;
indeed the Respondent
tendered no references at all to the Tribunal. The three
references that were tendered to the Court in the criminal proceedings were
provided to the Tribunal. The Respondent gave evidence that he had not informed
the two physiotherapists with whom he entered
into a partnership in 2003 of his
convictions. This may explain why no reference came from either of them. The
Respondent also gave
evidence that he did not know a senior colleague to seek
guidance from and this may explain the absence of a reference from a senior
The Tribunal notes that the
comments on the twelve Patient Satisfaction Surveys were of a positive nature.
As noted above, Mrs Margiotta
had handed the forms to the patients and watched
while they completed the forms, including the placing of their names on to these
forms. The actual skill of the Respondent as a physiotherapist is not a question
that is before the Tribunal; however it is to some
degree relevant to the
question of appropriate orders.
Another area where the
Tribunal has difficulty in accepting the submissions of the Respondent is in
relation to the use that should
be made of the report of Mr Ashkar (the
registered psychologist). Mr Ashkar saw the Respondent for something less than
on the day before the Hearing. He was not aware of the evidence
regarding the contents of the Probation and Parole reports tendered
to the Court
and the contents of the evidence from the DVA officers regarding their
investigation of the matter. Further, there is
nothing before the Tribunal that
would allow acceptance of some scientific formulation to assist in the decision
regarding good character.
What is relevant to the
question of current character is the fact that there is no evidence before the
Tribunal that the Respondent
has re-offended in the intervening period.
Certainly, the Respondent would now no doubt be aware that if he did re-offend
penalty would involve a period of incarceration. Given the
presentation of the Respondent as a committed family man, for whom dishonest
behaviour is not generally the norm the Tribunal has formed the view that he is
very unlikely to re-offend.
The Tribunal accepts that
the Respondent demonstrated a high level of shame in relation to his conduct
before the Tribunal. Indeed
his level of shame was such that it appeared to the
Tribunal to inhibit his ability to be forthright and frank with the Tribunal.
Shame also goes some way to explaining why the Respondent, as far as we know,
has not discussed this matter with anyone other than
his wife and legal adviser
and thereby did not provide any character evidence to the Tribunal. This is a
matter of concern for the
The Tribunal notes that
while the Respondent demonstrated considerable levels of shame before the
Tribunal, he has not been subjected
to levels of what might be described as
‘public’ shame as he has not widely disclosed his conduct.
shame would arise where colleagues, family and friends
became aware of the criminal conduct. This type of shame can be seen to have
been considered by the Court in the matter of
New South Wales Bar
Association
[1999] NSWCA 404.
This is a result of the
conduct of the Respondent. Whilst this behaviour (i.e. not informing other
people of his criminal behaviour)
may have assisted the Respondent to cope with
his own conduct in an immediate sense, it has not allowed him to ‘face
to the consequences of his actions nor to seek assistance for his
personal shortcomings. He may also then have put himself in a position
references from relevant people.
Another matter of deep
concern to the Tribunal is the evidence regarding the financial circumstances of
the Respondent. It is the
evidence of the Respondent that his initial criminal
actions were motivated by significant financial difficulties. The Respondent
gave evidence that he is the sole income earner for his family (being his wife
and four young children, three attending private school)
and is currently
servicing four mortgages. There is nothing before the Tribunal to indicate that
the financial situation of the Respondent
has significantly changed since the
time of the offences.
The Tribunal can only take
little comfort from the actions of the Respondent since that time. The
Respondent has not sought out advice
from the Board, a senior colleague, a
friend, a financial professional, a counsellor or even his general practitioner.
The Respondent
stated that he has relinquished control of the finances of his
practice to his wife which provides some reassurance to the Tribunal.
it is also of concern given the professional obligations of the registered
practitioner to be responsible for this aspect
of his practice and the
Respondent’s actions indicate an apparent total abdication of his role in
this regard. It is the ultimate
responsibility of the registered physiotherapist
to ensure that all billings are accurate and
Another matter of
significant concern to the Tribunal is the fact that the Respondent has not
disclosed to his current business partners
both his convictions and the
Complaints before this Tribunal.
The offending conduct of
the Respondent occurred over two discrete and significant periods of time. They
cannot be characterised as
isolated or ‘one off’ or in response to a
single acute episode of desperate financial need. The offending conduct involves
an abuse of the position of trust that is reposed in the professionals who
provide health care services. A person who cannot be trusted
accordance with the ethics and standards of a profession should not remain
entitled to be considered to be a member of
that profession. The principles of
protection of the public, protection of the reputation of the profession and
maintenance of the
confidence of the public in the profession all fundamentally
require trustworthy conduct on the part of members of the profession.
conduct of the Respondent clearly was a breach of trust. The Respondent as a
registered physiotherapist should have known that
dishonesty was not in any way
an acceptable part of the practice of physiotherapy.
103. It is the view of the Tribunal that the conduct of the
Respondent demonstrates that the knowledge, judgment possessed and care
exercised, by the physiotherapist in the practice of physiotherapy is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a physiotherapist
equivalent level of training or experience and that he is guilty of improper and
unethical conduct in the course of the practice
of physiotherapy. The conduct
therefore satisfies the requirements of s24 of the Act and amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
104. Considering all the evidence in this matter the Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that the conduct amounts to professional misconduct
in accordance with
section 25 of the Act as it is of such a serious nature to justify the removal
of the name of the Respondent from
the Register. Complaint 2 is proven.
In order to make a finding
in relation to Complaint 3 the Tribunal must consider the circumstances of the
commission of the offences
to resolve the question of fitness in the public
interest to remain registered. The Respondent was only able to commit these
because of his registration. Had he not enjoyed the privileges of
registration he would not have been in a position to have falsely
completed the
paperwork that resulted in his being paid significant amounts of money to which
he was not entitled. These offences
are intimately connected to the practice of
physiotherapy and are therefore relevant to the question of fitness to be
the Tribunal. Considering all the evidence in this matter, the
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent was unfit in the public
interest to
be a registered physiotherapist at the time he committed these offences, in the
circumstances they were committed. The
Tribunal accepts as genuine the
Respondent’s indication that he will comply with any conditions placed
upon his practice. It
is substantially the willingness of the Respondent to
comply with any conditions imposed by the Tribunal and the view the Tribunal
formed in relation to both the Respondent’s clinical competence and the
low risk of the offences occurring in the future
that allows the Tribunal to
come to the orders set out below that do not remove the Respondent’s name
from the Register.
It is clear that the
legislation contemplates a tribunal making findings of professional misconduct,
conviction and good character.
Criminal convictions are clearly a matter that
goes to the question of character. It is relevant to consider other aspects of
Respondent’s subsequent behaviour. Since the convictions, the
Respondent has, to his credit, undertaken treatment of DVA patients
at no charge
and has undertaken some work with a sporting team that may be seen as charitable
work. In a response to the offences
being discovered the Respondent also handed
over responsibility for the finances of his practice to his wife. The evidence
regard substantially consists of the evidence of the Respondent and his
wife. The Tribunal does not doubt that he has the support
of his wife in his
endeavour to not have the opportunity to
The offences involve many
separate acts of dishonesty over a significant period of time. This is extremely
hard to characterise as
a mere error of judgment but it was conduct that appears
to the Tribunal to be uncharacteristic for the Respondent. The subsequent
conduct of the Respondent does not provide the Tribunal with overwhelming
evidence to demonstrate significant changes to his character.
The misconduct is
intrinsically serious. It does not however relate to the direct clinical care of
patients. There was significant
and clear motivation for the first group of
offences (financial pressures) but these were not presented by the
Respondent’s
evidence as being as acute during the second period of
offending although it is clear from his evidence that he still faces financial
pressures. The Respondent has no other relevant prior criminal conduct. The
Tribunal does not doubt that he has not re-offended.
The Respondent now displays
immense feelings of shame and has the additional financial burdens of repayment
of the dishonestly obtained
monies, the payment of fines, the payment of
prosecutor’s costs and the cost of legal representation for his two
appearances
in the Local Court.
The Respondent submitted
that the Tribunal should have particular regard to the report of Mr Ashkar to
conclude that the conduct of
the Respondent does not demonstrate a lack of good
character but rather an error of judgment. The Tribunal has found that the
demonstrated a lack of judgment on the part of the Respondent (Complaint
2). The Tribunal accepts the HCCC submissions with respect
to this report. The
conduct cannot be explained by a simple lack of judgment.
The Tribunal agrees with
the submissions of both parties that the Tribunal is required to make an
assessment of character as at the
time of the Hearing. The Tribunal is of the
view that the Respondent was not of good character at the time he committed the
The standard that must be applied by the Tribunal is the
‘Briginshaw’ standard. If the standard to be applied by the
was the civil standard, Complaint 4 would be proven. However the Tribunal cannot
be comfortably satisfied that the Respondent
is not currently of good character.
Section 54 Protective Orders
The Tribunal is of the view
that its Orders should reflect the seriousness of the conduct of the Respondent,
should act as a general
deterrent for the profession in relation to conduct of
this nature and allow the Respondent an opportunity to address the defects
identified in this Reasons document.
The Respondent requires
some time to properly inform himself of the ethical obligations of a registered
physiotherapist. In the first
instance this should involve a reading of the Act
and an exploration of professional ethics. Disclosure of his prior professional
misconduct is essential for any future professional partnership or employment.
Reassurance that the Respondent is able to meet his
financial obligations is
required. This will remove the possibility that the factor motivating the
original criminal conduct will
arise in the
The Respondent is very
unlikely to re-offend. The Tribunal has no doubts about his clinical skills. If
it was otherwise the Tribunal
would proceed to make an order to remove the name
of the Respondent from the Register. The Tribunal has formed the view that he
not of good character at the time of these offences and was unfit to
practice at that time.
The Respondent agreed that
he would comply with any Order of the Tribunal that required him to attend
counselling of the nature described
in the report of Mr Ashkar. He confirmed
that he had not sought any counselling of this nature since the time that these
were committed and detected; in fact he had not discussed the matter
with anyone and for instance did not know a senior physiotherapist
who he could
seek guidance from. The Tribunal is mindful of its protective role. To ensure
that the public is protected, to maintain
the confidence the public are entitled
to have in the profession and to act as a general deterrent a reprimand and
stringent conditions
are required. A period of suspension is also required to
allow the Respondent time to reflect on his conduct, address the defect
by these matters and to put his affairs in order.
114. The Tribunal makes the following Orders in this matter:-
1. The Respondent is hereby reprimanded in terms of annexure E hereto.
2. The Respondent is suspended from practice as a registered physiotherapist for
a period of 6 months from the date one (1) calendar
month after the Board is
satisfied that the Respondent or his legal adviser have received a copy of this
Reasons for Decision document.
3. After the 6 month period of suspension the Respondent is not to work as a
registered physiotherapist until the Board indicates
it is satisfied that the
Respondent has complied with the following conditions:
Respondent has provided written confirmation that he has sought and received
financial management advice in relation to his intended
practice of
physiotherapy by an appropriately qualified person which concludes that the
intended practice of the physiotherapist
will sustain his current financial
commitments and has provided to the Board a written financial management plan
prepared by that
person. The Respondent must have written confirmation of
receipt of this plan by the Board before this condition is satisfied. The
may ask for further information as to the conclusion of this report and the
Respondent must comply with any such request.
The Respondent has provided
written confirmation from the psychologist approved by the Board in accordance
with Order 4 herein that
the Respondent has commenced treatment, has provided
the registered psychologist with a copy of this document, has complied with
requirements of therapy and has provided a written authority to the psychologist
to direct the provision of reports to the Board
in accordance with these
The Respondent has written
approval from the Board of the name of a senior colleague who is willing to act
in the role of supervisor
and mentor for the practice of the Respondent in
accordance with Order 5. In order to seek such approval the Respondent must
to the Board with the name of one or more senior colleagues who have
agreed to act in this role. The Respondent is only entitled
to assume that the
Board has given its approval for the supervisor if such advice is provided by
the Board in writing.
The Respondent has provided a
written plan as to the manner in which he intends the accounting aspect of his
practice to be supervised
and audited. The Respondent is only entitled to assume
that the Board has found the plan satisfactory if such advice is provided
Board in writing. The Respondent is to submit the name of a suitably qualified
and independent person to undertake the audits
required by these orders.
The Respondent has provided
written confirmation to the Board from any employer or business partner for whom
the Respondent intends
to work upon resumption of registration that they have
received a copy of this Reasons for Decision document.
4. The Respondent is to undertake treatment from a registered psychologist prior
to commencing work as a physiotherapist after the
6 month suspension period. The
Respondent is to provide the name of the registered psychologist to the Board
for approval. The Board
will indicate its approval of the registered
psychologist in writing. The Respondent must provide the Board with written
confirmation
from the registered psychologist that the registered psychologist
has been authorised to provide written reports to the Board on
a 3 monthly basis
and that the registered psychologist has received a copy of this Reasons for
Decision document. The Respondent
is to remain under the care of the registered
psychologist for a minimum period of 6 months after the expiration of the period
suspension and may seek approval from the Board after this time to have this
condition lifted. The Board may lift this condition
if it is satisfied from the
written reports of the registered psychologist that the Respondent has made
significant progress towards
the development of insight into his conduct. The
Respondent must undertake any treatment (including referral to other health care
providers such as a psychiatrist) and attend at intervals determined by the
registered psychologist and the Board as appropriate.
5. The Respondent is to provide the name of an appropriate senior colleague who
has agreed to act as a mentor/supervisor for his
practice for approval by the
Board. The name and CV of the proposed mentor/supervisor should be submitted in
writing to the Board.
The Board will indicate its approval of the supervisor in
writing. The Respondent is to allow the mentor/supervisor to attend his
practice, inspect all documentation related to the practice and is to
participate in discussions with the mentor/supervisor at intervals
determined by
the mentor/supervisor. This supervision is to continue for a minimum period of 2
years after the expiration of the
period of suspension.
6. During the period of suspension, the Respondent is to maintain his continuing
education as required by the Board. If the Respondent
has not worked for a
period of more than 5 years from the date of this document the Respondent will
also be required to supply the
Board with written evidence of successful
completion of a refresher course in physiotherapy approved by the Board. Once
again approval
must be sought in writing by the Respondent.
7. For a minimum period of 5 years after the expiration of the period of
suspension the Respondent is to provide a copy of this Reasons
for Decision
document to any employer who is employing him in his capacity as a registered
physiotherapist or business partner where
the practice involves physiotherapy or
to which the Respondent’s qualification as a physiotherapist is relevant.
may lift this condition if it considers it appropriate after the
expiration of the 5 year period.
8. If the Respondent practices either on his own accord or in a partnership
(i.e. in any other capacity than as an employee) he is
to provide the Board with
written audit reports. Such reports are to be from a suitably qualified person
for his practice. The first
such report is to be forwarded to the Board within 5
months of the resumption of practice and to follow thereafter at 6 monthly
for a minimum period of 4 years from the date on which such practice
commences (note – this Order intends to apply for a period
after the Respondent resumes practice either on his own accord or in partnership
whenever that may occur). Once the period
of 4 years has elapsed the Board may
lift this condition if it is satisfied with the contents of the audit
9. The costs associated with complying with these conditions are to be the
responsibility of the Respondent.
10. These Orders are to take effect one (1) calendar month from the date on
which the Registry confirms receipt of this document
by either the Respondent or
his legal adviser.
11. The Respondent is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed and if agreement
cannot be reached either party has leave to re-list
the matter for the Tribunal
to make an assessment of those
Publication
copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal advisers
2) The HCCC and its legal
advisers, and
3) others as the Board sees fit.
Dated: 31 August 2007
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
_______________________
Annexure A – Certificate of
Conviction – Local Court
Annexure B – Certificate of Conviction
– Local Court (Chief Industrial Magistrate)
Annexure C –
Prosecution Statement of Facts – Local Court (Exhibit 5)
Annexure D -
Prosecution Amended Statement of Facts – Local Court (Chief Industrial
Magistrates Court) (Exhibit 9)
Annexure E – Reprimand
– Schedule of Exhibits
Annexure G - Schedule of Suppressed Names (Only
to be kept with the original Reasons for Decision Document and not to be
in any version of the document)
Ezio Margiotta, the Physiotherapists Tribunal has found you guilty of
professional misconduct, that you have been convicted of offences
circumstances of which render you unfit in the public interest to be registered
as a physiotherapist and that you are not of
good character.
conduct has brought the profession of physiotherapy into disrepute and your
conduct would attract the severe criticism of your
peers. The two criminal
convictions recorded against you are grave matters.
The Tribunal found
that you acted dishonestly over periods from March 1998 to May 2002 and over
that time failed to uphold the professional
standards expected of a registered
physiotherapist. Further, you failed to uphold the guiding principles and
behaviour expected by
your professional body.
The Tribunal also finds
that since that time you have not shown sufficient honesty, insight and
contrition to demonstrate that there
has been a reformation of your character to
the extent that would allow the Tribunal to have confidence that you do not need
to be placed upon your practice. The further action of suspension
from practice for a period of 6 months should provide you with
sufficient time
to appreciate the views of the Tribunal, the gravity of your conduct in the
professional setting, to address the
deficits in your knowledge of ethical
practice and the professional obligations of a registered physiotherapist. This
time should
also allow you to put your affairs, particularly your financial
affairs, in order.
Provision is made for you to return to practice only
when you have satisfied those parts of the Orders specified in the Reasons for
Decision document. These are designed to address deficits identified by the
Tribunal. Further, the restriction placed upon your registration
once you are
restored to the Register will ensure that this conduct will not recur. The
Tribunal sincerely hopes this conduct does
In reaching these
Orders the Tribunal has been mindful of its role to be protective and not
punitive. The Tribunal advises that any
further breaches of ethical and proper
practice or any other matters of misconduct would be viewed very poorly by a
future Tribunal
and it is likely that an Order would be made to remove your name
from the Register and an Order made that you not be entitled to
reapply for
registration for a lengthy period of time.
SCHEDULE OF EXHIBITS
Complaint dated 12 September
2. Letter from Registrar, Physiotherapists Registration Board (PRB) to Acting
Health Care Complaints Commissioner dated 5 July 2005
2.1 Letter from respondent to Registrar PRB dated 16 June 2005
2.2 Letter from Registrar PRB to respondent dated 14 June 2005
2.3 Advice from Registrar Local Court dated 11 May 2005
2.4 Facsimile from Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) to Registrar PRB dated
28 April 2005
2.5 Facsimile from DVA to Deputy Registrar Local Court dated 28 April 2005
2.6 Copy of section 23
Physiotherapists Act
Certificate
of conviction
Court attendance
Prosecution Statement of Facts
Transcript of proceedings –
Magistrate Madgwick
Minute – National
Fraud Control Unit – Department of Veterans Affairs dated 20 September
Certificate of conviction
Prosecution Amended Statement of
Prosecution submissions of
Letter from HCCC to respondent
dated 24 August 2005
Letter from
respondent to HCCC dated 13 September 2005 and attachments (curriculum vitae,
professional development activity records
attendance)
Letter from HCCC to respondent
dated 21 March 2006
Letter from HCCC to
respondent dated 28 March 2006
(section 40
Letter from HCCC to respondent
dated 26 May 2006
Letter from respondent to
Director of Proceedings, HCCC dated 31 may 2006
17. Australian Physiotherapy Association Code of Conduct (issued June 1999, and
the 2001 revised version), Appendix 3A – APA
Ethical Principles 1994
18. Transcript of proceedings – Chief Industrial Magistrate Hart (13
September 2005)
19. Probation and Parole Service Pre-sentence report dated 2 November 2004
20. Probation and Parole Service Pre-sentence report dated 13 September 2005
21. ERISP of the Respondent conducted by Brendan Slape, senior investigator and
Andrew Burton, authorised officer, WorkCover, NSW,
dated 28 July 2004
22. Report of Peter J Ashkar, forensic psychologist with respect to the
Respondent dated 23 April 2007
23. Certificate of Registration Status for the Respondent dated 23 April 2007
24. Letter from the Respondent to Brendan Slape, senior investigator and Andrew
Burton, authorised officer, WorkCover, NSW, dated
29 July 2004
25. Statement of Allen Edwards, Department of Veterans Affairs (Cth)(DVA) dated
18 October 2004
26. Letters from DVA to the Respondent dated 12 July 2002 and 1 August 2002
27. File note of Allen Edwards, DVA dated 6 August 2002
28. Letter from the Respondent to Allen Edwards, investigator, DVA dated 5
29. File note of Helen Kindness, physiotherapy advisor, DVA dated 12 August 2002
and 12 September 2002
30. File note of Allen Edwards investigator, DVA dated 26 August 2002
31. ERISP of the Respondent conducted by senior investigator Hewitt and Allen
Edwards, DVA dated 9 December 2002
32. ERISP of the Respondent conducted by Geoffrey Francis, Director, National
Fraud Unit, DVA dated 9 December 2002
33. Letter from Respondent to the DVA dated 29 July 2003 and receipt from the
DVA for the sum of $13,423.05
34. Statement of Helen Kindness, physiotherapy advisor, DVA dated 9 December
35. Twelve Patient Satisfaction Surveys completed by patients of the Respondent
36. Respondent’s inventory of DVA patients treated but not billed since
37. Original diaries for the Respondent’s Miranda Practice for the years
2000 and 2006
38. Reference from Dr John Edmonds dated 24 April 1997
39. Letter from the Respondent to his solicitor dated 23 April 2007 regarding
his involvement with the Football Federation of Australia
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (411 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter