URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2009/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
IS v Public Guardian & Ors [2009] NSWADTAP 24 (22 April 2009)
NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS TRIBUNAL
Public Guardian & Ors
[2009] NSWADTAP 24
FIRST RESPONDENT
Public Guardian
THIRD RESPONDENT
FIFTH RESPONDENT
Guardianship Tribunal
FILE NUMBERS:
HEARING DATES:
28 November 2008
SUBMISSIONS CLOSED:
28 November 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
Britton A - Deputy PresidentHiggins S - Judicial
MemberBolt M - Non-Judicial Member
LEGISLATION CITED:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
CASES CITED:
Bar-Mordecai v
[2000] NSWCA 123
Carew v Protective Commissioner and Ors
NSWADTAP 13
GM v Protective Commissioner & Ors
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
and Anor v Protective Commissioner & Ors
[2004] NSWADTAP 13
KA v Public
Guardian & Ors
[2004] NSWADTAP 25
KW & Ors v KV & Ors (No.2)
[2004] NSWADTAP 48
Li v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2000] FCA 19
(2000) 96 FCR 125
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural
Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal;
ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR 13
TP v TR & ors (No 2)
[2006] NSWADTAP
TEXTS CITED:
APPLICATION:
power of attorney - review
of leave to appeal on other grounds - procedural fairness
REPRESENTATION:
IS' husband, Agent
FIRST RESPONDENT
No appearance
SECOND RESPONDENT
Newell, solicitor
THIRD RESPONDENT
No appearance
Decision maker
1.The decision to revoke IS’
appointment as enduring guardian made by the Guardianship Tribunal on 4 July
2008 is affirmed
2. The guardianship order in relation to IT made by the
Guardianship Tribunal on 4 July 2008 is affirmed
3. The order of the
Guardianship Tribunal made under the
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
on 4 July 2008
is set aside
4. The power of attorney decision is remitted to the Tribunal
as originally or similarly constituted for redetermination in accordance
these reasons.
Reasons for Decision:
REASONS FOR DECISION
1 The appellant, who we will refer to in these reasons by the pseudonym
‘IS’, appeals against three decisions made by
the Guardianship
Tribunal. These are, the decisions to revoke her appointment as her
mother’s enduring guardian, to appoint
the Public Guardian as her
mother’s guardian, and not disturb the enduring power of attorney
(‘POA’) executed by
her mother in February 2006.
2 The appellant’s mother, the subject person of this appeal, is 80
years of age and suffers from dementia. She is a permanent
resident in a
residential aged care facility. In these reasons she will be referred to by the
pseudonym ‘IT’.
3 All references in these reasons to ‘the Tribunal’ are to the
NSW Guardianship Tribunal.
Representation
4 Solicitor, Mr Stephen Newell of the Aged Care Rights Service was appointed
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
represent IT in these proceedings.
5 In these proceedings, IS was represented by her husband acting in the role
6 IS’ attorneys, IU and IV, respectively, the third and fourth
respondents, appeared in person. Both opposed the appeal.
7 The fifth respondent, IW, is the brother of the appellant and IU. He lives
overseas and did not attend the hearing into the appeal.
He opposed the appeal
and provided the Panel with brief written submissions.
8 The Guardianship Tribunal participated in a limited capacity consistent
with the principles outlined by the High Court in
R v Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal; ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR 13
at pp 35, 36.
9 The Public Guardian, the first respondent, did not participate in these
proceedings.
10 Since March 2006 the appellant’s mother has been living in an aged
care residential facility in Sydney (the Village). Born
in Sri Lanka, IT
migrated to Australia in 1996.
11 In a hearing conducted on 4 July 2008 the Tribunal determined three
separate applications:
An application by the appellant seeking a review of the enduring power of
attorney executed in February 2006 appointing her sister
and brother-in-law, IU
and IV, as her mother’s attorneys. That application was made in January
2007. While not entirely clear
it would appear that an administrative oversight
caused the listing of that application to be delayed.
An application, also made by the appellant, for review of her appointment as her
mother’s enduring guardian. That appointment
was made in November 2006.
According to the appellant, the reason for making that application was so her
appointment could be confirmed.
She believed that without this
‘order’ her sister would continue to obstruct her in the performance
of her role as guardian.
An application made by IU for a guardianship order. IU sought appointment as
her mother’s guardian. In her application to
the Tribunal IU stated that
the ‘enduring guardianship held by [the appellant] is not working
effectively as she does not appear
to have my mother’s best interest at
heart, and fails to understand my mother’s condition’.
12 The Tribunal decided to:
Review the power of attorney but make no orders
Revoke the appellant’s appointment as her mother’s enduring
Make a guardianship appointing the Public Guardian as IT’s guardian for a
period of 12 months, with decision-making authority
in respect of accommodation
and health care and power to consent to medical and dental
13 Written reasons were given for those decisions.
14 In the proceedings before the Tribunal, IT had been represented by a
solicitor appointed by the Tribunal.
15 It is not in issue that the Appeal Panel has power to hear appeals from
the three decisions, the subject of this appeal. Appeals
from these decisions
are described as ‘external appeals’
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act
Section 118
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
that an external appeal may be made, as of right, on any question of law and
with the leave of the Appeal Panel, on any other
Grounds of Appeal
17 In a Notice of Appeal filed on 4 September 2008 the appellant set out six
main grounds of appeal and attached lengthy submissions
in support. At hearing
the appellant advised that those submissions were to be disregarded and that she
now relied on submissions
filed on 29 October 2008. In these reasons any
reference to the appellant’s submissions is to the latter set.
18 The appellant’s written submissions run to some 37 pages and detail
numerous alleged errors and shortcomings on the part
of the Tribunal. In these
Reasons we have not addressed those arguments that are ‘manifestly
untenable’, adopting the
approach endorsed by the Court of Appeal in
Bar-Mordecai v Rotman
[2000] NSWCA 123
Many of the frequently repeated submissions were manifestly untenable, and many
were manifestly misconceived or lacking in any substance.
To address every one
of the matters purported to be raised in the submissions of the appellant
(written and oral) would be well
nigh impossible. It is also unnecessary,
because while we have considered all that the appellant put in his submissions
no need to discuss arguments which are hopeless or inconsequential to
the result in the proceedings. In accord with the approach
explained in
Australian Breeders Co-operative Society Ltd v Jones
[1997] FCA 1405
(1997) 150 ALR 488
Amadio Pty Ltd v Henderson
(1998) 81 FLR 149
at 175, we have
confined these reasons to those issues with which we understand the appellant
has principally concerned himself and
which we see as of some significance or
consequence.
19 The principal grounds of appeal may conveniently be dealt with under the
following headings:
(a) Failure to afford procedural fairness, in that:
(i) The Tribunal failed to have regard to her written
submissions
(ii) The Tribunal failed to give her a
reasonable opportunity to make oral submissions
(iii) The Tribunal was incompetent and ill-prepared for the proceedings
(iv) The Tribunal was biased against the appellant
(b) Failure to properly carry out the Tribunal’s role as trier of fact by
testing the evidence given by the appellant’s
sister and brother-in-law
that they had not abused the POA.
Failure to afford procedural fairness
20 A long line of Appeal Panel decisions has held that the Guardianship
Tribunal is required to afford procedural fairness to all
parties. (See for
GM v Protective Commissioner & Ors
[2003] NSWADTAP 59
v Public Guardian & Ors
[2004] NSWADTAP 25
KV v Protective &
Ors; KW & Ors v KV & Ors (No.2)
[2004] NSWADTAP 48
Protective Commissioner and Ors
[2005] NSWADTAP 13).
21 In short the rules of procedural fairness require that parties to
applications before the Tribunal receive a fair hearing from
an impartial
decision-maker. Two elements of procedural fairness are relevant to this appeal:
the hearing rule and the rule against
22 The content of the hearing rule in the context of proceedings before the
Tribunal has been examined by differently constituted
Appeal Panels in a number
of decisions including,
KV v Protective & Ors; KW & Ors v KV &
[2004] NSWADTAP 48
IZ v JC, JB, JA
[2009] NSWADTAP 4
Carew v Protective Commissioner and Ors
[2005] NSWADTAP 13
& ors (No 2)
[2006] NSWADTAP 12.
Those decisions held that that as a
minimum the hearing rule requires the Tribunal to disclose to all parties with
an interest in
the proceedings, the substance of any adverse or prejudicial
information and give them a reasonable opportunity to respond.
23 The rule against bias requires that a decision-maker must be, and be seen
to be, impartial. In this matter actual bias has been
alleged. Actual bias
will be established where a decision-maker is shown to have been committed to a
particular conclusion and had
a closed mind to the issues raised:
for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v Jia
Drummond J in
Li v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
[2000] FCA 19
(2000) 96 FCR 125
(at pp133-134), usefully summarised
the principles in regard to actual bias as follows:
(a) Actual bias exists where the decision-maker has prejudged the case against
the applicant, or has acted with such partisanship
or hostility as to show that
the decision-maker had a mind made up against the applicant and was not open to
persuasion in favour
of the applicant.
(b) The emphasis is upon the state of mind which affects the decision-making
rather than elements of the process of decision-making
taken in isolation.
(c) Proof of an intentional state of mind adverse to the party is not the only
way of proving actual bias. Such bias may be subconscious,
provided it is real.
(d) It is not sufficient proof of actual bias to show that the decision-maker
has expressed views adverse to the party’s position
at an early stage of
the proceedings unless there is also proof that those views were incapable of
being changed in the course of
the proceedings.
24 The onus of demonstrating actual bias lies with the appellant and is a
heavy onus to discharge (per French J in
Jia v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
(1998) 84 FCR 87
at pp 106 – 107, cited with
approval by Gleeson CJ and Gummow J in
Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs v Jia
1. Breach of hearing rule
A. Review of power of attorney
25 In support of her contention that the Tribunal failed to give her a
reasonable opportunity to put her case and give proper regard
to her case, the
appellant alleges that the Tribunal:
Determined an issue that she had not raised, namely the making of the power of
Failed to address her evidence of an alleged fraud on Centrelink perpetrated by
her sister and brother-in-law
‘Glossed over’ an alleged misuse of a Medicare card
Failed to properly address an allegation of misappropriation
Failed to have proper regard to her stated reasons for making the power of
attorney application (‘the POA application’),
namely, to give effect
to her mother’s wish that both daughters be involved in her
26 Before considering this submission it is necessary to examine the powers
of the Tribunal to review a power of attorney and the
27 The Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear and determine the
appellant’s application comes from
and (2) of the
Attorney Act 2003
(1) A review tribunal may, on the application of an interested person, decide to
review the making or the operation and effect of
a reviewable power of attorney
or not to carry out such a review.
(2) As a consequence of reviewing the making or operation and effect of a
reviewable power of attorney, a review tribunal may decide
whether or not to
make an order under this section.
28 The Guardianship Tribunal is a ‘review tribunal’ for the
Powers of Attorney Act
Section 36(1)
gives the Tribunal the power to do three things:
(1) to review the making of a reviewable power of attorney
(2) to review the operation and effect of a reviewable power of attorney
(3) to decline to do either (1) or (2).
30 The Tribunal, in its Reasons for Decision (at p 2), stated that the
appellant’s application to review the POA was made on
two bases: capacity
and the appellant’s ‘concerns about the manner in which the
attorneys had acted since their appointment’.
31 After examining in some detail the medical evidence about IT’s
capacity to make an enduring power of attorney the Tribunal
concluded (Reasons
for Decision at p 5), ‘[G]iven the lack of evidence about [IT’s]
capacity to execute the enduring
power of attorney [it is appropriate]
...pursuant to s 36(2) of the POA Act, not to make an order concerning
the enduring power of attorney on 27 February 2006’
[emphasis added]. The Tribunal went on to review the operation and effect
the power of attorney and decided to make no orders.
(i) Making of power of attorney
32 In her written submissions the appellant stated, ‘Nowhere in
requesting a review did I state that I want the Enduring Power
of Attorney
reviewed because I believed that [my mother] did not have the capacity to
execute the power of attorney’. She
went on to criticise the Tribunal for
‘conducting a hearing having absolutely no relation to the issues I wanted
would therefore appear that the members of the Tribunal had gone into
the hearing without even having read my application’
(appellant’s
submissions, p 5).
33 While clear from the ‘Application to Review an Enduring Power of
Attorney’ that the appellant’s main interest
was the operation and
effect of the POA, in the course of the hearing the appellant also asked the
Tribunal to review its making.
This is made clear by the exchange between the
appellant and the Presiding Member (Transcript of Proceedings, 4/7/08, pp 21,
34 The transcript also reveals that the appellant told the Tribunal that when
her mother executed the power of attorney she lacked
capacity. She provided
detailed evidence in support of that contention (Transcript of Proceedings,
4/7/08, pp 33 to 36). She told
the Tribunal that at the relevant time her mother
‘was absolutely insane, I have photographs to show how insane she looked
and she was just forced into doing that [execute the POA]’: (Transcript of
Proceedings, 4/7/08, p 29).
35 Even if the appellant had not raised capacity in the hearing, it was open
to the Tribunal to consider the issue. Once an application
for review has been
made by an ‘interested person’, it is a matter for the Tribunal to
review, or not review the making
of, and/or operation and effect of, the POA.
The issues identified in the initiating application do not circumscribe the
powers. Accordingly the Tribunal did not, as the
appellant’s submissions suggest, exceed its powers by reviewing the making
of the power of attorney. Indeed given that the appellant had provided evidence
that her mother was ‘insane’ when she
executed the power of
attorney, it is difficult to see how this issue could have been ignored.
36 The Tribunal, in our view, did not err in deciding to review the making of
the POA. Nor did its consideration of the issue indicate
that the Tribunal had
been inattentive to the appellant’s arguments.
(ii) Failure to address reasons for making the application
37 The essence of the appellant’s argument is that the Tribunal did not
give her a reasonable opportunity to put her case and
neither read her
submissions or listened to what she had to say. She argues that the Tribunal
did not have regard to, or proper
regard to, her allegations about the
interception of her mother’s Medicare card, the attorneys’
‘possible fraud’
on Centrelink and the misappropriation of her
mother’s funds. Furthermore, she contends that the Tribunal failed to
have regard
to the reason she made the POA application.
38 The Tribunal identified the appellant’s key concerns in the
following terms (Reasons for Decision, pp 5, 6):
That the attorneys have abused their authority and have blocked [the
appellant’s] actions as [IT’s] enduring guardian
in seeking to
obtain specialist attention for [IT’s] medical conditions.
That the attorneys have acted inappropriately in allowing [IT] to continue to
receive a widow’s allowance through Centrelink.
In [IS’s] view, her
mother may be liable for a large debt owed to the Australian government.
That [the appellant] wants both of her daughters to be equally involved in the
management of her finances
39 After reviewing the evidence the Tribunal concluded (Reasons for Decision,
There was no evidence that supported the allegation that [IT’s] funds had
been mismanaged, that her savings had been dissipated
or that [the
attorney’s] finances were intermingled with [IT’s] finances. Whilst
the Tribunal paid careful regard to
[the appellant’s] evidence that her
mother has indicated to her that [she] wishes to have both daughters equally
involved with
her financial affairs, the Tribunal ultimately decided that the
arrangements put in place in February 2006 which, on the evidence,
reflected the informal arrangements in place prior to that date, are working in
[IT’s] best interests and there is
no reason for those arrangements to be
changed. For these reasons, the Tribunal decided that no order should be made
section 36(3)
Powers of Attorney Act
and therefore dismissed the
application for review of the enduring power of
Alleged fraud on Centrelink
The appellant contends that the Tribunal failed to have regard to her
evidence about the ‘alleged possible fraud’ on Centrelink,
contended the attorneys were implicated in. The appellant complained to the
Tribunal that her mother held no entitlement
to a Widow’s Pension, which
she had been receiving since 2000. From the appellant’s point of view,
this evidence was
apparently relevant as tending to show the unfitness of her
sister and brother-in-law as attorneys.
41 In its Reason for Decision, the Tribunal set out the appellant’s
concerns and concluded that ‘the attorneys have not
acted in any way to
disadvantage [IT]’. The Tribunal stated (at p 8):
The Tribunal was not satisfied that the concerns raised by [the appellant] about
her mother’s entitlement to the widow’s
allowance were
substantiated. [IT] applied for and was granted the widow’s allowance
through Centrelink many years before she
appointed her daughter and son in law
as her attorneys. [IW] gave evidence that he had participated in this process
and was satisfied
that his mother had applied for and accepted payment of the
widow’s allowance in an open and transparent way. Once [the attorneys]
became aware of their sister’s concerns, they acted appropriately in
reviewing the documentation they had concerning their
mother’s entitlement
to the allowance, and satisfied themselves as to the appropriateness of the
payments. Whilst [the appellant]
provided evidence to the Tribunal of what
appeared to be a recent printout from a Centrelink website concerning the
current rules
and regulations concerning the payment of a widow’s
allowance, no evidence was provided about the basis of that payment in
[IT] apparently applied and was granted the allowance. The Tribunal was
therefore not satisfied that the attorneys have
acted in any way to disadvantage
[IT] in this respect.
42 The allegation made by the appellant was of serious misconduct or, at the
least, serious negligence on the part of the attorneys.
The basis of the
appellant’s allegation was simply that she had read material on the
Centrelink website and formed certain
conclusions of law. She advanced no other
43 The Tribunal has no statutory duty to investigate an application. While
it may, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, call for
evidence to be produced or
given, it was not required to follow up all allegations made to it by applicants
or, indeed, respondents.
44 There is nothing before us to indicate that the Tribunal did not give the
appellant a reasonable opportunity to put her arguments
issue or effectively ignored her submissions. It was open to the Tribunal on
the evidence before it to disregard
this complaint. It had no reasoned legal
argument before it and the presumption of regularity suggests that Centrelink,
in all probability,
duly assessed IT’s eligibility for the pension and
came to the conclusion that she was eligible. While not expressly addressed
the Reasons for Decision, it is to be noted that when the ‘alleged
possible fraud’ was committed, there is no evidence
to suggest that IT
lacked capacity and nor has this been suggested.
Interception of Medicare card
The appellant alleged to the
Tribunal that on her sister’s instruction, the staff of the Village had
‘intercepted’
her mother’s Medicare card, preventing her (the
appellant) from using the card to obtain alternative medical treatment for
mother. She claims that as a consequence, she was effectively prevented from
fulfilling her duties as her mother’s guardian.
In this appeal she
complains that the Tribunal failed to take this matter into account as it ought
to have done. She complained
during the appeal that the Tribunal ‘glossed
over’ her allegation. She claimed that ‘This is clear evidence that
my sister used the staff [at the Village] using guile to obstruct my mother from
receiving proper medical care’.
46 The relevance of this evidence, as we understand it, is that, if accepted,
it may tend to show that IU, the appellant’s sister,
was an unfit attorney
and it was not in her mother’s best interest that the power of attorney
remain on foot.
47 The appellant submitted that this was ‘a crucial piece of evidence
that the members of the Tribunal chose to dismiss and
clearly once again shows
bias against me’.
48 The Tribunal had little evidence with which to work on this point. It
would not be surprising if staff of the Village caring for
a patient suffering
from dementia collected his or her mail. It is self-evident that the staff, if
they collected IT’s Medicare
card at all, would have a duty to hold it for
a person authorised to use it. By the appellant’s own admission at the
the alleged interception she had not told either the Village or the
attorneys that she held an appointment as her mother’s
enduring guardian.
49 Without more evidence that conduct cannot be characterised as an
‘interception’, nor is it ‘clear evidence’
of misconduct
on the part of the appellant’s sister let alone of any conspiracy between
the appellant’s sister and staff
of the Village. The interpretation
placed on it by the appellant is probably sincere but, unfortunately for her
argument, has little
objective substance.
50 However, in any event it could not be said that the Tribunal failed to
give the appellant the opportunity to make submissions or
provide evidence on
this point or to have proper regard to her evidence and argument.
Misappropriation of funds
In submissions, the appellant also
stated that the attorneys may have misappropriated funds. She claimed that
from her mother’s accounts. She alleged that,
‘What members of the Tribunal have done is omit this important disclosure
and rather they have fabricated statements and attributed them to my brother and
sister to make it look like all is well. This is
dishonest.’
52 As the transcript reveals a significant proportion of the hearing was
devoted to the misappropriation issue. (See Transcript of
Proceedings, 4/7/08,
pp 11 to 28.) The Tribunal invited the appellant to particularise the
allegation. The appellant told the Tribunal
that in 2004 her mother informed
her that she held about $85,000 in various bank accounts and she suspected that
these funds had
disappeared, although she conceded that she did not know how
much was now held in those accounts as the attorneys had refused to
this information. Her sister gave evidence that her mother now had about
$76,000 in various accounts and in addition a
bond held by the Residential Aged
Care Facility of $28,000.
53 In its Reason for Decision after detailing the evidence about the
‘missing finds’, the Tribunal said (pp 8, 9):
The Tribunal accepted that [the appellant] feels a sense of frustration about
not being involved in decision-making about her mother's
financial affairs. [The
attorneys] acknowledged that they have not shared information about their
mother’s finances with [the
appellant] and this decision appears to be
based on a number of factors, including the breakdown in the relationship
between [the
appellant] and [IU] as well as a desire to maintain [IT’s]
approach for
attorneys to take, even though it may cause concern about a lack of transparency
felt by other family members.
Nevertheless, [the appellant] has also made a number of allegations about the
management of her mother’s affairs by the attorneys.
The Tribunal
considered each of these matters and, taking into account all of the evidence
came to the view that there was no evidence
to suggest that the attorneys were
operating in any way other than in [IT’s] best interests. Whilst [the
attorneys] did not
produce written evidence concerning [IT’s] current
financial affairs, the Tribunal accepted their evidence about the status
[IT’s] savings, her income and outgoings. There was no evidence to suggest
that her savings had been mismanaged. Rather,
the evidence suggested that
[IT’s] savings were being well managed and that her ongoing care needs
were being met out of these
54 The material before the Panel reveals that the appellant was given a
reasonable opportunity to provide evidence and present argument
in support of
the misappropriation allegation and the Tribunal took this account.
55 While not expressed in these terms, it would appear that the real issue
raised by the appellant is that the Tribunal accepted her
sister’s account
without any documentary evidence to corroborate her claim. We will return to
consider this issue.
Failure to have regard to the reasons the appellant had made the POA
application
The appellant contends that the Tribunal failed to give proper
regard to the reason she sought review of the POA, namely to give
effect to her
mother’s wish that both daughters be involved in her care and to ensure
that her mother’s best interests
57 The transcript reveals that the appellant gave detailed evidence about her
mother’s purported wish that both daughters be
involved’ with the management of her financial affairs (see for example,
Transcript of Proceedings, 4/7/08,
pp 6, 22 and 23). The Reasons for Decision
indicate that while the Tribunal had regard to that evidence, it did not
consider it
to be determinative. It stated (at pp 8, 9):
...Whilst the Tribunal paid careful regard to [the appellant’s] evidence
that her mother has indicated to her that [she] wishes
to have both daughters
equally involved with her financial affairs, the Tribunal ultimately decided
that the arrangements put in
place in February 2006 which, on the evidence,
largely reflected the informal arrangements in place prior to that date, are
in [IT’s] best interests and there is no reason for those
arrangements to be changed. ...
58 We are not
persuaded that the Tribunal failed to afford procedural fairness in respect of
its consideration of this issue.
B. Review of appellant’s appointment as enduring guardian
59 The appellant contends that the Tribunal failed to have proper regard to
the reason she applied for review of her appointment as
enduring guardian,
namely her ‘inability to fulfil [her] role due to obstructions placed by
my sister who is my mother’s
power of attorney’.
60 She contends that the Tribunal failed to read and understand her
application and had the members done so they would have realised
that she had
applied ‘to have the obstructions placed on me performing my duties by my
sister removed’ and not merely
to ‘confirm her role as enduring
61 Before dealing with this argument it is necessary to set out the statutory
provisions relevant to the review of the appointment
of an enduring guardian.
62 The Tribunal’s power on review is contained in
Guardianship Act 1987
. It provides:
6K Action on review
(1) On reviewing the appointment of an enduring guardian, the Tribunal may:
(a) revoke the appointment, or
(b) confirm the appointment, with or without varying the functions of the
enduring guardian under the appointment.
(2) The Tribunal must not revoke the appointment of an enduring guardian
(a) the enduring guardian requested the revocation, or
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the appointor
that the appointment be revoked.
63 The Tribunal correctly noted that the appellant’s appointment as
enduring guardian could not be revoked unless, it was satisfied
that it was in
IT’s best interests (Reasons for Decision, p 9). The Tribunal gave these
reasons for revoking the appointment
... [The appellant] did not inform either her family members or staff of the
nursing home of her appointment as enduring guardian
in November 2006. [The
appellant] clearly has concerns that her mother has been prescribed
inappropriate medications but was unable,
despite her appointment as her
mother's enduring guardian, to take steps to ensure that her concerns were
addressed. [The appellant]
gave evidence that she felt blocked in her ability to
do so and the difficulties in her relationship with her sister may have played
some part in this. However, a guardian needs to be able to work effectively to
overcome such matters in order to act in a person’s
best interests. A
guardian also needs to be able to communicate and work effectively with the
health professionals and other significant
people involved in that
person’s life.
The evidence satisfied the Tribunal that [the appellant] had not been able to
effectively carry out the role of [IT’s] enduring
guardian and decided
that it was in [IT’s] best interests that her appointment as enduring
guardian should be revoked.
64 The appellant’s
argument is misconceived. Like an application for review of a power of attorney
the parameters of a review
of the appointment of an enduring are not prescribed
by the initiating application. Once seized of an application for review it
matter for the Tribunal what matters to take into account, guided of course by
the objects of the
Guardianship Act
. In our view the Tribunal properly
identified the workability of the guardianship arrangements to be relevant to an
assessment of
IT’s best interests.
65 A careful reading of the transcript shows that the Tribunal afforded the
appellant an ample opportunity to provide evidence and
to make submissions.
Rather than, as the appellant alleges, the Tribunal ignoring her arguments or
‘glossing over’ matters,
it shows that the Tribunal made a sustained
and conscientious effort to focus on the principal issues for its determination
extract from her evidence relevant to the final determination.
66 There is nothing in the transcript to indicate that the appellant’s
submissions were cut short. Towards the end of the hearing,
for example, the
lawyer representing IT, outlined her view that given the level of conflict
between IT’s daughters there would
be merit in trialling the appointment
of the Public Guardian. The presiding member invited all parties to comment on
that proposal
and make any final comments or submissions. The appellant took
that opportunity and made further lengthy submissions, as did the
other parties.
67 It is also relevant to note that at the commencement of the hearing the
appellant made clear that she wished to relinquish the
appointment and had in
effect abandoned her request that the Tribunal ‘remove the obstructions
placed by her sister’
(Transcript of Proceedings, 4/7/08, p 4):
PRESIDING MEMBER: Before we do start, can I just double-check. [appellant],
are you still seeking - I just want to confirm that
you are still seeking to
have the Enduring Power of Attorney reviewed. Is that correct?
APPELLANT: No, I’m quite willing to give it up for a Guardianship Order -
what do you call it, a Public Guardian, sorry. I
would rather the Public
Guardian take over rather than me or my sister have it because our views are so
polarised on what we think
is best for my mother when it comes to medical care
and what have you.
PRESIDING MEMBER: So you would be - if an order were to be made for
Guardianship you would be suggesting that the Public Guardian
be appointed.
APPELLANT: Yeah, at least for about a year or
The Reasons for Decision and the transcript of the
proceedings do not support the appellant’s contention that the Tribunal
to ‘hear’ her case. The gravamen of her concerns raised in
evidence and submissions was considered. There is nothing
before us to indicate
that the Tribunal failed to have regard to the documents she had provided or
were, in effect, deaf to her arguments.
That the Tribunal reached a different
conclusion about the relevance of those matters and, ultimately, whether they
warranted an
interference with the POA or the revocation of her appointment,
does not indicate that it failed to take her submissions into account.
of procedural fairness do not require that a party’s argument be accepted.
69 For these reasons we do not find that the Tribunal was in breach of the
hearing rule.
70 The appellant made multiple claims of bias on the part of the Tribunal.
On nearly every page of her submissions is some allegation, direct or
indirect, of bias.
It appears that she takes the view that the only
reason her arguments could have failed is because of actual bias on the part of
Tribunal. The transcript, the evidence and her submissions provide no basis
for this claim. We have noted above the extravagance
of these arguments. We do
not question the sincerity of her views, but find no objective basis for them.
Error in fact finding
71 While expressed as a failure to afford procedural fairness, the appellant
also attacks various findings of fact made by the Tribunal.
In addition she
claims that the Tribunal failed to properly discharge its role as a finder of
fact. She claims in effect that there
was no basis for the finding that that
the attorneys had properly managed IT’s funds. She argues that it was
incumbent on the
Tribunal to ‘at the very least’ call for
documentary evidence that would support his sister’s claims about the
management of her mother’s.
72 We deal with this alleged error below.
Appeal on any other ground?
73 The final issue to be determined is whether not having found an error of
law, the Appeal Panel ought allow the appeal on ‘any
other ground’
(s 118B(1)(b)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
74 The factors to be taken into account in determining whether the discretion
to grant leave should be exercised were considered in
JT and Anor v
Protective Commissioner & Ors
[2004] NSWADTAP 13
Having decided that the Tribunal made no error of law, the Appeal Panel’s
task is to determine whether leave should be given
to appeal against the merits
of the Tribunal's decision. The ADT Act does not contain any guidance on the
relevant matters to be
taken into account in determining whether leave should be
granted. The Supreme Court has provided some guidance on this question
cases of K v K
[2000] NSWSC 1052
[2001] NSWSC 146
[2000] NSWSC
Those cases interpreted s 67 of
Guardianship Act 1987
which is the
equivalent provision to
in relation to appeals from Tribunal decisions to
the Supreme Court. In K v K, Young J observed at [10] that "it has never been
decided what the circumstances are that should lead the Court to grant
leave to appeal under
, but went on to make a number of observations on
this point: see para [10]-[15). After considering the relationship between the
and the Tribunal, Young J observed at [15]:
It would seem to me that
Guardianship Act
operates so that broad
questions of administration and policy and the applicability of policy to
individual cases, even if they are
not questions of law, may well be subjects on
which the Court will grant leave to appeal. On the other hand, it is very
that the Court will grant leave to appeal when there is a problem with
a fact finding exercise unless there are clear indications
that the Tribunal has
gone about that fact finding process in such an unorthodox manner or in a way
which is likely to produce an
unfair result so that it would be in the interests
of justice for it to be reviewed.
75 It seems to us that the one argument of any substance that the appellant
raises is that the Tribunal failed in its task of properly
finding the facts
concerning her mother’s financial situation. She argues that ‘The
Tribunal assessed that my mother’s
finances were well-looked after without
a single piece of evidence to support that assessment. This is a serious flaw
in the hearing,
defeats the very purpose of the hearing and the hearing should
not have proceeded at that stage.’
76 In this case the Tribunal decided to review the operation and effect of a
reviewable power of attorney:
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
assume that the Tribunal decided to carry out that review because of the
seriousness of the allegations of impropriety that the
appellant had made. The
review carried out by the Tribunal in this case consisted of perusing the
documents that each party had provided
and hearing the appellant’s and the
attorneys’ oral evidence in relation the way IT’s finances had been
The attorneys did not produce any documentation to support their claims
concerning IT’s finances. The Tribunal was satisfied
on the basis of that
evidence that there had been no impropriety. While that conclusion may have been
open to it on the evidence,
given the protective nature of the jurisdiction, it
would have been preferable for the Tribunal to have requested that the attorneys
provide relevant financial records to verify their assertions. That request
could not be described as onerous and would not have
put the attorneys to any
significant expense. If the records were provided and they confirmed the
attorneys’ oral evidence,
the Tribunal would have been justified in
declining to make any further order. However, if the financial records were not
or if they did not accord with the attorneys’ oral evidence, the
Tribunal would in our view be justified in making any one
or more of the orders
including an order that the records and accounts be furnished
to the Tribunal.
77 While the Tribunal’s failure to request relevant financial records
does not constitute an error of law, we regard it as an
omission of sufficient
significance to justify extending the appeal to the merits of the
Tribunal’s decision. The Guardianship
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is
first and foremost a protective one. When serious allegations of impropriety are
made the Tribunal
should obtain the best evidence reasonably available when
reviewing the operation and effect of a power of attorney. We set aside
Guardianship Tribunal’s decision and remit the matter to the matter for
reconsideration in accordance with these reasons.
78 During this Appeal, the appellant made a number of wide ranging
allegations about the attorneys, many of which had not been raised
Guardianship Tribunal. Those fresh allegations are not remitted to the
Tribunal. Rather the Tribunal is to redetermine
its decision about the power of
attorney application, on the basis of the existing evidence after requesting
that the attorneys voluntarily
produce IT’s financial records referred to
by IU in her evidence (see Transcript of Proceedings, 4/7/08, pp 11 –14).
If those records are not produced voluntarily, then the Tribunal should consider
whether to make an order pursuant to
s 36(4)(e).
While a matter for the
Tribunal, it may be that this issue could be disposed of ‘on the
1. The decision to revoke IS’ appointment as enduring guardian made by
the Guardianship Tribunal on 4 July 2008 is affirmed.
2. The guardianship order in relation to IT made by the Guardianship Tribunal
on 4 July 2008 is affirmed.
3. The order of the Guardianship Tribunal made under the
Powers of Attorney
on 4 July 2008 is set aside.
4. The power of attorney decision is remitted to the Tribunal as originally
or similarly constituted for redetermination in accordance
with these reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (56.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter