URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2010/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ZEPINIC v PSYCHOLOGISTS REGISTRATION BOARD of NSW [2010] NSWPST 6 (12 August 2010)
PSYCHOLOGISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH
N.B. Orders amended in accordance with the slip
MATTER NUMBER: PST 005/2008
APPEAL FROM BOARD DECISION
UNDER SECTION
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 109
PSYCHOLOGIST ACT
IN THE MATTER OF
VITOMIR ZEPINIC
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
__________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: Zepinic v Psychologists Registration
Board of New South Wales
[2010] NSWPST 6
PARTIES: Vitomir Zepinic
(Appellant)
no appearance.
Psychologists Registration Board of New South Wales represented by Mr
Stan Benson of Counsel, instructed by Mr Geoff Boyd, solicitor,
Crown Solicitors
Office of NSW (Mr Sagar Thakur in attendance on 27 and 28 April 2010)
(Respondent).
FILE NUMBER: 005/2008
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller
(Chairperson)
Mr Peter Champion (Psychologist
Mr Brian Sheridan (Psychologist Member)
Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 24 June 2009, 27, 28 April & 2 July 2010
DATE OF DECISION: 12 August 2010
The Tribunal orders that the Appellant’s name be
deleted from the Register, that the Appellant is not entitled to reapply for
registration for a minimum period of 5 years. Prohibition Order made commencing
as of date of Orders. Costs in favour of the Respondent.
CATCHWORDS: registered psychologist – appeal from decision of Board
Inquiry – convictions for offences of ‘holding
medical practitioner – unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – not of good
character – reliance on false
overseas qualifications – falsification of other documents – failure
to make appropriate
declaration on annual renewal of registration form return to
LEGISLATION CITED:
Psychologists Act 2001
(1), clause 4 of schedule 5, clause 5 of
schedule 5, clause 6 of schedule 5;
Health Registration Legislation
Amendment Act 2004
Statute Law (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act (No 2)(2004
- Schedule 4,
Health Care Complaints
Public Health Act 1991
Medical Practice Act 1992
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Practitioners Act 2001 (QLD) -
s 88, s148, s149,
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Ziems v The Prothonotary
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
(1966) 84 WN (NSW) (Part 2) 275 (CA);
(unreported Court of Appeal 1994);
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
New South Wales
Crime Commission v Vuletic and ors
[2005] NSWSC 614
Duncan v Medical
Practitioners Disciplinary Committee
(1986) 1 NZLR 513
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Tribunal convened on 24 June 2009 at the Tribunal Hearing Room in the offices of
what was then called the Health Professionals
Registration Board (HPRB) to
conduct an Inquiry to hear the Appeal lodged by the Appellant by letter dated 22
November 2008 with
respect to a decision of a Board Inquiry dated 27 October
Complaint before the Board Inquiry (Board Inquiry Complaint) was dated 23
September 2008. Further complaints dated 9 October 2009
made by the Board were
also inquired into by the Tribunal.
Appellant attended the first Directions Hearing when the initial timetable for
the exchange of documents was fixed and other preliminary
matters dealt with.
The Appellant then failed to attend the further Directions Hearings held on 24
September 2009 and 19 March 2010
and failed to provide any further documentation
to the Tribunal apart from the material annexed to his original Appeal.
Appellant only attended the first Directions Hearing in person and did not
appear before this Inquiry or at further Directions
despite the terms of section 36(1) of the Act, the Complaint brought before the
Board Inquiry not only alleged unsatisfactory
professional conduct but also
professional misconduct on the part of the Appellant. The Complaint also alleged
that the Appellant
was not of good character.
a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct is made a number of Orders
become available to the Board in accordance with
section 50 of the Act. This
section does not provide for an order of suspension or cancellation of
registration. However, when a
finding of professional misconduct or ‘not
of good character’ is made, suspension or cancellation of registration
be considered. Although the Board may make a recommendation to the
Chairperson (or Deputy Chairperson) of the Tribunal for a suspension
cancellation of registration in accordance with section 52(1), this section is
limited to matters involving insufficient capacity
to practise.
suspension can be ordered by the Board on an interim basis (see section 54(1))
it is relevant to note, given the nature of the
Complaint before the Board, that
cancellation of registration is not available to a Board Inquiry. Further,
section 36(1) of the
Act provides:
36 Serious complaints must be referred to Tribunal
(1) Both the Board and the Commission are under a duty to refer a
complaint to the Tribunal if at any time either forms the opinion
that it may,
if substantiated, provide grounds for the suspension or cancellation of the
psychologist's registration.
any case the Board Inquiry Complaint indicated that the complaint was referred
to a Board Inquiry after consultation between the
Board and the Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC). Ultimately the question of whether an Order for
suspension or de-registration
did not arise as the Inquiry only found
unsatisfactory professional conduct established. The Board Inquiry did not
therefore have
to deal with the absence of a power to suspend or cancel
registration.
Board Inquiry Complaint arose substantially from reports of a medico-legal
character written by the Appellant and his conviction
relating to holding out
(as a medical practitioner) offences with respect to the reports.
Particulars of the Board Inquiry Complaints of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, professional misconduct and ‘not of
good character’ were as
1. That on 19 August 2008 Vitomir Zepinic at the Burwood Local
Court was convicted on 6 counts of “Take/use false description
entitlement to register” contrary to the provision of
section 105
Medical Practice Act 1992
. The dates of the offences were: 6 September 2005,
21 December 2005, 2 September 2006, 22 February 2007, 23 March 2007 and 17 April
2. That Vitomir Zepinic did on 6 January 2004 hold himself out to the
public as a “consultant in psychological medicine”
and that he held
inter alia the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery.
3. That Vitomir Zepinic did on 21 September 2004 hold himself out to the
public as a “consultant in psychological medicine”
and that he held
inter alia the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery.
4. That Vitomir Zepinic did on 13 January 2005 hold himself out to the
public as a “consultant in psychological medicine”
and that he held
inter alia the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery.
Additional Complaints arose from further matters regarding the Appellant’s
qualifications and conduct that came to the attention
of the Board after the
Appellant lodged his Appeal. Leave was granted by the Tribunal for these
Additional Complaints to be made
in accordance with the Act.
Additional complaints
procedural steps were taken by the Tribunal to ensure the Appellant was
appropriately notified of the additional Complaints
and the additional material
relied upon by the Respondent. The Tribunal had regard to Clause 5 of Schedule 5
of the Act which provides:
5. Additional
(1) The Tribunal may in proceedings before it deal with one or more
complaints about a registered psychologist.
(2) If, during any such proceedings, it appears to the Tribunal that,
having regard to any matters that have arisen, another complaint
could have been
made against the psychologist concerned:
(a) whether instead of or in addition to the complaint that was made,
(b) whether or not by the same complainant,
the Tribunal may take that other complaint to have been referred to it
and may deal with it in the same proceedings.
(3) If another complaint is taken to have been referred to the Tribunal
under subclause 10, the complaint may be dealt with after
such an adjournment
(if any) as is, in the opinion of the Tribunal, just and equitable in the
circumstances.
The Complaint (as ultimately considered by the Tribunal)
Board Inquiry Complaint
Complaint as alleged before the Board Inquiry is set out above.
additional Complaints made are as follows:
ADDITIONAL COMPLAINT ONE
Allegation that Vitomir Zepinic is not of good character.
The complainant complains that Vitomir Zepinic, being a person registered as
a psychologist under the
Psychologists Act
, is not of good
PARTICULARS OF ADDITIONAL COMPLAINT ONE
15 August 1996 and in or about 1998, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
("RANZCP") that he had been
awarded an undergraduate degree in Medicine by the University of Sarajevo in
1976 and that he had obtained
a degree of Doctor of Medical Science (PhD).
or about 10 November 1997, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Australia
Medical Council that he held medical qualifications
from the Faculty of
Medicine, University of Sarajevo 1976 and postgraduate qualifications in
psychiatry from the University of Belgrade
in 1983 and 1985.
6 April 1999, Mr Zepinic created an unauthorised letter and forged the signature
of a colleague at St John of God Hospital Burwood
purporting to confirm an offer
of a position as "Medical Officer" at the hospital (to improperly support his
application for registration
with the New South Wales Medical Board) .
or about May 1998 Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Australia Medical
Council that he had been awarded an undergraduate degree
in Medicine by the
University of Sarajevo in 1976.
23 June 1998 Mr Zepinic made a false statutory declaration that:
(a) he had been
awarded a degree of Doctor of Medicine from the University of Sarajevo in
(b) from 1976
he was eligible to practice medicine as a doctor;
completed 5 years full time "Postgraduate Training in Psychiatry"; and
(d) he held a
degree of "Specialist in Psychiatry in 1983".
or about 1999, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Medical Board of Western
Australia that he held the qualifications "MBBS (Sarajevo)
or about 25 March 1999, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the New South Wales
Medical Board that he held the qualifications of
"MDBS" from the University of
Belgrade in 1976.
or about July 1999, Mr Zepinic falsely represented in a curriculum vitae
provided to the Hunter Mental Health Service that he held
an "MDBS" from the
University of Sarajevo (1971 – 1976).
or about September 1999, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to an interview panel of
the Hunter Mental Health Service that he held
an "MDBS from Belgrade in 1976".
17 September 1999, Mr Zepinic, in a Statutory Declaration declared at
Gladesville, NSW, falsely described his occupation as that
of "Psychiatrist" and
in that context gave his name as "Dr. Vito Zepinic"
or about 2000, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Medical Board of Queensland
that he held the qualifications of "MBBS (Sarajevo)
or before 20 March 2000, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Medical Board of
Queensland that he held the qualifications of "MD
Belgrade 1985".
Specialist – Psychiatrist with Toowoomba Health
Service District, Mental
Health Service, knowing that he was not medically qualified to undertake those
duties as a Specialist Medical
Practitioner.
or about 2 November 2001, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the New South Wales
Medical Board that he held the qualifications of
"MDBS" from the University of
Belgrade in 1976.
or about 28 July 2003, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the Australasian
Medical Publishing Company, for the purposes of dissemination
in the Medical
Directory of Australia, that he held the qualifications "MBBS (Sarajevo) 1976".
or about 2005, Mr Zepinic falsely represented to the University of Sydney that
he had been awarded an undergraduate degree in Medicine
by the University of
Sarajevo on 3 December 1976.
or about 2005, Mr Zepinic published a false document to the University of Sydney
to support his admission to that University's
Master of Medicine (Psychotherapy)
14 April 2008, Mr Zepinic gave false evidence to Burwood Local Court that he
held a Doctor of Medicine Degree from the University
of Sarajevo.
23 March 2009, Mr Zepinic made a false declaration to the Psychologists
Registration Board of New South Wales in that his answers
to questions one and
three of the declaration in the annual renewal of registration dated 23 March
2009 were false.
ADDITIONAL COMPLAINT
Allegation that Vitomir Zepinic is guilty of professional misconduct.
The complainant complains that Vitomir Zepinic, being a person registered as
a psychologist under the
Psychologists Act 2001
, engaged in conduct which
constitutes professional misconduct within the meaning of
Psychologists Act 2001
in that the psychologist contravened a provision
of the Act and /or otherwise engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the
of the practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF ADDITIONAL COMPLAINT TWO
On 23 March 2009, Mr Zepinic made a false declaration to the Psychologists
Registration Board of New South Wales in that his answers
to questions one and
three of the declaration in the annual renewal of registration dated 23 March
2009 were false.
Appearances
per headnote.
Suppression Order
Tribunal made Orders, in accordance with Clause 6 of Schedule 5 of the
Psychologists Act 2001 (Act) that the names and any details
that tend to
identify a number of people mentioned in the evidence in this matter must not be
published. These include a number of
clients mentioned in correspondence
provided to the Tribunal by the Appellant. A schedule marked ‘Annexure
C’ containing
their identities will be attached only to the original
Reasons for Decision document and the copies that are forwarded to the parties.
This schedule should not be reproduced if copies of the Reasons document are
made for any purpose other than to provide it to an
appeals court. The parties
are directed to take care to ensure that the schedule is not copied. If the
transcript of the proceedings
is legally provided to any entity, the Registry
must ensure that it is appropriately de-identified in accordance with the
were no witnesses called to give oral evidence before the
Documentation
Appellant provided a set of documents in support of his Appeal. These came into
evidence as exhibits 1 to 32. The Board tendered
three folders of documents
which came into evidence as volume 1 - exhibits RA - RG, volume 2 –exhibit
R(a), R(b), R1 –
R16, volume 3 – exhibits R17 – R28 as
itemised in Annexure ‘A’ hereto.
Relevant Law
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the Complaint have been established. In
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was), at 362–363, said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
25 of the Act is as follows:
Meaning of ‘unsatisfactory professional
For the purposes of this Act, unsatisfactory professional conduct, in
relation to a registered psychologist, includes any of the following:
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the psychologist in the
practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience,
(b) a contravention by the psychologist of a provision of this Act or the
regulations or of a condition of the psychologist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the psychologist to comply with a
direction by the Board to provide information with respect
to a complaint under
this Part against the psychologist,
(d) a failure by the psychologist to comply with an order made or a direction
given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the psychologist of section
34A (4) (Power of Commission to obtain information, records and evidence) of
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a psychologist in the course
of the practice or purported practice of psychology.
definition of ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’ was amended by
Health Registration Legislation Amendment Act 2004
(Schedule 1),
which commenced on 1 March 2005. The amendment, in summary, added the reference
to the standard reasonably expected
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience. The Tribunal notes that some of the Particulars of the
in this matter relate to a period of time prior to 1 March 2005 and
therefore this amendment does not apply. However some of the
Particulars of
Complaint relate to times prior to 1 March 2005 and pursuant to the transitional
provisions of the
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(Schedule 4), the relevant law to be applied by this Tribunal is that which was
in force at the time these Complaints were
filed. The Additional Complaint
currently before the Tribunal is dated 9 October 2009. Consequently, the
definition of ‘unsatisfactory
professional conduct’ applicable in
these proceedings is the definition contained in the current legislation.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found when the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the conduct made out demonstrates one
of the deficiencies or inadequacies that
are set out in section 25. The Complaint currently before the Tribunal alleges
conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of this section – specifically, in
this matter,
sub-sections (b) and (e).
Professional Misconduct
24 meaning of ‘professional misconduct’:
For the purposes of this Act, ‘professional
misconduct’, in relation to a registered psychologist, means
unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of the psychologist’s registration.
making findings in relation to the Particulars and the Complaints the Tribunal
then needs to consider the appropriate Order(s)
to be made in the circumstances.
Good Character
decision regarding the good character of the Appellant must be made as at the
time of the Inquiry (see
Ziems v The Prothonotary
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
Ex Parte Tziniolis
(1966) 84 WN (NSW) (Part 2) 275 (CA);
(unreported Court of Appeal 1994)) within the context of the purposes
of the Act.
Prothonotary,
Kitto J stated:
... conduct may show a defect of character incompatible with
membership of a ‘self respecting profession’. The decision
matter also states that the
‘whole position’
of the offence
must be considered with
‘meticulous care’
the matter of
Ex Parte Tziniolis
at page 277 Walsh JA stated:
...I am of opinion, in deciding this question, [i.e. as to
whether the applicant is of good character] the court is required to consider
matters affecting the moral standards, attitudes and qualities of the applicant
and not merely to consider what is his general reputation.
I think, further, that we are entitled to inquire into what may be
described as personal misconduct as distinct from professional
misconduct, in
determining in this case whether or not the applicant is a man of good
character, whilst recognising that there may
be some kind of conduct deserving
of disapproval which have little or no bearing on the question whether or not it
is shown that
an applicant for registration as a medical practitioner is a
person of good character.
McBride v Walton
BC9402907, Kirby P (as he then was) made the following
In determining whether it was proved that a practitioner was
‘ not of good character’ it was relevant to consider non
professional conduct insofar as it impinged upon the practitioner’s
functions and upon the reputation of the profession for
high standards of its
meaning of ‘good character’ is discussed in the President’s
decision at pages 21 - 25. The Tribunal accepts
that its role is not to uphold
human morality and does not give the term ‘not of good character’
too wide an ambit but
keeps it within the context of the Act. If the wrong
doing of the practitioner is extraneous to their profession it may be relevant
to the demonstration of want of good character but only if the conduct in
question showed what can be taken to be characteristic
of the individual
“i.e. not an isolated lapse which is uncharacteristic to the
practitioner or irrelevantly to the practice of the profession.”
at page 24 and 25, Kirby P makes it clear that personal misconduct or want of
character outside the strictly professional
context must be treated differently
by a tribunal as it is not a function of a professional disciplinary body to
assume wider obligations
or the duties of punishing a practitioner. At page 25
he makes the following remarks:
it is complained that the medical practitioner is "not of good character" and it
is established that, in a particular act or
connected series of actions, the
practitioner's behaviour falls below the standards usually required and expected
relevant to the
practice of medicine, a question will be posed as to whether
that behaviour was abhorrent, exceptional and such as is not likely
to interfere
in the function of the practitioner as such (as was held in Ziems) or whether it
betokens some more serious flaw of
"character" attracting an order affecting the
practitioner's practice (as in
In re Davis
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
barrister who, on admission, failed to disclose a conviction for breaking,
entering and stealing either to the court or to
his referees) and Ex parte
Tziniolis; Re the Medical Practitioners Act (1967) 84 WN (NSW) (Pt2) 275 (CA)
(an applicant for registration
who committed perjury and intimidation of a
discreditable kind).
In considering an alleged lack of good character it will
be relevant for the Tribunal to seek to catalogue the pertinent wrong proved,
either as an isolated incident or episode or as an indication of some deeper
underlying quality which shows a "character" demonstrating
defects relevant to
medical practice. Thus, the Tribunal will ask itself whether the errors which it
has found are simply errors
of judgment in a particular case or demonstrate
fault of "character".
It will often be relevant in this connection to
consider the motivation of the practitioner. See Ex parte Tziniolis (above),
Where that motivation is greed or some corrupt purpose, such a finding will
typically carry more weight than a conclusion that some
other motivation,
normally irrelevant to professional practice, affected the particular conduct
(emphasis added)
the matter of
(see reference above) there was a view expressed
that when a ‘not of good character’ finding is made that an order to
remove the practitioner from the register was appropriate if not inevitable. The
Tribunal accept this is the position of the law
and did not receive any
submission to the contrary.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, a case concerning a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
characterising the conduct, the Tribunal has regard to the potential for harm of
the conduct rather then the actual harm that
eventuated.
this Tribunal and others exercising a similar jurisdiction in New South Wales
have always adopted the practice of considering
the particulars of complaint
separately or cumulatively when determining whether the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct, the Tribunal
notes the comments made in a decision of the Court of Appeal in New Zealand,
Duncan v Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee
(1986) 1 NZLR 513
where at 546, Cooke P, Richardson, McMullin and Somers JJ said:
... a case is conceivable in which over a period a practitioner
manifests in a diversity of ways, some more serious than others, such
disregard of his professional responsibilities that, viewed as a whole, his
conduct can rightly be described as disgraceful
in a professional respect... we
can see nothing in the Act or in natural justice to prevent the Committee, after
investigating a
range of complaints, from regarding a comprehensive charge is
appropriate as well as separate ones. Indeed it might be against the
interest to deny the Committee any right to present an all-embracing charge. It
may be important that the appropriate professional
tribunal should be able to
look at the practitioner’s whole attitude to practice.
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 53,
subsection (3A) (an amendment introduced into the Act
on 4 December 2006). This
sub-section states:
If the Tribunal makes an order under
subsection (2) in respect of a person and it is satisfied that the person poses
a substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a
“prohibition order”) do any one or more of the following:
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or
permanently,
(b) place such conditions as the Tribunal
thinks appropriate on the provision of health services or specified health
services by the
person for the period specified in the order or
permanently.
service’ is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
as including the following services, whether provided as public or
private services:
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
the relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in
its meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
matter in relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Deane J observed that the word “substantial” was not only
susceptible of ambiguity, but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of
precision. In O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447 referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and
observed that, in selecting the word “substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of
(3A) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare risk but is less
stringent than
special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the maximum penalty
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months imprisonment
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person,
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
de-registered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is to
be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act 1991
and carries a penalty of a
fine of up to $5,500.00.
Evidence of other proceedings
4 of Schedule 5 of the Act states that:
The Tribunal may receive and admit on production, as evidence in
any proceedings, such of the following as the Tribunal considers
relevant to the
proceedings:
(a) the judgment and findings of any court (whether civil or criminal and
whether or not of New South Wales) or tribunal,
(b) the verdict or findings of a jury of any such court,
(c) a certificate of the conviction of or the making of a criminal
finding in respect of any person,
(d) a transcript of the depositions or of shorthand notes, duly certified by
the Registrar or clerk of the court or tribunal as correct,
of the evidence of
witnesses taken in any such court or tribunal.
Background material
Background of the Appellant
Appellant was born in 1953. The Tribunal has very little material regarding the
Appellant’s background apart from details
provided in two CVs in evidence.
As noted elsewhere some of the information contained in these CVs is false.
Appellant first registered as a psychologist in New South Wales on 1 March 1994
and he was registered until 30 June 2010. He became
a member of the Australian
Psychological Society (APS) on 13 September 1994 and a member of the APS College
of Clinical Psychologists
on 17 October 1996.
Appellant married in 1978. The Appellant claims to have arrived in Australia as
a refugee, having fled from the former Yugoslavia
due to the civil war.
Appellant’s wife, Milla Zepinic, who is also a registered psychologist,
gave evidence before the Burwood Local Court on
14 April 2008. She stated that
her husband had worked as a doctor in a small town called Sokolac in
Bosnia-Herzegovina. She gave
further evidence that this town was reasonably
close to Sarajevo, and that they resided in Sarajevo.
Background to the Complaint
noted above, a Complaint relating to the Appellant’s convictions at
Burwood Local Court on 19 August 2008 and various holding
out matters was
considered by a Board Inquiry. The Appellant lodged an appeal in relation to
the findings of the Board Inquiry.
An Appeal is by way of a hearing
. This fact along with other matters such as the public nature of a
Tribunal hearing, the requirement for the Reasons for Decision
to be placed on
the internet and that the Tribunal had powers beyond a Board Inquiry including
suspension, de-registration and the
award of costs were all discussed at the
initial Directions Hearing attended by the Appellant.
Appeal was set down for hearing by the Tribunal in the normal course. At a later
stage leave was sought to file material that
subsequently came to the Board. The
Tribunal also granted leave for the Complaint to be amended as indicated above.
On each occasion
the Appellant was put on notice of these matters and provided
with an opportunity to participate.
Evidence – the Appellant
Appellant’s documents
1 is a lengthy letter from the Appellant to the Registrar indicating,
, his application to appeal the Board Inquiry Decision.
2 is a letter dated 18 April 2008 from WorkCover to Gray & Perkins,
Solicitors. It appears from the contents of the letter
that Gray & Perkins
were acting for the Appellant with respect to two charges brought against him by
WorkCover pursuant to section
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act
. This section read as at the relevant
238AA Power to
obtain information, documents and evidence
(1) An authorised officer may, by notice in writing served on a
person who is, on reasonable grounds, believed by the authorised
officer to be
capable of giving information, producing documents or giving evidence in
relation to a possible contravention of this
Act or the 1987 Act or the
regulations under those Acts require the person to do any one or more of the
following things:
(a) to give an authorised officer, by writing signed by the
person (or, in the case of a body corporate, by a competent officer of
corporate) and within the time and in the manner specified in the notice, any
such information of which the person has knowledge,
(b) to produce to an authorised officer, in accordance with the
notice, any such documents,
(c) to appear before an authorised officer at a time and place
specified in the notice and give either orally or in writing any such
and produce any such documents.
(2) A notice under this section must contain a warning that a
failure to comply with the notice is an offence.
(3) An authorised officer may inspect a document produced in
response to a notice under this section and may make copies of, or
take extracts
from, the document.
(4) An authorised officer may take possession and retain possession
for as long as is necessary for the purposes of this Act, of
a document produced
in response to a notice under this section if the person otherwise entitled to
possession of the document is
supplied, as soon as practicable, with a copy
certified by an authorised officer to be a true copy.
(5) A certified copy provided under subsection (4) is receivable in
all courts as if it were the original.
(6) Until a certified copy of a document is provided under
subsection (4), the authorised officer who has possession of the document
at such times and places as the authorised officer thinks appropriate, permit
the person otherwise entitled to possession of
the document, or a person
authorised by that person, to inspect the document and make copies of, or take
extracts from, the document.
(7) In the section,
authorised officer
means an officer of
the Authority authorised by the Authority or the Nominal Insurer for the
purposes of this section.
(8) A person must not:
(a) without reasonable excuse, refuse or fail to comply with a
requirement under this section, or
(b) in purported compliance with a requirement under this
section, give information or evidence or produce a document knowing it
false or misleading in a material particular.
Maximum penalty: 100 penalty units.
letter confirms that the two charges were dismissed by Magistrate Hart on 18
July 2006 (in the Chief Industrial Magistrates Court)
and that there had been no
order as to costs.
3 is a Ministerial Brief to the Queensland Minister for Health which contains
information relating not only to the Appellant
but also to another person.
Various personal details of the other person (who shall be identified as Dr X
for the purposes of this
Decision) who had been employed within the Queensland
public hospital system are set out in the document. The Tribunal has no
of whether or not the information regarding Dr X is in the public
domain and as it has no relevance to the current proceedings it
was not received
into evidence. The Tribunal is unaware of the manner in which such a document
came into the possession of the Appellant.
document indicates that the Appellant had been employed within the public health
system at Toowoomba (Toowoomba Health). It notes
the following history:
The Appellant
applied to the Australian Medical Council (AMC) in May 1998 for assessment of
his specialist qualifications in psychiatry.
The AMC required
the Appellant to fulfil a period of supervised clinical practice (sic) before
being eligible to sit the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists Section 1 examinations.
On 17 February
2000 the Appellant lodged an application with the ‘Board’ (which the
Tribunal assumes from the context
to be the Queensland Medical Board) seeking
conditional registration to fill a training position within Toowoomba
On 8 May 2001
the Appellant applied for renewal of his conditional registration so that he
could continue his specialist training
as a ‘Senior Medical Officer
– Psychiatry’. This application was granted on 22 May 2001.
On 6 March 2000
(sic) the ‘Board’ was advised by the AMC that the
‘College’ had reassessed the Appellant’s
qualifications and
determined that he had completed post graduate training in psychotherapy which
was a non-medical course and therefore
he was not entitled to advance standing
in the medical specialty of psychiatry. The reason for the reassessment of the
Appellant’s
qualifications appears to have been the availability of
information from the ‘originating educational institution’ in
Belgrade that had not been available earlier due to the conflicts in Yugoslavia
at that time.
[The Tribunal assumes ‘2000’ is a typographical
error and that it should read ‘2002.]’
considered this advice on 9 April 2002 and issued a ‘show cause’
notice to the Appellant under
sections 148
Practitioners Registration Act
When the Board
attempted personal service of the ‘show cause’ notice the Appellant
had resigned his position with Toowoomba
Health and left no forwarding address.
Ultimately the Appellant was served with the ‘show cause’ notice on
15 April 2002
in Burwood, New South Wales.
The Appellant
responded to the ‘show cause’ notice on 24 April 2002 and after
considering same the Board cancelled the
registration of the Appellant on 14 May
2002 pursuant to
Medical Practitioners Registration Act
It was noted
that the Appellant did have a ‘valid registrable undergraduate
qualification in medicine’.
is unclear from the information provided to the Tribunal which part of
the Queensland Medical Board relied upon when it issued the
notice as to why his registration should not be cancelled. The
Tribunal notes at this point that
sections 148
Practitioners Registration Act
(QLD) provide:
148 Application of div 6
For cancelling a special purpose registration, division 6, other than
, applies as if:
(a) a general registration were a special purpose registration; and
(b) a certificate of general registration were a certificate of special
purpose registration.
149 Grounds for cancellation
(1) Each of the following is a ground for cancelling a special purpose
registration:
(a) the registrant has practised the profession other than for the
activity for which the registrant is registered;
(b) the registrant has been convicted of an indictable offence;
(c) the registrant has been convicted of an offence against this Act, the
Practitioners (Professional Standards) Act 1999
or a corresponding law;
(d) the registrant has contravened a condition of the registration;
(e) the registration happened because the board was given, by the
registrant or someone else, information or a document that:
(i) was materially false, within the meaning given by
section 273(1)
the time it was given; or
(ii) became materially false, within the meaning given by
section 273(1)
after it was given;
(f) the registrant ceases to have, or does not have, the qualifications
necessary for registration.
(2) Subsection (1)(a) applies subject to sections 150AA(4) and 150AC(8).
Medical Practitioners Registration Act
88 Cancellation
(1) This section applies if, after considering the accepted
representations for the show cause notice, the board:
(a) still believes the ground exists to cancel the registration; and
(b) believes cancellation of the registration is warranted.
(2) This section also applies if there are no accepted representations
for the show cause notice.
(3) The board may decide to cancel the registration.
(4) If the board decides to cancel the registration, it must as soon as
practicable give the registrant an information notice about
the decision.
(5) The decision takes effect on the day the information notice is given
to the registrant.
4 is a letter to Client A from GIO General Insurance dated 30 August 2005. It
appears from this letter that Client A was a
client of the Appellant. The letter
states that as the Appellant was currently being investigated by WorkCover, GIO
would no longer
be meeting the costs of consultations with the Appellant. The
treatment being provided related to a workplace injury in October 2001.
5 is another letter from GIO General Insurance. This letter dated 15 August 2005
is addressed to Client B. It provides similar
advice to the letter in exhibit 4
and relates to treatment being received by Client B in relation to an injury
that occurred in September
6 is a letter dated 8 May 2007 addressed to Client C from QBE Insurance. This
letter indicates that as a result of advice
received from WorkCover QBE would no
longer accept liability for treatment provided by the Appellant and his wife.
The treatment
received by Client C related to a workplace injury in 2003.
7 is a letter from Cambridge Integrated Services (as agent for WorkCover)
advising the Appellant that payment of invoices
with respect to services
provided to Client D would not be made on the instructions of WorkCover.
8 is a letter from GallagherBassett to the ‘Psychology Clinic’ (with
the address of the former practice of the
Appellant) returning invoices on the
basis that instructions were awaited from WorkCover regarding payment thereof.
9 is a letter from WorkCover to Patient D dated 13 March 2007. The letter
requests Patient D to attend a WorkCover office
to be interviewed in relation to
invoices with respect to invoices for treatment he had received from the
Appellant at time WorkCover
understood the Appellant was overseas (this
information having been obtained from DIMA – the Department of Immigration
Multicultural Affairs).
Exhibit 10 is a letter from GallagherBassett to the ‘Psychology
Clinic’ (with the postal address of the former practice
of the Appellant)
stating that invoices for Clients F, G and H would not be paid on the
instructions of WorkCover.
11 are pages extracted from the transcript of the criminal proceedings brought
against the Appellant in the Burwood Local
Court on 29 January 2008 and 14 April
12 is a letter dated 26 March 1999 from the New South Wales Medical Board
(NSWMB) to the Appellant. The letter informed the
Appellant that his application
for registration could not be considered until after advice had been received
from the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP)
regarding the suitability of the position at St John of God Hospital for the
of ‘familiarisation’.
13 is the first page of an Interview Report being a record of an interview that
took place between the Appellant and the NSWMB
on 17 September 1999. The
interview took place to assess whether or not the Appellant was suitable for the
position of CMO (Career
Medical Officer) in Psychiatry with the Hunter Mental
Health Service. The panel was comprised of four medical practitioners. The
entire Interview Report is found at volume 2 - exhibit 9a, page 143 - 145 and
another version of the same document is at volume 2
– exhibit 9b, pages
147 - 149). Clinical questions were posed to the Appellant and his answers
recorded. The part of the report
that indicates that the Interview Panel came to
the conclusion that the Appellant was not suitable for employment as a CMO in
was the part of the document not included by the Appellant in the
material he filed.
14 is a letter to the Appellant from the NSWMB dated 15 October 2001. The NSWMB
returned a cheque that had been forwarded
by the Appellant for the purpose of
paying for registration to work in the ‘Psychology Clinic’. The
NSWMB indicated that
it was awaiting the result of the RANZCP approval of the
proposed training position as a suitable training position. The letter advised
that the NSWMB required this approval prior to processing the registration.
15 is a letter to the Appellant from the NSWMB dated 14 November 2001. The NSWMB
once again returns a cheque to the Appellant.
The cheque appears to be for the
purpose of paying for registration so that the Appellant can work as a medical
practitioner in the
‘Psychology Clinic’. The NSWMB returned the
cheque on the basis that the RANZCP was currently considering the
Appellant’s
specialty training. The letter again advised that the NSWMB
required the approval of the training position from the RANZCP. The letter
encloses information regarding the Board’s requirements for registration
as a specialist trainee under
section 7(1)(F)
(presumably of the
Practice Act
16 is a letter to the Appellant from the NSWMB dated 6 May 2002. The NSWMB
advised the Appellant that the RANZCP had assessed
him as not being eligible for
advanced stranding/specialist assessment and accordingly he was not eligible for
registration as a
Specialist Trainee under
section 7(1)(F).
The letter enclosed
information regarding appeals from this decision. The letter stated that the
Appellant may wish to contact the
AMC regarding completion of the AMC exams that
lead to General registration.
17 is a letter from the AMC to the Appellant dated 30 June 1998 addressed to a
residential address in Turramurra. The letter
advised the Appellant that he was
eligible to
‘present for assessment
’ and that the RANZCP had
been selected to conduct the assessment.
18 is a letter from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 5 October 1998 responding
to the Appellant’s application for specialist
assessment via the AMC. The
letter informed the Appellant that he would need to be interviewed for the
purpose of deciding whether
or not he was eligible for any exemptions.
19 if a letter from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 21 October 1998. The
letter confirmed the date of the interview with
Training and
Examinations Exemptions Sub-committee to clarify details of your training,
assessment and experience in psychiatry’
20 is a letter from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 20 November 1998. The
letter confirmed a re-scheduled date of the interview.
21 is a letter from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 19 February 1999. The
letter stated that the Training and Examinations
Exemptions Sub-committee
had considered his application for specialist assessment via the AMC on 11
February 1999. The letter continues:
Subject to receipt of confirmation of your psychiatric
qualification ie PhD (which has been sought from the University of Belgrade)
a satisfactory reference from Dr Chuchkovich (to whom we have written)
and in line with current criteria, the Exemptions Sub-committee
determined that you be granted exemption in accordance with 2c of
the attached
Pathways document. This means that on receipt of the above, you would be granted
exemption from the training (including
elective year) requirements, the First
Year Assessment, case histories, Written examinations and dissertation, and
would be required
to complete the General Medicine Examination, and at least 6
months familiarisation* before being eligible to sit the Clinical
examinations.
(The letter goes on to explain * which is not reproduced
22 is a letter from the AMC to the Appellant dated 3 March 1999. The letter
informed the Appellant that the College had completed
the assessment of his
specialist qualifications and subject to the receipt of confirmation of his
psychiatric qualification and a
satisfactory reference from Dr Chuchkovich he
would be required to complete the General Medicine Examination and at least six
of familiarisation prior to sitting the Clinical examinations.
23 is a letter from the Medical Board of Western Australia (MBWA) to the
Appellant at an address in Western Australia dated
25 June 1999. The letter
noted that the Appellant had provided the MBWA with a copy of his primary
medical degree (from the University
of Sarajevo). The letter advised that the
MBWA had considered that document and had granted the Appellant
‘provisional registration – Conditional Registration –
Further Specialist Training in Psychiatry’
on the basis that the
conditions that the particulars contained in the letter from the RANZCP dated 12
April 1999 remain current.
The registration only permitted employment at
Fremantle Hospital and was valid for the period 28 June 1999 to 28 August 1999.
23 is a Certificate of Conditional Registration from the MBWA for the period 28
June 1999 to 28 August 1999. The Certificate
lists the qualifications of the
Appellant as
‘MBBS (SARAJEVO) 1976’
. The Specialty noted on
this Certificate is ‘Psychiatry’. The Tribunal notes at this point
that a letter from the WAMB
dated 20 July 1999 states that the Appellant’s
registration was withdrawn on that day (volume R2 – exhibit 7b –
25 is an ‘Extract from Register’ as at 5 April 2000 from the Medical
Board of Queensland (QLDMB). The Extract
records that the Appellant was
conditionally registered (under section 17C(f)) from 4 April 2000 until 30
September 2000. The Appellant’s
address on this document was an address in
Strathfield, New South Wales.
26 is a letter from the Health Insurance Commission to the Appellant dated 20
April 2000. The letter is addressed to the Appellant
at Toowoomba Health. The
letter advises the Appellant of his
‘Prescriber Number
This letter notes that confirmation had been received from the QLDMB that the
Appellant had been registered from 3 December
1999, renewable on 30 September
27 is a letter from Toowoomba Health to the Appellant. The letter is unsigned
and undated. The letter is addressed to the
Appellant at the Toowoomba Health
Service address. Confirmation is provided that the Appellant’s appointment
as a Staff Specialist
had been extended from 9 December 2000 to 8 June 2001.
28 is a letter from Queensland Health to the Appellant which appears undated,
but may also only be the first page of a lengthier
letter. The letter was sent
to the Appellant via what appears to be a residential address in Toowoomba. The
letter confirms the temporary
full time employment of the Appellant from 9 June
2001 to 8 June 2002.
29 is a letter from Toowoomba Health to the Appellant which again is either
incomplete or undated. The letter confirms the
employment of the Appellant from
10 April 2000 to 8 December 2000 as a
‘Staff Specialist –
Psychiatrist’
30 is a report on the Appellant’s performance assessment by Toowoomba
Health made by way of a letter dated 3 January
31 is a Certificate of Good Standing issued by the QLDMB to the NSWMB dated 20
March 2000.
32 is a letter from the then President of the AMA to the Appellant dated 28 June
2007. The letter seeks expressions of interest
to take part in a certain program. It lists the
Appellant’s ID number as 409290 at the postal address for the Psychology
(Burwood, NSW).
Evidence regarding the Appellant’s qualifications
are a number of documents in the exhibits that make representations regarding
the Appellant’s academic achievements and
qualifications. The volume of
documentation and the multitude of inconsistencies between them do not
facilitate a clear picture being
formed on first reading. Detailed comparisons
and chronological consideration are essential. It is not necessary for the
to set out all the inconsistencies. Some of the details are set out
below by way of an overall picture.
Tribunal has carefully considered all of the evidence before it. There are two
particularly relevant documents on the matter of
the Appellant’s
qualifications. One document is a letter dated 27 November 2008 from the Dean of
the Faculty of Philosophy,
University of Sarajevo, (volume R3 – Exhibit 7D
– pages 326-328). The letter confirms that the Appellant completed studies
and obtained tertiary qualifications at the Department of Pedagogy and
Psychology in the Faculty of Philosophy at the University
of Sarajevo,
graduating on 4 October 1976. The Diploma for this qualification was issued on 3
December 1976 and is numbered 2813/76.
The professional title that the Appellant
would have gained through this qualification was ‘Graduate Teacher of
Pedagogy and
Psychology’. This information is contained in a letter
addressed to NSW Health (at the HPRB address).
second important document is a statement from the Dean of the School of Medicine
at the University of Belgrade dated 21 December
2007 (Volume R2 – exhibit
9c – page 151). This statement includes the following at paragraphs 3 to
am the Dean of the School of Medicine at the University of Belgrade.
have been requested to confirm the academic qualifications of Vitomir Zepinic,
born 27 June 1953, in respect to the School of Medicine,
University of
and I am able to confirm that Vitomir Zepinic has
never been enrolled in medical
studies at this University to leading the Medical Doctor degree, he is not a
graduate of the School
of Medicine in Belgrade, and he did not complete a
Specialist Degree in Psychiatry at the School of Medicine, University of
Zepinic enrolled in post graduate studies at the School of Medicine in Belgrade,
after having graduated from the Faculty of
Philosophy – Department for
Pedagogy and Psychology in Sarajevo.
confirm that Vitomir Zepinic successfully completed the Post Graduate Training
in Psychotherapy and obtained a Masters in Science
degree in Psychotherapy on 18
March 1983 at the School of Medicine, University of Belgrade.
successfully defended a Master of Science thesis under the title
of extraversion and Neuroticism on Delinquent Behaviour of the Underage"
also successfully defended a Doctor of Philosophy dissertation under the title
"Psychological Characteristics of Underage Delinquent-Smokers"
School of Medicine, University of Belgrade on 22 March 1985.
considering all of the evidence the Tribunal has formed the view that the
Respondent’s undergraduate qualification is
in psychology as are his
post-graduate qualifications.
Tribunal notes that the Appellant first registered as a psychologist in New
South Wales on 1 March 1994 and was registered until
30 June 2010. It does not
appear to the Tribunal that he renewed his registration for the 2010/2011
Appellant became a member of the APS on 13 September 1994 and a member of the
APS College of Clinical Psychologists on 17 October
1996. When he applied for
membership of the College of Clinical Psychologists within the APS on 22
February 1996 he made declarations
that he was qualified as a clinical
psychologist and had worked as a clinical psychologist in Sarajevo between 1976
and 1982. When
he provided further information to the APS on 15 April 1996 he
stated that he was unable to provide a report on his work experience
teaching as a Clinical Psychologist in his former country because of the civil
war (volume R3 – exhibit b, pages 25 –
Appellant wrote to the RANZCP on 15 August 1996 (volume R2 – exhibit 1c
– page 56). The letter reads:
I would like to apply for membership of the Royal Australian
& New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
Owing to the war in Bosnia (former Yugoslavia), I was forced to leave my
former country where I have worked as a therapist, mostly
with serious mental
I have finished Faculty of Medicine at the University of Sarajevo in 1976.
After that in 1983 I defended my Master of Medical Science
at the Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of Belgrade. Meanwhile, I
finished four year study of Psychiatry,
University of Sarajevo. In 1985 I
defended my doctoral dissertation at the Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Psychiatry, University
of Belgrade, and obtained degree of Doctor of Medical
Science – PhD. All above degrees are recognized by the National Office
Overseas Skill Recognition.
Currently I am employed at the Hornsby Hospital & Community Mental
Health. Also, I am working as a Sessional Worker for Transcultural
Health Centre of NSW, mostly involved in the treatment of patients with war
related PTSD.
I believe that my qualifications and clinical experience are recognisable
to be member of the Royal Australian & New Zealand College
Psychiatrists.
Please send me application forms and other information needed for
membership.
the same day, i.e. 15 April 1996 the Appellant wrote to the APS (volume 2
– exhibit b, page 30). The letter reads as follows
(as written):
As you know I have recently sent my application form for the APS
College of Clinical Psychologists. Unfortunately, I have some difficulties
complete a requested form from my supervisor. Although I have had over 12 years
of working experience in the clinical sitting
(sic) and teaching as a Clinical
Psychologist I am unable to bring Supervisor’s report from my former
country. Owing to the
civil was in former Yugoslavia I was forced to leave my
former country and I have started to re-establish my professional career
Australia. I have enclosed confidential report from Mr Tom Jones who also has
been my supervisor for six months.
I am very interested to be member of College of Clinical Psychologists
from my former country.
With kind regards, yours sincerely (signature)
in 1996 the Appellant wrote a letter to RANZCP on 15 August 1996 making certain
representations and then on 23 August 1996 wrote
to the APS making other
representations. The letter to the RANZCP (volume 2 – exhibit 1c, page 56)
is an application for membership
of the RANZCP and states that the Appellant had
worked in his former country as a
‘therapist, mostly with serious
mental illness’
. The Appellant advised that he was currently
‘...employed at the Hornsby Hospital & Community Mental Health’
‘Sessional Worker for Transcultural Mental Health Centre of
. The letter also includes the following:
I finished Faculty of Medicine at the University of Sarajevo in
1976. After that in 1983 I defended my Master of Medical Science at
the Faculty
of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of Belgrade. Meanwhile, I
finished four years study of Psychology at
the Faculty of Philosophy, University
of Sarajevo. In 1985 I defended my doctoral dissertation at the Faculty of
Medicine , Department
of Psychiatry, University of Belgrade, and obtained degree
of Doctor of Medical Science – PhD. All above degrees are recognised
the National Office of Overseas Skill Recognition.
contrasts with the information in the letter written some eight days later on 23
August 1996 to the APS (volume 2 – exhibit
b, page 16) which is a follow
up letter regarding the Appellant’s application for membership of the APS.
In this letter the
Appellant states:
I am an overseas trained Clinical Psychologist with a PhD in
Clinical Psychology. In my former country I have had two years supervision
was working as a Clinical Psychologist. Last year I had six months of
supervision with Mr Tom Jones, Clinical Psychologist,
until he commenced a
private practice. Since that time my supervisor is Ms Glenys Wilson, Clinical
Psychologist, with the Hornsby
Ku-Ring-Gai Hospital &Community Services.
Appellant submits this supervision to be sufficient to meet the APS requirements
for admission.
Tribunal notes that the application form that had been ‘recently
sent’ by the Appellant listed that he had completed
(after four years full
time study) a B.A. (Hons) Psychology from the University of Sarajevo –
Faculty of Philosophy in 1976.
He then undertook a M.Sc. – Clinical
Psychology at the University of Belgrade – faculty of Medicine in 1983
years of part time study). These were followed by a PhD – Doctor
of Medical Science from the University of Belgrade- faculty
of Medicine in 1985
(after 2 years full time study). He also claimed to have completed
‘Medical Studies’ at the University
of Sarajevo in 1978 as well as
some psychotherapy at an institute in Zagreb. The Tribunal also notes that the
report provided by
the supervisor, Mr Tom Jones, which is completed on an APS
pro forma headed Board of Clinical Psychologists, Mr Jones stated that
he was aware the Appellant held a Doctorate in Clinical Psychology –
University of Sarajevo, Bosnia.
Tribunal has in evidence a letter addressed to the RANZCP dated 6 April 1999
(volume R2 – exhibit 2a, page 78) which appears
to have been written by
the General Manager of the St John of God Hospital. Records indicate the
Appellant was working there as a
psychologist. In an affidavit from the General
Manager in evidence (volume R2 – exhibit 2a, pages 76 and 77) she states
she had not written the letter dated 6 April 1999, that she did not sign
this letter, it was written on letterhead no longer used
by the hospital. When
the General Manager spoke to the Appellant he confirmed that he had written the
letter. The substantial parts
of the affidavit are reproduced below under
Evidence and Findings - Additional Complaint One - Particular 3. The General
also stated that some months after the Appellant resigned she received a
telephone call from someone in Queensland seeking a reference
from her. The
caller informed her that the Appellant had listed her as a referee.
Appellant made an application to the Australian Medical Council (AMC) on 10
November 1997 for
‘regulation (sic) of my qualifications in
psychiatry’
(Volume 2 – exhibit 1c – page 55). The letter
informs the AMC that:
I am writing to apply for regulation of my qualifications in
psychiatry.
Owing to the war in Bosnia (Yugoslavia), I have been forced to leave my
former country and arrived in Australia as a refugee in 1993.
In my former
country I finished Faculty of Medicine, University of Sarajevo in 1976,
postgraduate study in psychiatry and defended
Masters degree in 1983 at the
Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade. In 1985 I defended my PhD in
psychiatry also at the Faculty
of Medicine, University of Belgrade.
Since finishing medical study and general practice, I have worked at
psychiatric hospitals as Psychiatry Registrar and Psychiatrist
and I have had 20
years of work experience in clinical setting. I have also been involved in
teaching process at the University
of Sarajevo. I have published two books and
30 articles in difficult areas in psychiatry and clinical psychology.
I believe that my qualifications and experience are recognisable for
registration as Psychiatrist in Australia. More details about
qualifications, publishing work and experience you can see in attached
Appellant applied for registration as a medical practitioner to the NSW Medical
Board (NSWMB) on 26 August 1999 (volume R2 –
exhibit 7b – pages 100
and 101). In this document that Appellant indicates that he holds registration
in South Australia.
The Tribunal notes at this point that from the evidence
provided in exhibit 25 the Appellant has never been registered as a medical
practitioner by the South Australian Medical Board. The Tribunal also notes that
by this stage his registration (in whatever form
it was) in Western Australia
(WA) had been withdrawn.
engaging in some correspondence with the Appellant regarding his suitability for
(temporary) registration the Appellant proposed
he be considered for the
position of Career Medical Officer – Psychiatry within the Hunter Mental
Health Services. The NSWMB
ultimately invited the Appellant to a formal
interview. The Appellant was interviewed by a panel appointed by the NSWMB on 17
1999 (Volume R2 – exhibit 9a - page 143 - 145). The interview
involved the Appellant answering basic clinical questions asked
by the Interview
Panel. The report produced by the Interview Panel includes the following
The Panel was seriously disturbed by Dr Zepinic’s
responses and did not consider that he would be safe in a situation where
the only medical officer in attendance. He seemed not to understand the
difference between benzodiazipines and anti-depressants,
thought that Valium and
Ducene were different substances.
NSWMB Interview Panel concluded that they would not recommend the Appellant be
registered for the position of CMO in Psychiatry
at the Hunter Mental Health
Appellant gained conditional registration as a medical practitioner in WA on 28
June 1999 (volume 2 – exhibit 6a - page
84). This Registration would have
allowed the Appellant to work at Fremantle Hospital in the specialty area of
psychiatry. This Registration
was withdrawn by 30 July 1999 as he did not
commence his employment on 19 July 1999 (at Bentley Health Services) (volume R2
7b – page 102). A document advising all the states and
territories of the action taken by the WAMB stated as follows:
The Medical Board of Western Australia considered a request for
Conditional Registration for Dr Vito Zepinic. Granting of approval
was delayed
as Dr Zepinic was unable to provide to the Board documentation supporting a
primary medical degree obtained from the
University of Sarajevo.
The required documentation was subsequently provided and approval was
granted for Dr Zepinic to commence employment on 19 July 1999
at Bentley Health
Service. The Board has been advised today that Dr Zepinic did not commence
employment with Bentley Health Service
and therefore his registration with the
Medical Board of Western Australia has been withdrawn effective
immediately.
It is understood Dr Zepinic has returned to New South Wales.
Should Dr Zepinic lodge an application for registration with your
Board/Council, could you please contact Anthea McGrath in our office.
a statutory declaration dated 17 September 1999 provided to the NSWMB the
Appellant gave his occupation as ‘psychiatrist’
and sincerely
declared and affirmed the following (volume R2, exhibit 10a at page 152):
I have already registered in WA and I did not have any
discipline action against me including practice, relationship with patients
staff. I also had a good standing in my former country without any disciplinary
Tribunal notes the evidence indicates that the Appellant never worked as a
medical practitioner in WA. The Appellant confirmed
this position in his oral
evidence to the Burwood Local Court on 29 January 2008 (T89.29 at volume R3
– exhibit 18, page 418).
statutory declaration made by the Appellant and dated 23 June 1998 was provided
to the AMC (volume R2 - exhibit 5, page 83).
In this document the Appellant
declares the following information about his
‘educational and
professional background’
- I finished Medical High School in Sarajevo in 1971. After
finishing high school, I finished Faculty of Medicine, University of
and held a degree of Doctor of Medicine in 1976. Owing to the war in former
Yugoslavia I am unable to provide original
documents from there.
- When finishing Faculty of Medicine, I was eligible to practice medicine
as a Doctor (Lekar), and I have worked for two years in
general practice before
enrolment in Postgraduate Training in Psychiatry.
- I successfully completed five years full-time Postgraduate Training in
Psychiatry and held a degree of Specialist in Psychiatry
in 1983. This program
included dissertation - Master degree in Psychiatry.
- I completed psychiatric study and defended PhD in Psychiatry in
All above mentioned degrees were recognised in my former country and I
have been employed in Psychiatry field prior to the war in
1992. I have also
finished many other courses and training to improve my knowledge and
experience.
In my professional practice I have never been disbarred or expelled from
professional associations or registration boards because
of misconduct or any
other reasons. Moreover, as in good standing and practicing, I was rewarded
many times and promoted to many
leading roles including supervision and
Appellant also gained conditional registration as a medical practitioner in
Queensland on or about 3 December 1999 (Volume R3
– exhibit 17b –
page 313). Documents indicate that the Appellant was granted a provider number
and a prescriber number
by the Health Insurance Commission (HIC) from 12 April
2000. Documentation from Queensland Health indicates he commenced employment
a Staff Specialist – Psychiatrist on 10 April 2000 (volume R2 –
exhibit 1c- page 51).
RANZCP approved a position within Toowoomba Health as a suitable training
position for the Appellant commencing from 4 April 2000
(Volume R1 –
exhibit D2 - page 103 – 105).
Appellant’s employment with Toowoomba Health terminated around April
the business records produced by the NSWMB is a copy of a letter to the
Appellant dated 12 September 2001 addressed to the Appellant
at his workplace in
Toowoomba. A letter in reply is written on the letterhead of the
‘Psychology Clinic’, a business
that appears to have been operated
by the Appellant and his wife. The letter states that the practice was able to
offer him a temporary
position within the clinic provided he had
‘achieved registration to practice as a medical
practitioner’
. It is signed
‘Milla Deric’
Director of the Psychology Clinic practice.
Tribunal notes that the NSWMB wrote to the Appellant on 6 May 2002 informing him
that the RANZCP had assessed him as not being
suitable for advanced
standing/specialist assessment and therefore he was not eligible for
registration as a Specialist Trainee under
Section 7(1)F
Medical Practice
and invited him to contact the AMC re completion of the AMC exams leading to
General registration (volume R2 – exhibit 1f,
2 – page 18 is a copy of a letter dated 28 August 1995 that is signed
‘Dr D Kecmanovic’. The letter came
into evidence in answer to a
summons to the APS (and then served and filed by the Respondent). It was amongst
documentation that
composed application by the Appellant for membership of the
APS and subsequently admission into the College of Clinical Psychologists).
letter is not on formal letterhead. The address block reads as follows (as
Dr D Kecmanovic, FRANZCP
Consultant Psychiatrist
304 King Street, NSW 2042
Ph (02) 557-0854
letter is addressed ‘TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN’. The content of the
letter reads:
I, undersigned, testify that Dr Vitomir Zepinic was working for
fourteen years, at the Community Health Clinic, in Sarajevo, the former
Yugoslavia, as a Clinical Psychologist.
appears Dr Kecmanovic is a consultant psychiatrist. During the Inquiry the
Tribunal requested the Respondent contact Dr Kecmanovic
to confirm whether or
not this letter was written by him. In response to the enquiry from the
Registrar of the Board Dr Kecmanovic
replied by email as follows:
I cannot remember writing this letter, nor could I find my copy
of it. However, the signature looks like mine.
Sorry, I cannot be of more help in this matter.
Tribunal notes the information provided in the letter dated 28 August 1995
(which appears to be signed by Dr Kecmanovic) is contradictory
to the evidence
given by the Appellant’s wife before the Local Court at Burwood and to
some of the representations made by
the Appellant.
during the course of the Inquiry the Tribunal called upon the Respondent to
verify a letter addressed to the RANZCP purportedly
written by Dr Selywn M Smith
(volume 2 – exhibit 7b, page 106). This document was a letter dated 22
February 1999 written on
St John of God Hospital letterhead and purported to be
signed by Dr Smith. The letterhead was identical to the letterhead used for
letter purported to have been signed by Ms McCabe which the Tribunal has
accepted was a forgery on the part of the Appellant.
Enquiries were made with Dr
Smith. Ultimately, the Tribunal re-convened and received an affidavit from Dr
Smith. Dr Smith stated
that he had met the Appellant at the St John of God
Hospital. He was aware that the Appellant was employed as a clinical
psychologist.
The Appellant had informed Dr Smith that he had practised as a
psychiatrist in his former country and he was working as a clinical
psychologist
as his medical qualifications were not recognised in Australia.
Smith states that the Appellant did not ever ask him to provide a reference in
support of any application to the RANZCP nor did
the RANZCP ask him to provide a
Smith confirmed that he had been provided with a copy of volume 2 –
exhibit 7b, page 106. The letter was provided to Dr Smith
by way of a facsimile
transmission from the Registrar of the Board. Dr Smith states that prior to the
receipt of this facsimile transmission
he had not seen the letter nor was he
aware of its existence. After receiving the facsimile Dr Smith informed the
Registrar that
the letter was not his letter, that he did not prepare it and
that it was not in any way his reference. This was reinforced by Dr
his statement that it would be most inappropriate for a reference of this nature
to be written recommending a person qualified
as a clinical psychologist as a
member of the RANZCP. Further, Dr Smith stated that if he had written such a
letter it would be
on his own letterhead rather than the letterhead of St John
Smith ends his statement by saying that the signature at the foot of the letter
dated 22 February 1999 is not his signature and
that it is a forgery.
details of the Appellant’s efforts to obtain registration, further
education/recognition and employment as a medical
practitioner are contained in
the evidence before the Tribunal. The Tribunal has not recounted each detail of
these applications.
The details relevant to each Particular of Complaint is set
Evidence and Findings with respect to each Particular of
Original Complaint – dated 28 September 2008
Certificates of Conviction (six) with respect to these offences formed volume R1
- exhibit 4 in the documents before the Tribunal
establish the convictions. The
Tribunal notes the remarks made by the Magistrate at the time.
Particulars 2, 3 & 4
reports written by the Appellant relied upon by the Board are found at volume R1
exhibit 2, page 11 – 24. These are medico-legal
reports provided by the
Appellant to various entities (solicitors and insurance companies as detailed
above). The Tribunal notes
there is nothing on these reports that indicate the
Appellant was a registered psychologist. The report lacks notation with respect
to his professional status as a psychologist either directly or by way of
reference to qualification, registration status/number
or membership of the APS.
While it may be submitted that the name of the practice
‘Psychology
could indicate that the writer was a psychologist this is
overwhelmingly contradicted by his use of the qualification
BA(Hons) MSc PhD’
followed on the next line by the descriptor
‘Consultant in Psychological Medicine’
. This is then followed
by another line which reads:
‘WorkCover and MAA trained in the assessment of Permanent
Impairments and AMA Guides 4
letterhead does include the address of the practice, contact telephone and fax
numbers, the ABN and CAN numbers for the practice.
It does not list the members
of the practice or any other details that would assist a reader to identify the
nature of the practice.
Each of the reports provided to the Tribunal has the
same signature block.
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite standard that this Particular is
established. The Tribunal notes that the Local Court was
satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt.
Particulars of Additional Complaint
Particular 1
Tribunal has had regard to the evidence, particularly volume R2 – exhibit
1c – pages 40, 56 and
58. Page 56
is a letter from the Appellant to the
RANZCP dated 16 August 1996 wherein he stated:
I finished Faculty of Medicine at the University of Sarajevo in
1976. After that in 1983 I defended my Master of Medical Science at
the Faculty
of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of Belgrade.
In 1985 I defended my doctoral dissertation at the Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Belgrade and obtained
degree of Doctor
of Medical Science – PhD.
appears the Appellant’s application was again considered by the RANZCP in
early 1999 (volume R2 – exhibit 1c –
page 48 and 50). While a letter
dated 19 Feb 1999 from the RANZCP clearly states that the granting of exemptions
was subject to the
receipt of two documents. The first document required was
confirmation of
‘your psychiatric qualification ie PhD’
the University of Belgrade and the second was
‘a satisfactory
from Dr Chuchkovich.
letter dated 22 February 1999 on the letterhead of Dr Chuchkovich and signed off
with his common seal is in the evidence before
the Tribunal (volume 2 –
exhibit 7c, pages 107 to 109). Dr Chuchkovich’s letter to the RANZCP
advises that he had met
the Appellant at an International Psychiatric Conference
in Opatia in 1984 and more recently he had become well acquainted with him
he commenced working at St George Hospital in Sydney. The letter includes the
Vito Zepinic, has completed his undergraduate studies in
at the University of Sarajevo, the capital of the republic of
Bosnia, former Yugoslavia, which saw the horrendous
fratricidal war
armies and people of Serb, Croat and Moslem populists ethnic roots, essentially
Slavic people, but
practising ethnic cleansing in
spite of what the DAYTON (USA) ACCORD of
professed to
of this horrendous tragedy, that is almost
unbelievable to the minds of the free and democratic Australians, were the
Vito has, after graduation in MEDICINE (1976), embarked upon a successful
academic career by obtaining a MASTERS DEGREE and a DOCTORATE
in MEDICINE at
Belgrade (current Yugoslavia) University. However, his main interest and love
(clinical and academic)
psychology.
letter dated 19 March 1999 indicated that the RANZCP had received a
‘satisfactory reference from Dr Chuchkovich’
and had decided
to grant the Appellant the exemptions. The exemptions granted were in accordance
2c of the pathways document’
. The Appellant was also
advised that the requirement for written confirmation of his psychiatric
qualification from Yugoslavia had
been waived. No reason was given for this
Appellant was still required to complete the General Medical Examination and at
least six months of familiarisation before being
eligible for Clinical
examinations. The familiarisation was explained as a period of supervised
clinical work in Australia or New
Zealand to familiarise with local treatment
practices, methods of service delivery and cultural issues. The
Appellant’s efforts
to obtain employment that would allow him to satisfy
the familiarisation aspect of the RANZCP’s requirements are recorded
in this document.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that on 15 August 1996 and in or about 1998 the
Appellant falsely represented to the RANZCP that
he had obtained a degree of
Doctor of Medical Science (PhD). The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the
Appellant falsely represented
he had been awarded an undergraduate medical
qualification as it is the invariable inference from the Appellant’s
description
of his qualifications. This Particular is established.
Particular 2
content of the letter from the Appellant to the AMC dated 10 November 1997 is
set out above (volume R2, exhibit 1c – page
55). Given the
Tribunal’s findings with respect to the nature of the qualifications
actually held by the Appellant, this letter
speaks for itself. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
Particular 3
Tribunal has had regard to the affidavit of Maree McCabe sworn 29 October 2009.
Ms McCabe was the General Manager of the St John
of God Hospital and she stated
in paragraphs 3 to 9 of the affidavit: (Volume R2, exhibit 3c, pages 76-77):
incident regarding the letter to the College of Psychiatrists occurred as
came to my office in late March 1999 requesting a change to his employment
status. Vitomir stated that he wanted to be employed
at SJOG as a medical
officer so that he could complete the clinical requirements to be recognised as
a psychiatrist in Australia.
Vitomir told me that he had been a psychiatrist in
his own country and wanted to do that in Australia.
stated that I would need to check the budget as the allocation for medical
officers roster was currently full. I told Vitomir that
I would need a couple
of weeks to clarify this. I do not recall if we were either in the process of
preparing the budget or about
to start the process however I wanted to be sure
that there was a position available before agreeing to offer this. I do recall
that he wanted an answer as soon as possible.
few days later I was in contact with a female staff member from (my recollection
was Melbourne University however the letter states
the College of
Psychiatrists). I do not recall the purpose of our conversation or the name of
the staff member but at the end of
our conversation she said – I have a
letter here from you offering Vito a position at Burwood as a medical officer.
said something about him making a number of calls to her about this.
The letter referred to is Annexure A.
said there must be a mistake as I had not written a letter about this as I
wasn't sure that there was a position as the budget was
not finalised. I asked
if the letter was signed by me or on my behalf. She stated that it had been
signed on my behalf and asked
if it would have been signed by my PA. I stated
that I was sure that was not the case as I had not requested a letter be drafted
in relation to this and asked her to fax the letter to me which she did. After
the phone call ended I asked my PA if she had signed
a letter on my behalf in
relation to a medical officer position for Vitomir. She responded that she had
not done this.
received the attached letter via fax (Annexure A). The letter was on letterhead
that was no longer used by the hospital. I showed
the faxed letter to my PA and
she said that the letterhead on the letter had not been used for some time. I
asked my PA to contact
Vitomir and request that he come to my office as I would
like to meet with him.
I did meet with Vitomir I showed him the letter (Annexure A) and asked if he
knew anything about it. He said that he did. I
asked what he knew and he said
that he had written the letter. I asked him was that his signature on the
letter. He said that it
wasn't his signature. I asked whose signature it was
and he said that he had signed it. I asked him why he would sign a letter
behalf of the General Manager when he had no authority to do so. He said he
needed the letter to get into the program and he
needed it now. I reiterated
our previous conversation ie that I needed to check if we had a medical officer
position and that he
had no permission to do what he had done. Vitomir then
stated don't worry it doesn't matter we are friends, it is all right. I
are not friends, and even if we were, it would not give you the right to forge a
signature on a document on behalf of the
hospital. Vitomir said it's not a
problem, we are all friends and it doesn't matter. I said it matters very much,
I don't understand
why you think it's allright. I then asked how you respond if
I had forged your signature on a script. He stated that would be fine
what friends do for each other. I told Vitomir that I would be seeking advice
regarding this and we would meet on Monday.
McCabe annexes to her affidavit a copy of a letter dated 6 April 1999 which is
on St John of God letterhead and is addressed to
the RANZCP. The letter
I am writing to confirm that we have offered to Dr Zepinic a
position as a
Medical Officer
after receiving his medical
registration.
Documentation
indicates that the NSWMB received this letter.
Tribunal also notes that the contents of a letter dated 19 March 1999 from the
RANZCP to the Appellant makes it clear that the
RANZCP had been informed that
the Appellant was anticipating having a position working at the St John of God
Hospital. The letter
also requested the Appellant forward to the RANZCP a copy
of his renewal certificate of general registration or an annual practising
certificate for 1999.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Appellant created an unauthorised
letter and forged the signature of Ms McCabe and improperly
used that letter to
support his application for registration to the NSWMB (by gaining approval of
the training position from the
RANZCP). The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied
that this Particular is established.
Particular 4
Respondent referred the Tribunal to volume R2, exhibit 1d, page 67 and Volume
R2, exhibit 5, page 83 with respect to this Particular.
The first document is a
letter from the AMC to the NSWMB dated 6 March 2002 which records that the
Appellant made an application
to the AMC for assessment of his specialist
qualification in psychiatry. The letter informed the NSWMB that the Appellant
in his application (Form SB) that he had completed his primary
medical qualification at the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sarajevo
1976. The second document is a Statutory Declaration made by the Appellant on 23
June 1998. This is the document referred to in
Particular 5. The Tribunal does
not appear to have a copy of the Appellant’s application which is referred
to in this letter.
on the balance of probability the Tribunal would accept that such representation
was made to the AMC as described in the letter
to the NSWMB, the Tribunal cannot
be comfortably satisfied. The Tribunal did not receive any information regarding
the availability
or otherwise of the original application referred to by the
Particular 5
Statutory Declaration made by the Appellant on 23 June 1998 (volume R2, exhibit
5, page 83) speaks for itself. The declaration
made by the Appellant was false
in that it claimed the Appellant had been awarded a degree of Doctor of Medicine
from the University
of Sarajevo, that from 1976 he was entitled to practice
medicine as a doctor, that he had completed five years full time
‘Postgraduate Training in Psychiatry’
and that he held a
degree of ‘
Specialist in Psychiatry in 1983’
. In view of the
Tribunal’s findings with respect to the qualifications held by the
Appellant the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied
that this Particular is
established.
Particular 6
Tribunal has perused a Certificate of Conditional Registration issued by the
Medical Board of Western Australia (WAMB) effective
from 28 June 1999. The
Tribunal notes that this document was tendered in evidence before the Local
Court at Burwood. The Appellant
gave certain evidence with respect to the
inclusion of the descriptor
‘MBBS (SARAJEVO) 1976’
Tribunal notes that the Certificate is issued with respect to an application for
registration in the speciality of psychiatry
at Fremantle hospital. Once again
the Tribunal did not have the benefit of any original documentation from the
WAMB. While the Tribunal
accepts the submission that it is likely that the
information regarding the Appellant’s qualifications came from the
Appellant’s
application for registration, the Appellant has raised an
issue regarding this matter and where there is no explanation as to the
of relevant documents. The Tribunal cannot be satisfied to the requisite
standard. This Particular is therefore not established.
The Tribunal again notes
that the Appellant gave evidence that he did not work as a medical practitioner
in Western Australia (Local
Court Transcript page 89 – volume R3 –
Particular 7
Respondent relied upon volume R1 - exhibit D5 - page 119 and volume R2, exhibit
7a pages 88 to 91. The Tribunal notes that the
Appellant wrote to the NSWMB on
25 March 1999 enclosing documents in support of an application
temporary registration as a doctor by New South Wales Medical Board’
Included in the bundle was a Curriculum Vitae that listed under the heading
‘Education’
, the qualification
from the Faculty of Medicine University of Belgrade, Yugoslavia as having been
undertaken between 1971 to 1976. The letter detailed
above from the Dean of the
University of Belgrade records that the Appellant had never enrolled in medical
studies at Belgrade University
and that his undergraduate qualifications were
from Sarajevo University. The Tribunal is therefore reasonably satisfied that
Appellant falsely represented to the NSWMB that he held an
‘MDBS’ from the University of Belgrade. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that this Particular is established.
Particular 8
R2 – exhibit 8a, pages 121 – 132 is a letter from the Hunter Mental
Health Service dated 27 July 1999 making application
to the NSWMB on behalf of
the Appellant for Temporary Medical Registration. The application includes a
copy of a CV which is different
in several significant aspects to the CV
referred to in Particular 7 (volume R2 at pages 89 to 91). One of the
significant differences
in the CV referred to in Particular 7 which states that
was obtained from the University of Belgrade,
however, the CV at pages 124 -127 records the
obtained from the University of Sarajevo. The Tribunal notes that attached to
this second CV is a translation of a qualification
conferred on 3 December 1976
from the University of Sarajevo for the degree which entitled the Appellant to
use the professional
‘Doctor of Medicine’
qualification
is reproduced in the actual application
form (pages 122 and 123) completed by Dr Mansoor (Manager Medical Services,
Hunter Mental
Health Service).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Appellant falsely represented in a
curriculum vitae provided to the Hunter Mental Health
Service that he held a
from the University of Sarajevo (1971 -1976). The
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established.
Particular 9
Respondent relies upon a document found at volume R1, exhibit 9(a) which is a
record of an interview held with the Appellant by
the NSWMB on 17 September
1999. The Appellant had provided the Tribunal with only the first page of this
document. The second page
contains the adverse findings of the interview panel.
This is a record of the NSWMB and not a record of the Hunter Mental Health
Service. The Tribunal does not find this Particular established to the requisite
Particular 10
R2, exhibit 10a, page 152 is a handwritten statutory declaration made by the
Appellant on 17 September 1999 at Gladesville,
NSW. The statutory declaration
claims that his occupation is ‘psychiatrist’. From the evidence
before the Tribunal it
appears that at this stage the Appellant was not
registered as a medical practitioner (or as a psychiatrist) in any jurisdiction.
While it may be that the Appellant had authorisation from the NSW Psychologists
Registration Board to use the title ‘Dr’,
it does not entitle a
psychologist to describe his or her occupation as a medical doctor or as a
psychiatrist. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that the Appellant has
falsely described himself as a psychiatrist and therefore this Particular is
established.
Particular 11 and 12
Respondent relied upon an Extract from the Register from The Medical Board of
Queensland as at 5 April 2000 (volume R2 - exhibit
11a – page 154). This
document records the Appellant’s qualifications as
‘MBBS SARAJEVO
. The Tribunal also notes that the QMB issued a Certificate of
Good Standing to the Appellant on 20 March 2000 and the qualification
‘MD Belgrade 1985’
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Appellant falsely represented to the
QMB that he held an undergraduate degree in medicine.
The Tribunal was not
provided with the documents provided to the QMB by the Appellant. The Tribunal
is not reasonably satisfied as
to what the Appellant actually represented to the
Particular 12
Tribunal notes that the Appellant gave evidence before the Local Court at
Burwood on 29 January 2008 that he had a Doctor of Medicine
degree from the
University of Sarajevo (Transcript page 73, volume R3 - exhibit 18b, page 402).
in his evidence before the Local Court, the Appellant stated that he had been
registered by the Queensland MB on a conditional
basis under ‘
and was employed as a staff specialist in psychiatry at
Toowoomba Hospital between 4 February 2000 and 8 June 2002, although he later
gave evidence that he had resigned earlier in 2002 (see Transcript pages 411 to
418). Under cross-examination the Appellant ultimately
acknowledged he had
received a ‘show cause’ notice from the Queensland Medical Board
(QMB) on 15 April 2002 which stated
that the proposed ground for cancellation of
his registration was the materially false or misleading representations or
declarations
that he had made. The Appellant maintained that his registration
had been cancelled when he resigned in February rather than when
the Queensland
Medical Board proceeded to cancel the registration on or about 14 May 2002.
Tribunal has not been provided with the original application/documentation
however there is a strong inference that allows the
Tribunal to be reasonably
satisfied the Appellant gave the QMB the information regarding the medical
qualifications he held.
Tribunal notes with respect to Appellant’s dealing with the QMB the
following medical qualifications are recorded in documentation
Appellant or in QMB documents on the dates indicated:
SARAJEVO 1976
- 5 June 2001 (volume R2 - exhibit 16e page 254)
SARAJEVO 1976
- 3 April 2001 (volume R3 – exhibit, page 314)
MD BELGRADE
- 19 May 2000 (volume R3 - exhibit 17c – page 312)
MBBS SARAJAVO
- 5 April 2000 (volume R2 - exhibit 11a – page 154)
MD BELGRADE
- 20 March 2000 (volume R3 – exhibit 17b – page 315)
respect to Particulars 11 & 12 the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the
Appellant provided evidence to the QMB that
he held an undergraduate medical
degree of some description.
Particular 13
Tribunal has already made a finding with respect to the actual qualifications
held by the Appellant. The documentation before
the Tribunal indicates that the
Appellant was employed as a Staff Specialist – Psychiatry in the Toowoomba
Health Service District
(volume R2 exhibit 1c pages 51 – 53) during the
period specified in this Particular.
to the knowledge of the Appellant the Tribunal notes he wrote to the APS on 22
February 1996 stating that he had ‘
over 12 years of working experience
in the clinical seating
and teaching as a clinical
psychologist’
. (volume 2 – exhibit b, page 25) In the
Application for membership of the APS College of Clinical Psychologists attached
this letter (pages 26 – 29) the Appellant records that he had been a
member of the APS since 30 September 1994. The Appellant
lists his academic
qualifications in psychology as a B.A. (Hons) in Psychology from the University
of Sarajevo (four years full time
up to 1976), a M.Sc. in Clinical Psychology
from the University of Belgrade (six years part time up to 1983) and a PhD,
being a Doctor
of Medical Science from the University of Belgrade (two years
full time up to 1985). The Application also lists
at the University of Sarajevo (five years up to 1978), six
months of training at the Institute of Psychotherapy in Zagreb in 1981
in the qualification of
‘Licenced Cognitive Psychotherapist’
‘Senior Psychotherapist’
in 1982. The Application also
records that the Appellant worked as a clinical psychologist from 1976 to 1982
at the Psychiatric
Hospital in Sarajevo. The Tribunal notes that the
information in the application form is verified by the Appellant by way of a
declaration
that the information provided is ‘
true and correct in every
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that between about April 2000 and about 18
January 2002 the Appellant was employed as a Staff
Specialist –
Psychiatrist with Toowoomba Health Service District when he knew he was not
medically qualified to be so. Particular
13 is therefore established.
Particular 14
Tribunal notes that volume R2 - exhibit 7(a), page 88 is a letter written by the
Appellant to the NSWMB dated 25 March 1999. This
letter makes an application for
temporary registration. Enclosed with the letter is a CV which records the
Appellant studying for
at the Faculty of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Yugoslavia, from 1971 to 1976.
Tribunal also notes that volume 2 - exhibit 1(c), page 57(a) is a letter dated 2
November 2001 from the Appellant to the NSWMB
again requesting registration.
Attached to this letter is the actual application form (pages 57 (b) and (c)),
which relies upon Mutual
Recognition legislation. This Application is in the
form of a declaration that appears to have been executed by the Appellant in
front of a Justice of the Peace. In this Application the Appellant lists
‘MB BS, University of Sarajevo, Former Yugoslavia, 1976’
his medical qualification. The Application relies upon the Appellant holding
registration in Queensland, with the Registration
Number 1000430.
placed before the Tribunal this Particular refers to the representation of
“MDBS” on 2 November 2001. As can be seen
from the summary of the
evidence above, it appears that the Appellant falsely represented his
qualifications to the NSWMB on 2 November
. The Tribunal cannot therefore make a finding with
respect to this Particular as pleaded; however, the representations are false
and it is of significant concern that the Appellant not only represented he held
a medical qualification, but that his description
of that qualification as well
as the University from which it was claimed to have been obtained changed from
one application to the
there is sufficient evidence for the Tribunal to be reasonably satisfied that
the Appellant made false representations to
the NSWMB those representations were
not in the form pleaded. The Tribunal does not find this Particular established.
Particular 15
Tribunal had in evidence as part of volume R2 - exhibit 15 (b), a colour
photocopy of a form received by the Australasian Medical
Publishing Company, the
publishers of The Medical Directory of Australia. Volume R2 - exhibit 15(a) is a
statement from the Database
Manager of the Australasian Medical Publishing
Company (Company). This statement records that the electronic records of the
indicate that the Appellant was first entered onto the Company database
on 21 May 2001 after the Company had located his name on
the data from the
Queensland Medical Board. Further, the Database manager states that in
preparation for the 24
Edition of The Medical
Directory of Australia a form was sent to the Appellant on 22 July 2003 seeking
confirmation of the professional
details held by the Company. The form was
completed by hand and signed by the Appellant on 28 July 2003.
form records under the heading of ‘
Qualification’
handwritten entry as follows ‘
MB BS, Sarajevo, Yugoslavia,
. The form also records that the Respondent is practising from
rooms in Burwood, and advises that the
working week is spent in
‘Private medical practice –
, the form has the words
‘I am a Salaried doctor in
the Private System’
circled. The word
circled after
‘I have Hospital Rights’
, but the word
is circled after ‘
I have a Right of Private
. The form has
‘Psychiatry’
listed as the
‘Medical Practice’
which is a significant part of
‘daily practice’
, and ‘Public
as an area in which he has an interest, and
‘Occupational
as an area in which he is interested in participating for
clinical research.
the heading of
‘Therapeutic Drug Classes commonly prescribed
the Appellant indicated drug class(es) he currently prescribes were
‘Antianxiety agents’, ‘Antidepressants’
‘Antipsychotic agents’ and Vitamins & Minerals’.
The Appellant also indicates that he sees
patients per day and writes on average ‘
scripts per day.
Tribunal is reasonable satisfied that this Particular is established.
Tribunal notes that by the time the Appellant made this representation to the
Company he had been called before the QMB with a
‘show cause’ notice
(exhibit D2, volume 1, page 105) and that his registration as a medical
practitioner in Queensland
was cancelled on 14 May 2002.
Particular 16 & 17
1 February 2005 the Appellant wrote to the University of Sydney, School of
Medicine providing documents relevant to his application
for enrolment in a
Master of Medicine/Psychotherapy course.
of the documents attached to this letter is an
‘Application for
admission into a clinical Doctorate, Master’s degree by coursework,
Graduate Diploma or Graduate Certificate
in which the
Appellant indicates he wanted to be admitted into the Master of Medicine
(Psychotherapy) within the Department/School
of Medicine. The Appellant lists,
inter alia,
a Doctor of Medicine from the Faculty of Medicine, University
of Sarajevo awarded on 4 October 1976. Attached to this Application
certified translation of a Degree from the University of Sarajevo, Faculty of
Medicine wherein the degree awarded is translated
exhibit F, volume R1 (page 177), there is a copy of a letter dated 27 March 2008
from The Dean of The Faculty of Medicine and The
University of Sarajevo. This
letter states as follows (as written):
In refer to Your requierment, regarding the wanted informations
born on June the 27th of 1953. ;I want to informe You that I have
accomplished an investigation about this subject and came to knowledge
facts as follow:
person by the name of
"Vitomir Zepinic"
was never awarded a degree of
Medical Doctor, by the Sarajevo Faculty of Medicine.
Medical Faculty was never conferred/issued a degree of Medical Doctor to the
individual mentioned above; and therefore,
certify that the attached copy of
, for the individual noted above, is authentic and correct.
Tribunal also notes the contents of the statement from the Dean of the School of
Medicine at the University of Belgrade dated
21 December 2007 (Volume R2 –
exhibit 9c – page 151).
attached to the Application made to the University of Sydney (mentioned in
Particular 16 above) by the Appellant is a copy of
a translation of a Master of
Medical Science (M.Sc.) awarded by the University of Belgrade, Faculty of
Medicine on 28 April 1983.
In the actual Application form the Appellant recorded
that he received a Master of Medical Science/MSc on 18 March 1983 from the
Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade. At exhibit 9(c) of volume 2 (page
151) there is a statement from the Dean of the School
of Medicine at the
University of Belgrade. The substance of this statement is set out above but is
repeated below for ease of reference:
am the Dean of the School of Medicine at the University of Belgrade.
have been requested to confirm the academic qualifications of Vitomir Zepinic,
born 27 June 1953, in respect to the School of Medicine,
University of
and I am able to confirm that Vitomir Zepinic has
never been enrolled in medical
studies at this University leading to the Medical Doctor degree, he is not a
graduate of the School
of Medicine in Belgrade, and he did not complete a
Specialist Degree in Psychiatry at the School of Medicine, University of
Zepinic enrolled in post graduate studies at the School of Medicine in Belgrade,
after having graduated from the Faculty of
Philosophy – Department for
Pedagogy and Psychology in Sarajevo.
confirm that Vitomir Zepinic successfully completed the Post Graduate Training
in Psychotherapy and obtained a Masters in Science
degree in Psychotherapy on 18
March 1983 at the School of Medicine, University of Belgrade.
successfully defended a Master of Science thesis under the title "Influence of
extraversion and Neuroticism on Delinquent Behaviour
of the Underage". He also
successfully defended a Doctor of Philosophy dissertation under the title
"Psychological Characteristics
of Underage Delinquent-Smokers" at the School of
Medicine, University of Belgrade on 22 March 1985.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that these Particulars are established. The
Tribunal notes that the University of Sydney cancelled
the enrolment of the
Appellant and he did not graduate from this course.
Particular 18
the evidence before the Tribunal is the transcript of the Local Court
proceedings at Burwood. The Transcript records the Appellant
gave sworn evidence
on 14 April 2008 that the photocopy he provided to the Court as part of Exhibit
9 was the only record he had
of his original Doctor of Medicine Degree from the
University of Sarajevo. Attached to this photocopy was an English translation
the document.
Tribunal again refers to the letter from The Dean of the Faculty of Medicine,
University of Sarajevo (exhibit F, Volume 1 –
page 177) wherein it is
clearly recorded that no such degree was ever awarded to the Appellant.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Appellant gave false evidence to the
Burwood Local Court on 14 April 2008.
Particular 19
Tribunal makes reference to the affidavit of the Registrar of the NSW
Psychologists Registration Board dated 19 November 2009
(volume R3 - exhibit 19,
pages 507-511).
affidavit attached a copy of the
‘Renewal of Registration as a
Registered Psychologist Until 30 June 2010’
completed by the Appellant
on 23 March 2009. This is the usual form that all registered psychologists are
required to complete when
renewing their registration on an annual basis. This
form asks a number of questions. The questions are prefaced by the following
Below is a declaration concerning the twelve month period prior
to your renewal being due. Unless completing your renewal on line,
declaration must be completed and returned before your renewal will be
processed. By signing this declaration you are sincerely
declaring that the
information being provided is true and correct. You must read the explanatory
notes overleaf before continuing.
1 of the renewal form reads:
Have you been convicted of any offence, in or outside of New
South Wales, except an excluded offence?
Tribunal notes that a conviction under section 105(1) of the
Medical Practice
(NSW) is not an excluded offence. The Tribunal further notes that the
Appellant was convicted on 19 August 2008 of six counts of
take/use false
description concerning entitlement to register under
section 105(1)
Medical Practice Act
Tribunal notes that the Appellant answered ‘
to Question 1
and that the Appellant signed the form on 23 March 2009.
3 of the renewal form reads:
Has a criminal finding been made against you for an offence
committed in the course of the practice or purported practice of
psychology?
Appellant also answered this question
perusal of the transcript of the Burwood Local Court proceedings (volume R3 -
exhibit 18(b), commencing at page 423) reveals that
the offences relate to the
Appellant providing,
inter alia,
reports to the legal representatives for
several of his clients using the descriptor
name. These reports for the purpose of legal proceedings involving the
Tribunal notes that attached to a letter from WorkCover NSW to the Board dated
30 August 2005 are three de-identified reports
written by the Appellant
regarding treatment he had provided to his patients. These reports are addressed
to a firm of solicitors
and to workers’ compensation insurance companies.
Such conduct can only be considered to be in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
Appellant should have answered both question 1 and 3 in the affirmative. The
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular
is made out.
Submissions
the Respondent made final submissions in this matter, the Appellant did not make
final submissions as he did not appear. The
Tribunal has had regard to the
material filed by the Appellant which contains material in the nature of a
submission.
Respondent noted that the Appellant has been subject to a ‘Good
Behaviour’ Bond covering a two year period from 19
August 2008 until 18
August 2010.
Respondent listed the misleading references made by the Appellant to his
qualification to a whole range of authorities. The Respondent
noted that the
Decision of the Board recorded that the Appellant was still disputing his right
to use the particular post nominal
referred to in the criminal proceedings
(volume 2 - exhibit RA, page 4).
Respondent provided a chronology for the assistance of the Tribunal that is
annexed hereto and marked B. Given the volume of correspondence
referred to in
the Decision it may clarify contextual matters.
Respondent noted that the Appellant had never provided the original document
supporting his claim to undergraduate medical qualifications.
The Faculty of
Medicine of the University of Sarajevo would not certify the copy of the
qualification the Appellant claimed he held.
The conclusion that the Tribunal
would reach in the evidence before it is that the document provided by the
Appellant was a forgery.
Respondent noted that the first representation in time made by the Appellant in
the evidence currently before the Tribunal is
the letter to the APS dated 22
February 1996 (volume R2 - page 25). There is nothing in that letter or the
attached documentation
to indicate that the Appellant held qualifications as a
psychiatrist. The Respondent further submitted that the claim made by the
Appellant in the Application for recognition as a Clinical Psychologist
forwarded to the APS that he had worked in Sarajevo for 12
years as a clinical
psychologist is an admission against interest (with respect to the later
representations made that he had worked
as a medical doctor). Further, it is
noted by the Tribunal that the claims as to qualifications made in the initial
representation
is supported by the evidence currently before the Tribunal.
Respondent drew the attention of the Tribunal to the inconsistencies in the
versions of qualifications provided by the Appellant
in various documents and in
his evidence before the Burwood Local Court. The Respondent submitted that the
Appellant appears to have
undergone a metamorphosis from a psychologist into a
psychiatrist.
being cross-examined before the Local Court at Burwood the Appellant gave the
following evidence (T90.1-29 – 29 January
2008 – volume 3 –
exhibit 18a, page 419):
Q. Doctor, you gave evidence that you did your Doctor of Medicine
at Sarajevo University. Is that right?
A. That’s correct.
Q. And then you said two years later you did your psychology degree at
Sarajevo University?
A. That’s correct.
Q. Well that’s your evidence doctor. Is that correct or not?
A. `it’s incorrect. You’re interpreting incorrectly because my
study of psychology was part-time.
Q. You completed a psychology degree after you has, as you say, been awarded
a Doctor of Medicine from Sarajevo University.
A. That’s correct.
Q. Now since your completion of your Doctor of Medicine ar Sarajevo
University, did you work as a doctor in ...
A. Yes I did.
Q. Sarajevo?
A. Yes I did.
Q. Did you work as a psychologist in Sarajevo?
Respondent noted by way of example that by 10 November 1997 that when the
Appellant wrote to the AMC (volume R2 – exhibit
1c, page 25) he was
stating that his post graduate studies were in psychiatry and that he had worked
initially in general practice
after completing his medical studies and then as a
‘Psychiatry Registrar’ and ‘Psychiatrist’ with over 20
years of work experience in a ‘clinical setting’.
Respondent contrasted the information provided by the Appellant in an
Application to the APS dated 15 August 1996 and the Application
to the RANZCP
made on the same day.
was submitted that the conflicting content of the letters dated 15 and 23 August
1996 (to the RANZCP and the APS respectively)
written by the Respondent clearly
illustrate why the Tribunal should be concerned about the ability of the
Appellant to make truthful
representation.
Respondent also noted the letter from the APS dated 23 August 1996 (volume R2
– page 19) indicated that the Appellant had
been elected as to
‘Associate Membership’ of the College of Clinical Psychologists. He
was notified he had been made
a Full Member by letter dated 8 November 1996
(volume R2 - page 15) from the APS.
Findings in relation to Particulars of Complaint
Tribunal has made findings with respect to the Particulars of Complaint above
and notes for the best part the Particulars are
established.
Findings in relation to the Original Complaints
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Appellant’s conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct in that it
demonstrates that the Appellant
conducted himself in an improper and unethical manner and that the conduct
demonstrated that the
judgment possessed by the psychologist in the practice of
psychology was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of
psychologist of an equivalent level of training and experience to that of the
Appellant. Further the Tribunal is of the view that
the conduct is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of
registration. The Tribunal makes a
finding of professional misconduct with
respect to the original Complaint.
to the ‘not of good character’ Complaint, the Tribunal is required
to make a determination as at the date of the Inquiry/decision.
The conduct is
certainly indicative of a deficit in character. The Tribunal would not be
reasonably satisfied that this conduct alone
would result in a ‘not of
good character’ finding. Given the additional matters put before the
Tribunal it is appropriate
for the Tribunal to consider the conduct established
under the four Particulars of the Original Complaint along with those matters
subsequently put before the Tribunal when determining the appropriate Orders to
Findings in relation to Additional Complaint One
set out above, the Tribunal has made findings with respect to each of the
Particulars of the additional Complaint One. The Tribunal
accepts the
submissions made by the Respondent.
not every act of dishonesty (forgeries, false declarations and a failure to
disclose to the Board in this instance) would in
itself allow a finding of
‘not of good character’ to be made, the level of dishonesty of the
Appellant found by the Tribunal
is remarkable. When considered in its totality
there is a pattern of the Appellant providing information that would progress
various applications rather than of providing truthful information. His
reliance on the difficulties that are expected when leaving
a country in the
throws of civil unrest is disingenuous and deceitful. This conduct shows no
regard for those people who genuinely
hold qualifications to which they have no
access because of such upheavals and may be deserving of the trust of a
registration authority.
Tribunal has evidence before it that when the District Court considered a
personal injuries claim made by one of the Appellant’s
clients in 2001 it
was argued that his evidence should be rejected on the basis that there was (at
that stage) an allegation that
the Appellant was holding himself out as a
medical practitioner. On this occasion this argument was rejected. However, the
for an adverse outcome for a client of the Appellant as a result of
the Appellant’s conduct is clearly demonstrated (see volume
exhibit C1, page 58).
Appellant engaged in a pattern of misleading conduct, providing false
information whenever it suited his purposes.
Appellant forged documents and signatures. He provided the false and misleading
information not only to various relevant professional
bodies but also to
numerous registration authorities. He was prepared to provide this information
as statutory declarations and solemn
declarations which in some cases were
witnessed by Justices of the Peace.
Appellant made these representations knowingly, for his own purposes and
benefit. His aim was to gain professional standing to
which he was not entitled.
The Tribunal notes the provisions of the
Oaths Act 1900
reliance on his refugee status compounds the abysmal nature of his conduct.
the Tribunal has viewed the Particulars cumulatively in forming the view of a
reasonable satisfaction as to the conduct demonstrating
a lack of good
character, there are a number of Particulars that would in and of themselves
allow the Tribunal to reach such a finding.
The falsification of the letter on
the St John of God letterhead and the forging of Ms McCabe’s signature is
one such act and
the representations made to the effect that he held an
undergraduate medical qualification is another.
conduct occurred over a significant period of time. The Decision of the Board
Inquiry indicates that the Appellant was not acting
in a manner expected of a
professional person. The Appellant has not taken any steps to correct the
misleading information he has
provided to various entities even after the
falsity of the documents was beginning to be uncovered.
Appellant did not attend the further Directions Hearings in this matter and did
not comply with the timetables set by the Tribunal.
The Appellant failed to
attend the Inquiry. There is nothing in evidence before the Tribunal that would
indicate that there has been
any reformation of the character of the Appellant.
conduct of the Appellant demonstrates serious and significant defects in his
character. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that
the conduct of the
Appellant demonstrates that he is not of good character.
Findings in relation to Additional Complaint Two
Tribunal notes that the Appellant failed to honestly answer Questions 1 and 3 on
his annual registration renewal form. The Act
provides for the Board to require
this information to be provided and verified as a statutory declaration. By
making a false declaration
the Appellant has contravened a provision of the
even if there was no such statutory obligation, the provision of relevant
information is a fundamental responsibility of
all registered health care
professionals. Providing false information in the circumstances of this matter
clearly constitutes improper
and unethical conduct in the course of the practice
of psychology.
Appellant’s conduct is of such a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of registration. The
Tribunal makes a finding of
professional misconduct with respect to Additional Complaint Two.
Protective Orders
Tribunal has made a finding of professional misconduct and that the Appellant is
not of good character.
Tribunal notes that the Appellant signed off on the reports he wrote (subject of
the Burwood Local Court proceedings ) as follows
(see for example volume R1 -
exhibit 2, page18):
Dr Vito Zepinic
MBBS BA(Hons) MSc PhD
Consultant in Psychological Medicine
WorkCover and MAA trained in the assessment of Permanent Impairments &
AMA guides, 4
Appellant made blatant and wilful misrepresentations to the Board, to other
registration authorities and to other professional
organisations. The
misrepresentations may well have denied these bodies the opportunities to act
appropriately to protect the public
and to otherwise carry out their important
primary function of the Tribunal is to protect the public. Other matters to be
considered by the Tribunal as relevant considerations
are the maintenance of
discipline within the profession, a general deterrent effect and the maintaining
of public confidence in the
profession. The Tribunal therefore must consider
Orders that fulfil these requirements. Whilst it is an established principle of
law that the Tribunal should impose the least restrictive Orders possible in the
circumstances, the protection of the public is paramount
and outweighs
consideration of the onerous burdens that Orders may place upon a practitioner.
In this matter protection of the reputation
of the profession and the
maintenance of confidence that the public is entitled to expect in the
profession of psychology are prominent
considerations.
the length of time the Appellant engaged in the deceptive conduct detailed in
this matter and the nature of the deficits in
character exposed by the findings
of this Tribunal the Appellant will require a lengthy period of time to address
these issues. The
Tribunal will fix a period of five years from the date of the
decision during which the Appellant will not be entitled to apply for
of the Orders.
Tribunal is satisfied that the Appellant lacks the character required to be a
registered psychologist; further, he has conducted
himself in an improper and
unethical manner over a lengthy period of time.
Tribunal is of the view that conditions on registration would not be appropriate
in this matter. Not only is the conduct of the
Appellant so appalling that it
would attract the most severe criticism, the Appellant has demonstrated he
cannot be trusted to act
in an honest and truthful manner.
Appellant poses a significant risk to the public safety, particularly having
regard to the manner in which he has repeatedly made
false and misleading
statements to various regulatory and professional organisations. The Appellant
did not attend the Inquiry and
has not provided a full and frank account of his
conduct to the Tribunal. The conduct of the Appellant extended beyond the
of psychology, and beyond registration authorities. The Tribunal
therefore considers it appropriate to proceed to make a Prohibition
provisions of the Act relating to the award of costs are what is commonly know
as ‘costs follow the event’. The Tribunal
orders costs in favour of
the Respondent in the usual terms.
Publication
A copy of this document should be
forwarded to, the Appellant (noting that the Registry only holds two residential
addresses for the
Appellant), the Respondent, the Health Care Complaints
Commission of NSW, the New South Wales Psychology Council, the Psychology
of Australia, the New South Wales Medical Council, the APS, the AMC, the RANZCP,
and otherwise as the Council sees fit.
The Tribunal
considers that it is appropriate that the name of the Respondent should not be
on the Register of Psychologists. It appears
to the Tribunal that the Appellant
has not renewed his Registration and therefore his name will no longer be on the
Register. The
Tribunal makes Order 1 in the event that this is not the case. The
Tribunal orders:
(1) That the Appellant‘s name is to be cancelled from the Register (if
this has not already occurred).
(2) That the Appellant is not entitled to reapply for registration for a minimum
period of five years from the date hereof.
(3) That the Appellant is prohibited from providing the following health
services for a period of five years from today:
(i) therapy,
(ii) psychotherapy,
(iii) hypnotherapy,
(iv) mental
health service,
(v) welfare
services (as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
(vi) counselling,
(vii) any other
alternative/healing health care/therapies.
(4) After the expiry of the period of five years in Order 3 above, the Appellant
is permitted to provide these health services on
the condition that he gains
registration as a psychologist or other health professional, at which time the
registration authority
should consider the further continuation of the
prohibition order.
(5) The Appellant is to pay the costs of the Board as agreed or assessed. If the
parties cannot agree on costs, liberty is granted
for an application to apply to
have the matter re-listed before the Tribunal to determine
Dated: 12 August 2010
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Peter Champion
___________________
Brian Sheridan
___________________
Noel Greenaway
Annexure A – Index of
Exhibited Documents
Annexure B – Chronology
C - Schedule of Names Suppressed
INDEX OF EXHIBITED DOCUMENTS
ZEPINIC V PSYCHOLOGISTS REGISTRATION BOARD OF NSW
DOCUMENTS PROVIDED BY THE APPELLANT
from Appellant to Board dated 22 November 2008.
from the Principal Solicitor, WorkCover to solicitors (who appear to be acting
on behalf of the Appellant) dated 21 April 2008.
Ministerial
Brief to Queensland Minister for Health dated 9 January 2003.
from GIO General Insurance to Client A dated 30 August 2005.
from GIO General Insurance to Client B dated 15 August 2005.
from QBE Insurance to Client C dated 8 May 2007.
from Cambridge Integrated Services (as agent for WorkCover) to Appellant re
Client D dated 9 January 2008.
from GallagerBassett Services Pty Ltd to the Appellant dated 26 September
from WorkCover to Client E dated 13 March 2007.
from GallagerBassett to the Appellant dated 1 May 2008.
extracted from the transcript of the criminal proceedings brought against the
Appellant in the Burwood Local Court on 29 January
2008 and 14 April 2008.
from the New South Wales Medical Board (NSWMB) to the Appellant dated 26 March
page of an Interview Report of an interview of the Appellant and the NSWMB on 17
September 1999.
from the NSWMB to the Appellant dated 15 October 2001.
from the NSWMB to the Appellant dated 14 November 2001.
from the NSWMB to the Appellant dated 6 May 2002.
from the AMC to the Appellant dated 30 June 1998.
from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 5 October 1998.
from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 21 October 1998.
from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 20 November 1998.
from the RANZCP to the Appellant dated 19 February 1999.
from the AMC to the Appellant dated 3 March 1999.
from the MBWA to the Appellant dated 25 June 1999.
Certificate
of Conditional Registration from the MBWA for the period 28 June 1999 to 28
August 1999.
from Register’ as at 5 April 2000 from the MBQLD.
from the Health Insurance Commission to the Appellant dated 20 April 2000.
from Toowoomba Health to the Appellant.
from Queensland Health to the Appellant.
from Toowoomba Health to the Appellant.
on the Appellant’s performance assessment by Toowoomba Health made by way
of a letter dated 3 January 2001.
Certificate
of Good Standing issued by the MBQLD to the NSWMB dated 20 March 2000.
from the President of the AMA to the Appellant dated 28 June 2007.
DOCUMENTS FILED ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
Index – Volume One
Outcome of Board Inquiry – Decision dated 27 October
Documents provided to the Board Inquiry and Dr Zepinic in relation to
the Inquiry held 7 October 2008.
1. (a)Psychologists Registration Board complaint dated 23 September
(b)Certificate of Registration
(c)Additional Complaint dated 9 October 2009
2. Letter of complaint from Mary Hawkins, Director Provider Services Group,
WorkCover dated 30 August 2005 with attachments:
i. Report by Dr Vito Zepinic dated 6 January 2004
ii. Report by Dr Vito Zepinic dated 13 January 2005
iii. Report by Dr Vito Zepinic dated 21 September 2004
3. Letter from Ms Anne Harvey, Legal Officer New South Wales Medical Board
dated 31 July 2008
4. Certificates of Conviction
5. Legislation:
Psychologists Act 2001
– Grounds for complaints
Section 105
Medical Practice Act 1992
– Use of misleading titles
6. Psychologists Registration Board – Code of Professional Conduct
(November 2004)
7. Letter from Deputy Registrar dated 12 August 2008 to Dr Vitomir Zepinic
advising of the Inquiry on Tuesday 7 October 2008
Submission from Dr Zepinic dated 29 September 2008 addressing the Board
Inquiry with attachments:
1. Document from Qld Health referring to Dr Zepinic
2. Extract of transcript from Burwood Local Court
3. Judgment from Sydney District Court 2 June 2001
4. Certificate of Good Standing issued by the Medical Board of Queensland
dated 20 March 2000
5. Letter from Allianz Insurance to MAAS dated 13 April 2007
6. Court Attendance Notice dated 2 October 2007 (re s238AA(8)
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
7. Various correspondence to Dr Zepinic from 1998 to 2001
8. Letter from WorkCover to Gray & Perkins Lawyers dated 21 April
9. Various letters from NSW Medical Board to Dr Zepinic from 1999 to
10. Certificate of Conditional Registration issued by Medical Board of WA
dated 28 June 1999 – 28 August 1999; Extract from
Register of Medical
Board of Qld dated 4 April 2000 – 30 September 2000
11. Extract of transcript from Burwood Local Court
12. Various media articles dated 2 February 2008
13. Various media articles dated 5 – 6 February 2008, and 23 July
14. Email from Stephen Margetts to Dr Zepinic dated 31 August 2006 and
letter from DIMIA to Dr Zepinic dated 15 March 2002
Letter of Appeal from Dr Zepinic dated 22 November 2008 with
attachments:
1. Letter from WorkCover to Gray & Perkins Lawyers dated 21 April
2. Document from Qld Health referring to Dr Zepinic
3. Various correspondence regarding WorkCover investigation
4. Extract of transcript from Burwood Local Court
5. Various letters from NSW Medical Board to Dr Zepinic from 1999 to
6. Various correspondence to Dr Zepinic from 1998 to 2001
Other documents
Local Court transcript from 22 and 25 July 2008 – sentence
proceedings before Magistrate Barkell
Correspondence between the Board and The University of Sydney regarding
enquiries into Dr Zepinic's qualifications
Certificate of registration pursuant to
Psychologists Act
Additional Complaint – Particular
Document Description
Miscellaneous documents
Exhibit R(a)
Expert Report by Dr Michael Diamond dated 20 September 2007
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Exhibit R(b)
Application forms, references and other documents relating to Mr Zepinic's
application to the Australian Psychological Society's Clinical
Psychologists
Business Records of Australian Psychological Society Produced under
to NSW Medical Board from the RANZCP dated 5 December 2001
to RANZCP from NSW Medical Board dated 21 December 2001
to RANZCP from Mr Zepinic dated 24 January 2002 enclosing a number of
attachments including, a letter to the RANZCP from Mr
Zepinic dated 15 August
1996 with additional pages 57(a), 57(b) and 57(c).
to NSW Medical Board from Australian Medical Council dated 6 March 2002.
to NSW Medical Board from the RANZCP dated 20 March 2002
to Mr Zepinic from NSW Medical Board dated 6 May 2002
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Letter to the RANZCP from Mr Zepinic dated 24 January 2002 enclosing
numerous attachments and correspondence, including a letter to
the Australian
Medical Council from Mr Zepinic dated 10 November 1997 (see 1a) above)
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
(same as 1a) above)
of Maree McCabe dated 29 October 2009
to NSW Medical Board from RANZCP dated 21 April 1999
Note of NSW Medical Board dated 16 September 1999
Original document
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Letter to NSW Medical Board from Australian Medical Council dated 6 March
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Statutory Declaration of Vitomir Zepinic dated 23 June 1998
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Certificate
of Conditional Registration (Medical Board of Western Australia)
to University of Sydney from University of Sarajevo dated 27 March
Local Court Exhibit (7) produced under summons
to NSW Medical Board from Mr Zepinic dated 25 March 1999 enclosing application
for registration.
to NSW Medical Board from Mr Zepinic dated 26 August 1999 enclosing
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
to NSW Medical Board from Hunter Mental Health Service dated 27 July 1999.
to NSW Medical Board from Hunter Mental Health Service dated 16 August
to Hunter Mental Health Services from NSW Medical Board dated 20 August
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Medical Board Interview Report Assessment for CMO in Psychiatry, Hunter Mental
Health Services dated 17 September 1999.
to Colin Borg from NSW Medical Board dated 20 September 1999 enclosing area of
need conditional registration record of assessment.
of Prof. Bogdan Djuricic MD, D.Sc. dated 21 September
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Statutory Declaration of Vitomir Zepinic dated 17 September 1999.
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
from Medical Board of Queensland Register dated 5 April 2000
of Meeting of Conduct Committee of NSW Medical Board held on 16 August 2005,
attaching an article from The Australian newspaper
dated Thursday 4 August
to University of Sydney from University of Sarajevo dated 27 March
Local Court Exhibit (12) produced under summons
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Certificate
of Good Standing (Medical Board of Queensland) dated 20 March 2000
of Prof. Bogdan Djuricic MD, D.Sc., Dean of School of Medicine at University of
Belgrade dated 21 September 2007.
Document provided by appellant
Local Court Exhibit (2) produced under summons
Letter to NSW Medical Board from Vitomir Zepinic dated 2 November 2001
enclosing application for registration including material relating
to employment
as Staff Specialist in Queensland.
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Letter to NSW Medical Board from Vitomir Zepinic dated 2 November 2001
enclosing application for registration.
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
Same as 13 above
of David Lewinsohn, Australasian Medical Publishing Company dated 8 February
of Vaishali Joshi, Australasian Medical Publishing Company dated 8 February
Business Records of NSW Medical Board Produced under summons
to University of Sydney from Mr Zepinic dated 1 February 2005 attaching
application form
to Mr Zepinic from University of Sydney dated 17 March 2008
to University of Sydney from University of Sarajevo dated 27 March
to University of Sydney from Mr Zepinic dated 30 April 2008
to University of Sydney from NSW Medical Board dated 10 June 2008
to University of Sydney from Mr Zepinic dated 29 July 2008
to Mr Zepinic from University of Sydney dated 27 August 2008
to Mr Zepinic from University of Sydney dated 24 November 2008
to Nina Beeston of the Psychologists Registration Board from University of
Sydney dated 23 October 2008
Business records of University of Sydney, produced under summons
Additional Complaint – Particular
Document Description
to Mr Zepinic from University of Sydney dated 17 March 2008
to NSW Medical Board from University of Sydney dated 25 March 2008
to University of Sydney from University of Sarajevo dated 27 March
to Nina Beeston of the Psychologists Registration Board from University of
Sydney dated 23 October 2008
Medical Board s.192A Certificate.
Business records of University of Sydney, produced under summons
of Burwood Local Court hearing before Magistrate Barkell dated 29 January
of Burwood Local Court hearing before Magistrate Barkell dated 14 April
Translation
of purported Doctor of Medicine degree from Sarajevo University dated 3 December
Translation
of purported Master of Medical Sciences degree from University of Belgrade dated
28 April 1983
Translation
of purported Doctor of Medical Sciences (PhD) degree from University of Belgrade
dated 16 May 1985
Local Court file produced under summons
Local Court file produced under summons (Exhibit 9)
(Exhibit 5)
(Exhibit 6)
Affidavit of Mary Shanahan attaching Annual Declaration dated 23 March
20. Affidavit of Service of Mark Smith dated 2 December 2009 (confirming
service of volumes two and three of the Respondent’s
documents at
Appellant’s address on 1 December 2009).
21. Affidavit of Service of Stephen Hobbs dated 23 April 2010 (confirming
service of Notice of Inquiry and other documentation on
18 February 2010).
22.Letter from CSO dated 1 April 2010 filing documents.
23.A page printed from Australian Communications and Media Authority Website
dated 27 April 2010.
24.Email correspondence between Mr Sagar Thukar (CSO) and Maree McCabe dated
27 April 2010.
25.Letter from SAMB dated 28 April 2010 confirming the Appellant was never
registered in that state.
26. Letter dated 9 June 2010 from CSO filing
affidavit of Dr Selwyn Smith dated 2 June 2010 (with annexures).
dated 3 May 2010 from CSO enclosing,
correspondence to Dr
Kecmanovic from the Registrar and an email response from Dr Kecmanovic dated 28
April 2010.
28.Affidavit of Dr Selwyn Smith dated 2 June 2010.
ZEPINIC v PSYCHOLOGISTS REGISTRATION BOARD OF NSW
CHRONOLOGY PROVIDED BY RESPONDENT
Dr Zepinic was born (now aged 56)
Dr Zepinic was enrolled at the Department of Pedagogy and Psychology at the
University of Sarajevo which he completed on 4 October
1996. Dr Zepinic was
issued with a Diploma No 2813/76 on 3 December 1976: Vol 1/174-6 Vol
Dr Zepinic claimed University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine awarded him
an “MD BS”: Vol 2/89; Vol 1/119; Vol 2/143;
147. Contra Vol 2/72;
Dr Zepinic claimed University of Sarajevo, Faculty of Philosophy awarded
him BA(Hons) Psychology: Vol 2/27. But at Burwood Local
Court Dr Zepinic
testified that he was awarded a psychology degree 2 years after being awarded a
Doctor of Medicine degree from University
of Sarajevo in 1976: Vol 3/419.
Dr Zepinic claimed he finished Faculty of Medicine, University of Sarajevo:
Vol 2/55; 56. He described this qualification as “MBBS”
1/131; Vol 2/57.
Diploma at Doctorate of Medical Sciences – PhD Level issued from
University of Belgrade recites that Dr Zepinic had been awarded
degree at the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Sarajevo” in 1976:
Vol 2/58 (cf entry 4.10.1978).
Purported degree from University of Sarajevo, Faculty of Medicine as
“Doctor of Medicine”: Vol 2/60; 87; 130; 147 and
Vol 3/298-300;
312; 315; 316; 321; 499-501. NB the University of Sarajevo have stated that
Vitomir Zepinic was never awarded a degree
of medical doctor by the Sarajevo
Faculty of Medicine and refused to certify the copy of the medical diploma he
has relied on as
“authentic and correct”: Vol 1/177-178. The
University of Sarajevo has also certified that he was enrolled at the Department
of Pedagogy and Psychology between 1972 and 1976 and was issued with a diploma
from that faculty No 2813/76 on 3 December 1976:
Vol 3/326-327. The alleged
Doctor of Medicine from the University of Sarajevo records that degree was also
awarded on 3 December
1976 and its number is also 2813/76.
Dr Zepinic claims that he worked as a clinical psychologist at the
Psychiatric Hospital, Sarajevo, Yugoslavia. He claims that he
worked as a
“Psychologist, Supervisor and teacher at the university”: Vol 2/27.
See broad corroboration from Dr Kacmanovic:
Vol 2/18. Although he says that Dr
Zepinic worked in the community health clinic in Sarajevo as a clinical
psychologist. At Burwood
Local Court Dr Zepinic denied working as a psychologist
in Sarajevo: Vol 3/419.
Dr Zepinic also claimed that he had worked at a psychiatric hospital as a
psychiatry registrar and psychiatrist: Vol 2/55.
Diploma purportedly issued by University of Belgrade that recites that Dr
Zepinic was awarded a “B.Sc degree at the Faculty
of Philosophy”:
Dr Zepinic was awarded M.Sc in Psychotherapy at School of Medicine,
University of Belgrade (which was not a medical course). Verified
University: Vol 2/72.
Dr Zepinic claimed University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine awarded a
“M Sc Clinical Psychology”: Vol 2/27.
Dr Zepinic claimed he attended a post graduate study in psychiatry when he
attended a Masters degree at the University of Belgrade,
Faculty of Medicine:
Dr Zepinic claimed the University of Belgrade, Faculty of Medicine awarded
him a “PhD. Doctor of Medical Science”: Vol
Letter from Medical Board of Queensland to Dr Zepinic dated 19 May 2000
noted the qualifications in Register as “MD Belgrade
Dr Zepinic claimed he attended his PhD in psychiatry at the University of
Belgrade (Faculty of Medicine) Vol 2/55.
Dr Zepinic applied for registration with the Psychologists Registration
Board of NSW: Vol 3/507.
Dr Zepinic was granted registration as a psychologist by the NSW
Psychologists Registration Board. Vol 3/507. Mrs Zepinic was also
registered in NSW: Vol 3/465.
APS elected Dr Zepinic as a member: Vol 2/26.
Dr Zepinic worked at St George Hospital, Sydney as a clinical psychologist
under supervision: Vol 2/27.
Reference by Dr D. Kecmanovic (consultant psychiatrist) attesting that Dr
Zepinic worked for “14 years at the Community Health
Clinic in Sarajevo as
a clinical psychologist”: Vol 2/18.
Dr Zepinic commenced work at the Hornsby Ku-ring-gai Hospital as a clinical
psychologist: Vol 2/17; 27.
Application by Dr Zepinic to APS (which he declared to be true and correct)
in which he set out qualifications in psychology: Vol
2/27. This declaration
constitutes an admission consistent with communications from both the University
of Sarajevo and the University
of Belgrade.
Letter from Dr Zepinic to Australian Psychological Society enclosing his
application form for the APS College of Clinical Psychologists:
Vol 2/25. Dr
Zepinic stated that he had over 12 years working experience in clinical setting
and teaching as a clinical psychologist:
Vol 2/25. Letter was signed
“Dr Vito Zepinic, PhD MAPS, Clinical Psychologist”.
Letter from Dr Zepinic to APS in which he stated that although he had over
12 years working experience in a clinical setting and teaching
as a clinical
psychologist he was unable to provide a supervisor’s report due to the
civil war: Vol 2/30.
APS College of Clinical Psychologists determined Dr Zepinic’s
overseas post graduate qualification in clinical psychology was
equivalent to an
approved course in clinical psychology in Australia: Vol 2/20.
Letter from Dr Zepinic to APS College of Clinical Psychologists where he
asserted he was an overseas trained clinical psychologist
with a PhD in clinical
psychology. Dr Zepinic also stated that he worked overseas as a clinical
psychologist: Vol 2/16.
Letter from Glenys Wilson, Department Head of Psychology at the Hornsby
Ku-ring-gai Hospital stating Dr Zepinic had worked there since
October 1995 as a
clinical psychologist: Vol 2/17.
Australian Psychological Society (APS) College of Clinical Psychologists
elected Dr Zepinic to full membership of College of Clinical
Psychologists:
Letter from Dr Zepinic to Australian Medical Council applying for
“Regulation of my qualifications in psychiatry”: Vol
Zepinic stated he had finished the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sarajevo
in 1976 and post graduate Masters and PhD
in psychiatry at the University of
Belgrade. See degrees at Vol 2/58.
The University of Sydney, Faculty of Medicine issued certificate to Dr Veto
Zepinic in recognition of his significant contribution
to teaching from 1
January 1998 to 31 December 1999. The dates on this certificate call its
authenticity into question.
Dr Zepinic made a statutory declaration that he held a Doctor of Medicine
from the University of Sarajevo in 1976 (but owing to the
war he was unable to
provide original documents). Dr Zepinic also declared he had a PhD in
psychiatry in 1985: Vol 2/83, Vol 3/243.
Application by Dr Zepinic to Australian Medical Council/Medical College
Specialist Assessment: Vol 3/309.
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic advising of date for clarification
interview to clarify details of his training in psychiatry:
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic relating to his application for specialist
assessment by the Australian Medical Council granting
a partial exemption
“subject to receipt of confirmation of his psychiatric qualification i.e.
PhD (which has been sought from
the University of Belgrade”: Vol 1/67;
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic advising steps he needed to take in order
to be recognised by the College and recommended for registration
as a specialist
practitioner. One of the expectations was that he be employed in a suitable
position (e.g. Medical Officer) for
at least 6 months familiarisation: Vol
Dr Zepinic requested from Maree McCabe a change in employment status at St
John of God Health Services from psychologist to medical
officer as he had been
a psychiatrist in his own country and wanted to do that work in Australia: Vol
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic regarding his application for specialist
assessment and noting the requirement for written confirmation
psychiatric qualification from Yugoslavia had been waived: Vol 2/48. Dr
Zepinic was granted exemption from certain requirements
but was still required
to complete the general medicine examination and at least 6 months
familiarisation before being able to sit
the clinical examinations. The
familiarisation requirement included the expectation that Dr Zepinic would
undertake a period of
supervised clinical work (e.g. as a medical officer): Vol
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic noting it had received a
“satisfactory reference from Dr Chuchkovich and reiterated further
requirements”: Vol 2/73.
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic noting general medical examination was
scheduled for 18 August 1999 and requesting a copy of his
annual practicing
certificate for 1999: Vol 2/95.
Application for temporary registration as a doctor submitted to NSW Medical
Board: Vol 2/88 (includes CV): Vol 2/97.
Letter from NSW Medical Board (copy to Ms Gaff) regarding position
allegedly offered at St John of God Hospital: Vol 1/77.
Dr Zepinic allegedly forged a letter to the RANZCP purportedly by Maree
Gaff, General Manager of St John of God Hospital purporting
to offer Dr Zepinic
a position as a Medical Officer after receiving his medical registration: Vol
When Dr Zepinic was confronted with the forgery allegation, Dr Zepinic was
offered the option to resign which he did: Vol 2/77;
Certificate of Conditional Registration as a medical practitioner in
Western Australia based on qualification of “MBBS (Sarajevo)
Medical Board of Western Australia delayed approval of Dr Zepinic for
conditional registration because Dr Zepinic was unable to provide
documentation
supporting a primary medical degree; but did so after the required
documentation was subsequently provided. At Burwood
Local Court Dr Zepinic
initially testified all originals were destroyed in the war: Vol 3/437 although
he later changed that testimony
when at 438 and tendered a purported medical
degree from University of Sarajevo as Exhibit 9: Vol 3/439 & 499. The
conditional
registration was withdrawn because he did not present for work: Vol
Letter from Hunter Mental Health Service requesting NSW Medical Board grant
Dr Zepinic temporary medical registration to enable him
to take up the position:
Application for Registration by Dr Zepinic to the NSW Medical Board: Vol
2/100. The form indicates Dr Zepinic was registered at
the time in South
NSW Medical Board file notes issue of “character” would need to
be addressed if registration application progressed (related
to forged letter):
Statutory Declaration of Dr Zepinic as a psychiatrist declaring he was
registered in Western Australia: Vol 2/152.
NSW Medical Board interview report for registration stated the interview
panel was “seriously disturbed by his responses”
and recommended he
not be registered for Career Medical Officer in Psychiatry position at Hunter
Medical Health Services: Vol 2/143-146.
Letter from NSW Medical Board to Dr Zepinic declining his request for
temporary registration: Vol 1/79.
Medical Board of Queensland registration: Vol 3/313.
Dr Zepinic lodged an application with the Medical Board of Queensland for
registration to fill a training position at Toowoomba;
on that basis it appears
Dr Zepinic was accredited by the RANZCP to undertake a period of supervised
clinical practice from 4.4.2000:
Certificate of Good Standing from Medical Board of Queensland notes Dr
Zepinic’s qualifications as “MD Belgrade 1985”:
Commencement of Dr Zepinic’s temporary employment as a “Staff
Specialist – Psychiatrist” with the Toowoomba
Health Service
District: Vol 2/51.
Letter from Health Insurance Commission granting Dr Zepinic a medical
provider number after it confirmed he was registered with the
Medical Board of
Queensland: Vol 3/313.
Medical Board of Queensland Certificate of Registration records Dr
Zepinic’s qualification as “MD Belgrade 1985”:
Renewal of temporary appointment as Staff Specialist – Psychiatry
until 8 June 2001 at Toowoomba: Vol 2/52.
Progress training assessment by Dr Kluver at Toowoomba District Mental
Health rated Dr Zepinic as satisfactory: Vol 2/45; Vol 1/73.
Dr Zepinic commenced familiarisation program as psychiatrist with Toowoomba
Mental Health Services in Queensland: Vol 2/40.
Medical Board of Queensland Certificate of Registration notes
qualifications as “Dip Med Sarajevo 1976”: Vol 3/314.
Certificate of Registration issued by the Medical Board of Queensland
certifying Dr Zepinic’s conditional registration on the
Register of
Medical Practitioners. The certificate noted Dr Zepinic’s qualifications
as “Dip Med Sarajevo 1976”
and included the condition as:
“Restricted to undertake specialist training in psychiatry at Toowoomba
Health Service District”:
Further renewal of temporary appointment as a “Senior Medical Officer
– Psychiatry until 8 June 2002”: Vol 2/53.
Reference from Dr Mark Kluver, Director of Acute Community Mental Health,
Toowoomba District Mental Health Service noting Dr Zepinic
came to unit 9 months
earlier as a psychiatrist with overseas qualifications requiring 6 months
familiarisation before sitting for
the Fellowship exam in Psychiatry: Vol
Application for Registration by Dr Zepinic to NSW Medical Board under
Mutual Recognition Laws: Vol 2/162.
Letter from Dr Zepinic to RANZCP applying for exemption status in regard to
completing examinations required by that body. Dr Zepinic
asserted he was an
“overseas trained psychiatrist”: Vol 2/40. Dr Zepinic stated
that despite doing his test in preparation
to sit the exams he did not have
enough practice in general medicine since he finished medicine in 1976 and
recognised he needed
to do a “bridging course” in medicine but had
been unable to do so: Vol 2/41.
Letter from the Dean, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade to RANZCP
advising that Dr Zepinic had not undertaken studies in
medicine or psychiatry at
the University of Belgrade: Vol 2/72.
Letter from RANZCP to Dr Zepinic advising that as part of assessment of his
application to the Training and Examinations Subcommittee
the University of
Belgrade was contacted to confirm his psychiatric qualifications but the
University had advised that he had not
completed a specialist degree in
psychiatry at the School of Medicine: Vol 2/39.
Letter from RANZCP to NSW Medical Board expressing concerns in relation to
the veracity of documentation provided by Dr Zepinic to
the Australian Medical
Council for specialist assessment/advanced standing and his capacity for
eligibility in the training program
of the college: Vol 2/35.
Letter from the NSW Medical Board to RANZCP expressing appreciation for
their letter and requesting to be kept informed of any further
information
received by the Australian Medical Council: Vol 2/36.
Letter from Dr Zepinic to RANZCP “clarifying” his overseas
qualifications and training in psychiatry: Vol 2/37.
Letter from Australian Medical Council to NSW Medical Board advising that
the RANZCP had determined that Dr Zepinic was not eligible
for advanced
standing/specialist assessment by the College. The letter referred to a
communication from the Dean of the School of
Medicine at Belgrade University
stating Dr Zepinic did not complete a specialist degree in psychiatry at the
School of Medicine.
It also stated that Dr Zepinic enrolled for post graduate
studies at the School of Medicine in Belgrade in psychotherapy after
graduated from the Faculty of Philosophy, Department of Pedagogy and Psychology
in Sarajevo: Vol 2/67-68. The College
determined to advise AMC of its
concern regarding the veracity of Dr Zepinic’s documentation.
The Medical Board of Queensland determined to issue Dr Zepinic with a
“show cause” Notice under s. 148 and s. 149 of the
Medical Registration Act, 2001 as to why his registration should not be
cancelled as his post graduate training in psycho
therapy was a non-medical
course: Vol 1/105 (Note explanation regarding war). Medical Board of
Queensland tried to personally
serve Dr Zepinic with the Notice but he had
resigned his post in Toowoomba and left no forwarding address: Vol
Service of the Notice to Show Cause was affected.
NSW Medical Board wrote to Dr Zepinic advising he was not eligible for
registration as a specialist trainee under
Medical Practice Act
The Medical Board of Queensland cancelled Dr Zepinic’s registration
pursuant to
Medical Practitioners Registration Act
: Vol 1/105. At
Burwood Local Court Dr Zepinic testified that his registration was automatically
stopped because he resigned from
the hospital training position: Vol 3/
At some point Dr Zepinic resumed practice as a clinical psychologist at a
clinic in Burwood in NSW but the precise date is unclear.
Clinical psychology report issued by Dr Zepinic to Keddies represented his
qualifications as including “MBBS”: Vol 1/16.
Clinical psychology report issued by Dr Zepinic represented his
qualifications as including “MBBS”: Vol 1/6.
Clinical psychology report issued by Dr Zepinic represented his
qualifications as including “MBBS”: Vol 1/18.
Application for Enrolment to the University of Sydney Medical School by Dr
Zepinic to Master of Medicine (Psychotherapy) was supported
by a document
purporting to be a Doctor of Medicine from Sarajevo: Vol 2/211.
Dr Zepinic was admitted to the University of Sydney’s Master of
Medicine (Psychotherapy) Course on the basis of the medical
qualifications
provided (but the university subsequently cancelled his enrolment on 27.8.2008
effective from the date of enrolment
due to the fact that the University of
Sarajevo did not certify Dr Zepinic had been awarded the undergraduate degree in
as claimed by Dr Zepinic: Vol 3/324.
NSW Medical Board certified Dr Zepinic had never been registered as a
medical practitioner in NSW: Vol 3/327.
NSW Medical Board noted article in The Australian reporting that Dr Zepinic
“with no medical or psychiatric qualifications worked
as a psychiatrist at
Toowoomba Hospital from April 2000 to March 2002”. The report further
indicated the existence of the
“impostor” was not revealed to the
public: Vol 2/155-156.
Statement of Professor Djuricic, Dean of School of Medicine at the
University of Belgrade stating Dr Zepinic had never been enrolled
studies at the university leading to a medical doctor degree nor did he complete
a specialist degree in psychiatry at
the School of Medicine: Vol 2/151. The
Dean confirmed Dr Zepinic completed post graduate studies in psychotherapy:
Burwood Local Court.
Registrar of University of Sydney wrote to University of Sarajevo enclosing
certified copy of degree in medicine claimed to have been
issued by that
University and seeking confirmation it was valid: Vol 3/322.
Dr Zepinic tendered (after objection) purported Doctor of Medicine degree
from Faculty of Medicine, University of Sarajevo (but note
that document had the
same issue date and serial number as the diploma issued by the Department of
Pedagogy and Psychology from that
same institution): Vol 3/499.
The Registrar of University of Sydney received a reply from the Dean of the
Medical Faculty of the University of Sarajevo stating
Dr Zepinic was never
awarded a degree of medical doctor from that university: Vol 1/177-178; Vol
Letter from Dr Zepinic to University of Sydney asserting he brought
original degrees to the University that he said were accepted
by the Burwood
Local Court (which included Doctor of Medicine from University of Sarajevo);
but court admitted the degree into
evidence over objections: Vol 2/224.
Letter from University of Sydney to Dr Zepinic that based on correspondence
received from the University of Sarajevo it would appear
his documents
supporting his original medical degree were falsified: Vol 2/226.
Letter from NSW Medical Board to University of Sydney providing information
to assist their investigation into Dr Zepinic’s
qualifications: Vol
Decision of Magistrate Barkell in Burwood Local Court convicting Dr Zepinic
of 6 offences under the Medical Practitioners Act: Vol
Letter from Dr Zepinic to the University of Sydney claiming he was being
falsely discredited by people from his former country because
of his commitment
to assist in prosecution of war criminals. Dr Zepinic denied falsifying any
documents and sought to continue his
medical course. Vol 2/258.
Certificate of Conviction in Burwood Local Court under s. 105 NSW
Practice Act 1992
: Vol 1/30.
The University of Sydney cancelled Dr Zepinic’s enrolment in the
Master of Medicine (Psychotherapy) course effective from the
date of admission:
Dr Zepinic made a written submission to the Psychologists Registration
Board maintaining that he held qualifications in medicine (including
a Doctor of
Medicine degree from the University of Sarajevo) and that he finished
“three years of post graduate study in Master
of Medicine (Psychotherapy)
at the University of Sydney”: Vol 1/49.
The NSW Psychologists Registration Board (Ms Beeston) sought confirmation
from the University of Sydney about Dr Zepinic’s medical
qualifications:
University of Sydney replied to query from the NSW Psychologists
Registration Board that it had cancelled his enrolment in absence
of independent
objective evidence of medical qualifications: Vol 1/171; Vol 3/324.
Outcome of Board of Inquiry under the NSW
Psychologists Act 2001
reprimanded Dr Zepinic for unsatisfactory professional conduct: Vol
Letter from Dr Zepinic to the NSW Psychologists Registration Board
appealing the decision to reprimand him: Vol 1/97.
Letter from University of Sydney to Dr Zepinic confirming its decision to
cancel his enrolment in its course based on his failure
to provide independent
objective documentation confirming his academic qualifications in response to
the advice from the University
of Sarajevo that he had never been awarded an
under graduate degree in medicine: Vol 2/281.
Letter from Faculty of Philosophy at the University of Sarajevo certifying
that Dr Zepinic had been enrolled at the Department of
Pedagogy and Psychology
and awarded a Diploma on 3.12.1976 (No 2813/76): Vol 3/326-8; Vol 1/174.
Declaration by Dr Zepinic to Psychologists Registration Board that since 1
July 2008 he had not been convicted of an offence in NSW
or that a criminal
finding had been made against him for an offence committed in the course of
practice of psychology: Vol 3/510.
This is contradicted by the Certificate of
Conviction for the offence of “Take/Use False Description concerning
Entitlement
to Register” under s. 105(1) of the NSW
Medical Practice Act,
: Vol 1/30.
Dr Zepinic’s registration as a psychologist with the Psychologists
Registration Board is due to expire unless he extends that
by the payment of the
appropriate fee: Vol 3/507.
The period pertinent to Dr Zepinic’s good behaviour bond period for
the 6 convictions before the Burwood Local Court expires:
Vol 1/30-35.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter