URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/193.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ZT v R [2025] NSWCCA 193 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 193
Hearing Date(s):
20 August 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Bell CJ at [1];
Dhanji J at [48];
Yehia J at [187].
(1) Leave to appeal is
(2) The appeal is
(3) The applicant’s conviction is quashed and
a verdict of acquittal is entered in its place.
Catchwords:
CRIME – appeals – appeal against conviction –
unreasonable verdict – murder – joint criminal enterprise
extended joint criminal enterprise – investigated nine years later –
where applicant acquitted by this Court –
where High Court allowed Crown
appeal and remitted for determination – admissions – where
admissions central to proof
of Crown case – reliability of admissions
– inconsistent and against interest – litany of lies – Court
to review recorded material – intercepted telephone calls and
interviews with police – nature of advantage held by jury
advantage capable of resolving doubt.
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Cases Cited:
AK v Western Australia
(2008) 232 CLR 438
[2008] HCA 8
Dansie v The
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
Edwards v R
(2022) 107 NSWLR
[2022] NSWCCA 22
Em v The Queen
(2007) 232 CLR 67
[2007] HCA 46
[2006] NSWCCA 336
Gerakiteys v The Queen
(1984) 153 CLR 317
[2020] NSWCCA 288
[2013] NSWCCA 317
(2013) 241 A
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
McKay v The
(1935) 54 CLR 1
[1935] HCA 70
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR
[2002] HCA 53
Mitchell v The Queen
(2023) 276 CLR 299
Morris v The Queen
(1987) 163 CLR 454
[1987] HCA 50
Osland v The Queen
(1998) 197 CLR 316
[1998] HCA 75
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
R v McConnell
(1977) 1 NSWLR 714
[2001] WASC 84
121 A Crim R 103
R v Stephen; R v Tadrosse (No 4)
[2025] NSWSC 824
Warickshall
[1783] EngR 60
(1783) 1 Leach 263
(1783) 168 ER 234
[2022] NSWSC
Sinclair v The King
(1946) 73 CLR 316
[1946] HCA 55
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
Queen v Swaffield
(1998) 192 CLR 159
[1998] HCA 1
The Queen v Taufahema
(2007) 228 CLR 232
[2007] HCA 11
Tofilau v The Queen
(2007) 231 CLR
[2007] HCA 39
Whitehorn v The Queen
(1983) 152 CLR 657
[2023] NSWCCA 241
Principal judgment
ZT (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
D Dalton SC with P Coady SC (Applicant)
M England SC with B
Costello (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Nyman Gibson Miralis
(Applicant)
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions (NSW) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2019/00266663
Publication Restriction:
Statutory non-publication order pursuant to
Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act 1987
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of New South Wales
Date of Decision:
9 December 2021 (verdict)
File Number(s):
2019/00266663
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
Sometime between 30 March and 31 May 2010, William Chaplin (the deceased) was
murdered by PW in a circular paddock called the “round
yard” at the
back of PW’s property in Gerogery, New South Wales. At the time of the
murder, the applicant, who was 16
years old, and the deceased, who was 25 years
old, were residing at that property with PW, his wife SW, and their child, CW.
of the crime was made at the time. Nor was the deceased reported
missing. In 2017, while incarcerated, PW confessed the crime to
a fellow inmate
and an investigation was launched. That investigation led to the
applicant’s arrest and charge with murder.
Following a trial before Walton J and a jury in November and December 2021,
the applicant was found guilty of murder. The Crown case
proceeded on the basis
that the applicant was complicit in the murder by way of joint criminal
enterprise or extended joint criminal
enterprise with PW. Manslaughter was also
left to the jury on the basis that the applicant was a party to an unlawful and
act. The delay in the discovery of the crime limited the evidence
available to the Crown. There was some circumstantial evidence
supporting the
Crown case, including evidence given by SW, who co-operated with police, that
the applicant assisted in the disposal
of the body. Ultimately, central to the
proof of the Crown case was the reliability of various admissions made by the
The applicant sought leave to appeal to this Court on the sole ground that
his conviction was unreasonable or could not be supported
having regard to the
evidence. On 29 September 2023, a majority of this Court (Kirk JA, Sweeney J
agreeing, Fagan J dissenting) upheld
the appeal:
[2023] NSWCCA
Subsequently, the New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions, pursuant
to a grant of special leave to appeal, appealed the orders
made by this Court to
the High Court. On 2 April 2025, the High Court unanimously allowed the appeal
and remitted the matter for
redetermination according to law:
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676.
The applicant now seeks leave to appeal his conviction, out of time, on the
sole ground that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable
within the meaning of
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
The Court held
(per Dhanji J, Yehia J agreeing with additional
reasons, Bell CJ dissenting)
granting leave to appeal, allowing the appeal
and quashing the applicant’s conviction
Per Dhanji J:
(1) The reliability of the applicant’s admissions was at the centre of
the application. Those admissions were in many cases
inconsistent with the
objective evidence and inconsistent with each other. What was required was to
find a means of reasoning from
the applicant’s various admissions,
considered in the context of all the evidence, including the significant
circumstantial
evidence supportive of the Crown case, to satisfaction of the
applicant’s guilt. Attempting to reason to the applicant’s
the requisite standard required guesswork rather than the rational drawing of
available inferences from the available evidence.
The advantage held by the jury
was not capable of resolving the doubt experienced on the appeal (at
[48]-[186]).
Per Yehia J (agreeing with additional reasons):
(2) The discrepancies and inadequacies in the evidence gave rise to a
reasonable doubt which was not resolved by the jury’s
advantage in seeing
and hearing the evidence. The applicant gave several (often conflicting)
versions of the circumstances relating
to and the mechanism by which the
deceased was murdered. Some of those versions were entirely implausible,
inconsistent with objective
evidence, and in some instances, elevated his role
in the murder (at [187]-[193]).
Per Bell CJ (dissenting):
(3) It was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
applicant was guilty of murder, taking into account the
not insignificant
advantages of the jury and in light of the series of admissions made by the
applicant as to his involvement in
the murder in circumstances where he had no
cause or incentive to lie. The applicant’s false alibis and
bolstered the strength of those admissions and were
entirely consistent with a consciousness of guilt as to his involvement in
(at [1]-[47]).
The background to this appeal is set out in the detailed and careful
judgment of Dhanji J which I have had the benefit of reviewing.
Honour’s judgment includes a recount of the procedural history of this
matter, the split between a differently constituted
Court of Criminal Appeal on
the hearing of ZT’s first appeal (
[2023] NSWCCA 241
earlier appeal
)), the successful Crown appeal to the High Court (
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
)) and the rehearing of
ZT’s appeal in this Court. It also includes more general background to the
circumstances leading to
the murder of William Chaplin (
which I do not repeat here but familiarity with which is assumed in the balance
of my reasons.
Kirk JA (with whom Sweeney J agreed) said in the earlier appeal, senior counsel
for ZT at the trial effectively accepted that ZT
had been involved in the
offence of being an accessory after the fact to Chaplin’s murder but,
critically, had only been charged
with the murder on a joint or extended joint
criminal enterprise basis. Kirk JA took the view that clearly there was “a
possibility that ZT was involved in the murder” but properly observed
that that did not suffice: at [121]. His Honour and Sweeney
J, like Dhanji and
Yehia JJ, took the view that ZT’s admissions were not sufficiently
reliable to establish either joint criminal
enterprise or extended joint
criminal enterprise, and that the jury ought to have experienced a reasonable
doubt as to ZT’s
Crown’s case at trial was that the actual killing of Chaplin was committed
by PW who has been separately convicted of Chaplin’s
was common cause that ZT was present at the time of Chaplin’s murder, that
the murder was orchestrated by PW, and that ZT,
together with PW’s
ex-wife, SW, assisted PW with the burning and disposal of Chaplin’s body
on the day following his
murder. SW was convicted in separate proceedings for
being an accessory after the fact.
lent assistance to the police and was party to a number of conversations with ZT
that were recorded and placed in evidence in the
proceedings. She also gave
evidence at the trial. There were also a large number of recordings of
conversations between ZT and his
partner, ZT and his mother, ZT and his father,
and ZT and his brother. In addition, there were electronic recordings of two
interviews with ZT.
is true that ZT gave multiple versions of events, including to his parents and
the police, as to what had occurred. These ranged
from him not knowing Chaplin
at all, to not being present at the time of the murder, to being inside
PW’s house in Gerogery
at the time of the murder which took place
outside, to himself cutting Chaplin’s throat, to holding Chaplin down
while he was
stabbed by PW in the chest, to PW “pulling a Glock” on
him, to either he or PW using fishing line to kill Chaplin, to
SW being present
at the time of the murder, and to ZT having acted under duress.
of these accounts must have been lies and a review of the transcript of
telephone conversations between ZT and his parents, ZT
and his brother, and ZT
and SW exposes various versions of events being developed over time as alibis or
exculpatory accounts. These
included the following:
in a phone call
with SW on 18 August 2019, ZT said “we’ll see where this goes and,
if worst comes to worst, if you’re
happy to do it I’m blowing it
back on him [PW]”;
in a phone call
with his father on 22 August 2019, ZT complained to his father that
his uncle had destroyed his story that he had
gone to Queensland at the
time of the murder by telling police that he [ZT] “was down there
[i.e. Gerogery] at the time”,
but ZT then said to his father
“I’ll come up with a new one” i.e. a new alibi. This same
conversation was significant
for other reasons identified in [13]-[16]
in a phone call
to his mother at 19:13 on 31 August 2019, ZT said that he was “fully
prepared to tell them [Crime Stoppers]
what happened and what he [PW]
did”. In their next call at 19:17, the following exchange took
“Mother: ...just say ‘Look
I’m fearing for my life here’, not saying anything and then tell him
make sure you tell him, he used to put knives to your throat and
threatened and everything. Make sure ... you tell the lot.
ZT: Yeah I will.
Mother: Just to... cover you if you are
fearing for your life, when you were made to do stuff.
ZT: No I’m not going to
tell them I did anything.”
Implicit in the expression “when you were made to do stuff” is
ZT’s mother’s understanding from earlier exchanges
that ZT had told
her of his involvement in Chaplin’s killing.
Shortly after
this conversation with his mother on 31 August 2019, ZT called SW, saying that
“going to ring the detective and basically say that, you know, I
don’t know what happened after I left and that but he
threaten us, like, me and you with knives and guns and everything. Um,
and basically we’ve, we’ve both feared
for our, we both
feared for our life from him and we just, we didn’t know what he was
capable of doing. All right?”
He asked SW whether “I’m gonna,
I’m gonna have your back in this if you have mine. All
right?” to which she
replied she would. He then said:
“Basically me and you, me and you have no idea on what could happen. We
don’t know what he was capable of doing. ...
So, um, yeah,
I’m going to go with that
And then hopefully we cover our
ass in the meantime
.” (emphasis added)
Later in the same conversation, ZT said to SW “Well, let’s work
together. ... And let’s take this little motherfucker
On the following
day, ZT told his brother “Basically I’m going to tell them [the
detectives] what, what I went through
living with him and then say if
there’s any, if anyone had of done something it would have been him
I’d left, when I left William was still there”
(emphasis added).
Earlier in this conversation, ZT told his brother “I was 15 and I used to
wake up to knives and shit to my
throat. I was scared”. His brother then
said to ZT “Just say you, um, that you had nothing to do with the
to which he responded “Nah, nah. I’m going to say
On the same day,
ZT and Senior Constable Zeromski had the following interaction:
“SC Zeromski: So what do you think happened to
ZT: I couldn’t even tell you. I don’t know if
it’s actually happened or if it’s coincidence, but that
[PW] is unpredictable.”
This passage formed part of a lengthy conversation which involved ZT telling
the story that Chaplin moved into PW and SW’s house
in Gerogery where ZT
was also living but that, a few weeks later, ZT moved out of the shared house
and didn’t see Chaplin again.
This last aspect was avowedly false. The
consistent theme of the conversation was to seek to inculpate PW – not by
attributing the murder to him (because on ZT’s story to the
police, he was not aware of it and had left the house and did not
became of Chaplin) – but by describing him as a strange and scary and
abusive character.
multiplicity of accounts and falsehoods voiced by ZT contributed materially to
the doubt felt by Kirk JA and Sweeney J in the
earlier appeal as well as to the
decisions reached by Dhanji and Yehia JJ on the present appeal. Unlike Dhanji
and Yehia JJ, however,
and after my own review and anxious consideration of the
evidence as a whole, taking into account the advantages of the jury, I am
satisfied that it
open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that ZT was guilty of murder as charged.
reasoning broadly accords with that of Fagan J in the earlier appeal and places
particular emphasis on a series of admissions made
by ZT to his parents and
brother as to his involvement in the murder of Chaplin in circumstances where ZT
had no cause or incentive
to lie. It is also supported by the evidence of Ms W
(who was SW’s mother) in relation to what ZT had said to her in late
namely that PW and he [ZT] “had to sort out some guy who’d been
messing with [PW and SW’s] daughter.”
This was said well before ZT
realised he was a person of interest in relation to Chaplin’s murder.
many of the false alibis and “stories” set out at [7] above, in my
view, far from casting doubt on the reliability
of ZT’s admissions, in
fact bolster the strength of those admissions. This was not the conduct of
a “big noter”,
narcissist or fabulist. It was conduct entirely
consistent with a consciousness of guilt on ZT’s part, and, importantly,
as to involvement in Chaplin’s killing and not simply guilt to
having been an accessory after the fact. Having conducted my
own independent
review of the evidence, it was open to the jury, which was carefully instructed
on consciousness of guilt reasoning
by the trial judge, to take this view of
much of ZT’s evidence, in conjunction with his confessions or admissions
to his parents
and brother referred to in further detail below.
jury also had the benefit of listening to all the recorded intercepted telephone
calls. That advantage was not insignificant,
and the jury was able to bring
their commonsense and human experience in assessing the significance of verbal
interactions between
a husband and his partner, a son and his mother and father,
and brother and brother, including the tone of particular statements
variations in tone both within and as between certain conversations, and the
significance of pauses or delays between certain
questions and answers to them.
As the plurality explained in
at [10], reproduced at [46] below,
a jury may bring to the assessment of such matters a breadth of understanding
that a judge may
not have. Views as to the significance or otherwise of
particular conversations or portions of conversations, and or the tone thereof,
may vary as between jurors, but those views inevitably contribute to each
juror’s individual and ultimate assessment as to
an accused’s guilt
or innocence, and feed into the collective assessment and decision-making that
it is the jury’s responsibility
to undertake.
illustrate the point as to the jury’s advantage, reference may be made to
one of the first recorded telephone calls between
ZT and his partner who I will
simply refer to as M. That conversation was as follows:
“M: Did you kill someone two years ago?
M: Don’t lie to me.
ZT: Oi I’ll talk to you about it when we get home, when
I get home.
M: [ZT] get home right now.
ZT: Oh don’t stress. No I didn’t.
M: Get home right now.
ZT: Oh hang on. Yeah I don’t know. I never met a Will.
M: Fuckin’ bullshit.
ZT: No I never did.”
As the Crown submitted in relation to this exchange:
“What the transcript doesn’t record, and what is only discernible by
listening to the recording, is that the applicant
noticeably paused before he
’. The length of the pause, and the applicant’s
quiet tone when he did answer, was capable of being construed by the jury
indication that the applicant was deciding to lie to his partner. This is
particularly the case, in light of the applicant’s
admissions in his
interrupted call with his mother that he immediately afterwards resumed”.
(emphasis in original)
It was during the resumed call, parts of which are extracted at [18] below,
that ZT told his mother that he had killed Chaplin.
J has observed in his judgment that “[t]hroughout the morass of lies,
there was only one
admission to murder in the course of the many
admissions made in the intercepted calls that may plausibly have been
true” (emphasis
added), namely ZT’s admission to his father on 22
August 2019 that he and one other person had made the deceased
“disappear”:
see at [177] below. That admission was in the following
“Father: You didn’t, you didn’t make person
disappear did you?
ZT: Um, no comment at this point in time.
Father: Yeah, yeah well if you, if you did help, was there, was
there more involved in making person disappear?
Father: Oh there was a few people.
ZT: There was one.
Father: One other?
Father: Right, you and someone else made this person
Father: Just (unintelligible).
ZT: Correct.
Father: Right. Was this person [living]?
ZT: Negative.
Father: Okay. Well you better, yeah.
ZT: There’s no evidence, there’s
[138], Dhanji J has observed that:
“The portion of the conversation between the applicant and his father
extracted above stands out as the one admission consistent
with the applicant
having assisted PW in having murdered the deceased and thus the one admission
consistent with the manner in which
the Crown put its case at trial. In hearing
this conversation, the jury had an advantage in assessing its veracity.”
agree with his Honour’s assessment as to the jury’s advantage. The
point was well made by the Crown in submissions on
appeal that this exchange
demonstrated the weight of the jury’s advantage in listening to the
telephone recordings, noting
“initially sounded guarded and reluctant to share details with his father.
However, as his father sounded increasingly supportive
pieces together
’ (as the applicant later explained to his mother), the
applicant made various admissions that were capable of being construed
admissions to murder.”
may differ as to Dhanji J’s observation that there was “only one
admission to murder in the course of the many admissions made [by
ZT] in the intercepted calls that may plausibly have been true”
added) but, in any event, the direct admission to which Dhanji J refers was
confirmed or reinforced by a series of further
interactions ZT had with his
parents and brother as well as what may be referred to as indirect admissions.
Thus, less than an hour
following the conversation with his father set out at
[13] above, ZT spoke to his mother who had said that she had missed a call
his father. ZT responded to her, saying:
“ZT: You sure will get a phone
call. Can you fill him in? ...
I told him when I called over the phone
can you fill him in? I don’t know what my phones got.
Mother: As in what?
he knows. ... He
put the pieces together
... I don’t know if my phone’s hot or not. I’ll um, can you
explain it a bit more to dad?
... just fill him in a bit please and hey,
he knows he’s not
Mother: Yeah, but what does he know?
ZT: I don’t know.
I let him know a little bit
he doesn’t know a lot. All right?
He’s on the same page, he’s not, he doesn’t know shit anyhow
...” (emphasis added)
agree with Fagan J’s observation in the earlier appeal that “[t]he
above extract of the conversation with the applicant’s
mother could be
understood by the jury as an acknowledgement that he had already told her that
he had taken part in killing the missing
person and that his father had come to
that realisation from the applicant’s oblique statements to him”: at
in fact had told his mother on 15 August 2019 that he had killed
“ZT: How the fuck, (sounds like) yeah I
killed him...We found him one night touching [ PW and SW’s daughter].
Mother: Right.
ZT: [She] was about two years’ old
at the time, so I took him out to the round yard and cut his throat and then we
burnt the body.”
The reference to touching the daughter of PW and SW links this 2019 statement
to what ZT had told Ms W two years earlier (see [9]
above). Not insignificantly,
in the context of joint criminal enterprise, ZT twice referred to
“we” in this particular
conversation, the former of which could only
have been a reference to PW and himself. On the following day, ZT said to his
“There’s no body. There’s no murder weapon.
There’s nothing”. This was consistent with his statement
father a week later that “There’s no evidence, there’s
here, I agree with the following observations of Kirk JA in the earlier appeal
at [107] that:
“Of the various versions of his involvement given by the applicant the
most plausible, by some measure, is that he cut the
throat of the deceased. He
told this to each of his parents, separately, nine days apart. This
occurred soon after he learned of
the investigation. His admission to his
mother occurred in the phone call where he appeared first to learn of the
investigation.
He had no apparent reason to lie to his parents and it might
readily be concluded that he would be prepared to confide in them. When
these statements he did not appear concerned about the possibility of
phone intercepts.”
significance of these separate admissions to his parents and his earlier 2017
statement to Ms W was reinforced by confirmatory
statements in the days
following ZT’s admission to his father on 22 August 2019. Thus, on 23
August, ZT had the following exchange
with his father, implicitly confirming
what he had told him the day before:
“Father: Well, yeah, we’re going to have to sort
. I don’t know what you’re telling the truth, cause
you fucking always been
full of shit
, you know?
ZT: No, this,
totally different, Dad
. ... It’s just going to, yeah, it’s going
to, yeah, change everyone’s view of me. I know that but not much I can
As the Crown submitted, the apparent sincerity in ZT’s tone and manner
of speaking in this exchange was capable of affecting
whether the jury accepted
his strident denial to his father’s statement that he was “
”, and instead accepted his statement that “
totally different
”. This assumed significance in light of two text
messages to his father which followed on the same day. One was that
hurting me and I wish it was all a lie but unfortunately it is
not and it scares me that it will change everything between me and
The other was “this time I fucked up
context, ZT’s statement to his father on 24 August 2019 that
“I’m not coming clean” and telling his father
the fuck up” in response to the suggestion that he should do so is also
entirely consistent with a consciousness
of guilt on his part. Earlier that day,
ZT and his father had the following conversation:
“ZT: What you want to know?
Father: I want to know your involvement in this shit.
I am involved in
Father: Right. How deep?
The whole thing.
Father: Right. Did you take him out?
Father: How?
I cut his throat
Father: Yeah, righto. You’re full of shit.
No, I’m not. I cut
his throat and the ...
(emphasis added)
This account was confirmatory of ZT’s admission to his father on 22
August 2019 (see [13] above) and also accorded with what
ZT had told his mother
over a week earlier (see [18] above). It may be noted that most of the alibi
activity identified at [7] above
occurred after 22 August 2019. As Fagan J
observed in the earlier appeal of the above conversation between ZT and his
father, the
jury was “not bound to feel a reasonable doubt about the
reliability of that admission even if they thought his claim to have
performed a
specific act – ‘I cut his throat’ – was an
exaggeration or a mistaken belief about how effective
his use of a knife may
have been, or otherwise doubtful”: at [191]. On my own review of the
record, I did not feel a doubt
of the kind that I considered the jury should
have held so as to render the verdict unreasonable.
27 August 2019, in a call with his mother, ZT repeatedly associated his
involvement in the murder with the truth. Thus, he said
to his mother that his
father “thinks I’m a liar and ... I’m
doing it all for attention ...
I’d rather him believe
than know the truth
” and went on to say to his mother
that ”it was
hard enough telling you the truth
(emphasis added). At one part of this conversation with his mother, ZT said to
her that “I wouldn’t of told you
what I told you if I didn’t
trust you. Okay?”. In this conversation, he also said of a phone call
with his brother on
the previous day that:
“he thinks I’m a liar and fuckin’ um, I’m doing it all
for attention and all that. That maybe - fine if he
believe that, that’s great,
I’d rather him believe that
than know the truth
. ... it was hard enough
telling you the
” (emphasis added)
In that phone call the previous day with his brother, ZT also said:
“...Dad wanted to know the truth. I told him the truth... And it’s
the fuckin’ truth, it’s not a lie, it’s
the fuckin’
a further conversation with his father on 1 September 2019, the following
exchange occurred:
“Father: You know, it all helps. That’s all in your
favour. But you just got to do the right thing for you and your
ZT: That’s all I’m worried
Father: That’s it. That’s right. Well you got to
do the right thing. The only thing you’re going to do with
this is come
clean and (sounds like) sell what happened.
ZT: Dad, I don’t give a fuck about
what happens to me.
I know what I did. I did the wrong thing
(emphasis added)
in this conversation, the following exchange occurred between them:
“Father: At the end of the day too, it was
someone’s life. Even though he was a...
ZT: I know, dad.
Father: ...bit of shit or whatever but...
ZT: It’s always, it’s always fuckin’ been on
my mind. It’s always sat there on the back of me mind.”
another conversation on 1 September 2019 with his father, the following exchange
“Father: ‘And you’ll learn the whole lot,
right?’ Now I’ve got to go over and tell Bee what - you
‘cause we’re all your family, mate. You know?
Are you going to tell her that I
Father: No, I’m not going to say that. I’m going
to say that you were involved. Right? You’re involved in it.
not going to tell her everything
. I’m going to tell her enough to keep
her, okay, ‘Where do we start now, Dad?’ ‘Well we’ve
to wait for like you said detectives.’ It’s all in their
court. Isn’t it?
ZT: Like would it be better if it just
came from me, Dad?
Father: Well, no, look I’ll tell her in a subtle way,
that you’re in trouble, there’s a problem. She knows the
basics. She
can get on the internet and Google it and the story and, you’re the
Townsville link. That’s all it is, right?
ZT: Yeah, I know.
Father: That’s what I’m going to tell her. You’re
the Townsville
– I’m not going to tell her what you’ve told
me. I wouldn’t be that stupid, my boy
. Right, but just be, she knows
that you’ve got a problem and we’ve got to help you.”
(emphasis added)
do not accept ZT’s submission that this and many of the other
conversations set out above “are equally consistent with
a consciousness
of guilt of [ZT] being an accessory after the fact”. That is because
these conversations must be understood
in the context of the admissions outlined
above which are directly contrary to mere participation as an accessory after
including that he had “killed” [Chaplin], “cut his
throat”, made him disappear, or taken him out.
Confessions
or admissions against interest are “rightly regarded as evidence of a most
persuasive nature”:
Morris v The Queen
[1987] HCA 50
(1987) 163 CLR 454
[1987] HCA 50
) per Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ, at least in
circumstances where they are made voluntarily, by a person of sound mind
Sinclair v The King
[1946] HCA 55
(1946) 73 CLR 316
)) or made in circumstances which do not bring their
reliability into question such as an incomplete record of interview or a denial
of the veracity of the confession on oath:
Whitehorn v The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
152 CLR 657
[1983] HCA 42
McKay v The
[1935] HCA 70
(1935) 54 CLR 1
[1935] HCA 70.
Ordinarily, however,
persons do not make admissions against interest unless they are true:
[2006] NSWCCA 336
, affirmed on appeal:
Em v The Queen
[2007] HCA 46.
As long ago as 1783, it was said in
Warickshall
[1783] EngR 60
(1783) 1 Leach 263
(1783) 168 ER 234
Warickshall
A free and voluntary confession is deserving of the highest credit,
because it is presumed to flow from the strongest sense of guilt,
and therefore
it is admitted as proof of the crime to which it refers
; but a confession
forced from the mind by the flattery of hope, or by the torture of fear, comes
in so questionable a shape when
it is to be considered as evidence of guilt,
that no credit ought to be given to it; and therefore it is rejected.”
passage from
Warickshall
was cited with approval in
339-40 and was referred to more recently in
Tofilau v The Queen
(2007) 231 CLR 396
[2007] HCA 39
at 334, Dixon J put the matter as follows:
“Confessions, like other admissions out of Court, are received in evidence
as narrative statements made trustworthy by the
improbability of a party’s
falsely stating what tends to expose him to penal or civil liability.”
Brennan CJ quoted this passage with approval in
The Queen v Swaffield
(1998) 192 CLR 159
[1998] HCA 1
[2001] WASC
(2001) 121 A Crim R 103
confessions or admissions made in the present case were repeated and powerful.
They were made in a context of a young man reluctantly
confessing to his parents
and brother, and strenuously resisting any notion that he was making them up. He
had an established relationship
and young children to whom he was clearly
attached. He plainly did not want to go to prison and it would have been wholly
of him to confess guilt in the way he repeatedly did to those he
trusted if such a confession was inaccurate or unreliable. The confessions
not made involuntarily or in circumstances where ZT was protecting or seeking to
protect anyone else, or where ZT was not of
sound mind (cf.
or where there were any issues as to the veracity of the record which
contained them or any incompleteness in the context in which
they were made (cf.
They were not confessions made to the police or
suggested to have been vitiated by inducement.
am conscious that SW gave evidence that it has been contended raised a doubt as
to whether ZT cut Chaplin’s neck. To put that
evidence in context, SW gave
evidence that she was not present at the house at the time of Chaplin’s
murder, having had a fight
with PW and left the house, and that, when she called
PW (the day after Chaplin’s death) to check if she could return home,
told her that he “needed an hour to clean up some stuff”.
SW did return home, sometime between 11:30am and 12:30pm the following day, PW
asked if she wanted to be shown something, and
she agreed. It was at this point
that, according to SW’s evidence in chief, PW and ZT joked about it being
a lovely day for
sunbaking, an apparently malevolent reference to
Chaplin’s corpse which was lying in the sun in the round yard, which was
metres from the house’s back fence. Her evidence was that there was
a tarpaulin with a bulge in it, being Chaplin’s body.
The tarp was pulled
back by PW to above Chaplin’s waist.
gave the following evidence in chief:
“Q. Did you notice Mr Chaplin’s neck at all, did you notice whether
there was any damage or cut or bruising to his neck?
A. Not that I noticed, no.
Q. Did you see any blood on his neck?
was also asked whether she noticed anything about his clothing on the upper part
of his body to which she replied “[t]he
only thing I noticed is he had
what looks like a green jumper or a green shirt of some form.” She
confirmed the correctness
of an answer she had given in a police interview,
namely that it had a “normal collar”.
cross examination, she was taken to excerpts of a police interview with her and
confirmed the correctness of the following answers
in relation to what she
“Q. So if he had had his throat cut would you have seen it?
A. I’m sure I would have.
Q. Can you remember?
A. I can but I’m, I’m positive I did not see no cuts on
his throat at all.”
her confidence (in relation to an event which had taken place many years
beforehand), SW did not claim to have inspected the
corpse closely and, on her
own evidence, at least the lower part of Chaplin’s neck would have been
covered by the collar of
the green top to which she had referred. Moreover, and
again on her evidence, PW had delayed SW’s return to the house on the
basis that he “needed an hour to clean up some stuff”.
accepted in cross examination that she was in “in a state of shock after
seeing this man’s body that you believe [PW]
had killed”. She also
accepted that her memory had been strained because of the passage of time. It
may be noted in this context
that her police interview in which she was first
asked to recall what she noticed in relation to Chaplin’s corpse occurred
almost 10 years after Chaplin’s murder.
jury, which had the benefit of observing SW give evidence over a number of days,
evidently did not consider that SW’s confident
recollection of not
observing any cuts to Chaplin’s neck raised a sufficient doubt as to
ZT’s involvement in the joint
criminal enterprise in the face of the
repeated confessions and admissions by ZT. That may have been for one of a
number of reasons.
the jury might have accepted that, whatever the correctness of ZT’s
statements about slashing Chaplin’s throat
(and the Crown only submitted
in address to the jury that it was possible but unlikely), ZT’s multiple
statements to his parents,
his brother, SW, and the earlier 2017 statement to Ms
W were sufficiently powerful to convince them beyond reasonable doubt as to
involvement in the joint criminal enterprise. The jury did not need to reach a
view as to the precise mode of killing, as the
plurality pointed out in
at [25]. This is consistent with the observation of Fagan J noted at
[21] above.
in light of the observations in [35]-[36], namely that the events recalled by SW
had occurred nearly 10 years earlier, she
did not claim to have inspected the
body closely, PW’s collared shirt likely covered part of his neck, Chaplin
had been deceased
for many hours by the time SW observed his body, and PW had,
according to SW, spent at least an hour cleaning up “some stuff”
(which presumably included the body), the jury was entitled to reject SW’s
evidence that she was “sure” that if
Chaplin’s throat had been
cut she would have seen it, and to reject the Crown’s characterisation of
ZT slashing Chaplin’s
throat as “unlikely”.
and relatedly, the evidence of the expert, Dr Donlon, in relation to the
remnants of Chaplin’s body, was that defects
on two cervical vertebrae
towards the rear of Chaplin’s neck could have represented “some kind
of cut to the bone”.
it was open to the jury to be fortified in its conclusion by the consciousness
of guilt inherent in the multiple alibis
explored by ZT in discussion with his
parents and SW, and deployed in his interviews with the police, all of which the
be taken to have rejected.
applicable principles in relation to an unreasonable verdict challenge, derived
from a number of decisions of the High Court (
M v The Queen
181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
MFA v The Queen
213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
(2022) 274 CLR 651
[2022] HCA 25
(HC)), were
not in doubt.
the High Court stated at 493 that:
“Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to
sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked
to conclude that the
verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask
itself is whether it thinks that
upon the whole of the evidence it was open to
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty.
answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either
the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with
the primary
responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the
jury has had the benefit of having seen
and heard the witnesses. On the
contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations.”
(footnotes omitted)
Court must have due regard to the advantage of the jury in hearing and seeing
witnesses, as held in
“...In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a
doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced. It
is only where a
jury’s advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of
resolving a doubt experienced by a court
of criminal appeal that the court
may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say,
where the evidence lacks
credibility for reasons which are not explained by
the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by
is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the
evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies, displays
inadequacies,
is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the court
of criminal appeal to conclude that,
even making full allowance for the
advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an
innocent person has
been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set
aside a verdict based upon that evidence. In doing so, the court is not
substituting trial by a court of appeal for trial by jury, for the ultimate
question must always be whether the court thinks that
upon the whole of the
evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused was guilty. Although
the propositions stated in the four preceding
sentences have been variously expressed in judgments of members of the Court in
cases, we have put aside those differences in expression in order
to provide authoritative guidance to courts of criminal appeal
the propositions in the form in which they are set out above.” (footnotes
speaking, the lengthier the cross examination, the greater the jury’s
advantage. The jury’s advantage is, however,
”not limited to
its capacity to see and hear the witnesses give their
[2020] NSWCCA 288
Court held in
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
“It is fundamental to our system of criminal justice in relation to
allegations of serious crimes tried by jury that the jury
constitutional tribunal for deciding issues of fact’. Given the central
place of the jury trial in the administration
of criminal justice over the
centuries, and the abiding importance of the role of the jury as representative
of the community in
that respect, the setting aside of a jury’s verdict on
the ground that it is ‘unreasonable’... is a serious step,
taken without particular regard to the advantage enjoyed by the jury over a
court of appeal which has not seen or heard
the witnesses called at
trial.” (footnotes omitted)
advantages of the jury, including (as in this case) where the evidence consists
of recorded conversations or interviews, were
summarised in
“[9] First, although another
refers to the advantage the jury has in
‘seeing and hearing the witnesses’, the passage above confirms
that the jury’s
advantages are not confined to witness testimony but may
extend to all of the evidence adduced at trial. The advantages
are the advantages the jury had, including by the application of the
jurors’ collective wisdom and experience of ordinary affairs,
seeing and hearing the evidence as it unfolds when evaluating factual matters,
especially witness credibility. The existence,
nature and scope of those
advantages will vary from case to case depending on the form in which the
evidence was adduced and the
nature of the issues that arose at the
trial. For example, in
the advantage possessed
by the trial judge as arbiter of fact was assessed as ‘slight’
because the prosecution case was
circumstantial, consisting mostly of
transcripts of unchallenged testimony, and the appellant did not give
[10] Second, in applying
the appellate court is required to give ‘full allowance’
to the advantages of the jury in seeing and hearing the evidence
when assessing
whether those advantages are capable of resolving any doubt the
appellate court holds about the appellant’s
guilt. Whether the
evidence is adduced in the form of witness testimony or recorded
conversations or recorded interviews, the advantages
may extend to an assessment
of matters such as: the tone and manner in which the witness or participants
spoke or conducted themselves;
their maturity; their emotional state and
intelligence; and how they interact with others, including family members,
associates,
strangers or officials (eg, police officers). The jury can consider
those matters possessing a breadth of understanding of how different
speak and behave in such circumstances that a judge may not have.
requires that the appellate court undertake an ‘independent
assessment’ of the sufficiency and quality of the ‘whole
evidence’. However, that assessment is undertaken in a context in
which an appeal is as much of an adversarial process
as the criminal trial from
which the appeal is brought and in which it is for the parties to identify
the evidence that the appellate
court must review and assess and the features of
that evidence that support their respective cases on appeal. The appellate court
does not determine the grounds of appeal by simply reconsidering the
parties’ respective cases at the trial.” (footnotes
into account the advantages of the jury in a lengthy trial such as that
conducted in the present case and based upon my review
of the whole of the
evidence, including listening to the sound recordings of telephone conversations
and police interviews involving
ZT, I do not consider that “there is a
significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted”
at 494) nor “that a miscarriage of justice has occurred
authorising and requiring [this Court’s] intervention”
at [96]). It was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the accused was guilty (
at 495) and the appeal should, in my view,
be dismissed.
This is a case involving a murder that was, at the time of investigation,
approximately nine years in the past. There were no eyewitnesses.
The body was
largely destroyed. The evidence available to the Crown was, as a result,
limited. While there was some circumstantial
evidence supporting the Crown case,
including evidence the applicant assisted in the disposal of the body,
ultimately, central to
the proof of the Crown case was the reliability of
various admissions made by the applicant. The case is an unusual one in that
Whilst the applicant made many admissions to having murdered the
deceased, those admissions were, in many instances, inconsistent
another. Some were inconsistent with the objective evidence. Some, if accepted,
elevated the applicant’s culpability
beyond that which was alleged by the
Crown. The applicant now contends the various admissions made by him cannot be
relied upon.
It is in these circumstances it is contended that the verdict is
unreasonable and should be quashed.
The procedural
22 November and 9 December 2021, ZT (the applicant) stood trial in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales before Walton J and
a jury on an indictment that he,
between 30 March and 31 May 2010, at Gerogery in the State of New South Wales,
did murder William
Chaplin (the deceased). On 9 December 2021, the jury returned
a verdict of guilty. On 29 April 2022, the applicant was sentenced
to 12 years
imprisonment with a non-parole period of 8 years:
[2022] NSWSC
He filed a Notice of Intention to Appeal against his conviction on 27 April
29 September 2023, a majority of this Court (Kirk JA, Sweeney J agreeing, Fagan
J dissenting) upheld the applicant’s appeal
on the sole ground that his
conviction was unreasonable or could not be supported having regard to the
[2023] NSWCCA 241.
The Court granted leave to appeal,
allowed the appeal, quashed the applicant’s conviction and entered a
judgment of acquittal.
majority held that it was not reasonably open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the applicant was guilty
and that the doubt they held was
“not capable of being explained away by the natural advantages of the
jury”. This was
on the basis that the applicant’s admissions were
not sufficiently reliable such that the applicant’s guilt could be
established beyond reasonable doubt. In forming this view, the majority did not
listen to any of the intercepted telephone calls
or watch any of the recorded
police interviews in which the alleged admissions were made:
[128], [266]. Fagan J in contrast did watch some of the first police interview,
including parts where intercepted calls were played
to the applicant (which I
note were not separately transcribed in the transcript of the police interview):
New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions, pursuant to a grant of special
leave to appeal, appealed to the High Court against
the orders made by this
Court on the basis that, in failing to listen to or view the principal evidence,
the Court of Criminal Appeal
failed to discharge its appellate function
consistently with
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63.
April 2025, the High Court unanimously allowed the appeal, set aside the
acquittal and remitted the matter for redetermination
according to law:
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676.
members of the High Court found that the majority in this Court failed to
properly apply the test in
M v The Queen
in concluding that no part of
the reasoning to the conclusion that the verdict was unreasonable
“depend[ed] in any material
way on what impression would have been
conveyed by what the jury heard and saw”: at [53] per Gageler CJ, Gleeson,
Beech-Jones JJ with respect to both the telephone intercepts and the
police interviews, and at [90] per Gordon, Edelman and Steward
JJ with respect
to the telephone intercepts only. Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ
found the majority in this Court
were wrong in not having regard to the
advantage held by the jury as a result of their having viewed and listened to
the telephone
intercepts and the police interviews, without having listened to
or watched a “sufficient part of [that material] to make an
assessment of
the existence, nature and scope of the advantages the jury held” (at
[56]). Gordon, Edelman and Steward JJ (at
[92]) found that it was in error to
determine the matter without listening to any of the intercepted calls on the
basis that any
advantage held by the jury in having done so was not a
significant advantage and where the Crown had submitted that aspects of the
telephone intercepts not apparent from the transcript “could have a real
impact” on the reliability of admissions.
is necessary then to determine whether, as the applicant contends, the verdict
of the jury is unreasonable within the meaning of
Criminal Appeal
(NSW). That determination is to be made in accordance with
authority including the Crown’s successful appeal in this matter.
The principles to be applied
High Court, on appeal in the present matter, revisited the test to be applied by
this Court in determining whether a verdict is
unreasonable within the first
Criminal Appeal Act
. The Court again confirmed the
test is that stated in
M v The Queen
, per Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson
and Toohey JJ. That test had previously been stated in similar terms
has been consistently repeated through subsequent High Court
decisions. In
M v The Queen
, their Honours said (at
“Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to
sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked
to conclude that the
verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask
itself is whether it thinks that
upon the whole of the evidence it was open to
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty.
answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either
the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with
the primary
responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the
jury has had the benefit of having seen
and heard the witnesses. On the
contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations.
... In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt
which a jury ought also to have experienced. It is only
where a jury’s
advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a
doubt experienced by a court of criminal
appeal that the court may conclude that
no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence
lacks credibility
for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it
was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which
reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record
itself, contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies,
is tainted or otherwise
lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to
conclude that, even making
full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the
jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been
then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon
that evidence. In doing so, the court is not substituting trial
by a court of
appeal for trial by jury, for the ultimate question must always be whether the
court thinks that upon the whole of
the evidence it was open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. ...”
(footnotes omitted)
is important to have regard to the complete exposition of the test as set out
above. As Brennan J said in
M v The Queen
(at 501), simply asking
whether it was “‘open to the jury upon the whole of the evidence to
be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused was guilty’ ...
conceals an underlying controversy as to when it is ‘open to the
be so satisfied”.
Application
of the test requires this Court to make its own independent assessment of the
evidence before considering whether any
doubt that results is capable of
resolution by the advantage held by the jury:
M v The Queen
(at 492). The point was re-iterated in
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
, where the majority (French
CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ) observed that in applying the test
the appellate court “is to make ‘an
independent assessment of the
evidence, both as to its sufficiency and its quality’”. A failure
to undertake the independent
inquiry will necessarily lead to a focus on the
verdict of the jury and the basis on which it might be justified rather than a
on the charge and the evidence led to support it. Other than in more
extreme cases it will not be difficult to find a basis on which
a jury may have
reasoned to guilt. Justifying a verdict in this manner, however, risks the
process becoming perilously close to an
“open to the jury” inquiry
that requires simply some evidence capable of establishing the elements of the
course, the appellate court’s independent assessment is not the end of the
process. As
M v The Queen
and the cases which have followed make clear,
having made an independent assessment of the evidence, any doubt experienced by
appellate court may nonetheless be resolved having regard to the advantage
enjoyed by the jury. In answering the question posed by
M v The Queen
“the appellate court must not disregard or discount either the
consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the
responsibility of determining guilt or innocence or the consideration that the
jury has had the ‘benefit of having
seen and heard the
witnesses’”:
The King v ZT
at [7] quoting from
. With respect to that advantage, in
The King v ZT
, the majority
said (at [9], footnotes omitted):
“...the jury’s advantages are not confined to witness testimony but
may extend to all of the evidence adduced at trial.
The advantages spoken
of are the advantages the jury had, including by the application of the
jurors’ collective wisdom and
experience of ordinary affairs, from
seeing and hearing the evidence as it unfolds when evaluating factual matters,
especially witness
credibility. The existence, nature and scope of those
advantages will vary from case to case depending on the form in which the
was adduced and the nature of the issues that arose at the
The King v ZT,
the High Court also clarified that while evidence in the
form of electronically recorded statements may be viewed by an appellate
which will, at least to an extent, replicate the experience of jurors in viewing
the evidence, that does not mean that an appellate
court has the same function
in evaluating such evidence. Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ
observed (at [18]-[19]):
“18 ... Nothing in
prevents or impedes the appellate court watching and listening to
exhibits containing recorded statements, such as recordings of police
and intercepted telephone calls, provided there is a ‘real forensic
purpose’ for doing so. Such a purpose
can include ascertaining the
effect of the evidence visually or by sound, or assessing the existence, nature
and scope of the advantages
possessed by the jury in seeing and hearing that
evidence (before giving ‘full allowance’ to those
advantages, if found
to exist). What such a purpose does not include is the
appellate court making its own assessment of the credibility of anything stated
in those police interviews or intercepted telephone calls by reference to the
manner in which those statements were made. Such assessments
are (again) the
province of the jury.
19 Whether listening to or watching witness testimony or
exhibits containing recorded statements enables some aspect of the evidence
be discerned that is not discernible from the transcript, or assists the
appellate court to understand the extent, nature and
scope of the jury’s
advantages not apparent from the transcript, may not be ascertainable until
after the event. Accordingly,
an appellate court does not err merely because it
takes those steps only to conclude that there was no ‘real forensic
for doing so. Whether error is established depends on
the appellate court makes of listening to and watching
such material.” (Emphasis in original.)
question of whether there is a “real forensic purpose” in watching
and listening to recorded statements is determined
in the context of the
adversarial nature of an appeal against conviction. That is, “an appeal is
as much of an adversarial
process as the criminal trial from which the
appeal is brought” and, as a result, an “appellate court does not
the grounds of appeal by simply reconsidering the parties’
respective cases at the trial”:
The King v ZT
at [11]. It is, as a
result, incumbent on the parties to identify any portions of the evidence which
it is submitted should be viewed
or listened to:
SKA v The Queen
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
The King v ZT
passages of recorded materials have been identified by the parties does not
oblige the Court to listen to or watch those parts
of the recordings. It will
only be necessary to do so if the Court is satisfied that there is, as
contended, a genuine forensic purpose
in doing so.
against the contingency that one or more members of the Court would experience a
doubt based on the record of the trial,
the respondent submitted that the Court
should listen to, or view, various parts of the electronic evidence in order to
inform ourselves
as to the extent of the advantage held by the jury. Much of
that evidence comprised intercepted telephone calls which were played
There followed a helpful process where the parties in turn made submissions as
to what could be drawn from the particular
recording. I have viewed in chambers
other parts of the recordings which it was submitted should be viewed but which
were not played
in court. My assessment of the benefit of having listened to or
viewed parts of the evidence is discussed below in the context of
the particular
recordings. I would only observe at this point that, having listened to or
listened to and viewed the particular recordings,
the forensic purpose in doing
so with respect to some of them was not at all clear. At times, the submissions
on the utility of playing
the recordings tended to focus on the conclusions we
would draw from the experience (which were not relevant) rather than our
of the advantage the jury enjoyed in having experienced the playing
of the recording. That was, to a degree understandable, given
that the two
processes are not conceptually unrelated. Nonetheless, as
The King v ZT
establishes, the distinction must be maintained.
A brief outline
of the case against the applicant
deceased was murdered by PW sometime between 30 March and 31 May 2010 in
Gerogery. No report of the crime was made at the time.
Nor was the deceased
reported missing. As a result, for several years, the police remained unaware
that any crime had been committed.
In 2017, PW, while in prison, told another
inmate that he had murdered the deceased. That prisoner told the authorities and
an investigation
was launched.
investigation led to the arrest of the applicant. He was, at the time of the
murder committed by PW, 16 years old and living
with PW and his wife SW in their
was also living with
PW and SW. The case against the applicant proceeded on the
basis that he was complicit in the offence committed by PW.
police investigation also led to PW’s former wife, SW. She co-operated
with the police. She was, according to her evidence,
away on the night the
deceased was killed. She returned home to find him dead in the “round
yard”, a paddock ringed by
tyres forming a circular wall which was used
for breaking in horses. Neither PW nor the applicant appeared to be troubled by
death. She said that she, the applicant and PW attempted to destroy the
body. It was placed in a shallow grave and a large fire was
built over it. Bones
belonging to the deceased were ultimately found at the location.
order to understand the case against the applicant, it is helpful to know
something of PW. It was not in dispute that he was a
murderer. Beyond this, he
was also a child molester. He was manipulative and controlling. He destroyed
many lives. The applicant
formed a friendship with PW, ultimately moving in with
him and his wife SW. PW was, at the time the applicant moved in, 39 years
considerably older than the 16 year old applicant. Importantly, the relationship
between the applicant and PW was close, with
the result that PW was able to
exert control over the applicant.
to PW’s confession to murder, he killed the deceased because he caught him
sexually abusing his, that is PW’s,
child, CW. The reality was very likely
that PW killed the deceased because the deceased caught PW sexually abusing the
the time he made his confession, PW was in fact in gaol for sexual
offences against his biological children CW and DW whom he fathered
There was other evidence of PW having sexually abused his two biological
children from an earlier relationship with JW,
and at least four other young
persons. It was not suggested the applicant had any motive to kill the deceased
other than a desire
to assist and, perhaps, impress PW. Consistently with this,
the Crown Prosecutor opened the case on the basis that:
“[PW] elicited the aid of his friend, the [applicant], to help him kill
[the deceased] and [the applicant] did help him willingly.”
closing, the Crown Prosector said:
“There’s no doubt that [PW] was the orchestrator of the death of
[the deceased]. There’s no dispute. As I said
in my opening, under no
circumstances could [the deceased] reveal that [PW] had been caught sexually
interfering with his own daughter.”
respect to the applicant’s liability, the case was put on the basis that
he was party to a joint criminal enterprise or
at least an extended joint
criminal enterprise with PW to kill the deceased. On the Crown case, the
applicant was present in the
round yard with PW when the deceased was killed
pursuant to an agreement between the applicant and PW to kill or inflict
bodily harm on the deceased. As to extended joint criminal enterprise,
it was put that, having agreed with PW to assault the deceased,
the applicant,
while not agreeing to it, foresaw the possibility that PW would, with an
intention to do so, go further and inflict
grievous bodily harm or kill the
Manslaughter
was also left to the jury on the basis that the applicant was a party to an
unlawful and dangerous act. Understanding
how this might be established having
regard to the difficulty in particularising the act or agreement was not
straight-forward. The
necessary path of reasoning to guilt was that, while not
satisfied the applicant was guilty of murder, the applicant’s admissions
enabled a conclusion that he was a party to the act that resulted in death, and
which a reasonable person in his position would have
appreciated carried a risk
of serious injury.
was raised by the applicant based on admissions made by him in which he
confessed to his involvement but stated it was as a
result of a threat to his
life posed by PW, together with evidence of the nature of the relationship
between the applicant and PW
more generally. Duress was, however, only required
to be rebutted by the Crown with respect to liability for murder based on
joint criminal enterprise or in the event that the jury were required
to consider manslaughter. That is because duress is not an
available defence to
murder as a principal in the first degree but is available as a defence to
murder as a principal in the second
R v McConnell
(1977) 1 NSWLR
Liability based on participation in a joint criminal enterprise is primary
liability, that is, liability as a principal in the first
(1998) 197 CLR 316
[1998] HCA 75
. Liability based on
extended joint criminal enterprise has been accepted to be that of a principal
in the second degree:
Mitchell v The Queen
(2023) 276 CLR 299
R v Stephen; R v Tadrosse (No 4)
[2025] NSWSC 824.
case against the applicant absent the admissions
The role of PW in the murder
observed above, the murder came to light in 2017 when PW, while serving a period
of imprisonment, confessed the crime to a fellow
inmate. PW told his cellmate,
Sacha Priest, “by the way I murdered someone”. Mr Priest said that
PW went into “full
detail about what he did, why he did it, where the body
is” but that he, Mr Priest, could not remember the exact conversation.
said that PW did not say how he murdered the deceased but that he had burnt the
body and buried it on a farm where he had lived.
He said he had killed the
deceased because he was attacking or threatening to attack his family. He said
that his wife knew about
it and “was there”, but did not mention her
involvement otherwise. Mr Priest said PW did not mention the involvement
anyone else.
form in which PW spoke of his responsibility for the murder, taken literally,
suggests he assumed sole responsibility for the
murder. While he suggested SW
“knew about it” it was not clear as to when that knowledge arose.
That evidence was, as
a result, not inconsistent with SW’s evidence,
discussed below, that she only found out about the murder after the event.
failure to mention the involvement of anyone else in the killing is arguably
inconsistent with the applicant having been
involved. I would not, however,
place significant weight on this. PW, while willing to confess his own crime,
may have been reluctant
to implicate others. This might be particularly so in
the gaol environment. It may be that PW did not appreciate that the role played
by the applicant also rendered him liable for murder. Either on this basis or
otherwise, he may have thought little of the role played
by the applicant. PW
was, after all, nothing if not self-centred.
observed above, it was likely that PW’s motive for the murder was that the
deceased had caught PW sexually abusing his child.
Support for this theory was
found in PW’s history of sexually abusing children, including his own
biological children. PW’s
first wife, JW, gave evidence of an occasion
when she came home to find PW naked from the waist down on the floor with their
naked child, who was then aged about two years old. JW said that when
their other son was about five years old he told her of a sexual
and when he was ten years old he made a further complaint that he was made to
perform oral sex on PW. JW also gave
evidence of an occasion in 1996 when PW was
questioned by police in relation to sexual allegations made against him by a
girl” he babysat when he was 16 years old, and complaints by
a 14 year old neighbour and a 16 year old niece. SD gave evidence
sister had told him PW had digitally penetrated her on an occasion when they had
gone swimming as a group.
of PW’s abuse of children also came from SW. Her relationship with PW
commenced following the conclusion of PW’s
relationship with JW.
SW’s evidence was relevant to a number of matters and is discussed further
below. It is sufficient to
note here that the evidence of PW’s abuse of
male and female children was extensive.
in a conversation with the applicant in September 2019, asked him if he had been
abused by PW. She said that he responded that
he “would prefer not to
answer that question”. The applicant did tell the police in the course of
his second recorded
interview that he had been abused by PW.
was evidence, from both statements made by the applicant, and SD, a young
neighbour, that PW boasted of being a hit man having
killed numerous people.
This was likely untrue. The relevance of this evidence is limited to the
applicant’s belief that PW
was dangerous and may have acted on any threats
background to SW’s relationship with PW was given by SW’s mother, Ms
W. Ms W and her family met PW when SW was about
7 years old. In 2001, Ms W
allowed PW to move into her home. While he was living there, Ms W found him on
one occasion sleeping on
the floor of her son’s bedroom and on another on
the floor of SW’s bedroom. Some months later, Ms W asked PW to move
PW later told her that he intended to marry SW, who was then 14 years old, when
she turned 18. Four days later, SW left the
house and Ms W did not see her for
the next 16 years. Ms W gave evidence that she had been threatened and told to
stop looking for
SW a “couple of times”. On eventually reuniting
with her mother, SW told her that PW had not allowed her to make contact.
gave evidence that she started a relationship with PW when she was about 14
years old and he was about 32 years old. She gave birth
to their daughter, CW,
in 2008. After CW was born, PW began abusing her and was violent and
manipulative. She said that PW regularly
threatened to kill her and that she was
very scared of him.
said that at the time of the deceased’s death, she and PW were living in
Main Street, Gerogery with the applicant, the deceased,
and their daughter CW.
The deceased slept on the couch in the loungeroom and the applicant slept in the
spare room. The other two
bedrooms were occupied by SW and PW, and by CW. The
applicant’s uncle and aunt were neighbours.
gave evidence of an occasion in early 2010 when she and PW were having sex in
their bedroom and the deceased walked into the room,
claiming he really needed
to speak with PW. He then walked out of the room. Afterwards, SW had an argument
with PW about the incident.
She left the home to stay overnight with her
mother-in-law and did not take CW with her.
next day, SW telephoned PW to ask whether she could return home and PW said that
he “needed an hour to clean up some stuff”.
She arrived home between
11.30am and 12.30pm, at which time both PW and the applicant had a “normal
demeanour”. PW asked
her if she wanted to be shown something and she said
yes. SW said that PW and the applicant were joking about it being “a
day for sunbaking” and for “laying under the sun”.
gave evidence that PW and the applicant led her to the round yard, which was
house. She saw a tarpaulin
with a bulge in it lying on the ground in the round yard which PW pulled back to
reveal the deceased’s
body from the waist upwards. He was lying with his
arms by his sides, with his eyes open and staring up. He had a “small
above his right eye. SW did not notice any damage, cut or bruising
to his neck, nor blood on his neck. She confirmed that she did
anything about his chest, except that he was wearing a green jumper or shirt.
She said that the deceased was again covered
with the tarpaulin, after which the
three returned to the house. In the house, PW told SW and the applicant
“that we don’t
say anything otherwise we’re in the same
gave evidence that she later saw PW and the applicant digging up the
deceased’s body from an area “in the trees”
where a horse had
been buried, and returning his body to the round yard to burn. An area had been
dug up in the round yard and wood
had been laid on top of the deceased’s
body. SW gave evidence that she helped put some timber or wood on the pile and
PW started the fire with petrol. The fire lasted for about two to three
gave evidence that in August 2019 she was questioned by police in relation to
the death of the deceased. She was charged with,
and pleaded guilty to, being an
accessory after the fact to murder on the basis that she assisted in the
disposal of the body. SW
gave evidence that she assisted because of her fear of
PW and her belief that if she did not assist or if she told anyone what had
occurred, she “would have been dead” herself. SW co-operated with
police who requested she contact the applicant and
obtain information about the
death of the deceased. SW was sentenced to a Community Correction Order for the
offence. She acknowledged
she was at risk of being resentenced if she did not
give evidence, or if she gave untruthful evidence, in the proceedings.
the evidence of SW was challenged by the applicant at trial, her evidence was
not called into question on the appeal. There
is, in any event, good reason to
accept SW’s evidence that she was not present at the time of the murder
but returned to find
the deceased’s body. That is so despite the caution
required with respect to the evidence of persons who were criminally involved
events. SW clearly had much to gain in limiting her involvement. Objective
analysis of the evidence, however, supports her account.
In the course of an
intercepted conversation with the applicant, SW asked the applicant how the
deceased was killed and who killed
him. These were very risky questions to ask
if SW was in fact present. Had that been the case the applicant was very likely
pointed out that she was present and already knew the answer.
that SW was not present, there is also no reason to doubt her evidence as to
what she observed and what she did when she
returned. Her account of her actions
on her return is, of course, inculpatory. Important in this regard, for reasons
which will become
apparent, is that there is no reason to doubt her observations
of the deceased and, in particular, the absence of injury to the
neck. While it does not inevitably follow from the verdict, it
is likely the jury accepted SW as having given an, at least, honest
would, in any event, in making my independent assessment of the evidence, accept
the critical parts of her evidence. It
follows that the applicant in statements
in which he implicated her, or at least suggested she was present when the
killing occurred,
Evidence of the relationship between
the applicant and PW
evidence of the applicant’s relationship with PW came primarily from SW
gave evidence that the applicant initially befriended PW as a result of the
applicant’s interest in taking care of the horses
owned by her and PW when
he was about 14 or 15 years old. The applicant began attending their home more
frequently, coming nearly
every night after school and sometimes staying
overnight. SW described the applicant and PW as “good friends” that
do “[p]retty much everything” together, including hanging
around, talking and smoking marijuana. SW gave evidence that
she had never seen
PW assault or threaten the applicant and had never seen PW engaging in sexual
conduct with the applicant or been
told anything by the applicant in this
was 12 or 13 years old when he moved to Gerogery in 2005. That made him about a
year older than the applicant. He lived across
the road from the applicant and
they became friends. He also became friends with PW, spending many evenings
there and sometimes staying
overnight. He said PW supplied both he and the
applicant with alcohol and cannabis. SD said PW was “a little bit
intimidating”
and “very manipulative”. He recalled an occasion
when the three of them were smoking cannabis together and PW said of
“... he was proud of him, he stepped up and helped him do something,
didn’t exactly say what. He was proud of him, he
stepped up and helped him
take care of some business, about it and I, I was stoned, I laughed at him and
he kind of got the shits
and ended up pulling a blade on me.”
said he looked towards the applicant who had “a little bit of a smirk on
his face”. SD said that PW took hold of his
hair and put the knife to his
throat. He said PW motioned with his head towards the applicant who got up and
stood next to the door.
evidence is supportive of not only a close relationship between the applicant
and PW but also one in which the applicant
was prepared to do PW’s
bidding, even if it meant siding with PW against his more age-appropriate
friend. The suggestion that
the applicant had helped PW with something,
inferentially nefarious, could potentially have related to the killing of the
However, even if the suggestion did relate to the deceased, it does
not distinguish between the applicant’s assistance in disposing
deceased’s body and the applicant’s assistance in killing the
deceased. It should also be noted that SD had no recollection
of a bonfire in
the round yard, which would have presumably been proximate to the comment had it
related to the death of the deceased.
Consequently, no reliable conclusions can
be drawn from PW’s utterance, beyond it reflecting the nature of the
relationship
between PW and the applicant.
The forensic
agreed facts tendered at the applicant’s trial indicate that on 28 August
2019, police began forensic examination in the
round yard at the Gerogery
property. On the south-west side of the round yard, inside the last layer of
tyres, an area of interest
was identified as a result of police locating what
appeared to be pieces of burnt material and charcoal. Across two days police
part of a human skull, other bones and bone fragments, including what
appeared to be human teeth, gang nails, steel caps from work
boots, black
coloured cloth, cut strips of rubber, cigarette butts, nylon electric fence tape
and a bundle of thin, tangled wires.
DNA testing established the skull to be
that of the deceased. Police divers searched two dams on the property for a
knife, however
no knives were located. The significance of this is discussed
later in these reasons.
Denise Donlon, a forensic anthropologist, was called by the Crown. Of potential
relevance to the murder, Dr Donlon identified a
defect to the posterior surface
of one of the deceased’s right ribs. She opined that it had the appearance
of a puncture mark
and could have been caused by something pointed, shortly
prior to or after death. Dr Donlon also located defects to the posterior
lower cervical vertebrae, in other words, to the rear of the neck. One of the
vertebrae had a hinged, linear defect, and the
other had a mark to the spinous
process. Dr Donlon opined that the defects could have been caused by a cut to
the bone and could
have occurred either shortly before or after
The admissions
earlier indicated, an important part of the Crown case was the admissions made
by the applicant.
Admissions that were not electronically
The “sunbaking” comment
referred to above in the context of SW’s evidence, on SW’s return to
the home, and prior to seeing the body of the
deceased, she observed the
demeanour of both PW and the applicant was “normal”. There was, she
said, “joking about
it’s a lovely day for sunbaking”. She did
not indicate who said what, although it is tolerably clear from the evidence
that she regarded both the applicant and PW as joining in on the joke.
the applicant was joking with respect to the killing of the deceased suggests
approval or at least acquiescence on his part as
to what had occurred,
potentially amounting to an implied admission. There was no real advantage held
by the jury in evaluating this
evidence given it was a hearsay account of what
the applicant and PW had said and a description of their demeanour at the time.
evaluating the evidence the first observation I would make is that SW was
giving evidence many years after the event. That presumably
contributed to the
lack of precision with respect to what was said and by whom, and with respect to
what she could report as to the
applicant’s demeanour. Even if the
evidence is accepted, while consistent with the applicant having been involved,
the applicant’s
conduct cannot establish his liability for murder.
the “sunbaking” evidence cannot prove that the applicant committed
murder does not mean it should be set aside. It
establishes that the applicant
was at the premises when SW returned, and inferentially was there at the time of
the killing, and
adds to the evidence that he was under the influence of PW.
Beyond those matters the evidence is essentially neutral as to whether
applicant did assist in the killing, or merely approved of or was at least
unconcerned with, PW having murdered the deceased.
An admission
to SW’s mother
set out above, SW’s mother, Ms W, lost contact with her daughter in 2001
when SW was 14 years old. She did not see her again
until 2017. In around
November 2017, Ms W moved into SW’s home. By that time, PW was in gaol for
sexual offences against children,
including the children he shared with SW. Ms W
said that while she was staying with SW, she met the applicant who she
to be a friend of PW and SW. The applicant would visit SW from time
to time after work. Ms W did not know the applicant well, and
told him that she
did not trust him because he was PW’s friend.
W said that around a month after moving in with SW, she had a conversation with
the applicant in which he said that he and PW “had
to sort out some guy
who’d been messing with, with their daughter”. In cross-examination
Ms W agreed that it was possible
the applicant said “[PW] had to sort this
bloke out and he had to help him after that”.
reference to “sorting out” someone in the context of that person
interfering with PW’s daughter can be taken
as a reference to the killing
of the deceased. While Ms W appears to have readily accepted the possibility
that the applicant did
not admit to murder, but only to assisting with the body,
it is not possible from the written word to know whether she was expressing
real doubt about what was said, or rather a view more akin to an acknowledgment
that anything is possible. Even if the witness
had expressed certainty as to
what was said, she was giving evidence of a conversation which took place four
years earlier and in
relation to which she had not made a statement until some
two years after the event. Perhaps more significant is the somewhat bizarre
nature of the admission. If it was an admission to murder there is no evidence
as to what prompted it. There is nothing to explain
why the confession was made
to Ms W, with whom the applicant did not have a close relationship, and who had
in fact told the applicant
that she did not trust him. These matters have some
significance in the context of the unreliability of other admissions made by
applicant, as discussed below.
Admissions in the telephone
is impractical to summarise the entirety of the intercepted telephone calls. In
what follows, I canvas the various calls in which
statements are made that have
significance in advancing the contentions of either the Crown or the applicant
including each of the
calls it was submitted should be listened to by the
15 August 2019 at 9.29pm, 9.31pm and 9.34pm – the
applicant speaks with his mother and partner
to the applicant being made aware of the investigation, police spoke to his
mother (Ms T), informed her they were investigating
what they believed to be a
homicide and asked if she knew the deceased. Ms T was asked about SW, PW and the
applicant. Ms T immediately
tried to call the applicant. When she did not reach
him, she spoke to the applicant’s partner (MP) and, it appears, told her
“[w]ho the fuck is [the deceased]” also referring
to him by his
nickname, “Tall Man”. The applicant denied any knowledge of him
before being informed that police from
Albury had called her and had also
mentioned the names of PW and SW. It would appear the applicant lied with
respect to his knowledge
of the deceased. That lie does not, in my view, advance
the case for murder. While it is not inevitably the case that a lie will
neutral as between offences of differing seriousness, the circumstances here are
not such as to allow an inference that the lie
was told out of a consciousness
of guilt of murder as opposed to involvement in the disposal of the
deceased’s body: cf
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 35
[2013] NSWCCA 317
(2013) 241 A Crim
Edwards v R
(2022) 107 NSWLR 301
[2022] NSWCCA 22
applicant interrupted the conversation with his mother to take a call from his
partner, MP. This call was played to the Court.
In it, MP asked the applicant if
he had spoken to his mother to which the applicant indicated he had. The
following exchange took
“[MP]: Did she tell you?
[ZT]: Yeah.
[MP]: So what the fuck?
[ZT]: About what?
[MP]: You know very well what I’m talking about [ZT].
[ZT]: What?
[MP]: Did you kill someone two years ago?
[MP]: Don’t lie to me.
[ZT]: Oi I’ll talk to you about it when we get home, when
I get home.”
turns on the reference to the event being two years ago in the above exchange.
The applicant can be taken to have known the
questions related to the deceased.
The respondent submitted that it was open to the jury to regard the
applicant’s denial to
the question of whether he had killed someone two
years ago as a lie. The respondent in particular points to a not insignificant
pause before the applicant answered and what was submitted to be a change in
tone. These were matters available to the jury, and
for the jury to evaluate, in
giving meaning to the response. It was, given the circumstances, and the matters
pointed to by the respondent,
open to the jury to regard the applicant’s
response as dishonest.
are, however, limits to the weight that can be placed on the applicant’s
response. There were other potential explanations
for the applicant’s
delay in answering his partner’s question. He was, on any view, involved
in a serious crime. He may
have paused to consider precisely what he should say.
He may have been, and likely was, unsettled in making this determination. There
was a degree of dishonesty in the blanket denial, in that he was not being
completely open with MP. It was, therefore, open to the
jury to determine the
applicant was, at this point, being dishonest or at least obfuscating.
Determining the extent of the dishonesty
or obfuscation, and where the truth
might lie, is more difficult and in my view could not be gleaned by listening to
the recording.
The advantage held by the jury in listening to this recording
was, consequently, limited.
MP terminated the above call the applicant called his mother back and asked her
to tell him what was said in her call with the
police. Ms T told the applicant
she had told police that she thought she had moved to Townsville with the
applicant in 2007, so the
applicant would not have been in Albury at the time.
The applicant admonished Ms T for telling the police she knew PW and SW. The
following exchange took place:
“[Ms T]: What’s going on?
[ZT]: He went missing.
[Ms T]: I know, that’s what the copper told me.
[ZT]: Yeah.
[Ms T]: Somewhere along the line, you’ve been implicated, your
name’s come up.
[ZT]: How the fuck, (sounds like) yeah I killed him.
Fuck me. Um, I love you.
[Ms T]: I love you too [ZT]. You’re fuckin’ scaring
[ZT]: Oh we found him one night (sighs) Mum.
[Ms T]: I’m listening ...
[Ms T]: ... [ZT].
[ZT]: We found him one night touching [CW], all right?
[Ms T]: Right.
[ZT]: [CW] was about two years old at the time, so I took him out
to the round yard and cut his throat and then we burnt the
[Ms T]: Where?
[ZT]: In the paddock. (Pause) There’s no,
there’s no trace evidence of anything.
[Ms T]: What about bones and shit.
[Ms T]: No it was all disintegrated. Funnily enough, your sister came to
the bonfire. (Pause)
[Ms T]: Well I’m, I’m sticking to the story saying that you
were, you were up here with me.
[ZT]: Yeah, stick to the story. When do you come to town
[Ms T]: I’m there next week for me operation...
[ZT]: Oh, we need to talk.
[Ms T]: He’s ringing me back tomorrow.
[ZT]: Right, well stick to your story please.”
entirety of this call was also played to the Court.
the face of it, this call constitutes a clear admission to murder. Relatively
little scrutiny is, however, required before questions
arise as to the
reliability of the admission. The Crown closed its case on the basis that PW was
“the orchestrator of the death
of [the deceased]”, his motive being
that “under no circumstances could [the deceased] reveal that [PW] had
been caught
sexually interfering with his own daughter”. In the course of
the passage set out above, the applicant not only professed to
having killed the
deceased but provided the motive for doing so, that being that “we”
(the applicant and, presumably,
PW) had caught the deceased touching PW’s
daughter. This is contrary to the way in which the Crown closed its case and is
to be true.
is noteworthy that the applicant’s admissions to the killing are in the
singular. The applicant states, “I killed him”
and “I took him
out ... and cut his throat”. Importantly, while using the singular
“I” at these points, he
uses the plural “we” when
stating “[w]e found him one night touching” and “we burnt the
Thus, in the space of a few lines the applicant distinguished
between joint involvement or responsibility and individual responsibility.
leads to a strong inference that the applicant’s admissions are to the
effect that he alone killed the deceased. This
again is very likely untrue. Even
if the applicant had been responsible for the fatal wound it makes no sense that
he would take
sole responsibility for the death when on any view he was a child
under the influence of an older, violent and manipulative man.
addition to the above concerns, and perhaps most significant with respect to
this call, is that the applicant’s admission
to killing the deceased is
that he did so by cutting the deceased’s throat. SW’s evidence, as
discussed above, was that
she did not see any injury to the deceased’s
throat or blood on his neck. This was in the context of her memory that his eyes
were open and “[h]e had a small nick above his eye”. Given her
recollection of this level of detail, and that a fatal
wound to the neck would
be significantly more obvious than the “small nick” she recalled,
the possibility that SW overlooked
such an injury to the deceased’s neck
can be rejected.
the appeal, the respondent submitted that as the deceased was face-up, SW may
have been unable to see an injury to the rear of
the deceased. Such an injury,
it was argued, would be consistent with the forensic evidence of some defects
(including possible cut
marks) to the bones at the rear of the neck. Whatever be
the case in this regard, I do not regard it as possible to reconcile the
admission to having cut the deceased’s throat with SW not having observed
any blood or injury to the deceased’s neck.
The attempt to reconcile the
evidence by reference to a potential injury to the rear of the neck was not made
at first instance,
it seems to me, for good reason.
of less significance, another curious aspect of this call is the
applicant’s statement that his mother’s sister
came to the bonfire.
The evidence given by SW that neither the applicant’s aunt nor uncle
attended the bonfire suggests that
this was not so.
the basis of the above, it is clear the applicant told a number of untruths in
the course of this conversation. That is not unusual
for persons who have
committed serious offences. What is unusual is that, even if guilty of murder,
the applicant lied as to having
acted alone and having himself cut the
deceased’s throat - lies which elevate the applicant’s culpability
for the crime.
When pressed as to why the applicant would confess to a level of
criminality well exceeding his alleged responsibility, the respondent
that there were two available responses, albeit neither was relied upon at
trial. The first was to reject the premise that
the applicant lied as to cutting
the deceased’s throat. I have already rejected that argument. The second
argument was that
“the guilt ... has weighed on him, he’s
unburdening himself”. The argument is unpersuasive. It is not clear why
the applicant would not, while unburdening his guilt, give an honest account. It
is also quite unclear as to why he would not put
the events in their context
which would make his involvement in them more understandable. Nor does it
explain what appears to be
an entirely unnecessary untruth in relation to his
aunt’s presence at the bonfire.
are other aspects of this call which raise further questions. A short time after
the exchange set out above, the applicant said,
“... now you know what I
was involved in”. Later again, he says with respect to MP: “She
knows, she’s, she’s
known about it for, since day dot. She knows
exactly who I am”. Later again, the applicant’s mother tells the
that all she has asked is for him to be honest with her, to which the
applicant responds that he will, when he sees her in person,
but that “I
can’t promise you you’re going to enjoy what you hear”. The
claim that MP already knew about
it was untrue. It follows that the claim that
she “knows exactly who I am” was also false (at least insofar as the
implication
is she knew him to be a murderer). As to the prospect his mother
would not enjoy what she was going to hear, the applicant had already
he had cut a man’s throat. There was nothing more shocking the applicant
could reveal. These utterances have the flavour
of the applicant wanting his
mother to believe there was more to him than she had previously understood and
that he was in fact a
ruthless killer. That desire is a more convincing
explanation for the lies told by the applicant in this call than the explanation
proffered by the respondent.
jury of course had the advantage of listening to this call. Having also listened
to it, I do not regard it as possible to take
anything from that experience that
could be capable of explaining the concerns discussed above. No assessment of
the applicant’s
apparent sincerity or otherwise could assist in explaining
the content of the applicant’s admissions. The result is that, whatever
the explanation for what I regard to be the lies told by the applicant in this
call when admitting to the murder of the deceased,
the admissions in this call,
in my view, cannot be relied upon.
16 August 2019 at 8.58pm
– the applicant speaks with his mother
suggestion above that the applicant in the 15 August 2019 call sought to have
his mother believe that there was more to his background
or character than she
had known receives further support from a call between the applicant and his
mother on the following evening,
16 August. In this call the applicant says
“[s]o you’ve got a rough idea of what I used to do mum?” and
“I’ve been doing this a very long time ... I’m very
good at what I do” and “[m]um, I enjoy what I do”.
applicant again tells his mother, as he had the previous night, “you
ain’t goin’ to like what you know”
and that his partner, MP
“hates it”. This again has the flavour of the applicant elevating
the criminal activity in which
he was involved. The assertion that MP
“hates it” impliedly repeats the assertion she knows about this
murder and also
knows about others, which again appears to be
17 August 2019 at 10:42am – the officer-in-charge
speaks with SW
call between SW and the investigating detective on 17 August 2019 was played on
the appeal. The applicant had by this time had contact
with SW by text and was
expecting to speak with him by telephone in the near future. She was given
instructions as to the questions
to ask the applicant.
the extent that playing this call was relevant to assessing the jury’s
advantage with respect to findings relating to the
credit of SW, as noted above
no submission was made by the applicant on the appeal that SW’s evidence
should not be accepted.
It is noted in this regard that quite apart from having
heard the recorded materials, the jury saw SW give evidence including under
cross-examination on behalf of the applicant. As discussed above, I proceed on
the basis that SW’s evidence can be accepted.
2019 at 11.02am and 11.24am – the applicant speaks with SW
applicant and SW spoke on 18 August 2019 at 11.02am and discussed the police
investigation. The applicant dismissed SW’s
concern that they were
“going to be in a lot of trouble”. The conversation was interrupted
and then continued in a further
call, the first 14 minutes of which was played
on the appeal. The applicant speculated that the investigation had been prompted
PW having disclosed the offence while in jail and expressed an interest in
do with PW and said
“I don’t want to get in trouble for this either”. The
applicant responded, saying “[i]f
me and you ... keep it cool ... we
should be all right”. The applicant indicated that they should stick
together, and not be
concerned about PW. The applicant then told SW that the
last time he had seen the deceased, the deceased was leaving for Western
Australia. He said this was a couple of weeks before he himself left. Later in
the call the applicant said to SW, “I don’t
know what happened. Do
you?” and intimated that SW should adopt the same version.
applicant’s assertion that when he last saw the deceased he was alive and
that he did not know what happened was plainly
untrue. It was untrue to the
knowledge of both the applicant and SW, making it clear that it was the lie that
he proposed that they
both tell police. He said that his mother had already
given the police this version. The respondent submitted that this was evidence
of the applicant’s consciousness of guilt. The difficulty is that in
enjoining SW there is no logical basis to distinguish
between the guilt of the
applicant and SW, the latter’s guilt being limited to the disposal of the
body and the failure to
advise the authorities of the crime over a number of
again the applicant said, “if worst comes to worst, if you’re happy
to do it I’m blowing it back on him”
and that “even if we come
clean now we can still say, ‘He, he was threatening us...’”
and that “[i]f
we ever spoke he would kill us and we knew he would”.
Even if this version is accepted to be a lie (that not being entirely
reliance by the respondent on this version suffers the same problem as reliance
on the lies discussed immediately above.
applicant in the course of this call also told SW, with respect to his mother,
that “[s]he knows”. He explained that
he had no choice but to tell
her, describing himself as being “between a rock and a fuckin’ hard
place”. It is
not clear why this was so, particularly with respect to the
version given by the applicant to his mother.
was submitted by the respondent that, having told his mother that he had killed
the deceased, the applicant’s statement that
“[s]he knows”
necessarily meant his mother knew the applicant had murdered the deceased and
was thus evidence of consciousness
of guilt. The reasoning is, with respect,
convoluted, and ultimately unsound. The applicant when speaking to SW had not
said anything
to her as to what his mother actually “knew”. What his
mother “knew” was the version the applicant had given
previous day, which was not true, or certainly not true in important respects.
This is perhaps of no real significance as
what SW would have understood the
applicant’s mother as knowing was dependent on the version given by the
applicant to SW.
In accordance with the instructions given to her by the police,
SW asked the applicant who was actually responsible for the killing.
following exchange took place:
“[ZT]: So ...
[SW]: ... who actually did it?
[ZT]: He did.
[SW]: He did?
[ZT]: Yeah.
[SW]: Yeah. How did he do it?
[ZT]: I don’t know. I came inside.
[SW]: You came in, you went inside?
[ZT]: Yeah.
[SW]: Oh. Okay.
[ZT]: I don’t know if, I don’t even know, yeah, I
actually don’t know.”
the applicant’s statement that his mother “knew” would have
been understood by SW to have been knowledge consistent
with the above. The
respondent’s argument that the applicant’s statement to SW that his
mother “knew” assisted
its case of murder must be rejected.
respect to the above exchange, on the respondent’s case, the version given
by the applicant to SW was, necessarily, a lie.
It may be. Having listened to
the call it is difficult to perceive anything that might have assisted the jury
in evaluating the falsity
of this version as compared with the other
inconsistent statements made by the applicant.
are other aspects of this call which raise questions as to the applicant’s
reliability. SW asked the applicant (in accordance
with police instructions to
her) whether he had done anything “like that with him before”,
referring to PW, to which
the applicant said he had not. He was then asked why
PW had involved him, to which the applicant said he did not know but he thought
that PW was “going [to] do me”, and “[h]e wanted me to do
you”. The applicant also told SW that MP knew,
and always had known. He
said that PW had told MP as a way of getting rid of her. There was no rational
reason for PW to want to
kill the applicant or SW. MP did not know. These
statements were all false or very likely false.
applicant also claimed that PW had a severe cocaine addiction and caused the
applicant to become addicted to cocaine, matters
of which SW was unaware. He
also said PW was a contract killer with thousands of dollars stashed in the shed
in Gerogery. It seems
unlikely that PW had a drug habit of the severity
described by the applicant without SW having been aware of it. Nor was there any
suggestion by SW that he was a contract killer. These statements again appear to
be lies. It is not apparent why the applicant told
August 2019 at 6.56pm – the applicant speaks with his mother
call was played on the appeal. In it, the applicant tells his mother he had
spoken to SW. The applicant describes himself to
his mother as having nothing to
hide before he, inconsistently, appears to reprise his earlier suggestion that
he was significantly
involved in crime, stating “there’s some things
you still don’t know about me”. The applicant’s mother
asks whether the applicant’s father had rung him (the applicant’s
parents having separated sometime prior). The
applicant described his father as
a “mystery”, stating he did not know whether “he’d ...
fuckin’ side
with me or not”. It is, in my view, difficult to make
anything of this conversation as it, presumably, proceeds on the shared
understanding between the applicant and his mother that the applicant had cut
the deceased’s throat, a premise which I have
explained is very likely
false. I do not perceive anything in the quality of the recording to be capable
of affecting this conclusion.
22 August 2019 at 3.55pm and 4.03pm
– the applicant speaks with his uncle and with the police
22 August 2019 at 3.55pm the applicant received a call from his uncle, B. His
uncle told him the police had contacted him. The
applicant responded that he
knew the police were looking for him. Uncle B said he told the police that the
applicant had lived in
the area but moved “years ago”. The applicant
feigned surprise when told that the police were investigating a murder.
applicant said he believed the deceased had gone to Western Australia and denied
any knowledge of his murder.
the above, at 4.03pm, the applicant called Albury detectives and told them that
he was aware that a detective was asking
members of his family about him and he
was put through to the officer in charge. He told the officer in charge that he
had moved from Gerogery to Queensland in 2010, however expressed some
uncertainty as to this. When asked, the applicant said he did
not recognise the
deceased’s name but did know a number of Williams. Later, he said he did
remember the deceased as “Too
Tall”. The applicant generally
purported to have no knowledge of relevant events, although he did admit to
having lived with
PW before moving to Queensland. The versions given to both
uncle B and the officer in charge were lies generally consistent with
version the applicant had discussed with his mother and with
22 August 2019 at 4.59pm – the applicant speaks with
applicant spoke with his father at 4.59pm on 22 August 2019. He asked his father
if he had received a phone call, presumably from
the police. The applicant
denied he was in trouble. The applicant, at least initially, proffered the false
story that he knew nothing
there was an investigation in relation to someone going missing 10 years prior
and that he was in Queensland at the time. The applicant’s father said,
“if he deserved to go missing, well you know
some people go missing ...
’cause they deserve to go missing”. This appears to have prompted
the applicant to disclose
more, stating “he might have touched a kid, I
don’t know”. Later in the call, the applicant claimed the person
went missing was caught in the act of touching “the wrong little
girl” and said he witnessed this himself. The latter
claim was, as has
been discussed, very likely untrue.
applicant then told his father that his uncle had “fucked my whole story
up” as he had “spilled the beans”
by telling the police that
the applicant was in Gerogery “at the time”, inferentially of the
disappearance of the deceased.
He later claimed his uncle had told police that
the applicant knew the deceased. This is curious as, at least to the
applicant’s
knowledge, his uncle had not told police these things, merely
that the applicant had lived in the town some years ago, which was
incontestable fact. The applicant’s concern with the uncle having
“fucked” his story up, perhaps inevitably,
prompted the
applicant’s father to question him as to whether he was more involved. It
appears this might have been avoided
but for the applicant’s false claim
with respect to what his uncle had told police. The following exchange took
“[ST]: You didn’t, you didn’t make person
disappear did you?
[ZT]: Um, no comment at this point in time.
[ST]: Yeah, yeah well if you, if you did help, was there, was
there more involved in making person disappear?
[ZT]: Yeah.
[ST]: Oh there was a few people.
[ZT]: There was one.
[ST]: One other?
[ZT]: Yeah.
[ST]: Right, you and someone else made this person
[ZT]: Yeah.
[ST]: Just (unintelligible)
[ZT]: Correct.
[ST]: Right. Was this person [living]?
[ZT]: Negative.
[ST]: Okay. Well you better, yeah.
[ZT]: There’s no evidence, there’s nothing.”
applicant’s admission is consistent with the Crown case but is not
unambiguous. An admission to making a person “disappear”
is arguably
consistent with the applicant having assisted in destroying any trace of the
body, as the applicant appears to have believed
occurred. Against that, there
were three persons involved in the disposal of the body. The reference to the
applicant acting with
one other is, in my view, more consistent with the
applicant having acted with PW to murder the deceased.
in the call the applicant told his father that his mother also knew what he had
done, further strengthening the inference that
this was an admission to murder.
The applicant’s admission to his father was however inconsistent with that
made to his mother
insofar as the applicant’s admission to his mother
suggested he had acted alone.
applicant subsequently sought to satisfy his father that there was no evidence
as it was possible to destroy, inferentially a
body, in a fire. Apparently
against the possibility that the investigation did establish his guilt, or at
least implicate him, the
applicant said “[s]o there’s people waiting
to hear from me if it goes south. I’m gone”. With respect to
plan he said, “[i]t’s in play, it’s already waiting”.
The applicant told his father, as he had told
his mother, that there was more
out some shit that
you probably won’t like”. These parts of the call
replicate the applicant’s statements to his mother, suggesting,
without foundation, significant involvement with other crimes and
portion of the conversation between the applicant and his father extracted above
stands out as the one admission consistent with
the applicant having assisted PW
in having murdered the deceased and thus the one admission consistent with the
manner in which the
Crown put its case at trial. In hearing this conversation,
the jury had an advantage in assessing its veracity. Ultimately, this
the jury’s advantage with respect to it, are to be weighed with all the
evidence, including, in particular, the other
admissions.
August 2019 at 6.51pm – the applicant speaks with his father
applicant spoke to his father the next day at 6.51pm. The call was played on the
appeal. The applicant’s father indicated
he had spoken with the
applicant’s mother and they were both supporting him. His father expressed
a reluctance to speak on
the phone as it might be intercepted. The applicant
told him, in essence, that it was safe to speak, as he had changed his phone.
This appears to be untrue. The applicant’s father also questioned the
applicant as to whether he was telling the truth, stating,
“you always
been full of shit”. In response to this the applicant said “[n]o,
this, this is totally different,
Dad”. The applicant can be heard to sigh
before saying this. This, with the audio generally, was available to the jury to
in the evaluation of the reliability of the applicant’s statements
to his father.
applicant then told his father “I can’t tell you everything you know
that right”, stating that he could tell
him “fifty per cent”.
Later in the call, the applicant said, “I’m not the stupid little
boy everyone thought
I was” and then “[d]ad you have no fucking idea
but you’re about to”. A short time later the applicant’s
father referred to what the applicant did to “this person”, leading
to the applicant interjecting and saying “[p]eople”.
The applicant
then said “[n]o, no, no. More than one” and then
“[t]here’s quite a few and you’re going
to be very surprised
if it all comes out”. These aspects of the conversation appear to, again,
reflect the applicant’s
desire to impress on both his mother and his
father his competence in the context of his criminal conduct, that is, other
when there can be no realistic suggestion he was so involved.
the jury had the benefit of listening to this call, it is difficult to discern
how that experience may have founded a basis
on which the statements of the
applicant, submitted to be reliable indications of his guilt of murder, could be
distilled from the
statements identifiable as falsehoods.
August 2019 at 6.10pm – the applicant speaks with his father
applicant was called by his father at 6.10pm the day following the previous
call. The call was played on the appeal. His father
asked him if he remembered
introducing him to someone called “Too Tall”. The applicant
responded, “I don’t
know who you’re talking about”. This
appears to have been a statement made against the possibility the call was being
intercepted and was a transparent attempt to deflect the police in this event. A
short time later the following exchange took place:
“[ST]: I want to know your involvement in this shit.
[ZT]: I am involved in it.
[ST]: Right. How deep?
[ZT]: The whole thing.
[ST]: Right. Did you take him out?
[ZT]: I did.
[ZT]: I cut his throat.
[ST]: Yeah, righto. You’re full of shit.”
a short time later in the call:
“[ST]: You were only a sixteen snotty-nosed little kid.
[ZT]: Right.
[ST]: And you were, you were very gullible. If someone said,
‘Jump off the cliff,’ you’ll say, ‘Which cliff
high do I got to jump?’ You know? Okay.
[ZT]: Oh, are you on the same page or what?
[ST]: Yes, I’m very well on the fuckin’ page
respondent submitted that there was a quality to the recording that gave the
jury an advantage. That advantage can be accepted
but needs to be assessed
against the reality that the applicant was almost certainly lying, at least in
part, having told his father
he cut the deceased’s
26 August 2019 at 10.27am and 10.49am – the
applicant speaks with his mother
days later the applicant spoke with his mother. He chastised his mother for
worrying about his situation. He told her: “If
I get done, I get done.
I’m going away. So what? There’s not much I can do. I can’t
change the past.” As
in many other conversations, the applicant accepts
responsibility for a crime of some seriousness. Arguably, it is a crime of a
seriousness
beyond the disposal of a body. That, however, is to be seen in the
context of the applicant having already established the common
understanding
with his mother that he had committed murder. The applicant interrupted this
call to speak with SW. He then resumed
the conversation with his mother, telling
her that he had spoken with SW. When asked whether SW was involved the applicant
“[w]e all are”. Notably, he did not distinguish between
SW’s involvement and his own. Nor, however, did he suggest
his involvement
was less than murder, having previously admitted this to his
26 August 2019 at 3.14pm – the applicant speaks
with his brother
afternoon the applicant spoke with his younger brother. This call was played on
the appeal. Neither party made any submission
that there was anything apparent
from listening to this call that resulted in any particular advantage to the
jury. The applicant’s
brother told him that he, and their mother, thought
the applicant was lying. The applicant denied this to be the case. The applicant
said rhetorically “[w]hat happens if they drag that dam”, having
said the murder weapon was there. The dam was in fact
murder weapon. Given the lapse of time between the murder and the search there
may be a question as to
what weight can be put on the failure to locate the
weapon. At trial, however, the Crown Prosecutor accepted that the applicant had
probably lied as to the presence of a knife in the dam. The applicant also told
his brother that MP will “back” him “’cause
there” and knew exactly what happened. This was clearly untrue and as a
result casts doubt on the applicant’s
apparently earnest protestations
that he was being truthful.
27 August 2019 at 5.48pm – the
applicant speaks with his mother
applicant spoke with his mother on 27 August 2019 at 5.48pm. For reasons that
are not apparent the applicant denied that he had
told his father that he had
cut the deceased’s throat, stating “I didn’t tell him anything
like that”. This
was an odd lie to tell, as it was obvious that the
applicant’s mother had obtained the information from the applicant’s
father. The applicant said that what he told his father was that it was
“done quick, painless like a sheep”. While this
is consistent with
the cutting of the deceased’s throat, it was, firstly, not what he told
his father, and secondly, came after
the applicant denied telling his father he
cut the deceased’s throat. When pressed, the applicant said:
“’Cause he kept asking and asking and asking and asking, okay? Youse
don’t need to know how it was really done.
Youse don’t need to know
anything mum to be honest. I love you, that’s all you need to know.”
one view this utterance, while not reconciling the various versions given by the
applicant, could perhaps explain them. That is,
the applicant was unwilling to
disclose exactly how the deceased was killed, leading to him giving various
different versions. Against
this, had the applicant not wished to disclose the
actual mechanism by which the deceased was killed, he could have given a
but false version. More problematic in the acceptance of this theory
is that there is no explanation as to why the applicant would
seek to conceal
the method of killing. This is particularly so in a context where the applicant
admitted to his parents a role in
the murder which falsely elevated his
culpability and otherwise lied as to his involvement in other serious
31 August 2019 at 7.13pm – the applicant speaks with
few days later, on 31 August 2019 at 7.13pm, the applicant again spoke with his
mother. He told her that he was contemplating calling
Crimestoppers. He had, at
this time, already called Crimestoppers, apparently in Queensland, and was
directed to call New South Wales.
The applicant said he was scared of what PW
would do, but that he was “fully prepared to tell them what happened and
did”. This appears to be the first occasion on which the applicant
pointed to PW as being responsible for the murder. No attempt
was made by the
applicant to reconcile what he was now saying as to PW’s responsibility
with his earlier versions to his mother.
1 September 2019 at
8.40am – the applicant speaks with his brother
applicant engaged in a further conversation with his brother on 1 September 2019
at 8.40am. The call was played on the appeal.
In this call, the applicant told
his brother that he and SW both planned to give statements clearing their names.
He explained that
PW used to threaten him with knives and that he was scared of
him. He said that he proposed to tell the police what he went through
with PW, and that if anyone had done anything it would have been PW. He said he
would maintain that the deceased was still
there when he, the applicant,
submissions were made as to any benefit the jury enjoyed in listening to this
recording. The content of the call is such that,
while indicating the applicant
proposed lying to the police, it does not take matters any
1 September 2019 at 8.47am – the applicant speaks
with his father
few minutes after speaking with his brother the applicant spoke with his father.
This call was played on the appeal. In this call,
the applicant discussed going
to the police, which was encouraged by his father. His father asked him about
his involvement, to which
the applicant responded:
“[PW] gave me a - it was this one random night with, I was chilling, or
not, and, um, basically [PW] gave me, he told me to
go wait, go wait in the
Paddock, he’ll be out there in a minute. They both rocked up there and
basically [PW] said, ‘You’ve
got two choices. You either fight and
kill or you die now.’”
was the first time the applicant gave this version. It is inconsistent with
PW’s motive for killing the deceased. It is
yet another lie. The applicant
can be heard crying in the context of having given this version. He later refers
to PW having produced
a 9mm Glock pistol. This also appears to be a lie given
the absence of support for it from any other evidence. The Crown Prosecutor
trial accepted the applicant probably lied about this gun. While the
applicant’s tears in this call might ordinarily be
regarded as lending
veracity to his representations, it does not do so here where the
representations are palpably false.
applicant in this call did say: “I don’t give a fuck about what
happens to me. I know what I did. I did the wrong
thing.” While this is a
further admission, its weight is to be viewed in the context of all the
applicant expressed his fear of informing police about PW. He nonetheless
resolved to call the police and tell them of PW’s
responsibility for the
1 September 2019 at 10.32am – the applicant calls
spoken with his father, the applicant called the police later that morning. The
applicant at first indicated that he wanted
protection for his family before
providing any information. Despite the lack of any assurance in that regard, the
applicant told
the police about PW’s capacity for violence. He maintained
that when he left the property the deceased was still there. Thus,
the applicant
continued his attempt to exculpate himself by restating the false version
discussed in some of the calls with his family
and given to the police in the
call on 22 August. It is arguable that, had the applicant’s involvement
been limited to the
destruction of the body, and knowing the police were
investigating a murder, he would not have given this false version, suggesting
that the lie was told out of a consciousness of guilt. The availability of such
an inference is to be evaluated in the context of
The recorded interviews with police
applicant took part in two records of interview with the police, on 5 and 6
September respectively. The first interview took place
over approximately three
and a half hours. The second took place over about an hour.
first interview was accurately described by the respondent in written
submissions as “long, rambling and inconsistent”.
The applicant
admitted to living in Gerogery and at some stage moving to live with PW and SW.
Initially, he claimed he had no knowledge
of the deceased’s murder until
being told by police shortly before the interview. When confronted with the fact
that police
had been intercepting his phone (establishing he had been discussing
the murder for some time), the applicant said that he had wanted
to speak to
police, but was threatened two days prior by a man acting on behalf of PW who
told him to keep his mouth shut. When confronted
with his admission to his
mother of having killed the deceased, the applicant responded with a long, and
at times incoherent, explanation
of how PW had told him that if there was ever
an investigation, he was to admit to having been responsible. He said that
to a knife being used, fishing line had been used to strangle the
deceased. This would still appear to be (unbeknownst to the applicant
time) inconsistent with SW’s evidence.
call between the applicant and his father was played to the applicant in which
the applicant admitted to killing the deceased. The
applicant said that his
father was going to be the person, along with his brother, that was going to be
the most difficult to convince
that he had murdered the deceased, but he
endeavoured to do so as a result of the threats made by PW. He admitted to
a fire the night the deceased disappeared but maintained he did
not know at the time that the deceased had been killed.
lies told by the applicant were, at points, elaborate, or perhaps more
accurately, bizarre, particularly regarding PW. The police
at one point stopped
the applicant in the course of a particularly discursive response to ask him
what he was talking about. The
applicant embellished his account with odd
detail, such as him having had “mac and cheese” the night the
deceased disappeared
(nine years prior). He told pointless lies, including that
he had told his mother PW had sexually abused him, his mother having told
shortly before the interview that he had not made any such disclosure. The
applicant claimed to have make-up on his wrist
to cover a scar where he was cut
with a knife by PW. Later, he said he got a tattoo over it. Such were the
applicant’s responses,
the interviewing officer, perhaps unsurprisingly,
asked the applicant whether he was receiving treatment, or had in the past
treatment, for a mental illness. While the applicant denied this, he
said he was addicted to methylamphetamine and had had a shot
before attending
the interview. (In his evidence, the officer said he did not observe any signs
of intoxication but also accepted
that addicts are sometimes capable of covering
their drug use.)
as the applicant admitted the offence, and that his admission would result in
him going to gaol, he qualified this by saying
that it was necessary for him to
make the admission to keep his children safe, in keeping with his admission
being made on instructions
from PW. The applicant maintained this position for
most of the interview. Later in the interview, after some pressure was brought
to bear on him by interviewing police, the applicant modified his position. The
applicant gave the following answer:
“Yes, I was there. Yes, I witnessed it. No, I didn’t take part in
it. I sat on the tyres while he done it, [PW]. And
he wasn’t strangled, he
wasn’t throat cut or nothin’, he was shot. And unfortunate, the, the
bullet wasn’t
meant for [the deceased]. Yep. Yeah. [The deceased], [the
deceased] was stuck up for me that night and got into a fight with [PW]
because [PW] told [the deceased] that he was gunna shoot me that night in the
round yard. Instead, [PW], um, [the deceased]
had a fight with [PW] and [PW]
shot him. [The deceased]’s dead because of me. Then, and then [PW], [PW]
made me go out and
get fishin’ line and [PW] me that it, he was gunna do
[the deceased], but [PW] also told [the deceased] he was gunna do me.
got to the round yard, me and [the deceased] both told each other what [PW]
said. And I was only, I didn’t have the
strength to take [PW] on and I was
too scared. So [the deceased] hit [PW] over the head with a rock, and [PW] ended
the gun at, he aimed for me but [the deceased] fuckin’
stopped it. He grabbed [PW]’s hand and then, yeah, it just all
happened so
fast. And then [PW] made me go inside and grab [SW]’s ornamental knife and
throw it in the dam, ’cause I
never knew what actually, where [the
deceased]’s body went. I ran inside and locked myself in the room. And
then the next day
I wasn’t, I ended up goin’ and seein’ my
dad, and then they came over for the bonfire as well. And that’s
I, we were packin’ my bags and gettin’ out of there. And [SW], [SW]
knew what [PW] was gunna do to me. And
I tried to come, I tried to come to the
police station when I got up here, but I, ah, 2 days before I came, I was coming
to the police
station, ah, I got a phone call from [PW] and told me to shut my
mouth because there’s someone watchin’ my house. And
then 2 days
later, ah, for some reason my mum’s car got jumped all over and I thought
it was to do with him, so I panicked
and I didn’t say anything to anyone.
I just kept me mouth shut.”
respondent pointed to the applicant’s presentation at this point in the
interview. The applicant was crying and clearly
emotional. Observations of his
state were clearly available to the jury providing some advantage in assessing
the reliability of
the applicant’s answer. Whatever the applicant’s
state may say about his veracity, however, this version appears to be
nonsense. As previously observed, it is unlikely there was a gun involved at
all. Even if there was, it makes no sense that
PW was trying to shoot the
applicant. There was no reason to throw a knife in the dam (which was never
found) after PW had shot the
deceased. Having shot the deceased, there was
nothing stopping PW from carrying out his original intention to shoot the
Nor could this version be reconciled with what the applicant had told
his mother or his father.
the conclusion of the first interview, the applicant was arrested. The next
morning he was taken before a magistrate for
the purpose of his extradition to
New South Wales. He obtained legal advice and requested police conduct a further
interview. The
applicant told police, presumably based on a degree of insight
into the obvious quality of the lies he had told the previous day,
wanted to “come clean”. He said that he was forced to kill the
deceased and did so by strangling him with fishing
line. He had apparently told
the police this prior to the interview commencing. In the interview he said that
as this was too slow,
PW stabbed the deceased in the chest.
the applicant said, having obtained the fishing line, he climbed on top of the
tyre wall of the round yard as instructed by
PW. He said PW and SW were
“having a bit of a laugh about it” and saying it was “going to
be fun”. The applicant
said SW told PW to “[d]o it already”
upon which PW told the applicant to jump onto the deceased. He said he wrestled
the deceased to the ground and PW stabbed the deceased, killing him. He then
said he was unsure whether the fishing line was used.
version given in the second interview is more plausible than earlier versions
given by the applicant. A role in which the applicant
assisted PW to kill the
deceased is more in keeping with PW having the motive to kill the deceased and
with what is known about PW
and his relationship with the applicant. It is also
more consistent with PW’s confessions to having killed the deceased,
PW did not suggest he had assistance.
respondent pointed to aspects of this interview such as the applicant’s
vivid description of the sound of bone being crushed
when the deceased was
stabbed as a matter available to the jury. My own impression of the applicant,
having watched significant parts
of the interview, is that there was no doubting
his earnestness based on his presentation. The difficulty in giving weight to
applicant’s presentation is that whatever his demeanour may have
conveyed, the account was fantastic. Several matters lead
conclusion.
applicant claimed, falsely, that SW was present at the time and in fact gave the
go ahead for PW to do it. The applicant in general
elevated the role of SW,
asserting that PW did not act without her approval. This significantly altered
the role of SW, almost certainly
falsely. This may have been the
applicant’s response to learning, in the course of the interviews, that SW
had been working
with the police and as such, had betrayed him. Whatever the
reason, it was a lie and one which underpinned the account. As part of
narrative, the applicant said that either he or the deceased was going to be
killed. Again, this makes no sense given the absence
of any motive for PW to
kill the applicant.
respect to the means by which the deceased was killed, while strangulation with
fishing line may be perhaps less obvious than
a cut throat, it would
nevertheless be expected that SW would have seen marks on the deceased’s
neck. With respect to this
aspect the applicant did, later in the interview,
resile from any clear memory of having used fishing line. This is to be
with his apparently clear memory of having done so immediately prior
to and at the commencement of the interview. The means by which
the applicant
said the deceased was ultimately killed was by PW stabbing him to the chest.
This may receive some support from the
injury to the rib referred to by the
forensic anthropologist. Against this, SW said that when she was shown the
body, the tarpaulin was pulled back to a point above “his
hips or his waist”. She did not notice anything about his chest.
had told SW to give him an hour to “clean up” before returning home,
it is, in my view implausible that PW would
have put clean clothes on the
deceased’s body. This is particularly so given PW’s willingness to
show SW the body and
enlist her help in disposing of it. Further details, likely
false, emerged as the applicant elaborated on the events during the interview,
such as PW having a 9mm Glock pistol. Plainly, the applicant’s second
interview with police was comprised of more lies.
respondent, while pointing to aspects of the applicant’s presentation and
features such as the applicant’s description
of bone being crushed, did
not suggest that there were any admissions in the police interviews that could
be regarded as reliable.
That position was both understandable and inevitable,
given the difficulties with the applicant’s accounts. While perhaps not
strictly relevant, the primary impression gained by me from my viewing of the
portions of the interviews it was submitted the Court
should watch, was the
increasing discomfiture of the police as they sought to digest the
applicant’s responses.
leaving the interviews with police, it is necessary to deal with a further
submission made by the respondent. It was submitted
that the applicant exhibited
a different tone in speaking with the police when compared with the telephone
intercept recordings.
This difference was a further matter available to the jury
to evaluate and thus an aspect of their advantage over this Court. I do
however, regard it as providing any meaningful advantage. It is to be expected
that people will present differently in different
situations. In a formal record
of interview with police, with the knowledge that it is being recorded, it is to
be expected that
most people will look and sound different when compared with
conversations with persons with whom they are close or at least familiar,
they believe to be private. It is consequently difficult to ascribe significant
weight to the advantage of the jury in being
able to compare the
applicant’s presentation in the police interviews to that in the recorded
telephone conversations. Such
weight as it can be given is, in this case,
overborne by comparing what the applicant actually said with what can, in the
of all the evidence, be accepted to be true.
statements of the applicant bearing on his reliability
addition to the admissions to having killed the deceased, the applicant also
made an admission to having stabbed PW. The applicant
made contact with JW
(PW’s first wife) via Facebook on 31 August 2019. This resulted in a
telephone conversation between the
applicant and JW on 1 September 2019. JW told
the applicant that her son, who was then 28, was “really screwed up from
[PW] did to him” and that “[i]f it makes you feel any better I
punched him in the face once”. She said that the
applicant responded,
“I could do one better than that, I actually stabbed him”. She said
the applicant went on to say
that he had stabbed PW in the stomach and
“somehow I missed all the main arteries”. This was almost certainly
Neither JW nor SW had any recollection of PW having received such an
injury. The Crown Prosecutor’s closing address acknowledged
the applicant
had probably lied in this regard.
the call with his mother on 16 August 2019, discussed above, the applicant also
told his mother he had a New South Wales gun licence.
The applicant claimed at
one point that he had a security licence. The evidence of the officer in charge
established these statements
to be untrue. There was a multitude of other claims
that were very likely untrue, such as claims that PW had, over the years, sent
people to intimidate the applicant, in effect telling him that PW was still
watching him. Clearly, the applicant was prone to telling
lies, including lies
Determination
murdered the deceased. The applicant was involved in the events surrounding the
murder of the deceased, at least to the extent
of disposing his body and
remaining silent in the years that followed. Whether it is possible to reason
from that involvement, the
opportunity available to him as a result of his
presence (at least at the residence), and his relationship with PW, to the
that the applicant is guilty of murder, is dependent on what can be
drawn from the admissions made by the applicant. The reliability
admissions is at the centre of this application. At the trial, the Crown
Prosecutor in closing set out seven different versions
given by the applicant.
They were as follows:
(1) The applicant did not know anything about the murder. This was said in some
phone calls, including to the police and in the first
interview with police.
This version was a lie.
(2) The applicant cut the deceased’s throat. The applicant told his mother
and father in the intercepted telephone calls that
he had “cut” or
“slit” the deceased’s throat.
(3) The applicant killed the deceased in a fight to the death after being told
by PW to “[f]ight and kill or you die now”.
This was first raised by
the applicant in a call with his father on 1 September 2019. This version
involved the applicant being threatened
by PW with a 9mm Glock pistol. (A
variation of this in which it was either the deceased or the applicant who would
die was raised
in the second police interview.)
(4) The version told by the applicant in the first interview with police, in
which PW told the applicant he had caught the deceased
molesting his daughter,
and said the applicant had three choices: “You leave my house right now,
never speak a word of it,
you help with a job, or I put you where I’m, in
the same spot”. The “job” was to kill the deceased.
(5) The version told by the applicant in the second interview with police, that
it was SW who wanted PW to kill the deceased. He
said SW yelled out to him and
PW to “[d]o it already, it’s taking too long”.
(6) PW shot the deceased. In the first interview with police, towards the end of
the interview, the applicant said that PW shot the
deceased. This was said to
have occurred after the applicant argued with PW and PW threatened the applicant
with a knife. On this
version, the deceased stood up for the applicant. PW then
used his 9mm pistol to shoot the applicant, but the deceased jumped in
them and was fatally shot in the neck.
(7) In both police interviews, the applicant gave a version involving fishing
line being used to kill the deceased. At one point
in the first interview, the
applicant suggested PW used it to kill the deceased, having told the applicant
to fetch it. At a later
point in the interview, the applicant said he was sent
to fetch it but PW then shot the deceased. The second interview was held because
it seems that the applicant had told the detectives that he had strangled the
deceased himself with fishing line. That story evolved
to the applicant grabbing
the deceased and strangling him (it was not clear if this involved fishing line
or a headlock), and that
PW considered this was taking too long so he stabbed
the deceased in the chest.
these versions cannot all stand together. In this regard, the respondent
submitted, correctly, that it did not have to prove
the mechanism by which the
deceased was killed, the applicant’s role, or the circumstances
surrounding the formation of any
joint criminal enterprise (either resulting in
liability directly or by way of extended joint criminal enterprise). The
difficulty in doing so, however, redounds in a difficulty in
proving the case against the applicant.
Crown Prosecutor at trial closed the Crown case on the basis that the applicant
was given three options, consistent with version
(4) above. It was further
submitted, based on version (7), that the applicant “went to the shed, got
some fishing line, went
to the round yard, sat on the tyres as he’d been
told to do, and waited”. The Crown Prosecutor submitted that the applicant
then, at the direction of PW, jumped on the deceased, bringing him to the
ground, and that PW then stabbed him to death. However,
the basis on which these
versions were selected as reliable from amongst the litany of lies is not
entirely clear. Plainly, it is
not sufficient, in order to find the verdict was
unreasonable, simply to find fault in the logic of the closing address.
Nonetheless,
it is telling. It highlights a difficulty in determining what
weight can be put on the various statements made by the applicant.
can the difficulty be ameliorated simply by pointing to the puzzle created by
the applicant’s many and varied admissions.
As regards this puzzle the
respondent reiterated a submission made in writing on the first appeal to this
Court to the effect that
acceptance of the applicant’s argument would have
the result that “an admitted killer might throw doubt on their own
liability simply by making an increasing number of varied and inconsistent
confessions as to the manner of killing, so as to escape
liability for the crime
that had been committed”. The submission is not easy to fathom. It will,
in every case where an admission
has been made but where guilt is contested, be
necessary to consider the reliability of that admission. There is no logical
between the reliability of the applicant’s admissions and what
an accused person might do in some other case. Nor was there
any evidence or a
submission directed to the applicant having engaged in a shrewd plot to subvert
the case against him. What is required
in the present case is to find a means of
reasoning from the applicant’s various admissions, considered in the
context of all
the evidence, including the significant circumstantial evidence
supportive of the Crown case, to satisfaction of the applicant’s
the morass of lies, there was only one direct admission to murder in the course
of the many admissions made in the intercepted
calls that may plausibly have
been true. That was the applicant’s admission to his father on 22 August
2019, that he and one
other person had made the deceased
“disappear”. While I accept this to be, in context, an admission to
murder, one reason
this version may stand out amongst the others as plausible is
that it lacks detail. When the applicant did, in the second interview,
version consistent with this version in which he assisted PW in killing the
deceased, the detail then given marked the account
as false. Further, as
discussed above, there are other parts of this call in which the applicant told
falsehoods. These are capable
of casting doubt on the veracity of the admission
made in this call. Quite apart from any doubt created by lies told in other
of this call is the issue of how this particular admission might be
treated as reliable in the context of the many other unreliable
admissions.
as SW’s mother, Ms W, also gave evidence of the applicant having made a
direct admission to involvement in the murder,
putting aside any issue with
respect to the reliability of her evidence, the circumstances of that confession
are, for the reasons
discussed above, bizarre. One explanation may be that the
applicant wished to, for whatever reason, associate himself with PW and
willingness to engage in murder. Whatever the explanation, the circumstances in
which that confession was made, the subsequent
evidence demonstrating the
applicant’s willingness to attribute to himself acts that caused the
deceased’s death, and
the absence of any detail against which the
statement could be tested, make it difficult, in my view, to put weight on this
confession.
Ultimately,
the submission made by the Crown was that it was possible to take from the
various admissions a central truth which was,
to use my own paraphrase, cloaked
in detail which was not necessarily true. By way of example, in relation to the
applicant telling
his parents he cut the deceased’s throat, it was
submitted that, if this did not in fact occur the applicant “floridly
describe[d] a mechanism that didn’t happen for something that actually did
happen because he wanted his parents to know”.
It was submitted the
applicant wanted to obtain the support of his parents, leading him to elaborate
and exaggerate the detail. As
the Chief Justice said in response to the
submission, it is “an incredibly irrational pathway”. Had the
applicant wanted
the support of his parents, he was far more likely to invoke
their sympathy and consequently their support by telling them what on
case was the truth - that he was involved, but the killing was orchestrated by
it was not put this way, the high point of the Crown case is, in my view, that
the applicant implicated himself in the offence
in intercepted telephone calls
and then told lies to the police as to why he did so, eventually confessing his
involvement to the
police in a further false version. Can the applicant’s
lies in his interviews with the police with respect to his earlier (false)
admissions found a conclusion that the applicant murdered the deceased in some
shape or form? Suspicion abounds. But so does uncertainty.
Ultimately, I cannot
reason from my inability to understand the applicant’s actions to
satisfaction of his guilt. It is not
necessary to draw a positive conclusion that it occurred here, but experience
shows people
do, on occasion, make false confessions. Indeed, what can be said
is that the applicant did make false confessions, at least as to
do not regard the advantage held by the jury as capable of resolving the doubt
which I hold. The difficulty of placing weight on
what may be perceived by
listening to or listening to and watching the recordings when set against the
falsity of the accounts, has
been discussed above. My own view is that making
one’s way through the morass of admissions in a manner that allows
of some parts of some admissions and the rejection of others based on
perceived differences in the applicant’s demeanour has
the feel of
navigating the evidence with a divining rod. In the context of this case, that
conclusion is reached based on the conflicting
evidence prior to having any
particular regard to the caution to be applied in the context of demeanour
assessments, as discussed
The King v ZT
can the jury’s advantage in determining the meaning to be attributed to
various words or phrases account for the doubt which
I experience. Where there
was a contest as to the meaning of words such as “missing” or
“making a person disappear”
I have largely preferred the more
inculpatory interpretation of the applicant’s statements. The difficulty,
as I have sought
to demonstrate, is reconciling the inculpatory version with
other inculpatory versions and the evidence of what actually did or did
occur, or was likely or unlikely to have occurred.
do not forget the advantage of twelve individuals in a collective decision
making process. Indeed, authority requires that regard
be had to this advantage.
I also accept that it might be thought that there is an arrogance in a judge
preferring their own view
on a question of fact over the view formed by twelve
jurors. That a jury of twelve brings their knowledge of human behaviour to the
task is not, however, a panacea for a verdict based on evidence that is not able
to support it. While acknowledging the advantage
held by the jury, the one
factor I can call upon that acts as something of a counterbalance is the
discipline involved in providing
reasons for my conclusion. Having undertaken
this process, this is a case in which I find myself having been unable to write
conclusion:
AK v Western Australia
(2008) 232 CLR 438
described this matter at the outset as unusual. Ordinarily, statements against
interest will stand out amongst other self-serving
statements as being far more
likely to be the truth. That, for the reasons I have given, is not the case
here. Ultimately, in my
view, the conclusion that the applicant has been
established to be guilty beyond reasonable doubt requires guesswork rather than
the rational drawing of available inferences from the available evidence. I am
not satisfied of the applicant’s guilt. Nor
am I of the view that any
advantage held by the jury is capable of resolving that doubt.
establishing that a verdict is unreasonable an applicant will ordinarily be
entitled to an acquittal:
Gerakiteys v The Queen
(1984) 153 CLR 317
[1984] HCA 8
The Queen v Taufahema
(2007) 228 CLR 232
[2007] HCA 11.
There is no reason in the present case why that order ought not be made and the
applicant acquitted of murder. There remains available
an alternative verdict of
manslaughter which was available to the jury and is potentially available to
this Court:
Criminal Appeal Act
Based on my reasoning with
respect to the offence of murder, however, it follows that there is no basis on
which this Court could
substitute a verdict of manslaughter.
propose the following orders:
(1) Leave to appeal is granted.
(2) The appeal is allowed.
(3) The applicant’s conviction is quashed and a verdict of acquittal is
entered in its place.
I have had the considerable advantage of reading the draft judgments of
Bell CJ and Dhanji J. Their Honours have summarised the evidence
and conducted a
comprehensive analysis of the multiple admissions made by the applicant in
respect of his participation in the murder,
for which I am grateful. It is
therefore unnecessary to repeat or replicate that task.
conclusions reached by Dhanji J accord with my own. As Dhanji J has explained,
the Court listened to several conversations captured
by telephone intercepts.
Immediately following each recording, the parties made submissions about the
reliance placed on them. The
process adopted during the hearing was helpful both
in understanding and evaluating the submissions made in relation to the
enjoyed by the jury. Like Dhanji J, in addition to the recordings
played in court, I have listened to other recordings (including
portions of the
police interviews) which were not played in court that had been identified by
the parties.
undertaking an independent assessment of the evidence, I have had regard to the
prosecution’s circumstantial case and the
admissions made by the
applicant, upon which the prosecution relies heavily. The prosecution does not
of course have to prove the
mechanism by which the deceased was killed. However,
proof of the applicant’s guilt requires credible and reliable evidence
capable of satisfying the high standard of proof of beyond reasonable
applicant’s admissions to his participation in the murder fall far short,
in my view, of establishing his guilt to that
requisite standard. The applicant
gave several (conflicting) versions of the circumstances relating to and the
mechanism by which
the deceased was murdered. Some of those versions were
entirely implausible and inconsistent with objective evidence.
addition, and of considerable significance, is the fact that the
applicant’s admissions, in some instances, elevated his
role in the murder
by using language which strongly suggested that he committed the murder alone
(which is inconsistent with the
prosecution case) and by claiming that he had
cut the deceased’s throat which is inconsistent with other evidence in the
prosecution
undertaken an independent assessment, I am of the view that the discrepancies
and inadequacies in the evidence give rise to
a reasonable doubt. For the
reasons expounded by Dhanji J, that doubt is not resolved by the jury’s
advantage in seeing and
hearing the evidence, even having regard to the
jurors’ collective wisdom.
agree with the orders proposed by Dhanji J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (560 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter