URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/658.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Curry Communications Pty Ltd v Watson and Santaco Rural Pty Ltd (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 658 (30 December 2013)
Curry Communications Pty Ltd v Watson and Santaco Rural Pty Ltd (Home Building)
[2013] NSWCTTT 658
(30 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
APPLICATION NO:
HB 13/08086
Curry Communications Pty Ltd
RESPONDENTS:
Neil Watson and Santaco Rural Pty Ltd
4 July 2013 and 29 August 2013
APPLICATION:
Applicants claim for debt recovery, respondents’ denial of debt and
claim for compensation.
APPEARANCES:
Mr T Curry for the applicant, Mr Watson for the respondents
LEGISLATION:
Consumer Claims Act 1998
Electricity (Consumer
Safety) Act 2004
Consumer Claim, residential building work
first respondent Neil Watson is pay the applicant Curry Communications Pty Ltd
the sum of $18,018.00 on or before 8 January 2014.
REASONS FOR DECISION
proceedings were heard on 4 July 2013 and 29 August 2013 at Tamworth. Mr T.
Curry appeared on behalf of the applicant and gave
evidence as did Mr B Curry.
The applicant also relied upon documents that were admitted into evidence. Mr
Watson appeared on behalf
of the respondents and gave evidence. Mr Watson also
relied upon documents that were admitted into evidence. The evidence was given
on 4 July and the matter was then adjourned to enable the parties to make
written submissions particularly on the issue of whether
applied to the applicants claim. Written submissions were made by
each party and on 29 August 2013 the Tribunal reserved its decision.
proceedings were originally commenced in the Local Court by the applicant and
were transferred to the Tribunal by consent after
the respondents had filed
defences and the first respondent a cross claim.
pleadings in the matter consisted of a Statement of Claim dated 18 October 2012
by which the applicant sought payment of the sum
of $20,518.00 being the balance
of an account for the supply and installation of a power line to the
respondent’s proposed
new residence on a rural property at Timbumburi in
New South Wales in January and March 2010. Defences were filed by both
respondents
denying liability for the amount claimed. The first respondent also
filed a cross claim seeking payment of compensation for alleged
contract in relation to the supply and installation of the power line. It is
clear on the evidence that the first respondent
contracted with the applicant
and that the second respondent has no liability.
issue arose during the course of the proceedings as to whether the work the
subject of the applicant’s claim was residential
building work within the
meaning of the
. If the work was not residential building
work then the Tribunal would not have jurisdiction to hear the applicant’s
debt recovery
claim and if it was the applicant would not be able to recover
pursuant to contract but would have to rely on the principles of unjust
enrichment as various provisions of the
had not been
complied with. The Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the work performed
by the applicant was not residential
building work for reasons that are set out
below. However as noted above the matter was transferred from the Local Court
and included
a defence by which the first respondent sought relief from the
payment of the balance of the applicants account and a cross claim
compensation from the applicant. It is clear the applicant is a supplier within
the meaning of the
Consumer Claims Act 1998
and that the first respondent is a
consumer within the meaning of that Act. It is also clear that the claims and
counter claims made
arise from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to a
consumer in New South Wales. The
Consumer Claims Act
provides in
Sections 3A
as follows:
Meaning of “consumer claim”
3A Meaning of “consumer claim”
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a
"consumer claim"
(a) a claim by a consumer for the payment of a specified sum of money, or
(b) a claim by a consumer for the supply of specified services, or
(c) a claim by a consumer for relief from payment of a specified sum of
(d) a claim by a consumer for the delivery, return or replacement of
specified goods or goods of a specified description, or
(e) a claim by a consumer for a combination of two or more of the remedies
referred to in paragraphs (a)-(d),
that arises from a supply of goods or services by a supplier to the consumer,
whether under a contract or not, or that arises under
a contract that is
collateral to a contract for the supply of goods or services.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, a reference in this Act to a consumer claim
includes a reference to a claim by a consumer against
a supplier (for example, a
manufacturer or wholesaler) who is not the direct supplier of goods or services
to the consumer if the
claim arises from or in connection with the supply of
those goods or services by the direct supplier to the consumer.
7 Jurisdiction in respect of consumer claims
(1) General The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and
determine any consumer claim brought before it under this Part, whether or
the matter to which the claim relates arose before or after the commencement of
this Part, except as otherwise provided by this
(2) Supply or agreement made, or supply intended to be made, in New South
Wales The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine
claim only if:
(a) the goods
or services
to which the claim relates were supplied in New South Wales, or
(b) a contract or other agreement to which the claim relates contemplated
that the goods
or services
would be supplied in New South
Wales (whether or not they were so supplied), or
(c) a contract or other agreement to which the claim relates was made in New
South Wales (whether or not the goods
or services
supplied in New South Wales).
Tribunal orders
(1) In determining a consumer
claim wholly or partly in favour of a claimant, the Tribunal
may, subject to this Part, make such one
or more of the following orders as it
considers appropriate:
(a) an order that requires a respondent to pay to the claimant a specified
amount of money,
(b) an order that requires a respondent to perform specified work in order to
rectify a defect in goods
or services
to which the claim
(c) an order that requires a respondent to supply
to the claimant specified services
other than work,
(d) in the case of a claim for relief from payment of money, an order
declaring that a specified amount of money is not due or owing
by the claimant
to a respondent,
(e) an order that requires a respondent to deliver to the claimant goods
of a specified description,
(f) an order that requires a respondent to return to the claimant specified
which are in the possession or under the control
of that respondent, whether the
property in the goods
has passed or not,
(g) an order that requires a respondent to replace goods
to which the claim relates,
(h) an order that requires:
(i) a respondent to refund all or part of the purchase price of specified goods
that are in the possession or under the control of
the claimant, and
(ii) the claimant to return all or part of those goods
to the respondent,
whether the property in the goods
has passed or not.
(2) In determining a consumer
claim wholly or partly in favour of a respondent to the claim, the Tribunal
may make such one or more
of the following orders as it considers appropriate:
(a) an order dismissing the claim or a part of the claim,
(b) an order that requires the claimant to pay to the respondent a specified
amount of money,
(c) an order that requires the claimant to return to the respondent specified
goods which are in the possession or under the control
of the claimant, whether
the property in the goods has passed or not.
Tribunal therefore finds that it has jurisdiction to determine the issues
between the parties as the defence filed in the Local
Court is “a claim by
a consumer for relief from payment of a specified sum of money” within the
Section 3(1)(c)
and that pursuant to
if the Tribunal
determined that claim wholly or partly in favour of the applicant ( the
respondent to the consumer claim within the
the Tribunal
“make an order that requires the claimant to pay to the respondent
a specified amount of money.”
Tribunal also finds that the cross claim by the first respondent is a claim by a
consumer for payment of a specified sum of money
within the meaning of
and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with the cross claim
subject only to the monetary limit of the Tribunals jurisdiction
in the sum of
$30,000.00. The respondent agreed at the hearing on 29 August 2013 to forgo any
excess over the amount of $30,000.00
in the event that the Tribunal found that
did not apply. The Tribunal therefore finds that
notwithstanding that the work the subject of the claims and counter claims
the Tribunal was not residential building work that it has jurisdiction
to deal with the issues between the parties.
work carried out by the applicant supplier on behalf of the respondent consumer
consisted of the construction of a power line
from the electricity authority
Country Energy’s power lines on the New England Highway to the site of the
respondents proposed
new home a distance of approximately 1 kilometre. It is
clear from the applicants written submissions and page 3 of the “Shared
Asset Reimbursement Scheme Original Customer Agreement” signed by Mr
Watson that the works carried out were to remain the property
of Country Energy
and not Mr Watson.
provides the following definitions in
“residential building work"
means any work involved in, or
involved in co-ordinating or supervising any work involved in:
(a) the construction of a dwelling, or
(b) the making of alterations or additions to a dwelling, or
(c) the repairing, renovation, decoration or protective treatment of a
It includes work declared by the regulations to be roof plumbing work or
specialist work done in connection with a dwelling and work
concerned in
installing a prescribed fixture or apparatus in a dwelling (or in adding to,
altering or repairing any such installation).
It does not include work that
is declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition.
"specialist work"
(a) plumbing work (other than work declared by the regulations to be roof
plumbing work), or
(b) gasfitting work, or
(c) electrical wiring work, or
(d) any work declared by the regulations to be refrigeration work or
air-conditioning work.
"electrical wiring work"
has the same meaning as it has in the
Electricity (Consumer Safety) Act 2004
Electricity(Consumer Safety) Act 2004
provides the following definitions
"electrical wiring work"
means the actual physical work of installing,
repairing, altering, removing or adding to an electrical installation or the
supervising
of that work.
"electrical installation"
means any fixed appliances, wires, fittings,
apparatus or other electrical equipment used for (or for purposes incidental to)
conveyance, control and use of electricity in a particular place, but does
not include any of the following:
(a) subject to any regulation made under subsection (4)-any electrical
equipment used, or intended for use, in the generation, transmission
distribution of electricity that is:
(i) owned or used by an electricity supply authority, or
(ii) located in a place that is owned or occupied by such an authority,
(b) any electrical article connected to, and extending or situated beyond,
any electrical outlet socket,
(c) any electrical equipment in or about a mine,
(d) any electrical equipment operating at not more than 50 volts alternating
current or 120 volts ripple-free direct current,
(e) any other electrical equipment, or class of electrical equipment,
prescribed by the regulations.
is clear that works carried out by the applicant are owned by Country Energy and
are therefore not an electrical installation within
the meaning of the
Electricity (Consumer Safety) Act 2004
and do not therefore fall within the
definition of electrical wiring work under the
carried out is therefore not residential building work for the purposes of the
applicant sought to recover the sum of $2,0518.00 being the balance of the
account owing for carrying out the work. The quoted
price for carrying out the
work was initially $46,618.00 but was reduced to $45,518.00. A deposit of
$25000.00 was paid leaving a
balance owing of $20,518.00. Mr Watson disputed
liability for this amount saying that the agreement called for the power line to
consist of 7 poles constructed in a dog leg fashion for a distance of 1.2
kilometres around a stand of trees and in the vicinity
of some yards rather than
in a straight line consisting of 6 poles through the trees which Mr Watson
claimed the applicant had cut
down without any permission from him and contrary
to the agreement reached between himself and Mr B Curry. Mr Watson claimed that
he was entitled to a reduction of the quoted price as only 1 kilometre with 6
poles had been constructed together with compensation
for the loss of his trees
including the cost of replanting trees, fencing together with compensation for
the additional cost he would
incur in connecting power to the yards as the power
line had been constructed further away from the yards. Mr Watson also claimed
that Mr B Curry had apologised for cutting down the trees and offered
compensation.
B Curry denied that the agreement called for the power line to be constructed in
a dog leg fashion, denied that the trees had been
cut down by himself or anyone
else on behalf of the applicant. Mr B Curry claimed that the felling of the
trees in a straight line
was carried out by Mr Watson or someone on his behalf
and that they had returned to the site to install the overhead power lines
first installing the poles only after Mr Watson had informed him that he had
removed the trees.
T Curry denied cutting down the trees, stated that he and Mr B Curry had erected
6 poles in a straight line in January 2011 and
then came back in March 2011 and
installed the overhead power lines after the trees had been cleared. Mr T Curry
claimed that Mr
Watson had thanked them for the work and said that they had done
an excellent job.
applicant also relied heavily on the “Shared Asset Reimbursement Scheme
Original Customer Agreement” signed by Mr
Watson in 2 places apparently on
18 and 19 October 2010 which included a plan showing the power line in a
straight line. This document
was witnessed by Georgina Kane. Neither party
called Georgina Kane. Mr Watson agreed that he had signed this document and
that he had signed it in blank relying on Mr B Curry to fill in the
details accurately in accordance with the agreement.
original quote which was annexure C to Mr Watsons statement of 15 May 2013 in
sum $46,618.00 was in the following terms.
“Please find enclosed the quotation to supply Single Phase Power
Supply to your property on the Duri Dungowan Road, installing
a 25kva pole sub
and approximately one kilometre of high voltage power line to new bore
We have made allowance for 7 poles but may only require 6 a reduction of
$2500.00 will apply.
Our price includes supply of all materials, labour, construction and
monopoly fees.”
Significantly
the quote makes no reference to doglegs or tree felling.
is a clear conflict between the evidence given on behalf of the applicant and
respondent. One party has been less than frank.
Having considered the whole of
the evidence both oral and documentary the Tribunal prefers the evidence given
on behalf of the applicant
not only because of the Tribunal’s observations
of the witnesses but because the objective evidence in the form of the quote
the “Shared Asset Reimbursement Scheme Original Customer Agreement”
supports the applicant’s claims.
Tribunal finds that the contract called for the power line to be constructed in
the manner that it was in fact constructed and
that the applicant was not
responsible for felling the trees as claimed by Mr Watson. The Tribunal finds
that Mr Watson is not entitled
to the compensation that he seeks. The Tribunal
finds that the power line only required 6 poles and that Mr Watson is entitled
a reduction of $2,500.00 in accordance with the terms of the quote. The
Tribunal therefore in finding in favour of the applicant
(the respondent to the
consumer claim) makes an order that the respondent is to pay to the applicant
the sum of $18,018.00 within
Tribunal Member
Consumer, Trader and
Tenancy Tribunal
30 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (140 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter