URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1098.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Broken Hill Health Employees (State) Award 2024 [2025] NSWIRComm 1098 (10 November 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Broken Hill Health Employees (State) Award 2024
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1098
Hearing Date(s):
Matter determined in chambers
Date of Orders:
10 November 2025
Decision Date:
10 November 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Muir
The Commission orders that:
(1) The Broken Hill Health Employees (State)
Award 2025 is made in the terms sought in the Application; and
(2) The Broken
Hill Health Employees (State) Award 2024 is revoked.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Awards and enterprise agreements
– Approval and creation – Remuneration –
Equal remuneration
– consent award – no issue of principle
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Principal judgment
Secretary, NSW Ministry of Health (Applicant)
Broken Hill Town Employees
Union (Respondent)
Health Services Union NSW (Respondent)
Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union (Respondent)
Representation:
K Jones (Health Secretary)
R Ferry (BHTEU)
Michael Crosby (CFMEU)
File Number(s):
2025/413362 and 2025/226383
Publication Restriction:
27 October 2025 the Secretary, NSW Ministry of Health (Health Secretary) applied
(Application) for the making of a new award, being
the Broken Hill Health
Employees (State) Award 2025 (2025 Award).
Application sought a two-year award, effective from 1 July 2025. The terms of
the 2025 Award reflect the acceptance of an offer
made by the Health Secretary
to the Health Services Union (HSU) for NSW Health Awards covered by the HSU.
Except for the 2025 Award,
the Awards covered by the HSU have been made,
reflecting the consent position reached by the parties.
Application followed the notification of an industrial dispute on 13 June 2025
concerning the terms of an award for the relevant
employees. That dispute,
assigned matter number 2025/226383, was the subject of multiple listings for
conciliation by the Industrial
Relations Commission.
the course of that conciliation, each of the parties proposed a range of issues
they wished to have incorporated in an award,
and each eventually agreed that
they could not achieve all of their list of issues. Some issues were agreed as
ones which would be
the subject of further negotiations, and able to be brought
to the Commission, notwithstanding the no extra claims clause.
am satisfied that the parties have genuinely reached an agreement,
notwithstanding that each of them has issues they regard as of
significance,
which are not addressed in the terms of the 2025 Award.
Application set out that the 2025 Award:
(1) gives effect to salary increases for two years being FY 2025/26 and FY
(2) includes the following changes from the 2024 Award, as set out in clause 7
of the Application;
“a. The title has been amended to ‘2025’ and references to old
awards updated.
b. The Area, Incidence and Duration clause has been updated.
c. Updated rates of pay and allowances to apply from the first full pay period
on or after 1 July 2025 and the first full pay period
on or after 1 July 2026
representing an increase of 4% for FY 2025/26 and 4% increase for FY 2026/27.
d. Updated no extra claims clause as required by the NSW Government Fair Pay and
Bargaining Policy 2024-25.
e. Updated annual leave clause to reflect change in the accrual of annual leave
to be progressive from commencement of employment.
This change is to reflect
annual leave changes to the State awards covered by the HSU.
f. Addition of new BIC classifications and levels in Schedule 1 of the Award:
i. BI Pharmacist Grade 4 and 5
ii. BI Cardiac Technician
iii. BI Cardiac Technologist Grades 1 and 2
iv. BI Senior Cardiac Technologist.
g. The additional BIC classifications above have been given the current rate of
pay as set out in the Health Employees’ Pharmacist
(State) Award 2025 and
Health Employees (State) Award 2025 respectively.”
(3) replaces the Broken Hill Health Employees’ (State) Award 2024;
(4) rolls over existing terms and conditions from the 2024 Award, except as
set out above; and
(5) applies for a two-year duration effective from 1 July 2025 subject to any
order or award the Commission may make.
27 October 2025, the Health Secretary filed an affidavit of Alice Murphy,
Director, Industrial Relations and Change, which set
out the background matters
outlined above in respect of the Application. Ms Murphy deposed that the 2025
Award meets the requirement
for approval under
of the Act. Ms
Murphy gave evidence that:
Equal remuneration
13. The proposed award provides for equal remuneration and
other conditions of employment for male and female employees doing work
and comparable value.
14. The proposed award provides:
a. equal rates of pay and allowances for men and women
b. the same eligibility criteria for employment for men and
women for each job classification
c. the same duties for men and women under each job
classification and
d. conditions of employment which will ensure equal access to
employment for men and women.
Public Interest
15. The making of the new award is in the public interest
having regard to the matters set out in
of the Act.
Objects of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
16. The proposed award accords with the objects in
Act in the following ways:
a. the proposed award promotes efficiency and productivity in
the economy of the State of NSW supporting the provision of ongoing
health services to the community in the Far West Local Health District by:
i. maintaining the existing classification structure to retain
a suitably qualified workforce and
ii. adding additional BIC classifications and levels to support
the attraction and retention of a suitably qualified workforce.
b. The proposed award promotes participation in industrial
relations by employees and employers at a workplace level by providing
framework for the resolution of disputes _
c. The proposed award contains provisions dedicated to the
prevention and elimination of discrimination in the workplace
d. The proposed award supports the ongoing attraction and
retention of staff to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of
services in the Far West Local Health District through a remuneration increase
for the next two financial years.
Economy of New South Wales and fiscal position and outlook of the
17. The proposed award covers a workforce of approximately 165
full time equivalent staff (as at the commencement of FY 25/26)
noting that
classifications in Schedule 2 of the Broken Hill Health Employees' (State) Award
have their pay rates set by the State
Awards covered by the HSU.
18. I consider that the making of the proposed award is in the
public interest on the following basis:
a. The proposed award reflects an agreement that has been
reached between the parties.
b. The changes in the proposed award comply with the governance
framework set out in
of the NSW Government Fair Pay and Bargaining
Policy 2024-25.
c. To the best of my knowledge and belief, the pay increases
and the creation of the proposed award were approved by the NSW Government
taking into account their effect on the NSW economy, the fiscal position and
outlook of the Government.
No extra claims
19. The proposed award includes an updated no extra claims
clause at clause 10.”
(Emphasis in original.)
Consideration
requirements for making an award under the Act are set out in Division 1 of Part
1 of Chapter 2. Relevantly, the Act provides:
Division 1 Awards generally
10 Commission may make awards
The Commission may make an award in accordance with this Act setting fair and
reasonable conditions of employment for employees.
11 When award may be made
(1) An award may be made—
(a) on application to the Commission or on the Commission’s own
initiative, or
(2) An application for an award may be made only by—
(a) an employer, or
(b) an industrial organisation of employers or employees, or
(3) Anyone who can apply for an award may become a party to any proceedings for
making an award.
(4) An applicant for an award, or to become a party to the making of an award,
is required to satisfy the Commission that it or any
one or more of its members
has a sufficient interest in the proposed award.
13 Formal matters relating to making of award
(1) An award is required to be in writing, expressed to be an award and signed
by at least one member of the Commission.
(2) An award is to be published by the Industrial Registrar on the NSW
industrial relations website.
(3) An award is to comply with such other requirements as to form and procedure
for its making as may be made by the regulations
or (subject to any such
regulations) by the rules of the Commission.
14 Mandatory dispute resolution procedures in awards
(1) An award is not to be made unless it contains procedures for the resolution
of industrial disputes under the award (dispute resolution
procedures).
(3) Dispute resolution procedures are to include procedures for—
(a) consultation at the workplace, and
(b) the involvement of relevant industrial organisations.
15 Commencement of award
(1) An award comes into force on the date specified by the Commission.
(3) An award may be expressed to apply retrospectively, but not earlier than the
date on which—
(a) application for the award was lodged with the Industrial Registrar, or
(b) the Commission itself initiated proceedings for the award, or
(c) the industrial dispute giving rise to the award was notified to the
Commission.
(4) Despite subsection (3), the following awards may, with the consent of the
parties to the making of the award, apply retrospectively
from a date, specified
in the award, that is earlier than any date referred to in that
subsection—
(b) an award that sets conditions of employment for employees of a single
employer or for employees of two or more associated employers.
16 Term of award
(1) An award applies for the period specified in it as its nominal term and,
after that period, until rescinded by the Commission.
(2) The nominal term of an award must not be less than 12 months nor more than 3
Consideration
consider that the requirements of s 10 are satisfied based on:
(1) The award continuing the terms of the 2024 Award, other than increases to
rates of pay and salary related allowances, and those
matters to which are
referred to already;
(2) The consent of all parties and their submissions that the 2025 Award would
set fair and reasonable conditions; and
(3) The evidence of Ms Murphy as to the 2025 Award complying with equal
remuneration principles.
consider that the requirements of s 11 are satisfied based on:
(1) The Application having been made by an employer;
(2) The proposed parties to the award being persons who are permitted to apply
for the making of an award; and
(3) Each of those parties having a sufficient interest in the 2025 Award because
they have either members who will be covered by
the award, or are the employer
of employees to be covered by the award.
consider that the requirements of s 13 are satisfied based on:
(1) The 2025 Award being in writing and expressed to be an award;
(2) That it will be signed by a member of the Commission in due course and
published by the Industrial Registrar; and
(3) The 2025 Award otherwise apparently conforming as to form and procedure with
the regulations and rules of the Commission.
consider that the requirements of s 14 are satisfied based on the 2025 Award
containing a dispute resolution procedure, which includes
procedures for
consultation at the workplace and the involvement of relevant industrial
organisations.
consider that I am able to make the 2025 Award apply retrospectively pursuant to
s 15(3)(c) or s 15(4)(b).
requirements of s 16 are satisfied, given that the nominal term of the 2025
Award will be 2 years, commencing on 1 July 2025.
146(2) provides that:
146 General functions of Commission
(2) The Commission must take into account the public interest in the exercise of
its functions and, for that purpose, must have regard
(a) the objects of this Act, and
(b) the state of the economy of New South Wales and the likely effect of its
decisions on that economy, and
(c) for the exercise of a function about public sector employees—the
fiscal position and outlook of the Government and the
likely effect of the
exercise of the Commission’s function on the position and outlook.
consider that it is in the public interest to make the 2025 Award. In arriving
at this decision I have taken into account the objects
of the Act and in
particular those matters referred to in Ms Murphy’s evidence at [7].
have also considered those matters in s 146(2)(b) and (c) namely the likely
effect of the decision to make the 2025 Award on the
economy in New South Wales
and the fiscal position and outlook of the Government and the likely effect of
the making of the 2025
Award to it. On the basis of the evidence of Ms Murphy
that approximately 165 full time equivalent staff (as at the commencement
25/26) will be covered by the 2025 Award, I consider that the making of the 2025
Award to have a negligible impact.
deciding it is in the public interest to make the 2025 Award, I have also had
due regard to the fact that the parties all consent
these reasons, I have decided it is appropriate to order the making of the 2025
Award in the terms sought by the Application.
Consequently,
I have also decided that it is appropriate to order that the 2024 Award be
Commission orders that:
(1) The Broken Hill Health Employees (State) Award 2025 is made in the terms
sought in the Application; and
(2) The Broken Hill Health Employees (State) Award 2024 is revoked.
Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter