URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 17 (24 October 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 17
Hearing Date(s):
15 October 2025
Date of Orders:
24 October 2025
Decision Date:
24 October 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I convict Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
I impose a fine of $150,000.
(3) Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 — fall from height — formwork —
worker not adhering
to established safety systems — no elevated work platform — low
range of objective seriousness
SENTENCING — relevant factors
on sentence — objective seriousness — deterrence — aggravating
mitigating factors — parity — appropriate
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South
Wales (2000) 49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[2011] HCA 49
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR
357; [2005] HCA 25
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for New South
Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
R v Borkowski
[2009] NSWCCA 102
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
v Thomson; R v Houlton (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
R v Youkhana
[2004] NSWCCA 412
SafeWork NSW v
Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC 8
SafeWork NSW v PRW Services
Pty Ltd; SafeWork NSW v Peter Whalan
[2024] NSWDC 16
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd (Offender)
Representation:
A Sivanathan (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Wotton Kearney
File Number(s):
2024/416238
Publication Restriction:
Bridgeworks
(Aust) Pty Ltd (Bridgeworks) undertakes turn-key solutions for road, rail and
over water span structures. It was engaged
by Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd
(Menai Civil) to assist with the construction of a bridge at a site in Huntley,
New South Wales
(the site). Bridgeworks contracted with Topdeck Formwork
Services Pty Ltd (Topdeck) for the supply of formworkers for the site. On
November 2022, Mr Michael Bagnato, a contractor engaged by Topdeck, suffered a
fall while stripping formwork at the site, sustaining
serious injuries to his
Bridgeworks
appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence charged in an Amended
Summons filed on 30 June 2025 that as
a person who had a work health and safety
duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
) it failed to comply with that duty and thereby exposed Michael
Bagnato to a risk of death or serious injury contrary to s 32 of
risk particularised at paragraph 11 of Annexure A to the Summons is as
“The risk was the risk of Mr Bagnato, suffering death or serious injury as
a result of falling from a height while undertaking
formwork stripping at the
its plea of guilty, Bridgeworks accepts that it could have taken the following
reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at
least minimise the reasonably
foreseeable risk:
“(a) Implementing and enforcing a safe system of work for the stripping of
formwork on abutments at the Site, which:
(i). Specified that an Elevated Work Platform or a Platform Ladder ... was
required to be used to detach the formwork from the abutment
and connect the
chains from the excavator to the formwork; and
(b) Providing Mr Bagnato, with adequate supervision in relation to the stripping
of formwork.”
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843).
prosecutor tendered an Agreed Statement of Facts. I have taken this document
into account in coming to an appropriate sentence.
What follows is a brief
summary of the facts relevant to the offence to permit an understanding of the
sentence imposed.
Bridgeworks
was contracted by Menai Civil to assist with the construction of a bridge at the
site. Bridgeworks engaged Topdeck, as
needed, to provide formworkers. Mr Bagnato
was engaged by Topdeck to undertake formwork stripping at the site. He had
approximately
eight years of experience in the construction and formwork
industry and commenced working at the site in around August 2022.
workers at the site included Menai Civil’s Site Supervisor Mr Jeff Stewart
and Bridgeworks’ Site Supervisor, Mr
Tobias Buchanan. Mr Buchanan had been
working for Bridgeworks for 16 years. Mr Jake Mather, a formworker who had been
to Topdeck since about November 2021, was also present on site.
to the project commencing, Menai Civil and Bridgeworks had an initial meeting
with the principal contractor on site, Stocklands
Development Pty Ltd
(Stocklands), in which the works, construction methodology and safety issues
were discussed. Bridgeworks had
a four-metre platform ladder, extension ladders,
harnesses and a static line available for use at the site.
Bagnato arrived at the site on the morning of 11 November 2022 and signed onto
both the Menai Civil and Bridgeworks Toolbox Meeting
sheets. During the daily
pre-start meeting, Mr Buchanan and Mr Stewart discussed the works that would be
occurring on the day, including
the beginning of the removal of formwork on the
southern abutment of the bridge.
workers stripped one side of the abutment before lunchtime. On inspection, Mr
Stewart observed that the work was proceeding in
accordance with the Safe Work
Method Statement (SWMS) and that Mr Bagnato was working from a platform ladder.
After lunch the workers
attended to the other side of the abutment. Mr Bagnato
accessed the top of the southern abutment using an extension ladder from where
he attached wire chains between a 26t excavator and the form soldiers. Mr Scott
Raybould was operating the excavator while Mr Bagnato
was loosening the main
screws, and Mr Mather remained at the bottom of the abutment.
2:20pm, after attaching the chains from the excavator, Mr Bagnato began to
physically shake the formwork in an attempt to separate
it from the cement. Once
the formwork separated, Mr Bagnato lost balance and fell from the abutment.
Paramedics were called and attended
to Mr Bagnato, who suffered serious injuries
including a compound fracture to his right lower leg and a broken tibia and
Legal obligations and guidance material
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (WHS Regulation) requires
a person conducting a business or undertaking (PCBU) to manage the risk of a
fall in the vicinity
of an edge over which a person could fall. Clause 79 of the
WHS Regulation requires a PCBU that cannot eliminate the risk of a fall
minimise it by providing adequate protection, including by use of a fall
prevention device such as a temporary work platform.
was also a significant amount of guidance material available to Bridgeworks.
SafeWork NSW’s “Code of Practice –
(March 2021) contains information about how to manage the risks associated
with formwork. It relevantly provides the following guidance
material to
(1) Risks associated with formwork are to be managed using a “hierarchy of
control” – measures from the highest
level of protection and
reliability through to the lowest. Where reasonably practicable, hazards must be
eliminated. If elimination
is not reasonably practicable, the risk must be
minimised so far as is reasonably practicable. Duty holders must regularly
and revise control measures.
(2) As well as consulting with the principal contractor, any contractor altering
and stripping formwork should assess the risks involved
and identify measures to
prevent them from materialising. These include, but are not limited to providing
a documented SWMS and assessing
hazardous manual handling tasks, minimising the
working heights for persons stripping formwork and stripping formwork in
with a structural engineer’s guidance or with guidance from a
relevant work standard (AS 3610 series).
(3) Information, training and instruction must cover the nature of the work,
associated risks and control measures to be implemented.
A PCBU must ensure that
anyone undertaking construction work has completed general construction
induction training and is competent
to do the work safely.
(4) Controls such as handrails, edge protection, perimeter protection screens
and temporary catch platforms can minimise the risk
(5) It is recommended to use guardrails and handrails that have been designed
and engineered as edge protection systems in accordance
with “AS 4994.1:
Temporary Edge Protection – General Requirements”.
(6) Stripping and dismantling formwork should be carried out in an orderly,
systematic and progressive manner so that the deck is
gradually removed.
Work Australia’s “General Guide for Formwork and Falsework”
(July 2014) contains information about how to manage risks involved in
undertaking formwork and falsework. It states that when dismantling
formwork and
falsework, workers should follow the designer or manufacturer’s
instructions, provide suitable manual or mechanical
component handling, maintain
working platforms at least 450mm wide at the level of dismantling, maintain a
full working platform
below the dismantling level and remove any fall protection
components at the last possible stage as the dismantling progresses.
Work Australia’s “Formwork and Falsework Information Sheet”
(July 2014) also contains information regarding
how to manage risks associated
with formwork and falsework activities, including the use of edge protection and
PPE to mitigate the
risk of falls.
SafeWork NSW’s “Code of Practice – Managing the Risk of Falls
at Workplaces” (August 2019) contains
information about falls from heights
generally. It discusses identifying fall hazards, providing adequate protection
and minimising
any remaining risks so far as is reasonably practicable by
implementing administrative controls.
Systems of work prior to
the incident
the time of the incident, Bridgeworks had in place the following systems of
(1) A Project Safety Plan that included information on the induction process,
Toolbox Talks, personal protective equipment (PPE),
safe work permits,
subcontractors, safety audits and incident reporting and investigation.
(2) A Project Quality Plan that included information on responsibilities of site
managers or foremen, induction training and monitoring
subcontractors.
(3) A Construction Method Statement that included specific sections related to
working at heights and contained a work methodology
requiring handrails for
enclosed work areas and harnesses for areas that are not fully enclosed to
address the identified hazard
of falling.
(4) Multiple SWMSs covering different aspects of the work, one of which was SWMS
No. 3, “Substructure Construction” dated
2 August 2022, which was
supplied to Topdeck prior to the works commencing. This SWMS identified the risk
of falling from height
when removing formwork shutters and set out various
controls, including using elevated work platforms (EWP) encapsulated by
Mr Bagnato signed this SWMS on 18 October 2022.
Bridgeworks
participated in Menai Civil’s daily pre-start meetings to discuss the
planned work, participants’ roles and
presenting hazards and provided a
site supervisor each day. At the time of the incident that was Mr Buchanan, who
is highly experienced
and holds certificates in high-risk work and safe working
at heights, but he was in the site office.
Bridgeworks
achieved accreditation of its occupational health and safety management system
for civil construction of road and rail
bridges (ISO 45001:2018) on 28 January
2021. All workers had recently completed working at height training. New workers
were required
to undertake the Menai Civil induction process, and Mr Bagnato did
so on 18 October 2022.
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, Bridgeworks conducted an internal investigation. It then developed
and documented a new work methodology that
included the use of EWPs to remove
formwork. Toolbox Talks now include regular SWMS workshops. All subcontractors
are required to
be trained in working from heights. In addition, Bridgeworks
attends monthly safety meetings with Menai Civil and Stocklands to prepare
changing high risk work environments.
Bridgeworks
has developed a new Safe Working Procedure for erecting and dismantling formwork
to accompany the Construction Method
Statement and SWMS. The revised SWMS was
reviewed and accepted by Menai Civil. Senior management conduct yearly reviews
of the Working
and Heights Procedure. Bridgeworks has also developed an
Operational Procedure Handbook which contains all updated procedures, including
onsite takeaways which are incorporated into weekly Toolbox
Offender’s case on sentence
Bridgeworks
read and relied on the affidavit of Joseph Tower affirmed 24 September 2025. The
following is a summary of his unchallenged
evidence, in addition to matters
already set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
Tower is the Managing Director of Bridgeworks. He is responsible for
Bridgeworks’ operations and performance, with shared
responsibility for
work health and safety compliance, human resources, project management, finance
and administration. He has over
40 years of experience in bridge construction
and civil engineering.
Expression of remorse and
behalf of Bridgeworks, Mr Tower accepted responsibility for the company’s
failure to comply with its duty under s 19(1) of
acknowledged that this failure was a substantial cause of Mr Bagnato being
exposed to a risk of death or serious injury. He apologised
both to the Court
and Mr Bagnato.
Tower stated that Bridgeworks is committed to providing a safe workplace for
workers and persons who might be affected by its operations.
He also stated that
Bridgeworks is confident that the steps it has taken following the incident will
prevent a similar incident from
occurring. This is Bridgeworks’ first
serious incident, and prior to this incident, the company had never been issued
an Improvement
Notice by SafeWork NSW.
Immediately
after the incident Bridgeworks contacted Mr Bagnato and Topdeck to receive an
update regarding Mr Bagnato’s injuries.
Mr Tower offered him assistance
both in the period immediately after the incident as well as at several points
after his discharge
from hospital.
Bridgeworks
was registered as a company in 2007 but has been operating in infrastructure
construction through different entities since
1993. It is a family business
owned by Mr Tower. His son Mr Daniel Tower is the company’s senior
engineer, and his wife is
the administration manager. It is a Transport for NSW
prequalified road and bridge specialist contractor, with its core work
of infrastructure projects for the NSW Government and local
Bridgeworks
employs Mr Tobias (Toby) Buchanan as the Site Manager. Mr Buchanan is
responsible for supervising onsite works to ensure
they are being carried out
safely and in accordance with documented construction methodology. He has
approximately 15 years’
experience within the infrastructure construction
industry, has led onsite crews of up to 50 people and holds various safety
qualifications.
He had completed refresher training in working safely at heights
one month prior to the incident.
Bridgeworks
also employs one full time leading hand and two labourers. Further, from time to
time, Bridgeworks engages additional
workers from labour hire companies such as
Topdeck. Formworkers are assessed over a trial period to ensure they have the
and skill to undertake formwork duties.
Bridgeworks
makes significant community contributions both domestically and internationally.
It supports Mr Daniel Tower to partner
with non-government organisations working
in conflict affected areas including areas in Iraq targeted by ISIS and in West
Bridgeworks financially supports Mr Daniel Tower to travel annually to
Iraq to support civil infrastructure projects, community outreach
programs and
intercommunity cohesion initiatives on a pro bono basis. It also assists him to
develop and execute infrastructure and
societal projects through sharing
strategic operations knowledge.
community contributions made by Bridgeworks and Mr Tower include consistent
donations to the UN Refugee Agency over the past
10 years, direct community
assistance and pro bono technical support to local government councils during
the 2019–2020 NSW
“Black Summer” bushfires and providing
recycling and material donations wherever feasible.
circumstances surrounding the incident
Tower stated that Bridgeworks was engaged by Menai Civil to provide site
establishment, piling works, supply and construction of
substructure and
superstructure and supply and construction of concrete and steel barriers. Mr
Bagnato was engaged through Topdeck
to undertake formwork for Bridgeworks. He
had previously done formwork stripping on a bridge construction project for
Bridgeworks
and was found to be a competent worker. His competency to construct
and dismantle formwork was assessed by site supervisors over
approximately four
to five weeks.
to the incident, Bridgeworks had provided four metre platform ladders for the
task of dismantling the formwork. The intended
method of work was for the worker
to ascend the platform ladder, attach the slings of the excavator to the
formwork shutters and
then descend to the ground below. There was no requirement
for the worker to access the abutment or physically shake the formwork
separate it from the concrete element. Bridgeworks also had fall arrest
harnesses and static lines available for use.
Systems of work
prior to the incident
Bridgeworks
had the following systems of work in place at the time of the incident, in
addition to those set out in the Agreed Statement
(1) Quality Management, Environmental Management and Occupational Health and
Safety Management systems that had been certified by
the International
Organisation of Standardisation;
(2) Toolbox Talks conducted by Mr Buchanan following the principal
contractor’s pre-start meeting to inform workers of new
hazards on site
and remind them of appropriate controls;
(3) inspections to ensure workers are following safe work methods;
(4) informal site audits every six to 12 months; and
(5) regular site visits by Mr Tower and Mr Daniel Tower.
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, Bridgeworks purchased a mobile EWP at a cost of $152,000.
Bridgeworks reviewed and revised construction sequence
methodologies for other
parts of the project, in particular “Erection and Removal of Work
Platform” and “Construction
of Superstructure”. It made work
health and safety a standing item in all management and site coordination
meetings and committed
to providing ongoing formal work health and safety
training to all workers through training organisations. Mr Buchanan has
further training in working safely at heights and implementing and
monitoring work health and safety policies, procedures and programs.
and Mr Daniel Tower have both recently completed courses in work health and
safety due diligence for CEOs, directors and
Bridgeworks
has also implemented a system by which workers undertake formal documented risk
assessments when site conditions or activities
change, especially prior to the
commencement or continuation of any high-risk work. Mr Tower has committed to
regular fortnightly
site visits which increase in frequency when there is a
change of work phase.
Bridgeworks
has always undertaken infrastructure design so as to eliminate or minimise risks
associated with construction work and
adopted construction methodologies that
reduce or eliminate time spent working at heights. It also routinely adapted
construction
sequencing to minimise elevated piling and column works in
embankment areas. Such measures have a renewed focus.
material from MidCoast Council in September 2023 and Goulburn Mulwaree Council
in December 2024 rated Bridgeworks’
management of worksite safety as
superior. The referee from the latter council observed that Bridgeworks’
“meticulous
attention to documentation set a benchmark for professionalism
and compliance”. Another client, Dungog Shire Council, made
reference to
Bridgeworks’ “strong and proactive safety culture on
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Markarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Objective seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Bridgeworks falls in
the range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relevant
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
49 NSWLR 610;
[2000] NSWIRComm 71
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the
“ ... It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk
of the consequence, to the extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but is the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring.
To discount the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct
question is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries,
whether or not they are
likely to materialise. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which
mitigating steps could have been taken.”
prosecutor submitted that this offence falls within the mid-range of objective
seriousness. The risk of a person falling from
height whilst conducting formwork
stripping at the site was obvious and well-known to Bridgeworks. Any person
stripping formwork
would be working at height and would be at risk of falling if
safe systems of work were not implemented and enforced. It would have
straightforward for Bridgeworks to mitigate the risk by ensuring that workers,
and in particular Mr Bagnato, were utilising
safe systems of work. Such a
failure was said to be inconsistent with a proactive or systematic approach to
meeting which occurred between Menai Civil, Bridgeworks and Stocklands prior to
the commencement of the relevant works at the site,
in which the works,
construction methodology and safety issues were discussed, also supports an
inference that Bridgeworks was aware
of the safety requirements for the types of
works they were engaged in. The risk was identified in SWMS No. 3
“Substructure
Construction”, which required EWPs to be encapsulated
by barriers and harnesses to be worn. Further, the August 2022 Project
Plan provided for regular site safety inspections to check for potential
workplace hazards, including compliance by work crews
with safe work methods.
a cursory site inspection would have revealed that there was no EWP at the site.
Mr Buchanan was the site supervisor on site
at the time of the incident.
Considering his 15 years of experience in the construction industry, it ought to
have been obvious to
him that no EWP was available on site to be used to strip
formwork as contemplated by the safety documents. However, in oral submissions,
the prosecutor accepted that Bridgeworks had a platform ladder available for
use, and that the gravamen of the offending was Bridgeworks’
ensure that Mr Bagnato had continued to comply with the safe work systems that
were in place when he began stripping the
formwork from the south side of the
Bridgeworks
contended that the objective seriousness of the offence was in the low range.
Its failure was confined to ensuring the
safety of Mr Bagnato on 11 November
2022 and not workers more generally. The safe system of work for stripping
formwork which Bridgeworks
had failed to implement and enforce allowed for a
platform ladder to be used, and Bridgeworks had made one available. Site
supervision
undertaken earlier in the day had confirmed that Mr Bagnato was
compliant with the intended safe work method. It was not part of
Bagnato’s role to climb onto the abutment or shake the formwork and there
was no evidence that this had previously occurred.
Mr Bagnato was a form worker
with eight years’ experience who had been assessed on site as
Bridgeworks had taken proactive steps to develop a robust safety management
system to comply with its duty under the
. The Project Safety
Plan, Construction Method Statement and SWMS were all site-specific documents.
Workers were inducted onto the
site by the principal contractor as well as
inducted into the SWMS, and Toolbox Talks were conducted on a daily basis by the
experienced
and well qualified site supervisor.
Bridgeworks accepted by its plea that the system failed when Mr Bagnato accessed
the top of the abutment on 11 November 2022.
The incident was a fall from height
on a construction site which carries an inherent stigma of seriousness.
Bridgeworks contended
that the offending conduct should be viewed as an
aberration of an otherwise well-functioning and safe system of work, although it
also accepted that the SWMS did not adequately detail the process for stripping
formwork which was in operation earlier in the day.
measures which Bridgeworks accepts that it could have taken to prevent the
incident are set out at [
] above. The risk of a fall from heights was
foreseeable, well known to Bridgeworks and increased by the unavailability of an
on site, as contemplated by the SWMS. Further, it was entirely
straightforward for Bridgeworks to implement and enforce its intended
method using the available platform ladder, because that safe work method had
been used for stripping formwork earlier
in the day. The method which Mr Bagnato
was allowed to adopt after lunch represented a gross departure from acceptable
and was plainly unsafe.
I accept that the offence was an aberration. It was not part of Mr
Bagnato’s role either to climb to the top of the
abutment or to shake the
formwork. The potential consequences of falling almost 3.85 metres to the
ground, which must include fatal
injury, need to be viewed in that context. An
appropriate (but inadequately documented) process had been in place when
supervision
of the formwork stripping occurred on the morning of the day in
charge provides for the use of a platform ladder as an appropriate safe work
method for stripping formwork. This reflects recognition
that it will not always
be appropriate to use an EWP. A platform ladder in the immediate vicinity of the
work was available to be
used. I also accept that the degree of supervision
which Bridgeworks was required to provide to Mr Bagnato ought to reflect his
as a formworker and his assessment on site over several weeks as
competent. Taking all of the above matters into account, I find
the offence to
be in the low range of objective seriousness.
Aggravating
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
. In order for the aggravating factor to be established,
the Court must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
more deleterious than may ordinarily be expected for the subject offence:
[2004] NSWCCA 412
offence does not require an injury to be sustained, but merely the creation of a
risk of death or serious injury. The injuries
sustained by Mr Bagnato are
sufficient to establish the aggravating factor.
Bridgeworks
has no prior convictions: s 21A(3)(e)
Bridgeworks
is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
. This is demonstrated
by its corporate citizenship in supporting community projects both locally and
abroad to which I have already
referred, as well as its response to the
incident. Further, Bridgeworks and its predecessor entities have been operating
without conviction or so much as the receipt of an Improvement Notice
prior to the incident giving rise to this offence.
find that Bridgeworks has good prospects of rehabilitation (s 21A(3)(h)
) and is unlikely to reoffend (s 21A(3)(g)
fortified in this view by the measures taken by Bridgeworks’ management in
response to the incident, including the purchase
of a mobile EWP, the additional
training provided for both employees and contractors in relation to safety
issues and its increased
focus on documentation of operating procedures and risk
assessments. The training which Mr Buchanan has undertaken in implementing
monitoring WHS policies, procedures and programs directly addresses the critical
failing giving rise to the subject offence.
Both Mr Tower and his son have
completed work health and safety due diligence training for CEOs, directors and
managers. I have referred
above to the superior rating given to Bridgeworks by
some of its more recent clients for its management of worksite safety.
Bridgeworks
has shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i)
. I accept Mr
Tower’s evidence that Bridgeworks has accepted responsibility for its
actions and has acknowledged that its failures
led to the injury of Mr Bagnato.
This is reinforced by the assistance offered to Mr Bagnato both immediately
after the incident and
following his discharge from hospital.
Bridgeworks
entered a plea of guilty on 30 June 2025 to the charge particularised in an
Amended Summons of that date. The plea of
guilty was entered at the third
mention of proceedings which commenced on 8 November 2024 and were first before
the Court on 17 February
2025. Bridgeworks is entitled to a discount on penalty
that reflects the utilitarian value of that early plea:
R v Thomson; R v
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. The prosecutor did not take issue with
the defendant’s submission that it should be afforded a discount on
sentence of 25%
in recognition of its early guilty plea. I accept that a
discount of 25% is appropriate in the circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
Bridgeworks
submits that its cooperation with the authorities, an agreed fact, is a matter
which should operate in mitigation of the
sentence to be imposed upon it:
s 21A(3)(m)
. I accept Mr Tower’s evidence that
Bridgeworks responded in a timely manner to several regulatory notices served
upon it. Further,
the steps taken by Bridgeworks in response to the incident
extended beyond the revision of its methodology for dismantling formwork
shutters. Mr Tower states that Bridgeworks reviewed and revised its construction
sequence methodologies and SWMS across the project.
Accordingly, I accept that
Bridgeworks has cooperated with authorities sufficiently to attract the benefit
of this mitigating factor
and apply a modest discount on the sentence that would
otherwise be imposed.
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must reflect the need for general
deterrence. Falls from height are a notoriously
prevalent issue both in the
construction industry generally and in the specific context of formwork. The
fine to be imposed should
also operate as a form of specific deterrence.
However, I accept that because Bridgeworks has no criminal antecedents, is a
business with a significant degree of personal oversight from the
managing director and has responded to the incident in the fulsome
described, specific deterrence does not carry significant weight in the
sentencing exercise.
19 August 2025, Menai Civil was convicted of an offence pursuant to s 33 of the
that arose from this same incident and fined $69,750 (which
represented a 25% discount on the otherwise appropriate fine of $93,000):
SafeWork NSW
Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWIC
The principle of parity with co-offenders is not limited to persons charged
with the same offence:
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
SafeWork NSW v PRW Services Pty Ltd; SafeWork
NSW v Peter Whalan
[2024] NSWDC 16
. However, I accept the
prosecutor’s submission that that there is little assistance to be gained
from that sentencing exercise,
concerning as it did an offence which does not
involve the exposure of an individual to a risk of death or serious injury or
Bridgeworks did not submit otherwise.
Capacity to pay
Court is required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
before imposing a fine. Bridgeworks has not provided any evidence concerning its
capacity to pay a fine and makes no submission
in that regard.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal recognised that a fine which may be crippling to a small
business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a large
corporation and that the maximum penalty for the offence was
“undoubtedly” set having
regard to that circumstance. I accept that
Bridgeworks is a family operated business and I have regard to that matter in
determining
the appropriate penalty.
appropriate fine is $200,000, which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea
make the following orders:
(1) I convict Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
(2) I impose a fine of $150,000.
(3) Bridgeworks (Aust) Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter