URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dyason and Dyason & Ors v FAI General Insurance Company Limited [2000] NSWFTT 15 (12 September 2000)
Dyason and Dyason & Ors v FAI General Insurance Company Limited
(12 September 2000)
File No. BU 1999/1496 & BU 1999/1562
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
: Dyason & Dyason
: FAI General Insurance Company
APPLICATION
: Appeal against decision of insurer to
decline insurance claims.
APPEARANCES
: Mr J Nairn for
Mr M Hasofer for Respondent
2000 and 1 August 2000
Legislative Provisions:
Whether homeowners are beneficiaries under H.O.W.
Scheme under
Cases cited:
FAI General
Insurance Company Limited v Brookman & Anor
[2000] NSWSC 56
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v SRA of NSW
[1982] HCA 24
(1981-1982) 149 CLR 337
Healy v. Story
[1848] EngR 875
(1848) 3 Ex 3
Judith Ann Brookman v. FAI
Insurance Company Limited
BU 1999/1540, which was upheld on appeal:
[2000] NSWSC 56
G R Securities Pty Ltd v. Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty
(1986) 40 NSWLR 631
Bridge Shipping Pty Ltd v. Grand
Shipping S.A. and Anor
[1991] HCA 45
(1991) 173 CLR 231
Scottish Amicable Life
Assurance Society v. Reg Austin Insurances Pty Ltd & Ors
(1985) 9 ACLR
, 923 – 924
Clarke Equipment Credit of Australia Ltd v. Kiyose
Holdings Pty Ltd
(1989) 21 NSWLR 160
scheme of insurance – execution of
contract, capacity in which – intention to bind
DECISION ON PRELIMINARY ISSUES OF FACT
Application BU 1999/1496
The Tribunal holds that:
(a) The home building contract for works at Waverley, executed on or about
28 August, 1998, was made solely between the applicants
Mr and Ms Dyason (as the
property owners) and Action United Pty Ltd (as the building
contractor).
(b) In respect of the abovementioned building works, no
collateral contract has existed or exists between the applicants Mr and Ms
Dyason and Mr Cohen (Managing Director of Action United Pty Ltd) in his
personal capacity.
(c) It is not disputed that at all material times Action
United Pty Ltd was uninsured.
Application BU 1999/1562
The Tribunal holds that:
(a) The home building contract for works at
Botany, executed on or about 23 November,1998, was made solely between the
Tapiki and Matapuku (as the property owners) and Action United Pty
Ltd (as the building contractor).
(b) In respect of the above-mentioned
building works, no collateral contract has existed or exists between the
applicants Tapiki and
Matapuku and Cohen (Managing Director of Action United Pty
Ltd) in his personal capacity.
(c) It is not disputed that at all material
times Action United Pty Ltd was uninsured.
I. McDonell, Deputy
Chairperson and Presiding Member
Dated: 6 September, 2000
REASONS FOR DECISION AND ORDERS
1. Introduction
1.1 In their applications, Mr and Ms Dyason [BU
1999/1496] and Tapiki and Matapuku [BU 1999/1562] have appealed against
of the Respondent insurer, FAI General Insurance Company Limited
(FAI), to decline insurance claims arising out of two home building
(hereafter "Dyason contract" and "Tapiki contract").
1.2 In light of the
common background circumstances of these contracts (outlined below), and with
the full agreement of the parties,
the two applications were consolidated for
the purposes of a joint hearing of preliminary factual issues. These issues
concern the
identity of the parties to the contracts and whether or not certain
alleged collateral oral contracts existed in each case.
2. Common background circumstances of Dyason and Tapiki
2.1 During the later part of 1998, each set of applicants
entered into contracts for renovation works at their respective properties.
both cases they dealt from the outset with an individual, Mr Cohen (Cohen), a
licensed builder.
2.2 After execution of the building contracts and the
commencement of works on the respective dwellings, building work fell behind
schedule and there followed complaints about delays and poor quality of
workmanship. In neither case was the building work completed.
2.3 Both Dyason and Tapiki contracts were in the same Department of Fair
Trading standard home building contract form and in both
contracts the identity
of the contractor was recorded at page 1 as:
Action United Pty Ltd.
At page 23 of both contracts there was a heading:
“Signed by the contractor
Where the contractor is a company or partnership or the contract is to be
signed by an authorised agent of the contractor, the capacity
of the person
signing the contract, eg director, must be inserted.”
this heading on the Dyason contract the contractor executed in the following
G Cohen (signed)
Name (print)
Capacity (print)
M. Director
Tapiki contract the contractor executed as follows:
Cohen (signed)
Name (print)
Managing Director
2.4 All parties accept that there was
in existence for all relevant periods a certificate of insurance issued pursuant
by the Respondent FAI in respect of
Cohen. The period of insurance was from 19 February 1998 to 19 February 1999.
The essential ground
upon which FAI has declined liability to each of the
applicant home owners is that the relevant insurance was issued in respect of
the individual Cohen and not in respect of the corporate entity Action United
Pty Limited.
2.5 It was not in dispute that Action United Pty Limited
carried no home building insurance cover at all material times.
3. Preliminary factual issues in dispute
3.1 Who are the parties to these two contracts?
The principal
issues to be determined are whether Cohen by appending his signature as
contractor to each of the contracts with the
capacity of "M. Director" and
"Managing Director" bound the company Action United Pty Ltd named on the first
page of the contract
or bound himself personally. These questions as to who are
the parties to the respective contracts are factual issues to be determined
conclusively by the Tribunal of fact. In
FAI General Insurance Company
Limited v Brookman & Anor
[2000] NSWSC 56
at pars 23 and 24, Newman J
Australian Gas Light Company v. The
Valuer-General
Jordan CJ analysed the rules which apply to appeals
where the appellate court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law.
His analysis has not been overturned in the sixty years which have since
Relevantly he found that a finding of fact by a Tribunal
of fact cannot be disturbed if the facts inferred by the Tribunal upon which
finding is based are capable of supporting its finding and there is evidence
capable of supporting its inferences. Furthermore,
that such a finding can be
disturbed only: (a) if there is no evidence to support those inferences, or (b)
if the facts inferred
by it and supported by evidence are incapable of
justifying the finding of fact based upon those inferences.
3.2 Did collateral contracts exist between the respective applicants and
A subsidiary factual issue in dispute in each case was whether
or not any collateral contract or contracts were made between the
applicants and Cohen in his personal capacity.
4. The identity of the contracting parties and the
parol evidence rule
4.1 In the absence of any ambiguity the parol evidence rule precludes a
review of the circumstances in which each contract came into
discussing the operation of this rule in
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v SRA
[1982] HCA 24
(1981-1982) 149 CLR 337
“The true rule is that evidence of surrounding
circumstances is admissible to assist in the interpretation of the contract
the language is ambiguous or susceptible of more than one meaning. But it is not
admissible to contradict the language of the
contract when it has a plain
meaning. Generally speaking facts existing when the contract was made will not
be receivable as part
of the surrounding circumstances as an aid to
construction, unless they were known to both parties, although, as we have seen,
facts are notorious knowledge of them will be presumed
4.2 FAI argued that in both cases no ambiguity could be found as to the
capacity in which Cohen was signing both contracts and thus
there was no basis
for going beyond the bounds of the contracts to establish the objective
intention of the parties.
4.3 The applicants asserted, to the contrary,
that in both cases there was necessarily an ambiguity arising simply because
Cohen signed
with his personal signature and that unless he added words
expressly indicating that he was not signing personally then he must be
have entered into the contract personally. They also argued that the words "M.
Director" and "Managing Director" were ambiguous
in that they might be merely
descriptive of Cohen's occupation and not words intended to show that his
intention was to bind Action
United Pty Ltd. It was argued that Cohen could have
added after his signature (and quite unambiguously) such words as "for and on
behalf of Action United Pty Ltd" or he could have signed it as "Action United
Pty Limited by G Cohen, managing director".
4.4 In support of their
arguments for the admission of circumstantial evidence in each case on the
ground of ambiguity, the applicants
Healy v. Story
[1848] EngR 875
(1848) 3 Ex 3
where two directors of a company signed a promissory note. The note was signed
“for and on behalf of the Wesleyan Newspaper
Association” and
beneath the signatures appeared the word “directors”. It was held
that the directors were personally
liable because the word
“directors” was merely descriptive of the occupation of the
signatories and not as a word signifying
the capacity in which they signed. The
respondent submitted that
Healy v. Story
must be distinguished from the
instant cases, in that was an example of the construction of a document as a
whole which document included
the words “jointly and severally”.
These words being taken by the court to rebut a construction that the
signatories
were signing solely in their capacity as directors.
parties referred to a previous “similar decision” of the Tribunal:
Judith Ann Brookman v. FAI Insurance Company Limited
BU 1999/1540, which
was upheld on appeal:
[2000] NSWSC 56.
The Tribunal notes that the facts in
concerning the execution of the contract by the contractor and
certain other facts were materially different from the facts in the
now before the Tribunal; that the Tribunal is not bound in any way by its
previous decisions and that each case must be
decided on all the evidence
presented in that case alone.
4.6 The applicants also cited
Securities Pty Ltd v. Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd
, 636-637, where McHugh JA stated:
“. . . even if
parol evidence is only admissible to clarify meaning when a term in a document
is ambiguous, that rule has
no application when the issue is whether the person
sued or suing is a party to the contract.”
The Tribunal finds
that this statement was made in the context of determining the issue of whether
evidence could be admitted to
ascertain whether a party was in fact an existent
or non-existent entity. Therefore it has no relevance to the facts of the
cases or to the issue of identifying an ambiguity for the purposes of
the parol evidence rule.
4.7 The Tribunal also finds that the purely
procedural and remedial rectification of a mistake as to the name of a party in
of court proceedings - the issue raised in
Bridge Shipping Pty Ltd
v. Grand Shipping S.A. and Anor
[1991] HCA 45
(1991) 173 CLR 231
, is not a relevant issue
in either of the present cases. In the course of these two applications in the
Tribunal no mistakes have
been made by any party as to the name of any other
4.8 In considering the issue of the existence or non-existence of
possible ambiguities, and in deciding whether or not the Tribunal
confined to an examination of the contract alone or is entitled to examine the
whole contract together with the factual
matrix leading up to and surrounding to
its execution, the Tribunal must always take into account the type of the
contract before
it and the particular commercial context.
4.9 It is the
objective intention of the parties at the time of contracting which is always
paramount. In
Scottish Amicable Life Assurance Society v Reg Austin
Insurances Pty Ltd & Ors
(1985) 9 ACLR 909
, 923 – 924, McHugh JA
“The formation of a contract does not depend upon the actual
intention of the parties. A contract exists because the law attaches
obligations to the external conduct of the parties, one at least of whom has
expressly or impliedly made a promise . .
The present case,
therefore, depends on what the parties did and not what they intended to do when
they signed . . . . And what
they did depends on the construction to be placed
on the documents which they signed. A commercial document however, must be
in its commercial setting — in accordance with the surrounding
circumstances known to the parties . . .
In the end the decision
must depend upon the terms of the document including the qualification attaching
to the signature together
with the surrounding circumstances. This is a question
of fact not law.
4.10 In each of the instant cases, the contract
which is to be construed is a standard form plain English contract specifically
and drafted to cater for the needs of ordinary, lay consumers of
building services, entering into home building agreements on there
own behalf,
without any knowledge of legal terminology or the special legal significance of
particular words and without the assistance
of lawyers or any legal advice
whatsoever prior to signing.
4.11 The Tribunal finds, in light of this
particular hybrid commercial/consumer context and the nature and form of the
plain English
contract in these cases that there was a probable degree of
ambiguity existing concerning the execution of both contracts by the
contractor.
The Tribunal therefore finds that in each case the surrounding matrix of facts
to the execution of these two home owner
building contracts can be looked at to
assist in the determination of the correct identity of the contractor.
4.12 An examination will therefore be made of the objective framework of
facts within which each contract came into existence. In
making this inquiry,
the conduct and behaviour of the parties after the contracts were entered into
is only marginally relevant,
as evidence of consistent behaviour. A statement of
the correct approach to apply to this task is to be found in
Clarke Equipment
Credit of Australia Ltd v Kiyose Holdings Pty Ltd
(1989) 21 NSWLR 160
. “ . . the proper approach is to inquire whether there is to be
found an intention that the signatory be personally bound
to the contract . . .
meaning thereby not subjective intention but an intention to be found
objectively, notwithstanding a qualification
attached to the signature, in the
light of surrounding circumstances to the extent to which evidence thereof is
permissible.
4.13 Before looking at the circumstances of each contract in turn, the
Tribunal notes that it is satisfied that Cohen was quite consistent
completing the entries on page one of each contract by entering identically the
name of the contractor
as “Action United Pty Ltd”, with the
identical Australian Company Number underneath in each instance. The only
and additional entry was that on the Tapiki contract, where, below the
name of the contractor, as
qualified supervisor
was written the name:
“G..... Cohen”. On page 23 there was equal consistency displayed in
entering under
“Managing Director” in the Tapiki
contract and “M. Director” in the Dyason contract.
5. The Dyason contract and surrounding facts and
circumstances
5.1 Mr Dyason stated that all his dealings preliminary to the contract were
with Mr Cohen and that he had specifically chosen Mr Cohen
because he wanted a
good personal working relationship with him and that he believed at all times
that he was in fact contracting
with Mr Cohen.
5.2 On all the evidence
presented, the Tribunal is satisfied that the original quote for the job sent to
the Dyasons and subsequent
progress payment claims were on Action United Pty Ltd
letterhead. The Tribunal is also satisfied that cheques sent by the Dyasons
meet these progress payments were drawn in favour of Action United Pty
The execution of the contract
In cross examination,
Mr Dyason was asked: “
Did you read the contract before you signed
” Mr Dyason replied: “
I saw there was a company logo
attached but I believed I was contracting with [Mr] Cohen because I personally
asked him if his men
were ready to work.
” (transcript
Concerning the presentation of the contract to him at the time of
its execution by him, the following questions (inter alia) were
asked of Mr
Dyason (transcript p.15):
Q. And you saw that the contractor
was nominated as Action United Pty Limited?
that an Australian company number was number was nominated?
Q. And you understood, didn’t you, that it was a company
that was nominated as the contractor?
A. Well, I noted that
“Action United” was written on that page.
recognised, not the least from the fact that an Australian company number was
nominated on the same page, and from a description
of the title that it was a
company that you were, on the face of the document, contracting with, on the
face of that page of the
document, contracting with?
Mrs Dyason in cross-examination about her signing of the contract
answered questions as follows [transcript pp. 57 and 58]:
Q. When you
signed this contract, your husband brought it home; is that
Q. And you didn’t particularly look
through it in any detail?
Q. But you did look
through it sufficient to notice that your husband had signed the
Q. And that Mr Cohen had signed the
contract identifying his capacity as managing
A. Although I
didn’t notice “managing director”.
Q. You see there
[indicating p. 23 of the contract] Mr Cohen has signed the document and his name
is printed and his capacity is identified
in the document as M.
Q. You accept, don’t you that that
was there at the time you signed
Regarding the insurance
certificate in respect of Mr Cohen
In evidence, Mr Dyason
first stated that at the time of executing the contract there were two pages
stapled to the contract and that
this included an insurance
certificate.
In cross examination, Mr Dyason was asked (transcript
Q. And you say, do you that to the best of your
recollection there was attached to the contract at the time you signed it an
certificate?
Q. But you’re not
sure about that, are you?
A. No, it’s only the best of my
– that’s what I believe.
[and at transcript p.
Q. Mr Dyason, you don’t ever recall having retained any
copy of any insurance certificate, do you?
A. No, only from the time
when the contract was signed I believe it was attached.
are not sure about whether it was attached or not?
A. My belief is it
was attached.
Q. Based on that belief, do you have any recollection
as to why it is not now attached to the
The Tribunal is not satisfied that
any inference can be drawn that the Dyasons relied in any way upon seeing a copy
of an insurance
certificate prior to executing the contract.
Tribunal, in construing the contract as a whole and in the context of all of the
evidence as to the conduct of each of the
parties and the objective framework of
facts within which it came into existence, and applying an “objective
bystander test”,
finds on the balance of probabilities, that:
(a) Gary Cohen signed the Dyason contract expressly in his capacity as
the managing director of Action United Pty Ltd and in so doing
clearly evinced
an intention to bind that company to the contract.
Mrs Dyason at the time of executing the contract intended to contract with
Action United Pty Ltd and no other party.
6. The Tapiki contract and surrounding facts and
circumstances
In her evidence, Matapuku averred that at all times from her initial contact
with Mr Cohen, that she dealt with Mr Cohen personally
and believed that she was
contracting with him and that he would personally be doing the renovations at
her residence.
The execution of the contract
cross-examination concerning the circumstances of execution of the contract the
following questions were put to Ms. Matapuku [transcript
“Q. So that when you signed the contract – or,
sorry, when Mr Cohen gave you the contract for you and Mr Tapiki to read
through, you could see that the contractor was described or named as Action
United Pty Limited?
Q. And you already knew that
that entity, Action United Pty Limited, had quoted for the work, didn’t
A. Well, I know G..... Cohen quoted me the work.
you turn to the back page of the contract, you see that there’s a quote
there on Action United Pty Limited letterhead?
Q. Addressed to you and in fact addressed to Mr and Mrs
Q. And that has been initialled,
A. Mmm-hmm.
Q. By yourself and Mr
The Tribunal is satisfied that the
original quote for the job which was sent to “Mr and Mrs Matapuku”
was on Action United
Pty Ltd letterhead. The Tribunal is also satisfied that to
the knowledge of the applicants progress claims for payment were lodged
bank on Action United Pty Ltd letterhead and that the applicants instructed the
bank to make payments in favour of Action
United Pty Ltd.
The Tribunal is
satisfied that Ms Matapuku did obtain a copy of a certificate of insurance from
Cohen which was obtained for finalising
approval of the building application
with Botany Council – specifically for the purpose of release of stamped
plans so that
work could commence. The Tribunal is not satisfied that any
inference can be drawn that the insurance certificate in any way confused
Matapuku or Mr Tapiki as to the identity of the building
contractor.
6.2. The Tribunal, in construing the contract as a whole in
the context of all of the evidence as to the objective framework of facts
which it came into existence, finds on the balance of probabilities and applying
an “objective bystander test”,
(a) Mr Cohen signed the
Tapiki contract expressly in the capacity of managing director of Action United
Pty Ltd and in so doing clearly
evinced an intention to bind that company to the
(b) Tapiki and Matapuku at the time of executing the
contract intended to contract with Action United Pty Ltd and no other party.
7. Collateral contracts
7.1 Both sets of applicants argued that the written home building contracts
were limited to work involved in the construction of the
works in their
respective dwellings and that there also existed collateral oral contracts with
Cohen. These were that Cohen would
personally coordinate and supervise any works
done by Action United Pty Ltd and that consequently FAI must indemnify the
against loss or damage that has flowed from breaches of statutory
warranties on the part of Cohen.
7.2 The respondent submitted that
there was no convincing evidence of the existence of any collateral contracts
having been made between
Cohen in his personal capacity and the applicants. It
was also argued, that in any case, there was no need for any such collateral
contracts to have been made between the parties.
7.3 On all the evidence
presented, the Tribunal is not satisfied that either the Dyasons or Tapiki and
Matapuku have discharged the
onus of proof resting upon them of establishing the
existence of any separate oral collateral agreements between them and Cohen.
The Tribunal finds that the Department of Fair Trading standard home building
contract, in each case, comprehensively covered the
contractual relations
between the owners and the contractor Action United Pty Ltd in respect of all
aspects of the works to be completed.
These works being listed, in each
instance, in the schedule of progress payments on page 10 of the respective
8. Conclusion and determination
8.1. The commercial context in
which both these contracts were made is that of a regulatory regime under the
. This regime strongly protects the interests of
consumers of residential building services. It requires building contractors to
licenced and to perform work only pursuant to written contracts and to be
fully insured against breaches of statutory implied warranties
non-completion of building works. It penalises building contractors for
non-compliance by disabling them from enforcing their
contractual rights while
preserving the rights of consumers to pursue remedies against the
8.2 In the present cases, the building contractor Action United
Pty Ltd must be presumed to have been aware of the requirement of
insurance cover, and yet it failed to put such cover in place. On the
determination given here as to the identity of the
contractual parties, the
applicants clearly have a contractual claim against Action United Pty Ltd, but
they do not have a claim
as the beneficiaries of a policy of insurance.
8.3 The regulatory regime for the home building industry enacted by the
New South Wales Parliament provides a protective scheme of
compulsory insurance
and penalties for non-compliance but also has definite limitations. Unlike some
other areas of compulsory insurance,
such as for work and transport related
personal injuries, the home building compulsory insurance scheme does not in
circumstances
where uninsured perpetrators cause harm and loss, give the victims
of such damage ultimate access to a compensation fund via a nominal
defendant or
some other administrative mechanism.
8.4 On all the evidence adduced
and on all the above findings, the Tribunal holds that:
1. In Application
BU 1999/1496:
(a) The home building contract for works at Waverley,
executed on or about 28 August, 1998, was made solely between the applicants
and Mrs Dyason (as the property owners) and Action United Pty Ltd (as the
building contractor).
(b) In respect of the abovementioned building works, no
collateral contract has existed or exists between the applicants Mr and Mrs
Dyason and Mr Cohen (managing director of Action United Pty Ltd) in his
personal capacity.
(c) At all material times Action United Pty Ltd was
2. In Application BU 1999/1562:
(a) The home
building contract for works at Botany, executed on or about 23 November,1998,
was made solely between the applicants
Tapiki and Matapuku (as the property
owners) and Action United Pty Ltd (as the building contractor).
respect of the abovementioned building works, no collateral contract has existed
or exists between the applicants Tapiki and
Matapuku and Mr Cohen (managing
director of Action United Pty Ltd) in his personal capacity.
material times Action United Pty Ltd was uninsured.
McDonell M Noone
Deputy Chairperson Member
Fair Trading Tribunal Fair
Trading Tribunal
Date : 12 September 2000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (56.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter