URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v MASON [2020] NSWNMPSC 1 (17 January 2020)
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) to hold an
Inquiry into a
Complaint in relation to:
Ms Pamela Mary Mason NMW0001324285
Dates of Inquiry:
11 December 2019
12 December 2019
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul - Chairperson
Mr Ronald Wilson – Professional Member Dr Gerda Tolhurst –
Professional Member
Dr Rose Leontini – Lay Member
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Feneil Shah, Legal Officer
Appearance for Ms Pamela Mary Mason:
Ms Katherine Doust, Solicitor, New South Wales Nurses and Midwives
Association
Decision date:
17 January 2020
The Committee made no finding of unsatisfactory conduct
Publication of decision:
No non-publication directions have been made
Introduction
On 21 March 2016, at about 10:15, Pamela Mary Mason, a registered nurse
working in the emergency department of a public hospital,
began her task of
triaging an 18 month old boy who had been brought to the hospital by his mother.
handed over care of the young boy to the
In-Charge RN. Our task is to determine whether Ms Mason’s conduct in
caring for the
young boy fell significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a nurse of her equivalent level of training or experience.
Though there were aspects of her conduct that were unsatisfactory, we have
concluded that her conduct, in its parts and overall, was
not significantly
below the standard reasonably expected. Despite weaknesses in her practice, her
triage and handover were adequate.
We have decided the Complaint brought by the
Health Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) has not been proved. As a
consequence,
we are not required to consider the need for action in the
protection of the health and safety of the public.
Though not immediately relevant to our inquiry, we are aware of the
subsequent events. The child remained at the hospital in the paediatric
the emergency department until discharge, and left with his mother shortly after
2pm. He continued to be unwell. The next
morning he was taken by ambulance to
the hospital. He could not be resuscitated and died at 12:50pm on 22 March
The coroner determined the cause and manner of death was Septicaemia due to
Streptococcal infection upon the failure by the treating
specialist in the
emergency department on 21
March 2016 to recognise the signs of
toxicity caused by a possible sepsis, to investigate the possibility of sepsis,
and to administer
antibiotics.
necessarily and appropriately focused attention on every aspect of care provided
to the child from the time he entered the
emergency department. We do not
inquire into those matters, other than to assess the care provided by Ms
Our inquiry
We undertook the hearing of our inquiry on 11 and 12 December 2019. As
permitted by section 170 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(the National Law) we conducted an inquiry concerning another nurse at
the same time. That nurse had provided care to the child from
day through to the time of discharge. The outcome of that inquiry is contained
in a separate statement of decision.
The Commission’s Complaint against Ms Mason is dated 7 August 2019. At
the commencement of the hearing the Commission made a
minor amendment, there was
no objection, and we accepted it. The Complaint with particulars, but formal
parts omitted, is attached.
The Commission complains
Exhibit 4, Tab 71, page 23.
that Ms Mason made an “inadequate triage assessment”,
particularised by a failure to assess the respiratory rate, poor
documentation
and not considering the child for the NSW Health Sepsis Pathway.
The Commission was represented by Mr Feneil Shah of the Commission. Ms Mason
was represented by Ms Katherine Doust from the New South
Wales Nurses and
Midwives Association.
Earlier in the proceedings an order had been made to maintain confidentiality
as to the identification of the 18 month boy. Mr Shah
advised us that the
parents of the boy did not seek the continuation of the order, and neither did
the Commission. On that basis,
and without objection from Ms Doust, we lifted
At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Shah provided us with registration
certificates for Ms Mason and the other practitioner (Exhibit
1 and Exhibit 2).
The Commission also provided us with two folders of material which contained a
comprehensive and thorough collection
of the material relevant to our inquiry
(Exhibit 3 and Exhibit 4). Relevant to the present inquiry the folders
report by the Executive Director of Medical Services of the Illawarra
Shoalhaven Health District;
tatements from the child’s mother and father along with statements from
staff at the hospital and one from Ms Mason;
orrespondence between the Commission and Ms Mason;
n opinion and reports from Ms Rebekah Middleton as an expert engaged by the
Commission, with follow-up correspondence;
arious policies applicable to the hospital;
he patient records; and
aterials relating to the inquest.
On behalf of Ms Mason, Ms Doust provided a folder of material (Exhibit A)
containing a statement by Ms Mason in response to the Complaint,
along with a
record of her continuing professional development and letters from referees. We
were also provided with a performance
review from November 2019 (Exhibit B) and
a record of Ms Mason’s recent attendance at a clinical communication
documentation
seminar (Exhibit C)
We accepted all of this material as being relevant to our inquiry, subject
only to objections by Mr Shah about the way in which Ms
Mason stated what she
would have done in different circumstances. When we later heard evidence from Ms
Mason, Ms Doust asked questions
on that topic to assist us understand what Ms
Mason said was the way she usually did her work at that time.
In large part there was little disagreement as to what had happened, at least
so far as the Commission identified it’s concerns
in the Complaint. Whilst
there may not have been enough information for us to determine all that happened
in the period when Ms Mason
was providing care, we did have enough information
and evidence to reach conclusions about the Complaint as particularised by the
Commission.
Ms Mason gave evidence, as did the other nurse. We then heard evidence from
Rebekah Middleton, who was called by the Commission as
an expert. Ms Middleton
had prepared a detailed and thorough report supplemented by her answers to
further questions asked by the
Commission. It was clear
Ms Middleton had given careful consideration to all the information that had
been available to her by the Commission about what had
happened on 21
March 2016 and the care provided by Ms Mason.
As Ms Middleton gave evidence after Ms Mason and the other nurse we were able
to ask her about some of the evidence they had given.
In some respects to do
with record keeping there was a difference between the assumptions that had been
made by Ms Middleton when
preparing her report, and what we learned from our
inquiry. Ms Middleton was critical of various aspects of Ms Mason’s
and also of the practices then in place at the emergency department of
the hospital. It remains our task to assess whether Ms Mason’s
fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected.
In undertaking our consideration we proceeded on the basis that Ms Mason is
an experienced practitioner particularly when it comes
to paediatric
emergencies. Her training at that time was sound even though her continuing
professional development had not been extensive
in recent years. She had been
working in the emergency department full time from January 2014 after an
extensive and varied career
in nursing in public and private hospitals,
including originally at Guys Hospital in London and the Hospital for Sick
Children, Great
Ormond Street, London.
The child’s arrival at the hospital
The mother was a registered nurse and worked at the hospital, though not on
that day. She was due to commence a night shift later
that day. She had come
into hospital to tell the Nurse Unit Manager that she would not be able to do
her shift because her child
was ill. Apparently she was on her way to see her
general practitioner but the NUM suggested that the child could be seen by one
of the doctors in the hospital.
During the conversation the child began to shake, perhaps with rigors, and
the mother accepted the NUM’s offer to have the child
seen by a doctor at
the hospital. She was then taken to the emergency department shortly after 10am,
where Ms Mason was on duty as
the triage nurse.
The outcome of the triage is recorded in the clinical notes, relevantly at
Exhibit 4, tab 70, page 2. There was some dispute about
what Ms Mason had
observed at the time of her triage and what had been reported to her. Below is
the extract from the notes, as
entered by Ms Mason:
Triage SDMH
Triage Presenting Information :
lethargic, pale and febile, restless
overnight. not tolerating food but been drinking water and breast milk. Wet
nappies. vomited
post paracetamol 01.00. shaky limbs and mucosy vomit at
Mason, Pamela (RN) – 21/03/2016 10:15 AEDT
The entry was made at 10:15, which we take as being the time when
Ms Mason was speaking to the mother. On the face of it, that passage can be
read as including a record of Ms Mason’s observations
at the time
(lethargic, pale and febrile; wet nappies; shaky limbs and mucosy vomit at
triage), and in some parts read as a report
from the mother (restless overnight;
not tolerating food but been drinking water and breast milk; vomited post
paracetamol 01.00).
Ms Mason gave evidence that the heading “
Triage Presenting
Information
” is a prompt within the computerised records system to
record the history given by the patient, in this case the mother. It
evidence that all of the information up to and including “shaky
limbs” was what had been reported to her by the
mother rather than
anything she had observed herself. To make that clear she said she should have
inserted a full stop after the
words shaky limbs and made a note such as O/E
(meaning ‘on examination’) mucosy vomit at triage. She said the
a mucosy vomit when being examined. She said she did not observe any
shaky limbs, or any of what the mother reported.
Based on Ms Mason’s evidence, the format of the document, and the words
on the page, we have concluded that what is written
in the notes is the history
provided by the mother with Ms Mason having observed only the mucosy vomit.
Ms Mason did make some observations and they are recorded below the text. Of
importance is the Peripheral Pulse Rate at 173 BPM, temperature
of 38.9 degrees
Centigrade, oxygen saturation of 100% on room air, and weight of
g. From page 9 of the clinical notes it is apparent that Ms Mason did not
make notes of respiratory distress or respiratory rate,
as no entry appears in
the locations for those observations. Ms Mason allocated Triage Category 3, and
concluded her triage around
With that background, it is convenient to set out our findings about what
happened by reference to the particulars of the Complaint.
We then consider
whether the Complaint of “inadequate triage assessment” amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 1a – failed to measure the child’s respiratory
Ms Mason did not assess the child’s respiratory rate. She said she did
not do so because the child was crying at the time and
the mother said she
wanted to breast feed the child. Ms Middleton expressed the opinion that a
respiratory rate test should have
been performed as part of the triage, unless
some good reason not to do so. He was not crying the entire time, and at one
stage was calm enough to be placed on scales for weighing.
Once the child was breast feeding he may have been calm enough for an
assessment. Ms Mason said she thought an assessment of the respiratory
not necessary for her to make the triage assessment and it could wait,
particularly because she saw no signs of respiratory
Particular 1b – failed to document unsuccessful efforts to measure
the child’s respiratory rate
Ms Mason acknowledges she did not make a note of not taking the respiratory
rate as the child was crying. It would have been better
if she had done so.
She said there was no particular place within the documentation used in the
emergency department to record the reason the rate was
not taken. Also, there
was a well-established practice within the emergency department of recording
only the abnormal observations,
and on her observation the child was not in
respiratory distress. She also said it would have been obvious from the lack of
adjacent to
Respiratory Rate
in the Vital Signs section of the
clinical records that she had not assessed the respiratory rate.
As to recording only abnormal results and observations, Ms Mason said that
was the practice in the emergency department, particularly
at the stage of
triage when the main task was to make a categorisation of seriousness.
Ms Mason said that at a hospital triage meeting she attended she was advised
not to record respiratory rates on crying children unless
there were signs of
decreased oxygen saturation, tracheal tug or chest recession. The child’s
oxygen saturation was 100% on
room air, and she saw no tracheal tug and there
was no chest recession or cough.
We had limited information on whether it was the practice within the
emergency department to record only those observations that were
abnormal. Ms
Mason gave evidence that it was. The nurse in the other inquiry gave evidence to
the same effect. We also had reference
to a letter to the Commission of
Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health District of 19 April 2018 (Exhibit 4, Tab 61).
That letter does
not deal with this specific issue in precise terms but it is
nevertheless reasonably apparent that the emergency department at the
was somewhat behind in implementing updated clinical record systems and any new
policies and procedures. The slowness may
be explained by a general, but
informal practice within the emergency department to record only abnormal
observations, along with
a passivity to change.
Ms Mason told us that the practice had since changed, and all those within
the emergency department were now recording the observations
that they made,
whether abnormal or not.
We accept that at the triage stage it is not always appropriate or practical
for a nurse to undertake a complete and thorough examination
as may be done in
other circumstances. The task will be to focus on the presenting signs and
symptoms in order to make the triage
assessment. Nevertheless, we express
concern about any practice that worked on the principle of recording only
abnormal observations. Record keeping is an important aspect
of good nursing
practice. The failure to record a relevant normal observation creates an
ambiguity for those that later read the
notes – was any observation made
at all, and if so was no record made because the observation was normal, or was
it abnormal
but the person neglected to record it?
Had this been the practice of Ms Mason alone then a different assessment
might be made. However, the evidence is of a general practice
emergency department. Ms Mason’s conduct is to be judged in that
Particular 1c – failed to document relevant clinical findings about
the child’s respiratory distress including any negative
Ms Mason said she did not observe any signs of respiratory distress and in
accordance with the practice in the emergency department
she did not make a note
of her observed absence of respiratory distress. As with respiratory rate there
was a location to record
respiratory distress within the Vital Signs section of
the clinical notes. Ms Mason says the lack of an entry was understood by those
in the emergency department to mean no distress had been observed. Ms Mason says
that in not making an entry she was following the
practice as understood within
the emergency department. She says her role as the triage nurse was to make a
triage classification
within a short period of time and then hand over the
patient, rather than take the time to carry out and record all observations.
Again, we observe that the practice of only recording abnormal observations
was unsatisfactory, and necessarily diminished the utility
and useability of the
clinical records. Rather than being presented with an empty entry for
respiratory distress, it would be of
value to those that read the record to know
whether the triage nurse had looked for respiratory distress but had seen no
blank is ambiguous: does it mean there was no distress observed, or
perhaps no observation was made, or was an abnormal observation
made but not
Particular 1d – failed to document sufficient information concerning
the child’s hydration including her observation of
“moist mucosa,
tears present, eyes not sunken, did not have decreased tissue turgor or
decreased urine output”
The quoted words in the particulars of the Complaint come from the statement
given by Ms Mason to the coroner some time after the
events. Ms Mason said she
prepared that statement from notes she made the day after she saw the child. At
the prompting of other
staff, she made a personal a note in anticipation of a
coronial inquest.
Ms Mason acknowledges that she did not document her observations of the signs
of hydration. She said that other than in the
Triage Presentation Information
text box there was no appropriate place to record those notes. Ms Mason says
she could have typed the observations in that space,
but again it was not the
practice to do so, as the observations were “normal”.
Particular 1e – failed to document the child’s reassuring
capillary refill results
Ms Mason acknowledges that she did not make a record of the capillary refill
test that she says she undertook.
In her statement (Exhibit 1, Tab 1, paragraph 14) she said she tested the
capillary rate at the sternum and it was “brisk”,
implication that a brisk rate was within normal range. Mr Shah asked what she
meant by brisk, and drew her attention to
her evidence before the coroner
(Exhibit 4 tab 73 at pages 32-33). The questions and answers before the coroner
are somewhat ambiguous
as to whether Ms Mason was saying brisk was “5
seconds”, or that brisk was “less than 5 seconds”.
From her later answers before the coroner it appears she meant
“brisk” was less than three seconds (page 34, line 15).
told us that the capillary refill rate was brisk and that it was less than 5
seconds. Ms Mason made no record of the capillary
refill rate. As submitted by
the Commission it would have been easy for her to record “CRR<3”
meaning a refill rate
of less than three seconds.
In using the word brisk in her statement and in her answers to us Ms Mason
said she was following the practice of using descriptive
terms rather than
objective measures. That Ms Mason could not provide us with a measure of time
for what she called a “brisk”
rate is demonstration of the weakness
in using descriptive rather than objective terms – the objective measure
is lost to the
imprecise descriptive.
A capillary refill rate of between two and four seconds or greater than four
seconds suggests a triage categorisation of 2 or 1, (see
physiological discriminators (PPD),
Exhibit 3, Tab 47). The Commission does
not complain that Ms Mason’s triage assessment of category 3 was wrong and
have been category 2 or category 1. That being so and on the
information available to us we do not consider this issue.
Particular 1f – documented the child had “wet nappies”
which was not an objective assessment for hydration
The reference to “wet nappies” is in the “
Presenting Information
” section of the Emergency Documentation
(Exhibit 4, Tab 70, page 2). As explained above Ms Mason said it was a record of
she was told by the mother rather than Ms Mason’s observation at the
Ms Mason said the Emergency Documentation she was completing did not require
a comment on hydration. Ms Mason did weigh the child,
presumably without a
nappy, and Ms Mason could have assessed that nappy. We have no record of her
doing so. Had Ms Mason made an
entry of “wet nappies” from her own
observation then that would have been an inadequate entry. It would have been a
generic description instead of being specific as to how wet, or how
heavy, at what frequency, or in relation to fluid intake and
It may well have been useful and desirable for Ms Mason to ask questions
she did not see any
signs of dehydration and the child was about to be breastfed. She did not see it
as necessary to make those enquiries
in order to make her triage assessment.
The Complaint is not making an inadequate hydration assessment. The Complaint
is of the use of the term “wet nappies”.
We conclude that
Ms Mason did not use that term as a record of her observation, but instead as
a record of what was reported to her.
Particular 1g – documented that the patient had “shaky
limbs” without further and sufficient clinical details of
child’s presentation including whether the child appeared to have rigors,
was shivering or displaying other abnormal limb
As with the reference to wet nappies, Ms Mason says that what she was
documenting was not her own observation but rather the report
of the mother.
The mother said in her statement (Exhibit 3, Tab 7, page 2) that the child
had started to shake again as she was speaking to the NUM.
This was shortly
before she went to the emergency department with her son who was then triaged by
The mother stated that during the triage Ms Mason had difficulty with the
first temperature reading and said she would take another.
The mother says she
thought the difficulty in taking the temperature was that there was a spike and
the temperature was still rising,
and the mother connected the temperature spike
with the rigors. It is unclear whether her mention of rigors is a reference to
rigors observed by the NUM a few moments beforehand or that rigors were
present with Ms Mason.
Ms Mason denies seeing any evidence of rigors. She said that while observing
the boy she did not see any of signs of shaky limbs.
She did not ask the mother
mother, which she recorded.
On the evidence available we have come to the
conclusion that while there were shaky limbs or rigors seen by the NUM, which
the visit to the emergency department Ms Mason did not observe shaky
limbs or rigors.
The criticism of failing to follow up with further observations is made on
the basis that Ms Mason had observed the shaky limbs. As
we have earlier
concluded, Ms Mason did not observe shaky limbs.
Particular 1h – fail to investigate and communicate whether the
child should be considered for or commenced on the NSW Health
Ms Mason says it was not part of her task to investigate that question, but
instead to make the triage assessment and then complete
the handover. As set out
above she says she recorded all the abnormal observations that she
made, and completed the triage assessment. She said she gave an appropriate
handover to the In-Charge RN and also to the doctor on
shift both in ISBAR form
(Introduction, Situation, Background, Assessment, Recommendation), and in doing
so was a satisfactory communication
of the child’s condition at that time.
No complaint is made about her handover. It is unclear what, in addition would
been required by the Sepsis Pathway.
Ms Mason said that at the time, the NSW Health Sepsis Pathway had not been
established within the emergency department. There was
no evidence before the
coroner to conclude the policy was mandatory even though it was “a highly
and widely endorsed document”
(Exhibit D, Tab 71, paragraph 74) Ms
Middleton commented that from her review of the materials there was no clear
policy or guideline
within the emergency department around sepsis (Exhibit 3,
Tab 45, page 9).
Ms Middleton also noted that there may have been some disconnect on this
point between the understanding and practices at the local
level and the
position as reported by Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health District. In those
circumstances she was not critical of
Ms Mason’s position even though she
was critical of the disconnect.
As best as we can assess from the materials a sepsis program had been
introduced in the hospital along with the “Between the
Flags” (BTF)
program. The coroner concluded The BTF was in a transient phase of introduction
in the emergency department, but
we do not conclude that it was then in
operation. Had it been in operation it would document a patient’s vital
signs in various
“zones” which would then subsequently trigger a
clinical response.
The response type would vary according to the clinical condition of the
patient and warrant a medical review with varying degrees
of urgency. However,
this trigger and response system was not in use at the triage stage at this
time, which may have had an impact
on the urgency of the triage category
applied. She did communicate with the treating medical practitioner which was
the procedure
in place at the time (Exhibit A, Tab 1, paragraph 32) – her
task was triage and the Sepsis Pathway procedures, to the extent
something more
was required, were not then in place in the emergency department.
Was the conduct unsatisfactory professional conduct?
In considering this issue we were greatly assisted by written submissions
prepared overnight by Mr Shah and Ms Doust and the discussion
in identifying
aspects of the evidence and the evaluation of Ms Mason’s conduct.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct includes:
conduct that demonstrates the knowledge skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
Section 139B(1)(a) of the National
As is apparent from our consideration of the particulars, there were
weaknesses in Ms Mason’s conduct:
he observations she made she only recorded those that were abnormal –
as was the practice;
he did not measure the child’s respiratory rate, or attempt to measure
it by any means even allowing that the child was crying
much of the time;
he did not document that she made no attempt to measure the respiratory
hough she made an assessment of respiratory distress she did not make an
entry in the “Vital Signs” section of the notes
or anywhere else
– there was space to record something in the
Triage Presentation
Information
section to do so.
he assessed hydration as satisfactory but made no note of it – again
because it was not the practice to do so;
he did not record the capillary refill rate, because, she says, it was not an
abnormal rate;
iven that the mother had mentioned wet nappies Ms Mason could have taken the
opportunity to confirm that assessment when the nappy
was removed for weighing
t would have been useful for her to ask a question about the mother’s
report of shaky limbs; and
he saw her role as limited to making the triage assessment only and in the
context of then handing over to others for a more thorough
assessment.
In responding to our questions Ms Mason presented as taking a somewhat rigid
approach to her work in that she was diligent in following
routine and usual
procedures within the department but with little reflection on whether those
procedures, such as not recording
normal observations, were best practice.
This was demonstrated by her responses when questioned about the heart rate
of 173 beats per minute. Although not a particular of
the Complaint she was
questioned about her knowledge of the Between The Flags (BTF) processes that
were then being implemented throughout
the hospital. She was aware that they
were operating within the wards but said it had not been “rolled
out” in the emergency
department. A peripheral pulse rate of 173 BPM on an
18 month old child would be a red flag.
Though Ms Mason knew that the heart rate was high she made no inquiry or
asked any question about whether what she had recorded was
a red flag.
She did not do so as that was something that was not in place in the
emergency department. She also said there were too many measures and
variables within the Between The Flags document for her to remember
without making a special trip to the wards to look at the document and that was
not part of her task when triaging within
the emergency department.
Although a senior practitioner she readily accepted and followed the general
but informal policy of recording only abnormal observations
even though she knew
that meant that the clinical records were not as good as they could be, and
might not be helpful to practitioners
who were not schooled in the informal
Ms Mason’s conduct is to be assessed in the context of the practice of
the profession at the time, being that of an experienced
and well trained triage
nurse in an established and typically busy emergency department of a local
public hospital, undertaking triage.
As discussed above there were aspects of
her conduct that could be said to be inadequate.
No unsatisfactory professional conduct
The issue is whether her conduct fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected. The task she was undertaking was one of
triage within a
period of three to five minutes - she was to assess the patient, pay attention
to reasons for presentation, undertake
the standard observations if possible,
allocate a triage assessment and hand over the patient. Ms Mason reached an
appropriate triage
and effected a satisfactory handover. In that sense her
conduct was reasonable given the task she was undertaking, and within the
of what might be expected, even if not as good as it could have been.
The care exercised at the triage assessment, though weak in some aspects was
not significantly below the standard expected from a
triage nurse. This is so
particularly given that some of the weaknesses in her practice were in part
consequences of the method within
the emergency department of recording only
abnormal results. Record keeping was to some extent hampered by a system at the
stage that had no allocated location for entering general observations
other than in the
Triage Presenting Information
While it is not good practice to simply follow procedures, in the context of
a triage assessment it was not significantly below the
standard reasonably
expected for Ms Mason to follow the then current practice in a department where
that was the methodology, and
she did immediately liaise with the in- charge RN
and the medical officer at handover. Given this context
Ms Middleton did not consider her conduct to have fallen significantly below
the expected standard (Exhibit A, Tab 45, page 5).
Ms Mason did fail to assess the respiratory rate. In our view she should have
unless unable to do so within the triage. Ms Middleton
says that respiratory
rate should be assessed or a reason given if it could not be done (Exhibit A,
Tab 45, page 6). Ms Mason says
the child’s crying and the mother’s
desire to breastfeed led her not to make the attempt. In our view, that is a
explanation for not doing so. She should have made a note, but there
was no location on the form for her to record those reasons.
Ms Mason says it
apparent from the absence of a note in the Vital Signs section of the
clinical notes that she had not assessed the respiratory rate.
Ms Middleton concluded that Ms Mason “provided a succinct triage with
some key information about [the child’s] presenting
symptoms”, though more data could have been included and her documentation
better. On this aspect Ms Middleton was
of the view her conduct did not fall
significantly below the standard expected (Exhibit C, Tab 45, page 10).
Although Ms Mason did not specifically investigate and communicate whether
the child should be considered for or commenced under the
NSW Health Sepsis
Pathway, given her handover to the treating medical practitioner we do not
conclude that her failure to do so amounted
to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Ms Middleton said her failure did not fall significantly below given
her rapid assessment
and handover to the medical staff for review and assessment
(Exhibit A, Tab 45, page 8).
Evaluating her conduct in its parts and overall we have not concluded that
her conduct fell significantly below the standard reasonable
expected given her
level of training and experience. The Complaint has not been proved. On that
basis we do not consider any protective
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
We provide a copy of this written statement of our decision to:
s Pamela Mary Mason,
he Health Care Complaints Commission,
he National Board, and
he parents of the boy.
Chairperson
Date: 17 January 2020
tMsigsstsst2acsa
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (78.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter