URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2001/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boon v Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd [2001] NSWFTT 1 (31 January 2001)
Boon -v- Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWFTT 1
(31 January 2001)
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL NSW
Boon on behalf of Weir (senior)
Respondent:
Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd
File number:
CM 2000/1464
Hearing dates:
13 November 2000
Submissions closed
: 13 November 2000
Date of Decision:
31 January 2001
Gabriel Fleming, Senior Member
Primary Legislation:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Act
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998
Application:
Application to reopen and vary the contract between the parties pursuant to
Section 70 of the Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code.
Matter for Decision:
Transfer of proceedings to the Supreme Court.
REPRESENTATION
Paul Batley and Fiona McMullin, Solicitors, Legal Aid Commission.
Respondent:
Peter Russell, Barrister, instructed by Michael Boyce, Solicitor.
1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction in this matter.
2. The Application to transfer the matter to the Supreme Court is
The matter is listed for
further directions by telephone at 9.30 am on Monday 12 February
Reasons for Decision:
THE APPLICATION
1 On 14 February 2000 Ms Boon (‘the Applicant’) lodged
an application in the Commercial Division of the Fair Trading Tribunal
(‘the Tribunal’) against Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd (‘the
Respondent’). Ms Boon lodged the application
on behalf of her father Mr
Weir senior, who is elderly and living in a nursing home. At the time of
lodgement she held his power
of attorney and she has since been appointed as the
private manager of his estate by the Guardianship Tribunal of NSW. This
appointment,
dated 30 October 2000, specifically authorises her to act on her
father’s behalf in these proceedings.
2 The Respondent is a company (ACN 010 286 674). Mr Boyce, is a
Director of the Respondent and Principal of Boyce Lawyers who act
Respondent in these proceedings.
3 This application seeks relief under the Consumer Credit (NSW)
Act 1995 and the Consumer Credit(New South Wales) Code. The application
Weir (Snr) was under duress from his son Mr Weir (Jnr) at the time he signed an
interest-only loan at very high interest
and agreeing to pay the costs of the
lender’s solicitors in the matter. Mr Weir gained nothing from the
mortgage but stands
to lose his house, his only asset. Mr Weir (Jnr ) has now
defaulted on the loan. Mr Weir (Snr) did not want to sign the loan but
because he was dependent upon his son (he is now in a nursing home) and fearful
of his son. The loan is unconscionable and
unjust as against Mr Weir
4 The Applicant sought orders staying any enforcement proceedings,
reopening the contract and varying the contract to bind ‘only
junior, and releasing Mr Weir senior’. The Applicant also sought costs
against the Respondent.
5 The Respondent filed an application to dismiss the claim on the
basis that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction. Evidence and submissions
issue of jurisdiction were received in writing and at a hearing held in Coffs
Harbour on 13 November 2000.
6 The Respondent has also made an application to the Tribunal that
this matter be transferred to the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Applicant opposes that application.
7 This decision concerns both the issue of jurisdiction and the
transfer of proceedings to the Supreme Court.
Relevant Law
8 The Consumer Credit (NSW) Act 1995 (‘the Act’)
confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal in relation to matters under the
Credit (New South Wales) Code (‘the Code’). The Code commenced
operation in NSW on 1 November 1996.
9 The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is found in Section 8 of the
Act which provides as follows:
“8 Conferral of
judicial functions
(1) The jurisdiction that is expressed to be exercisable by "the
Court" under the Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code and the Consumer
(New South Wales) Regulations is exercisable by the following:
(a) in the case of any jurisdiction prescribed by the regulations
for the purposes of this paragraph only the Commercial Tribunal,
[to be read as
the Fair Trading Tribunal from 1 March 1999 in accordance
(b) with the Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998 Schedule 4, section
(c) except in the case referred to in paragraph (a) either the Fair
Trading Tribunal or any court.
(d) (Repealed)
(2) The jurisdiction conferred on a court by this section (other
than the Fair Trading Tribunal) is subject to the court's general
limits (so far as they relate to the amounts, or the value of property, with
which the court may deal), but is not
subject to the court's other
10 The Fair Trading Tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under section 69, 83(1), 89, 100-104 or 162 of the
(Consumer Credit (NSW) Special Provisions Regulation 1996). In all other matters
the Tribunal has concurrent jurisdiction with
ordinary courts.
11 The Code forms an Appendix to the
Consumer Credit (Queensland)
and is incorporated into New South Wales law by section 5 of the
Consumer Credit (NSW) Act 1995. It represents uniform legislation
that applies
to all consumer credit lending, without monetary limit, throughout Australia.
The Code deals comprehensively with all
aspects of consumer lending, from
pre-contractual disclosures to the form of credit documentation, changing and
enforcing credit
contracts, civil penalties, related insurance contracts and
remedies for non-compliance. The Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulation
1995 (‘the Regulations’) similarly reflect uniform regulation
throughout Australia.
12 Section 4 of the Code defines ‘credit’ as
For the purposes of this Code, "credit" is provided if under a
(a) payment of a debt owed by one person (the debtor) to another
(the credit provider) is deferred; or
(b) one person (the debtor) incurs a deferred debt to another (the
credit provider).”
13 Section 5 of the Code states that “for the purposes of
this Code, a "credit contract" is a contract under which credit is
provided, being the provision of credit to which this Code
14 Section 6 of the Code details the credit contracts to which the
Code applies, as follows:
“Provision of credit to
which this Code applies
6. (1) This Code applies to the provision of credit (and to the
credit contract and related matters) if when the credit contract is
entered into
or (in the case of pre-contractual obligations) is proposed to be entered
(a) the debtor is a natural person ordinarily resident in this
(b) the credit is provided or intended to be provided wholly or
predominantly for personal, domestic or household purposes; and
(c) a charge is or may be made for providing the credit;
(d) the credit provider provides the credit in the course of a
business of providing credit or as part of or incidentally to any other
of the credit provider.
(4) For the purposes of this section, investment by the debtor is
not a personal, domestic or household purpose.”
15 Section 11 sets out the presumptions in favour of application
of the Code to all consumer credit transactions. It provides as
“Section 11 Presumptions relating to
application of Code
8 (1) In any proceedings (whether brought under this Code or not) in
which a party claims that a credit contract, mortgage or guarantee
which this Code applies, it is presumed to be such unless the contrary is
established.
(2) Credit is presumed conclusively for the purposes of this Code
not to be provided wholly or predominantly for personal, domestic
or household
purposes if the debtor declares, before entering into the credit contract, that
the credit is to be applied wholly or
predominantly for business or investment
purposes (or for both purposes).
(3) However, such a declaration is ineffective for the purposes of
this section if the credit provider (or any other person who obtained
declaration from the debtor) knew, or had reason to believe, at the time the
declaration was made that the credit was in fact
to be applied wholly or
predominantly for personal, domestic or household purposes.
(4) A declaration under this section is to be substantially in the
form (if any) required by the regulations and is ineffective for
the purposes of
this section if it is not.”
16 Regulation 10 prescribes the form of the Section 11
Declaration. It provides that the declaration is to contain, immediately below
the words “I/We declare that the credit to be provided to me/us by the
credit provider is to be applied wholly or predominantly
for business or
investment purposes (or for both purposes)” a warning in the form as set
out in a box marked:
sign this declaration unless this loan is
wholly or predominantly for business or investment purposes.
By signing this Declaration you may
your protection
under the Consumer Credit Code.
17 Schedule 2 of the Code contains ‘Miscellaneous Provisions
Relating to Interpretation’. Clause 7 of Schedule 2 provides
interpreting “a provision of this Code, the interpretation that will best
achieve the purpose or object of this Code
is to be preferred to any other
interpretation”.
Evidence Relevant To
18 Mr Weir senior, and his son Mr Weir junior entered into a loan
contract and related mortgage with Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd
in September
1997. On or around December 1998/January 1999 the mortgage was varied and the
loan extended until September 1999. The
circumstances surrounding these
transactions form the facts relevant to this dispute. The jurisdictional issue
before the Tribunal
concerns whether these transactions are subject to the
Consumer Credit Code. The relevant facts are set out in more detail
19 Mr Weir senior was born 15 December 1915 and has lived in
Bridge Street Lawrence, NSW for most of his adult life. From about 1980
early 1999 his son Mr Weir junior lived with him. On 14 April 1999 Mr Weir,
senior, was admitted to the Mareeba Nursing Home
in Maclean and he has remained
living there ever since, with occasional in-patient periods in Maclean hospital.
His son Mr Weir junior
continued to reside in his father’s home in
1996 Mortgage
20 On 24 June 1996 Mr Weir senior and Mr Weir junior executed a
mortgage over two properties, namely, Mr Weir senior’s home
Street, Lawrence, and two parcels of land owned by Mr Weir junior in Rutland
Street and March Street, (and Tenterfield)
Lawrence. The mortgagee was Hector
John Mackinnon, the principal sum $60,000, the term 12 months and the interest
rate 17.5% per
annum reducing to 12.5% per annum ‘for prompt
21 On 7 July 1997 Property Investment Concepts Pty Ltd, acting as
a finance broker, wrote to the Respondent enclosing an application
term finance for ‘Mr Weir, of Bridge St, Lawrence’. The evidence
before the Tribunal is that this application
was initiated by Mr Weir junior,
although the letter to the Respondent does not identify whether the applicant
was Mr Weir junior
or senior. The letter contains details of the loan required
and the words “General Mr Weir currently operates his property
cattle stud. He currently has a business loan with Elliott and Harvey. He wishes
to pay them out ($60,000) and purchase
some additional stock.” The
properties were variously described as ‘housing block, 1st grazing
property and 2nd grazing
property. The use of the funds was stated as ‘pay
out Mortgagee $60,000, purchase stock $10,000-$15000 and Fees and
22 The Respondent obtained Valuations in relation to the
properties. These indicate that the block in Bridge St, belonging to Mr Weir
senior, is the housing block made up of only his home and vacant land.
23 On 2 October 1997 the mortgage to Mackinnon was discharged
following arrangements for re-financing as set out below.
11 Credit Code Declaration
24 On 31 July 1997 Mr Weir senior executed a declaration pursuant
to section 11 of the Code. This declaration is as follows:
“I/We, [Mr] Weir (senior) of Bridge Street,
Lawrence in the State of New South Wales, do hereby solemnly and sincerely
as follows:-
1. I/We am/are the Registered Proprietors or am entitled to be the
registered proprietors of property situated at Bridge Street,
2. I/We declare that the credit to be provided to me by the Credit
Provider Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd is to be applied wholly or
predominantly
for business or investment purposes (or for both purposes).
3. I/We declare that this Declaration was executed prior to me/us
entering into the Mortgage and associated documents.”
sign this declaration unless this loan is
wholly or predominantly for business or investment purposes.
By signing this Declaration you may
your protection
under the Consumer Credit Code.
25 The Declaration is not exactly in the form prescribed in
Regulation 10 because the declaration itself is followed by “I/We
that this Declaration was executed prior to me/us entering into the Mortgage and
associated documents” and the warning
IMPORTANT box then follows. The
issue is whether the warning is ‘immediately below’ the declaration.
26 Mr Weir senior’s signature then appears at the bottom of
the form which is witnessed by Karen Brennan JP and dated 31 July
Preparation
of 1997 Mortgage and Loan Documentation
27 Mr Weir senior and Mr Weir junior travelled to Grafton to meet
with their solicitor Mr Gallagher, on 10 September 1997 and they
documentation relevant to the loan and mortgage.
28 Mr Gallagher told the Tribunal that Mr Weir and his son were
known to him prior to 1996 but that he could not recall exactly how.
prepared loan documentation in 1999 for refinancing of the loan (discussed
below). He stated that “ . . . On both occasions
[of their attendance at
his office] [Mr] Weir (senior) confirmed to me that he understood the nature and
effect of these documents
and the transactions involved”. He told the
Tribunal that he understood Mr Weir senior was assisting his son in ‘some
cattle enterprise”.
29 On 24 September 1997 Park Avenue Nominees advanced $75,000 to
Mr Weir senior and Mr Weir junior. The loan was an interest only
period of 12 months and was secured by three registered mortgages, one of which
is a registered mortgage over Mr Weir
senior’s home at Bridge Street,
Lawrence. Mr Weir junior’s two parcels of land were also security for the
loan. The mortgagee
was Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd (the Respondent), the
principal sum $75,000, the term 12 months and the interest rate 17% per annum
reducing to 12% per annum ‘for prompt payment’.
Refinancing
30 On 17 December 1998 Boyce and Associates wrote to Mr Weir
senior and junior advising that Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd were prepared
extend/vary the loan of $75000 previously advanced. A variation of mortgage and
associated documents were attached to this letter
with the instruction that the
Weirs should attend a solicitor for the documents to be explained and completed.
The Weirs attended
upon Mr Gallagher in January 1999 and the documents, in
similar terms to those set out above in relation to the original loan, were
31 A second Consumer Credit Code, Section 11, declaration was
signed by Mr Weir senior on 15 January 1999. This was witnessed by Mr
32 The Variation of Mortgage document is dated 27 January 1999.
Weir junior
33 Mr Weir junior gave oral evidence to the Tribunal hearing on 13
November 2000. He is currently unemployed and is living in his
fathers home in
Bridge St, Lawrence. He told the Tribunal that he had lived with and cared for
his father, with assistance from various
community services, until his fathers
admission to hospital in February 1999.
34 Mr Weir junior told the Tribunal that he initially borrowed
from Mackinnon in Queensland, in order to finance the purchase of his
was unable to make sufficient repayments on this first loan and he had been
visited by a Sheriff who warned him of the likelihood
of foreclosure. He said
that when he was unable to repay the loan he spoke to the ‘people in
Queensland’ and they sent
‘through some paperwork’ about
refinancing the loan.
35 Mr Weir junior told the Tribunal that he had arranged for his
father to go with him to see Mr Gallagher to ‘sign the papers’
the loans in 1997 and 1999. He said that Mr Gallagher did not read the documents
to him. He said he is able to read but his father
36 Mr Weir junior told the Tribunal that he ‘talked [his]
father into helping’ him with the loan by telling him he was
going to lose
his farm. He said his father ‘did not want to do it’ but that he was
‘harping at him for a couple
of weeks’ and then he agreed. He
promised his father that he would pay back the loans and that ‘nothing
would happen’.
He said that each year as the loans came to an end he was
unable to repay them and just ‘kept borrowing money every year until
finally [he] couldn’t do it any more’. His father knew that he had
brought a farm and knew ‘about the ‘cattle
SUBMISSIONS
ON JURISDICTION
Respondent’s Submissions
37 The Respondent has submitted that the Section 11(4) Credit Code
declarations signed by Mr Weir senior, comply with the requirements
of the Code
in both substance and form. The Respondent claims that in . . . “making
those declarations on 31 July 1997 and
15 January 1999 pursuant to s11 of the
Code and s10 of the Regulations, the credit provided to Mr Weir (senior) is
presumed conclusively,
for the purposes of the Code not to be provided wholly or
predominantly for personal, domestic or household purposes. Accordingly,
provisions of the Code do not apply and the Fair Trading Tribunal has no
38 The Respondent submitted that the form of the Code declarations
substantially comply with the requirements of the code and that
this is all that
is required. The Respondent submitted that the position of the word
‘IMPORTANT’ following paragraph
3 in the declaration, while not in
strict compliance with the Regulations, does not in any way lessen the impact of
the notice. Ultimately,
submits the Respondent, the notice complies with the
statutory requirements.
39 The Respondent submitted that were the Tribunal to find that
the section 11 declaration were invalid, then the ‘real purpose’
the loan was in any event clear and known to the lender as for
‘business’ including the purchase of stock for a grazing
The loan was essentially for investment in the farming venture of the Weirs,
father and son. The Respondent argued that
section 11 of the Code imposes no
duty on the Lender to make inquiries of the borrower. In this matter Mr Weir
junior dealt with
the Respondent with the assistance of a broker. The loan
application of July 1997 included a valuation of livestock of $50000 which
reasonably indicated that Mr Weir junior had a working farm.
Applicant’s
Submission on Jurisdiction
40 The Applicant submitted that the legislature did not intend
that a Section 11 Code declaration would effectively be a tool to oust
submitted, is to protect borrowers, not lenders,
and to assist in the
determination of whether matters are regulated by the Code where there is some
doubt. The presumption in the
Code is in favour of its application and the
circumstances in which this may be rebutted should be narrowly
41 The Applicant submits that the Section 11 Declaration fails to
comply with the requirements of Regulation 10 in that the
‘IMPORTANT”
notice is not immediately below the words referred to in
Regulation10(1) of the Regulations. The Applicant argues that the requirement
that the warning be ‘immediately below’ the specified words of the
declaration is a mandatory requirement, not capable
of partial compliance. Thus
the issue of substantial compliance is not possible and ‘failure to comply
with this requirement
42 The Applicant submits that the reason for such a strict
requirement is founded in the severity of the consequences to the borrower
depriving him of the substantial consumer protection of the Credit Code. The
words of the IMPORTANT warning, argues the Applicant
reinforce the declaration
and therefore must appear ‘immediately beneath’ it. The Applicant
further submits that a ‘decision
to declare the Declarations ineffective
will not deprive the Respondent of any rights in relation to any arguments it
that may provide a defence to the Applicant’s
43 The Applicant also submitted that the Respondent ‘could
or should have know that the credit was in fact to be applied wholly
substantially for domestic purposes, within the meaning of s11(4) Credit
Code’. The Applicant claims the evidence shows
‘that Mr Weir senior
did not know what he was signing or why, if indeed it was he who signed the
declarations’. To support
this claim the Applicant points to the Mr
Weir’s reported state of health as evidenced by his medical records and
the affidavit
of Ms Boon (his daughter), his age, the evidence of Mr Weir junior
and the implausibility that Mr Weir senior was entering into a
business or
investment. The Applicant points to the totality of the circumstances
surrounding these transactions and submits that
it could at no time be said that
Mr Weir senior had a business purpose in relation to the credit borrowed from
the Respondent.
44 The Applicant argued that it was clear to the Respondent that
Mr Weir Seniors property was not farming land but merely his home.
have been clear that the involvement of Mr Weir senior was principally to
provide security for the loan to Mr Weir junior
and that Mr Weir senior derived
no benefit and that his only role was in relation to repayment of the loan.
These, and the ongoing
circumstances of the pattern of refinancing larger loans
to Mr Weir senior should have put the Respondent on notice to, at least,
additional steps to ensure that Mr Weir senior’s purpose in borrowing was
truly business or investment. The Applicant
argues that the circumstances should
have put the Respondent on notice that independent and separate legal advise
should be obtained
for Mr Weir senior and junior.
45 The Applicant does not dispute that Mr Weir junior had a
business purpose in obtaining credit. However the Applicant argues that
dominant purpose was refinancing of existing loans, not business or investment.
AND REASONS ON JURISDICTION
Section 11 Declaration
46 The Consumer Credit Code applies to credit which is provided
‘predominantly for personal, domestic or household purposes’.
Applicant claims the benefit of the presumption that the Code applies to the
transaction and it is for the Respondent to rebut
this presumption (section 11
47 Section 11(2) of the Code provides a mechanism for the
conclusive rebuttal of the presumption that credit is provided for
domestic or household purposes’. This mechanism is the
completion of a declaration made substantially in the form set out in
Regulations. Importantly, the procedure set out in section 11 enables a credit
provider to establish that a transaction is not
for a purpose to which the Code
48 The Respondent has submitted that the purpose of the loan was
for the financing of Mr Weir senior and junior’s joint farming
The Respondent has obtained and relies upon a declaration pursuant to section 11
which, if effective, will exclude the
application of the Code.
49 I am not satisfied that the declaration executed by Mr Weir
senior is effective.
50 Section 11 requires that the Declaration be
‘substantially in the form required by the Regulations’. Schedule 2,
11 further provides that where a form is prescribed under the Code
‘strict compliance with the form is not necessary and substantial
compliance is sufficient’.
51 Section 11 and Regulation 10 set out the form in which a
declaration as to the purpose for which the credit is to be provided is
effected. They specify the words to be used and their placing in relation to
each other. Regulation 10 requires that the boxed
‘IMPORTANT’
warning is to be placed ‘immediately below’ the words of the
declaration.
52 It is necessary to reconcile the relevant legislative directive
as to ‘substantial compliance’ with the specific provision
warning on the section 11 declaration is to appear ‘immediately
below’ the declaration itself. Schedule 2 of
the Code assists in
interpretation of the Code and provides that ‘an interpretation which
promotes the purpose of object of
the Code is to be
preferred’.
53 The term ‘substantial compliance’ has also been the
subject of much judicial consideration. Justice Sheppard gave a
summary of the relevant cases in the matter of Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v
Comcorp Australia Ltd & ors [1996]
848 FCA 1 (24 September 1996), as
“Expressions
such as "substantial compliance" are ordinary English expressions and ought to
be given their ordinary meaning.
Nevertheless, the expression has a history and
a significance in relation to problems relating to statutory construction where
question arises whether a provision of an Act, apparently mandatory in its
terms, is in fact mandatory or directory.
The conventional distinction drawn has been to describe statutes
which require strict compliance as mandatory and those which do not
directory. This approach has been criticised. I refer, for example, to the
decision of the Court of Appeal of
New South Wales in Tasker v Fullwood
[1978] 1 NSWLR 20
(at 24) where the Court said that the only true guide to
the statutory intention is to be found in the language of the relevant provision
and the scope and object of the whole statute. The court said that it can be
misleading if one substitutes for the question thus
posed an investigation as to
whether the statute is mandatory or directory in its terms.
is an invitation to error, not only because the true inquiry will thereby be
side tracked, but also because these descriptions
have been used with varying
significations."
The Court's remarks were followed in
TVW Enterprises Limited v Duffy
[1985] FCA 382
(1985) 62 ALR 63.
See also Statutory Interpretation in Australia, D.C. Pearce,
4th Ed (1996) at 284. A number of the authorities dealing with this
question use
the expression "substantial compliance".
. . . Stephen J in
Victoria v The Commonwealth
[1975] HCA 39
said (at 179)] . . . . emphasises the importance of considering whether
what has been done gives effect to the general object of
the legislation. If it
does not, there will not be substantial compliance.”
54 The meaning and interpretation to be given to
‘substantial compliance’ was considered by the High Court in Project
Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(28April 1998). In a
joint judgement, JJ Mchugh, Gummow, Kirby and Lehane High Court stated that:
“In our opinion, the Court of Appeal of New South
Wales was correct in
Tasker v Fullwood
[1978] 1 NSWLR 20
in criticising
the continued use of the "elusive distinction between directory and mandatory
requirements"[at 23-24] and the division
of directory acts into those which have
substantially complied with a statutory command and those which have not. They
are classifications
that have outlived their usefulness because they deflect
attention from the real issue which is whether an act done in breach of
legislative provision is invalid. The classification of a statutory provision as
mandatory or directory records a result which
has been reached on other grounds.
The classification is the end of the inquiry, not the beginning [
(1986) 7 NSWLR 644
Australian Capital Television
(1989) 86 ALR 119
That being so, a court, determining the validity of an act done in
breach of a statutory provision, may easily focus on the wrong
factors if it
asks itself whether compliance with the provision is mandatory or directory and,
if directory, whether there has been
substantial compliance with the provision.
A better test for determining the issue of validity is to ask whether it was a
of the legislation that an act done in breach of the provision should be
invalid. This has been the preferred approach of courts
in this country in
recent years, particularly in New South Wales. In determining the question of
purpose, regard must be had to "the
language of the relevant provision and the
scope and object of the whole statute.”
55 The purpose and objectives of the Consumer Credit Code are not,
surprisingly, set out formally in the Code itself. The Explanatory
notes to the
Bill state that the purpose is to regulate the provision of credit to
individuals and to promote “truth in lending
which will allow borrowers to
make informed choices when purchasing credit” (Consumer Credit
(Queensland) Bill 1994 Explanatory
Notes). The Code is beneficial consumer
protection legislation. It is uniform across Australia and covers a broad range
transactions. It is directed at regulating the lending relationships
between individual borrowers and financial institutions. To
this end the Code
has incorporated a ‘purpose’ test to distinguish between those
borrowers with commercial interests
(business and investment) and those who are
borrowing for a ‘personal, domestic or household” purpose. Sections
11 of the Code are directed to the issue of ‘purpose’.
56 Sections 6 and 11 of the Code together with the requirements of
Regulation 10 provide a mechanism for a credit provider to clarify
where a loan
is for a business or investment purpose. They are not intended to provide credit
providers with a means for ‘opting
out’ of the consumer protection
requirements of the Code where they would otherwise apply. It is consistent with
and purpose of the Code that an inquiry should be made by the Tribunal
as to whether Declarations sought to be relied upon to exclude
the Code properly
comply with it.
57 The consequences of effecting a Section 11 Declaration are
significant for the borrower. The intention of the legislation in setting
the specific form which a Section 11 Declaration must take is to ensure that
borrowers are clearly aware, and informed of, the
consequences of losing the
protections of the Code. The Regulation sets out the exact form of words which
are to be used and the
placing of those words in relation to each other. In my
view the legislature intended that a Declaration which, as in this case,
inserted other words between the declaration and the ‘warning’
should not be effective. Regulation 10 uses the words
‘immediately
below’ and to give these words there ordinary meaning there must not be
text between the declaration and
the ‘warning’.
58 In summary, I find that the intention of the legislation, when
considered in terms of the language of the relevant provisions and
the scope and
object of the Code, is that unless the words of the warning (IMPORTANT) appear
‘immediately below’ the
words of the Declaration then it is not
effective to exclude the application of the Code.
59 It follows from the above that I find the Section 11
Declaration to be ineffective in rebutting the presumption that the code applies
to the transaction. It remains for the Respondent to rebut this presumption by
evidence which establishes that the purpose of the
transaction was
‘business or investment’ and thus the transaction is unregulated by
60 The words ‘personal, domestic or household’ are not
defined in the Code and are to be determined in accordance with
their ordinary
meaning. In Linkenholt Pty Ltd v Quirk
[2000] VSC 166
(5 May 2000) Justice
Gillard stated that:
“The interpretation of the Code is a question of
law. Hence it is a question of law for the court to decide what is meant by
"personal purposes" in s.6(1)(b) of the Code. However, having construed the
provision it is a question of fact whether at the time
when the credit contract
was entered into, the credit was provided or intended to be provided for
personal purposes?”
61 This phrase ‘personal, domestic or household’ has a
counterpart in section 52 of the Trade Practices Act (Cth) in relation
‘goods and services’ and it is well understood in that context (see
State Bank v Sullivan
[1999] NSWSC 596
(14 July 1999). The words should be given
their ordinary meaning.
62 The Code is unclear as to whether the relevant
‘purpose’ is that of the debtors actual purpose in obtaining the
or the purpose to which the credit provider believes the credit will be
put.(For a discussion of this point see A Duggan and E Lanyon
Consumer Credit
Law, Butterworths 1999 at 60). The Tribunal is of the view that it is inquiry
and determination of Mr Weir seniors,
(the debtors) actual purpose in obtaining
the credit at the time the when the credit contract was entered into which is
to the determination of this issue. It is necessary to look at the
‘substance and reality’ (Linkenholt at paragraph 121)
transaction in this matter.
63 The Tribunal notes the words of Justice Gillard in Linkenholt
Pty Ltd v Quirk
[2000] VSC 166
(5 May 2000) where his honour was similarly
called upon to determine the ‘purpose’ of a credit transaction under
my opinion, it is appropriate to consider what the money was used for in order
to determine the purpose of the provision
of the credit. In considering the
question it is important to consider the substance of the transaction in the
context of its performance.”
64 I make the following relevant findings of fact:
Mr Weir senior is the registered owner of the Bridge
Street, Lawrence property, where he resided until 1999. The property is a
residential
at all relevant times was in poor health.
Mr Weir junior is the registered owner of two blocks of land in
Rutland and March Street, Lawrence. At times he has operated this
‘cattle stud’.
In June 1996 Mr Weir junior and senior executed a mortgage and loan
contract over their combined properties. The loan, for $60,000
was not repaid
within the set term of one year.
In July 1997 Mr Weir junior, through a finance broker, approached
Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd in relation to the refinancing of the
loan. The loan and associated registered mortgages over Mr Weir senior and Mr
Weir junior’s three properties were
executed in September 1997. The amount
financed was $75,000.
Mr Weir junior presented the purpose of the loan, to the broker and
subsequently the lender, as the financing of the purchase of stock
improvements to his ‘cattle stud’.
All negotiations for finance to Mr Weir junior and senior were
initiated by Mr Weir junior. Mr Weir senior took no part in developing
son’s cattle stud. He was not held responsible by his son for repayment of
the loan. Mr Weir senior entered into the loan
arrangement in order to assist
The 1997 loan was nor repaid within its term and was refinanced in
January 1999 Mr Weir senior. He moved to a nursing home in February
65 The above facts evidence a pattern of borrowing and failing to
repay while at the same time the amount of the loan increased from
$75,000. I accept that Mr Weir junior may have had an investment purpose when
entering into the loan arrangements in 1996.
He told the Tribunal that he had
tried to operate his property as a cattle stud. It was on the basis of these
arrangements that the
finance broker negotiating refinancing of the loan
presented the application to Park Avenue Nominees Pty Ltd, the Respondent.
in considering what the money was actually used for I have come to the
view that the nature and character of the original loan in
significantly changed by the time of refinancing in 1997 and later in 1999. Mr
Weir junior, on his own account to the Tribunal
stated that he had to keep
borrowing because he could not repay monies already spent..
66 The fact that Mr Weir senior is now in a nursing home and
unable to give evidence personally is unfortunate. However, on considering
evidence before me I am satisfied that Mr Weir senior entered into the
transactions the loan transactions in 1997 and in 1999
solely to support his son
by alleviating his debt. He was, and is, elderly and not in good health. I do
not accept that he was part
of a business or investment venture in relation to
his son’s property. I accept that Mr Weir senior was reluctant to enter
into the loan transactions, was not expected by his son to generate repayments
of the loan and did not derive any benefit from it.
67 There is little evidence as to the extent, if any, to which Mr
Weir junior continued to work his farm as a ‘cattle stud’
relevant period. It is not clear whether Mr Weir junior continued to have a
business purpose in relation to the funds
which he had first borrowed in 1996.
He told the Tribunal that he effectively kept borrowing in order to repay
earlier loans. At
the same time it must be said that Mr Weir junior did not
impress as a completely reliable or truthful witness. He failed to return
Tribunal at the allocated time to resume his evidence because he was trying to
arrange to get a dose of methadone which was
overdue. He said that he had been
recently unwell, and was in treatment for drug dependency. He did not appear
totally oriented and
clear in his evidence. The Applicant has conceded that Mr
Weir junior did have a business purpose in first obtaining the
68 On balance, I am not satisfied that the Respondent has rebutted
the presumption of the application of the Code. The evidence before
me suggests
that the predominant purpose of Mr Weir senior, in the refinancing of the loans,
to the extent that it can be said that
he had one, was to repay his sons debts.
It was not investment in the cattle stud. The evidence suggests that Mr Weir
a similar purpose but was also using the funds to operate his cattle
stud. Had Mr Weir junior and Mr Weir senior both been working
the ‘cattle
stud’ during that period it may be that my conclusion would be different.
In the ordinary course of conducting
a business it might be expected that loans
might be refinanced without changing the nature and character of the transaction
(Linkenholt
Pty Ltd v Quirk
[2000] VSC 166
(5 May 2000)). However I am not
satisfied that this is the case here.
69 In giving the terms ‘personal domestic or
household’ purposes there ordinary meaning I am satisfied that in entering
into a loan contract solely to help his son out of financial difficulty Mr Weir
senior acted within the intended meaning of each
of these words. Such an
interpretation is consistent with the objectives of the Code. I am satisfied
that the loan was predominantly
for a ‘personal, domestic or household
70 Having made the above findings it follows that the Consumer
Credit Code applies to these transactions.
to the Supreme Court
71 Section 23 of the Fair Trading Act 1998 provides for the
transfer of matters to a Court of competent jurisdiction where both parties
consent to that transfer or the Tribunal of its own motion transfers the
proceeding. The Tribunal is of the view that this provision
is relevant where,
for instance, ‘new’ law is being tested or where the determination
of legal issues might affect a
large number of potential claimants. In other
cases, the consent of the parties is a crucial element in the Tribunal’s
consideration
of whether to transfer a matter pursuant to section 23. The
Tribunal also has specific power to refer a question of law to the Supreme
where this is deemed necessary (Section 62).
72 The Respondent submitted that fairness demands that these
proceedings be transferred to the Supreme Court so that the Respondent
forced into a second round of litigation to obtain an order for possession of
the property. Efficiency and fairness suggest
that the matters be dealt with in
the one forum and one set of proceedings.
73 The Applicants oppose the transfer of the proceedings to the
Supreme Court. The Applicant submits that the Tribunal, as the specialised
for the determination of Code matters is the appropriate place for this dispute
to be determined. The Applicant argues that
the Tribunal also has the advantage
of timeliness and less cost.
74 The Applicant has chosen the Tribunal as the forum for
resolving this dispute and does not consent to the transfer of these proceedings
to the Supreme Court. The Tribunal obviously, and intentionally, operates
differently to a court. Proceedings are informal, expeditious
and inexpensive
(Sections 3, 27, Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998). Mr Weir senior is represented
in this action by his daughter who
has an order as his private manager from the
Guardianship Tribunal. They are represented by the Legal Aid Commission and do
to have funds to conduct a lengthy matter in the
75 The legislature has vested both exclusive and concurrent (with
the courts) jurisdiction in the Tribunal under the Code. This allows
Tribunal to develop a high level of expertise in matters under the Code, as was
the case with the Commercial Tribunal of NSW.
This matter is not one of such
complexity nor of effect on such a large number of litigants that it would
warrant transfer to the
Court. It would be expected that in matters under the
Code it is desirable for matters to be heard in a forum which is inexpensive
informal. The Tribunal is such a forum.
76 On balance, the Tribunal is not persuaded that this matter
should be transferred to the Court. To transfer the matter to the Court
basis that the Respondent would be in a more convenient position to pursue an
action for possession of the property is to
pre-empt the outcome of these
proceedings. It would also do so at significantly greater cost to the Applicant.
77 The Tribunal refuses the application to transfer the
proceedings to the Supreme Court.
I order that:
1 The Tribunal has jurisdiction in this matter.
2 The Application to transfer the matter to the Supreme Court is
3 The matter is listed for further directions by telephone on
Monday 12 February at 9.30am.
..............................
Gabriel Fleming
Senior Member
HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE RECORD OF THE REASONS FOR
DECISION OF THE FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL.
REGISTRAR/DEPUTY REGISTRAR
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (139 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter