URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2011/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v LAU [2011] NSWPHT 2 (15 December 2011)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION v VICTORIA LAU
[2011] NSWPHT 2
(15 December 2011)
INQUIRY: into a Complaint against a pharmacist pursuant to
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
, Sections 145D, 165A.
Complainant
: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
: Ms. Victoria LAU
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
Mr. Peter Dwyer (Chairperson)
Mrs. Elizabeth Anderson (Pharmacist
Mr. Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Dr. Sue Liew (Lay
HEARING DATES: 12, 20, 21, 22, 23 September 2011
DECISION DATE: 15 December 2011
Pharmacist—Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct—Professional
Misconduct —Not suitable person to hold registration
Pharmacist—Impairment—Failure to comply with statutory requirements
concerning Restricted Substances; unlawful diversion
of anabolic / androgenic
steroids for purpose of illegal supply; creation of false prescriptions;
providing knowingly false &
misleading information; fraudulent alteration of
document; misappropriation and unlawful self-administration of Restricted
Substances;
Legislation cited
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No. 86a.
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation, 2002
Poisons Act 1966
Health Records
Information Privacy Act 2002.
Cases cited
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630
Bar Association v
[2006] NSWCA 340
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA
HCCC v Pierce
[2010] NSWMT 23
HCCC v Sayegh
HCCC v Larden
[2009] NSWPHT 1
Law Society v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Lucire v HCCC
[2011] NSWCA 99
(1971) 2 NSWLR) 18
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
Kirumba v Walton
NSWCA (40180/90) 4 October
v NSW Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
Ex Parte Tziniolis
Re Medical Practitioners Act
67 SR (NSW) 448.
Bannister v
NSWCA, Unreported, 30 April 1992.
Dawson v Law Society of
[1989] NSWCA 58
[2008] NSWMT (21 October
HCCC v Simring
[2010] NSWMT (29 April 2010)
Law Society of
NSW v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185.
[2010] NSWPHT (22 April 2010)
APPEARANCES:
Ms. S. Beckett of Counsel, instructed by Ms. P. Hook, Solicitor (HCCC), for
the Complainant;
Ms. J. Lonergan of Counsel, instructed by Ms. M. Nicolle & Ms. F.
Parker, Solicitors (Meridian Lawyers), for the Respondent.
Complaint “A” (dated 7 December 2010)
Tribunal finds the complaints of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
as particularised respectively, in Complaints 1
and 2 of Complaint “A”, proved and accordingly, the Respondent is
professional misconduct
Tribunal finds the complaint as particularised in Complaint 3 of the Complaint
“A” proved and accordingly, that the
is not a suitable
person to hold registration as a pharmacist
Complaint “B” (dated 4 August 2011)
Tribunal finds the complaints of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct
as particularised respectively, in complaints 1 and
2 of Complaint “B” proved and accordingly, that the Respondent is
professional misconduct
Tribunal finds the complaint as particularised in complaint 3 of Complaint
“B” proved and accordingly, that the Respondent
is not a suitable
person to hold registration as a pharmacist;
Tribunal finds the complaint of
as particularised in Complaint
4 of Complaint “B” proved and finds accordingly.
Respondent’s registration as a pharmacist is
pursuant to
Section 149C (1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
, (NSW) No. 86a (“the National Law”) to take effect from
the date of these Orders.
to Section 149C (7) of the National Law, an application by the Respondent under
Division 8 of the National Law, for review
of the Order cancelling her
registration, may not be made until a period of eighteen (18) months has elapsed
from the date of these
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
the appropriate review body pursuant to Section 163 (1) (a) of the National Law,
to review any application for review of the Order
cancelling the
Respondent’s registration.
Respondent is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed, or, if agreement
cannot be reached, either party may have the matter
of costs re-listed for
assessment by the Tribunal.
DATE OF ORDERS: 15 December 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Complaints
There were two (2) separate Complaints before the Tribunal for its
inquiry—the first dated 7 December 2010 was as proposed and
Counsel for the parties and as designated in an agreed Chronology of events
relevant to the complaints, described throughout
the Inquiry as
Complaint A
”; and the second complaint dated 4 August 2011
described as “
Complaint B
”. Within Complaints “A”
and “B” the numbered sub-complaints were described accordingly,
the proceedings as “1A, 2A, 3A” and “1B, 2B, 3B and
COMPLAINT “A”
(7 December 2010)
Victoria Jocelyn Wing Yung Lau (“the pharmacist”
being a pharmacist registered under the National Law:
COMPLAINT ONE (1A)
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning of section 139B of the Act in that the
pharmacist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by her in the practice of pharmacy is significantly
standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE (1A):
Between 8 July 2008 and 27 August 2008, the pharmacist was employed as a
pharmacist at the Day’n’Night Pharmacy at Blaxland,
the Michael
Mullins Pharmacy in Orange and the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy.
On 27 August 2008, the practitioner was interviewed by Mr Smith, the
co-proprietor of the Blaxland Day’n’Night Pharmacy
and Mr Stubbs,
the manager of the Blaxland Day’n’Night Pharmacy and the Michael
Mullins Pharmacy, in relation to discrepancies
in anabolic steroids stocks and
dispensing information at the Blaxland Day’n’Night Pharmacy and the
Michael Mullins Pharmacy.
In February and March 2009, the Pharmaceutical Services Branch conducted an
investigation into the possible theft of anabolic steroids
by the pharmacist
from the Day’n’Night Pharmacy at Blaxland, the Michael Mullins
Pharmacy in Orange and the Winmalee
Chemmart Pharmacy.
During an interview with the Pharmaceutical Services Branch on February 6
2009, the pharmacist admitted to the theft of anabolic steroids
Day’n’Night Pharmacy at Blaxland, the Michael Mullins Pharmacy in
Orange and the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy.
At the conclusion of the interview with the Pharmaceutical Services Branch on
6 February 2009 the pharmacist agreed to an Order being
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
restricting her from possessing and
supplying anabolic and androgenic steroidal agents.
On 12 March 2009 an Order was made under
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
restricting the practitioner from possessing and
supplying anabolic and androgenic steroidal agents.
various dates between 8 July 2008 and 27 August 2008, whilst employed as a
pharmacist at the Day’n’Night Pharmacy at
Blaxland the practitioner
removed the anabolic steroids Sustanon Amps 250mg, Decadurabolin and/or
Primotestin Depot 250mg from the
Day’n’Night Pharmacy:
a prescription; and
payment; and
the purpose of supplying the steroids to a third party and/or for personal
various dates between 8 July 2008 and 27 August 2008, whilst employed as a
pharmacist at the Michael Mullins Pharmacy in Orange,
removed the anabolic
steroids Sustanon Amps 250mg and/or Decadurabolin 50mg from the Michael Mullins
a prescription; and
payment; and
the purpose of supplying the steroids to a third party and/or for personal
various dates between 8 July 2008 and 27 August 2008, whilst employed as a
pharmacist at the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy, the practitioner
removed the
anabolic steroids Sustanon Amps 250mg, Decadurabolin and/or Primotestin Depot
250mg from the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy:
a prescription; and
payment; and
the purpose of supplying the steroids to a third party and/or for personal
various dates between 8 July 2008 and 27 August 2008 the pharmacist supplied the
anabolic steroids Sustanon Amps 250mg, Decadurabolin
and/or Primotestin Depot
250mg to a third party without a prescription and/or used the steroids herself
without a prescription.
15 July 2008, whilst employed at Michael Mullins Pharmacy as a pharmacist, the
pharmacist created a false prescription for anabolic
steroids in the name of
Timothy Robinson on the Michael Mullins Pharmacy computer system and dispensed
it, in circumstances where
no such prescription existed.
23 July 2008, whilst employed as a pharmacist at the Blaxland Day’n’
Night Pharmacy, the pharmacist created a false
prescription for anabolic
steroids in the name of in the name of Robert Massey on the Blaxland
Day’n’Night Pharmacy computer
system and dispensed it, in
circumstances where no such prescription existed.
13 August 2008 whilst employed as a pharmacist at the Blaxland
Day’n’ Night Pharmacy, the pharmacist created a false
prescription
for anabolic steroids in the name of Robert Massey on the Blaxland
Day’n’Night Pharmacy computer system
and dispensed it, in
circumstances where no such prescription existed.
12 July 2008 whilst employed as a pharmacist at the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy,
the pharmacist created a false prescription for
anabolic steroids in the name of
Robert Massey on the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy computer system and dispensed
it, in circumstances
where no such prescription existed.
8 July 2008 and 27 August 2008, the pharmacist used deceptive means to obtain
and remove anabolic steroids Sustanon Amps 250mg,
Decadurabolin and/or
Primotestin Depot 250mg from the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy by:
the Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy, and removing steroids from the pharmacy, on days
when the pharmacist was not rostered to
the steroids in a sealed cardboard box and having other employees of the
Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy gift wrap the cardboard
box containing the steroids,
before removing the steroids from the pharmacy.
27 August 2008, whilst being interviewed by her employer in relation to
discrepancies in anabolic steroids stocks and dispensing
information at the
Day’n’Night Pharmacy and the Michael Mullins Pharmacy, the
practitioner denied all knowledge of the
discrepancies, in circumstances where
the practitioner knew that the reason for the discrepancies was that she had
removed anabolic
steroids from the Day’n’Night Pharmacy and the
Michael Mullins Pharmacy without prescriptions and without payment.
22 July 2009, the pharmacist knowingly provided false and/or misleading
information to the Health Care Complaints Commission,
Robert Massey was a fictitious name and that no person by the name of Robert
Massey was known to her; and
the pharmacist’s current employer was aware of the investigation by the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch into the pharmacist’s
conduct and of the
pharmacist’s agreement with the Pharmaceutical Services Branch to an Order
being made under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
restricting the pharmacist from possessing and supplying anabolic and androgenic
steroidal agents.
12. On 22 July 2009, the practitioner knowingly
provided a false document to the Health Care Complaints Commission, being a
of reference from the pharmacist’s employer dated 22 July 2009
that had been fraudulently altered by the pharmacist.
COMPLAINT TWO (2A)
Has been guilty of professional misconduct
within the meaning of section 139E of the Act in that the pharmacist:
(i) has demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by her in the practice of pharmacy is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice
of pharmacy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO (2A)
The Particulars of Complaint Two (2A) are identical to the Particulars for
Complaint One (1A), above.
COMPLAINT THREE (3A)
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a pharmacist.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE (3A)
The Particulars of Complaint Three (3A)
are identical to the Particulars
Complaint One (1A),
COMPLAINT “B”
(4 August 2011)
Victoria Jocelyn Wing Yung Lau
(“the pharmacist”)
being a pharmacist registered under the National Law,
COMPLAINT ONE: 1B
Has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
meaning of section 139B of the National Law in that she has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by her in the practice of pharmacy is significantly
standard reasonably expected of pharmacist of an equivalent level of training or
experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE (1B)
The pharmacist was employed as a registered pharmacist at Manning River
Pharmacy between 7 January 2009 and 5 July 2010.
On 6 June 2010, the pharmacist was admitted by ambulance to the Emergency
Department of Manning Base Hospital following a suspected
overdose. She was
discharged from Manning Base Hospital on 23 June 2010.
On 8 July 2010 the Pharmaceutical Services Branch (PSB) was notified by the
proprietor of Manning River Pharmacy that the pharmacist
had allegedly
misappropriated drugs from the pharmacy in the course of her employment.
Following an interview with PSB officers on
16 July 2010, the pharmacist agreed
to an order being made under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
providing for the complete withdrawal of her authority to possess and
supply all prescribed restricted substances (Schedule 4 Appendix
D drugs) with
effect from 7 October 2010.
approximately two to three occasions during her employment at Manning River
Pharmacy, including in or about December 2009, the
pharmacist diverted a packet
of 42 Xenical capsules from the pharmacy:
payment; and
personal use.
more than one occasion during her employment at Manning River Pharmacy, the
pharmacist diverted temazepam, diazepam and/or Duromine
from the pharmacy:
a prescription;
payment; and
personal use.
5 June 2010, the pharmacist diverted 3 to 4 bottles of Temaze (temazepam) from
the dispensary at Manning River Pharmacy:
a prescription;
payment; and
personal use.
5 June 2010, the pharmacist diverted 3 to 4 bottles of Antenex (diazepam) from
the dispensary at Manning River Pharmacy
a prescription; and
without payment; and
personal use.
On 6 June 2010, on admission to the Emergency Department at Manning Base
Hospital, the pharmacist had the following unlabelled medications
possession:
(i) Reductil
(ii) Temazepam;
(iii) Diazepam;
(iv) Frusemide;
(v) Duromine;
(vi) Xenical
when she did not have permission to remove these
medications from Manning River Pharmacy.
On 16 July 2010, officers of the Pharmaceutical Services Branch interviewed
the pharmacist concerning,
, the allegation that she had
misappropriated bottles of Temaze and Antenex from Manning River Pharmacy on 5
June 2010. In the course
of that interview, the pharmacist:
stated that she had only diverted drugs from Manning River Pharmacy on one
occasion, on 5 June 2010, when she had wanted to
end her life; and/or
denied taking any drugs from Manning River Pharmacy other than the Temaze and
Antenex on 5 June 2010.
COMPLAINT TWO: 2B
Has been guilty of
professional misconduct
within the meaning of
section 139E of the National Law in that she has:
(i) engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of her
registration; and/or
(ii) engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct on a number of occasions
which, when considered together, amount to conduct of
a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of her registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO (2B):
The Particulars for
Complaint Two are identical to the Particulars for
Complaint One (of Complaint “B” ) above.
COMPLAINT THREE: 3B
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a pharmacist.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE (3B):
The particulars for
Complaint Three are identical to the Particulars for
One (of Complaint “B”) above.
COMPLAINT FOUR: 4B
within the meaning of
of the National
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR (4B):
The pharmacist has a mental impairment, disability, condition or disorder which
detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally
affect her capacity to
practise pharmacy, namely depressive disorder; and/or polysubstance abuse;
and/or body dysmorphic syndrome.
Categories of conduct
Complaint “A”
summary, the conduct in Complaint “A” concerns a period in 2008 when
the Respondent was employed as a registered pharmacist
at the Blaxland Day
‘n’ Night Pharmacy (“the Blaxland Pharmacy”), the
Michael Mullins Pharmacy in Orange
(“the Orange Pharmacy”) and the
Winmalee Chemmart Pharmacy (“the Winmalee Pharmacy”).
July and August 2008 whilst the Respondent was employed at the above pharmacies,
the Complaint particularises her removal of and
supply to a third party and/or
for personal use, without a prescription, various quantities of
medications (“steroids”) from each pharmacy and without
payment. Such removal and supply was contrary to the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Act 1996
(“PTG Act”) the relevant parts of which are set
Table of Breaches
reproduced below, provided by the Complainant
without objection by the Respondent, for the assistance of the Tribunal.
Relevant also
to such removal and supply are certain parts of the
& Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
(“PTG Regulation”) about
which there was no disagreement between the parties.
to the removal and supply of the steroids, Complaint “A” also
particularises the Respondent’s creation
of false prescriptions in the
names of persons specified in the particulars of Complaint
Massey and Timothy Robinson. Robert Massey according to the evidence is the name
of the Respondent’s apparently former,
boyfriend or partner and the other
name is fictitious; and there was no evidence before the Tribunal, to the
contrary. The person
known as Robert Massey, becomes relevant also, to the
Respondent’s alleged, later conduct particularised in Complaint
particularised in Complaint “A” relevant to the removal and supply
of steroids as above, are the deceptive means
utilised by the Respondent at the
Winmalee Pharmacy, to obtain and remove specified steroids from that
27 August 2008, when interviewed by her employer about discrepancies in stock of
steroids and dispensing information, at the Blaxland
and Orange pharmacies,
Complaint “A” particularises the Respondent’s denial of any
knowledge about such discrepancies,
when she had removed them without
prescriptions and without payment.
particularised in Complaint “A” is the Respondent’s providing
on 22 July 2009, knowingly false and / or misleading
information to the
Complainant
. that the name “Robert Massey” was fictitious
and no person by that name was known to her; that the Respondent’s
current employer at the Manning River Pharmacy in Taree (“the Manning
Pharmacy”) was aware of the Pharmaceutical
Services Branch, NSW Department
of health (“PSB”) investigation into her conduct above and of her
agreement to an Order
being made pursuant to Section 18AA of the PTG Act
restricting her possession and supplying of, steroidal agents, both anabolic and
androgenic.
Complaint “B”
Essentially,
in the period December 2009 to June 2010 and on the dates particularised in
Complaint “B”, the subject conduct
relates to the Respondent’s
unlawful diversion whilst employed as a registered pharmacist at the Manning
Pharmacy, of a range
of medications—temazepam, diazepam and / or Duromine
[phentermine](Schedule 4, Restricted Substances) without prescription,
payment and for personal use; and of Xenical [orlistat](Schedule 3 medication)
without payment and for personal use.
Additionally,
when admitted to the Emergency Department of the Manning Base Hospital
(“Manning Hospital”) on 6 June 2010,
the Respondent had in her
possession, the unlabelled medications Reductil (sibutramine), temazepam,
diazepam, frusemide, Duromine
(phentermine) and Xenical(orlistat) removed by her
without permission, from the Manning Pharmacy
and diazepam are members of the benzodiazepine group of medications; frusemide
is a diuretic medication; Reductil (sibutramine)
and Xenical (orlistat) are
medications used for weight-reduction.
Complaint also alleges that the Respondent made certain false statements and
denials to PSB officers during an interview with
the Respondent on 16 July 2010.
as defined in Section 5 of the National Law, also forms part of Complaint
the Inquiry commenced, Respondent’s Counsel made formal admissions on her
behalf. A document entitled
Response to the Complaint dated 7 December
(i.e. Complaint “
”) signed by the Respondent and
dated 2 September 2011, was tendered by the Respondent and without objection,
admitted as Item
1 of Respondent’s Exhibit “R-2” in which the
Respondent admitted each of the complaints (1, 2 and 3) and all of
particulars within Complaint ‘A’ but for the allegations that
diversion of the steroids was for her personal use
which was not admitted; and
with respect to Complaint 3 the Respondent admitted only that “...
is currently not fit to hold unconditional registration as a
respect to Complaint “
”, Respondent’s Counsel made
formal admissions on her behalf, admitting each of the complaints numbered 1, 2
each of the particulars thereof; and in respect of complaint 3, the
Respondent admitted only, that
“...she is currently not fit to hold
unconditional registration as a pharmacist.
Accordingly,
but for those particulars alleging the Respondent’s personal use of the
diverted steroids and that she is not a
suitable person to be registered as a
pharmacist, the Respondent admits each of the complaints and that her admitted
conduct relevantly
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct; she also admits that she has an impairment as defined
by Section 5 of the National Law.
Notwithstanding
the Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal must consider the evidence in
order to be satisfied that the complaints
are proved according to the standard
articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
, that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities,
but that having regard to the serious nature of the Complaints and
consequences, the satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony or indirect references
Complainant’s evidence
for some objections by the Respondent—in effect, on the basis of
unreliability or lack of clarity—to some parts (subsequently
not admitted
into evidence) of the two (2) volumes of documents tendered by the Complainant,
these materials were otherwise admitted
without objection, as Exhibits
” respectively, the contents
thereof being listed in an
reproduced, below.
to the particulars of complaints, Exhibit “C-1” included reports of
the investigation conducted by PSB pharmacist
/ officers into the matters the
subject of Complaint “A”; and a transcript of an interview by PSB
officers with the Respondent,
conducted on 6 February 2009; and copies of
dispensing records relevant to the complaints.
“C-1” also includes statements made by the Respondent’s
employers at the Blaxland Pharmacy—pharmacists
Kim Stubbs and Brendan
Smith, and that of Ian Stubbs, Group manager of retail businesses including the
Blaxland and Orange pharmacies;
and relevant to the Winmalee Pharmacy,
statements from each of Phillip Bardsley-Smith, Managing Pharmacist, Derek
Leung, pharmacist
and Linda Byrne, pharmacy assistant;
Correspondence
between the Complainant and the Respondent relevant to Complaint “A”
is also included in Exhibit “C-1”.
peer review
’ report by pharmacist Jennifer Zwart dated 5
December, 2009 was included in Exhibit “C-1” relevant to Complaint
“A”; and another report dated 5 June, 2011 relevant to Complaint
“B” was included as part of Exhibit “C-2”.
Complainant had requested Ms. Zwart to consider various materials and to express
her opinion as to whether the Respondent’s
conduct particularised in
Complaints “A” and “B”, fell below the standard expected
of a pharmacist of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
Also within Exhibit “C-2” are the PSB report of its investigation of
matters relevant to Complaint “B” and
correspondence related to the
Order pursuant to Section 18AA of the PTG Act, applied to the Respondent; and
correspondence between
the Complainant and the Pharmacy Council of New South
Wales (“the Council”).
to Complaint “B” and also included in Exhibit “C-2”are
statements made by the Respondent’s
employer at the Manning
Pharmacy—pharmacist-owner Diep Nguyen and by others employed at the
pharmacy—Sonya Birkefeld
and Kate Nicholson. A statement by a neighbour of
the Respondent, Gavin Pennell, is also included in Exhibit
before the Tribunal within Exhibit “C-2” and relevant to Complaint
“B” are the patient records from the
Manning Hospital with respect
to Respondent’s two admissions thereto; the clinical records of:
Respondent’s father, a
General Medical Practitioner [“GP”]
(for the period, October 1998 to April 2007); GP Dr. Long Phan Nguyen (who
the Respondent at Taree June 2009 to January 2011); Respondent’s
treating psychologist Francis Fagan (Taree); and of Dr. Ian
Fowler, the
Respondent’s treating psychiatrist. Also included are the clinical records
of the practice of GP Dr. Anita Radojcic
(at Blaxland) concerning consultations
with the Respondent during the period, February 2008 to October 2008.
Chronology prepared by the Complainant was (with the exception of some
amendments sought by Respondent’s Counsel) agreed to
by the Respondent and
placed before the Tribunal for its assistance during the Inquiry.
records of the Respondent’s treating psychiatrist Dr. Ian Fowler, were
tendered by the Complainant and admitted without
objection, as Exhibit
” (patient records produced in response to a Summons
dated 1 September 2011) and “
” (patient records produced
in response to a Summons dated 12 September 2011).
of the Westmead Children’s Hospital relevant to the Respondent’s
admission within the period 1998-2000 were tendered
by the Complainant and
admitted without objection, as Exhibit “
” having been
produced in response to a Summons issued by the Tribunal after its Inquiry had
only witness called by the Complainant to give evidence before the Tribunal, was
Dr. Anthony Samuels, a psychiatrist originally
engaged by the Council to assess
the Respondent (Report, 29 June 2011, Exhibit “C-2”, at 31); and who
later provided
a supplementary report at the request of the Complainant (Report
20 August 2011, Exhibit “C-2” at 32).
Complainant’s documentary evidence was not disputed by the Respondent save
as to some items to which objection was taken
and which were not admitted into
Respondent’s evidence
to the Chairperson’s enquiry whether the Respondent would be present at
the hearing, her Counsel confirmed that the
Respondent would not be present
during the Inquiry and would not be giving any evidence before the Tribunal.
bundle of documents numbered 1 to 12 inclusive, were tendered by the Respondent
and without objection, admitted as Exhibit “
thereto is reproduced, below.
of three (3) letters on the letterhead of
The New Children’s Hospital,
Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children
, from Dr. Michael Kohn (Department of
Adolescent Medicine) to Dr. B. Collins at Turramurra, dated respectively, 6 May
1998, 9 September
1999 and 27 January 2000; together with a copy of letter from
Dr. Kohn to Dr. Kenneth Nunn (Department of Psychological Medicine)
also at the
above hospital, dated 26 May 2000; and an undated half-page extract from the
Respondent’s
Continuation Notes
which included
references addressing “...weight-gain...” and the hospital
staff’s keenness to have the Respondent
at the hospital in respect of her
“...eating disorder...”, were tendered by the Respondent and without
objection, admitted
as Exhibit “
”. Although more likely a
GP, there was no evidence before the Tribunal confirming precisely, Dr.
Collins’ professional
discipline at the relevant time.
Ian Fowler was the only witness called by the Respondent to give evidence before
the Tribunal.
The Respondent—background
Respondent aged 27 years, grew up in Sydney and attended private schools. Her
father was a practising GP who appears to have had
a role in treating the
Respondent during her childhood, teenage and early adult years. Between October
1998 and 13 May 2007, her
father prescribed medications for the Respondent for
various conditions, including allergies, asthma, migraine, atopic eczema, and
prophylactic antibiotics.
to a copy of a letter from the Respondent’s father to the Complainant
dated 30 June 2011, within her father’s
medical records (admitted into
evidence as Exhibit “C-2” [at 28]), the Respondent “...
her early teens...started to have frequent migraine attacks and mood
...[which]...
later developed
into an overt Eating
.” Despite a good response to medication prescribed for her
migraine, he also needed to prescribe analgesics and anti-emetics
attacks were severe. He also ordered pathology tests for the Respondent in
November 1998, January 2000, July and August
1997 the Respondent contracted
bacterial endocarditis
with subsequent
mitral valve
repair undertaken at the New Children’s Hospital at
Westmead, in 1998. For some years after this operation the Respondent sought
treatment by Dr. Michael Kohn of the hospital’s Adolescent Medicine
Department for her Eating Disorder with according to her
father’s letter
(Ibid.), “...
good progress
her graduation during visits home, when sometimes she had an acute migraine
attack, her father would ask the Respondent to take
some appropriate medicine
samples he kept in his medicine cabinet including Panadeine Forte, Stemetil and
Pariet, prior to attending
her local GP afterwards. He provided the Complainant
with a list of the medications he prescribed for his daughter from 1997 to 2007,
inclusive (Ibid.).
respondent’s
curriculum vitae
included within Exhibit “C-1” (at 37). Her academic achievements
were significant during her school education and at
the University of Sydney
where she completed her Pharmacy studies. Her Higher School Certificate
(“HSC”) achievements
are impressive and included the
Premier’s Award for All Round Excellence
in the HSC examinations.
at school in Year 10 during September to October 1999, the Respondent gained
work experience at a major pharmaceutical manufacturing
Astra-Zeneca
studies in the Faculty of Pharmacy at the University of Sydney were undertaken
during 2001 to 2005. In 2006 she was awarded the
degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy,
with Class 1 Honours in Advanced Pharmaceutics, to which she was invited based
upon academic merit.
She achieved a high credit-distinction average in her
Honours research project, with a focus on “
growth factor delivery from
polymeric implants
her university studies the Respondent participated in a range of
pharmacy-related activities: as the university undergraduate
representative for
the Society of Hospital Pharmacists of Australia; as a student member of the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia; and
as an Advanced Pharmaceutical Industry
Experience Student at another major pharmaceutical manufacturing company
Sanofi-Aventis
, gaining experience
, in its Departments
of Regulatory Affairs,
Pharmacovigilance
and Medical Information.
her university studies, the Respondent worked at a number of suburban, community
pharmacies between October 2003 to November
2005, initially as a Pharmacy Sales
Assistant and later, as a Pharmacy Dispensary Assistant. In July 2005 she
participated in a Clinical
Pharmacy student placement at a community pharmacy at
Taree, on the NSW Mid-North Coast; and participated in a Clinical Pharmacy
student placement, at St. Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney, in March-June
her pharmacy-related experience outlined above, the Respondent was clearly,
familiar with the professional operation of a community
pharmacy, hospital
pharmacy and also, with aspects of the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry.
There is no evidence before the
Tribunal that the Respondent lacked
understanding of any such pharmacy-related activities.
Respondent completed her Graduate Pharmacist year at the Orange Base Hospital in
country New South Wales, from January 2006 to
January 2007. Her
responsibilities included”...
dispense and supply accountable
and maintain drug register in accordance with Board and
legal requirements
” and the need to ensure
appropriateness of prescribed therapy in accordance with current
therapeutic guidelines and protocols
...[and the]...
identification
of issues and errors regarding administration, dosing, prescribing, adverse
... [and]...
interactions
...” (Emphasis
added). Also included were “...
the appropriate destruction and disposal
of accountable drugs
...[and the provision of]...
medication counselling
to inpatients, outpatients and / or carers
.” (CV, Exhibit
“C-1” at 37).
in the Respondent’s CV under the heading “
” are the following: “ [to]
...obtain a
position...as a pharmacist in the provision of clinical pharmacy services to
optimal patient care in the community healthcare
...[and]...
an aim to continually develop...clinical skills and
excel in such a working environment where my skills in collaborative teamwork
and high standards of individual professional performance are strongly
.” (Emphasis added)
Background to the Complaints—a summary
is no evidence before the Tribunal as to what pharmacy practice if any, was
undertaken by the Respondent between completion
of her graduate year at the
Orange Base Hospital in January 2007 until June 2007, when she commenced
employment as a graduate, non-registered
pharmacist, at the Blaxland Day &
Night Pharmacy at Blaxland (“the Blaxland Pharmacy”) in the Blue
Mountains, West
April 2008, whilst employed at the Blaxland Pharmacy, the Respondent also
commenced employment as a graduate, non-registered pharmacist,
at the Winmalee
Chemmart Pharmacy at Winmalee (“the Winmalee Pharmacy”) also in the
Blue Mountains area. The Winmalee
Pharmacy was at the relevant time, managed by
pharmacist, Phillip Bardsley-Smith, whom the Respondent first contacted when
for a position as a pre-registration pharmacist, prior to commencing
employment at the Blaxland Pharmacy. Mr. Bardsley-Smith received
telephone call from her seeking a position as a registered pharmacist; and he
employed her in about April 2008 (which must
be an error as the Respondent was
not registered until 14 May 2008) as a casual, part-time registered pharmacist
(Statement—Phillip
Bardsley-Smith, Exhibit “C-1” [at 23])
seemed the Respondent experienced some difficulty satisfying her examiners in
her numerous attempts at the oral examinations conducted
by the (then) NSW
Pharmacy Board, successful completion of which was an essential prerequisite to
registration as a pharmacist. The
Tribunal notes in respect of her apparent
failures in these oral examinations, what appears to be a clear inconsistency
Respondent’s impressive history of significant academic
achievements at school and during her university studies. There is
no evidence
before the Tribunal concerning whatever difficulties the Respondent encountered
in her undertaking such oral examinations.
seems from the evidence before the Tribunal, that the Respondent likely
experienced a change following commencement of her employment
at the Blaxland
Pharmacy—an issue further discussed, below. This is relevant to the
question of
of the Respondent’s admitted conduct—an
issue of significant disagreement between the Respondent and Complainant at the
Inquiry. In the absence of any evidence from the Respondent, the Tribunal must
do the best it can on such evidence as was brought
before it, in considering the
Respondent’s admitted conduct, the subject of the Complaints.
Respondent was registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 14 May 2008 and
thereafter continued employment as such, at the
Blaxland Pharmacy and the
Winmalee Pharmacy. During her time at the Blaxland Pharmacy, she also worked as
a registered pharmacist
at the Michael Mullins Pharmacy in Orange (“the
Orange Pharmacy”) the sole proprietor of which was Ms. Kim Stubbs who
the relevant time, was a co-proprietor (with co-proprietors Brendan and Damian
Smith) of the Blaxland Pharmacy and sole proprietor
also, of the Leura Pharmacy,
at Leura (“the Leura Pharmacy”) which is not relevant to the conduct
particularised in the
Complaints before the Tribunal (Statement, Ms. Kim Stubbs,
Exhibit “C-1” [at 14]).
February 2008, the Respondent attended a GP in Blaxland, Dr. Anita Radojcic,
presenting with a two month history of “...
depression, lack of sleep,
inability to concentrate on her exams, not coping, low motivation, not suicidal,
not at risk...no particular
reason that she can see...
Records, Dr. Radojcic, Exhibit “C-2” [at 30]). She was prescribed an
antidepressant medication Lexapro
10mg daily. Thereafter, the Respondent’s
condition improved, “...
feels much better, anxiety reduced
feels she is not falling apart any more...”
(Ibid.). The above
medication was continued. There were further consultations with Dr. Radojcic on
3 April, 21 April (with Dr. Galetova—at
same practice as Dr. Radojcic), 29
April and 6 May 2008, the last consultation entry included a notation:
remains well
...” (Ibid). There were no further entries
in these records until 21 August 2008, discussed below.
from the records of Dr. Radojcic in respect of the Respondent there was no other
medical evidence (apart from her father’s
records referred to above)
between 2000 and February 2008 when she first consulted Dr. Radojcic.
was during the Respondent’s employment at the Blaxland, Orange and
Winmalee pharmacies—between 8 July and 27 August
particularised in Complaint “A”, that the Respondent’s
admitted, unlawful diversion of the steroids
and her associated conduct,
21 August 2008 according to the practice records of Dr. Radojcic, a Dr. Benjamin
Wong was called to the Blaxland Pharmacy to attend
on and assess, the Respondent
whom he described as experiencing “...
cramps in...hands and feet...not
able to breathe and tingling all over...crying and
distressed...hyperventilating...gradually settled...
” (Dr. Radojcic,
26 September 2008, Dr. Radojcic again consulted by the Respondent, records
Presented for f-up, quit jobs, but locuming...recently panic
” and the Lexapro 10mg daily dose was continued. On 2 October
2008, Dr. Radojcic notes “...
worsening panic attacks, also low mood,
not coping...agreed referral to psychologist...
” and the Lexapro
dosage was increased to 20mg daily. On 9 October 2008, at further consultation
Dr. Radojcic recorded: “...
no panic attacks since increase in meds;
teary today; No particular problem but generally very low
.” (Records,
Ibid.). According to Dr. Radojcic’s records this appears to be the
Respondent’s final consultation
January 2009, according to the agreed Chronology, the Respondent commenced
employment at the Manning Pharmacy on the Mid-North
Coast of New South Wales,
owned by pharmacist, Mrs. Diep Nguyen. During this employment the
Respondent’s admitted, unlawful
diversion of scheduled medications for
personal use and unauthorised removal and possession of scheduled medications
particularised
in Complaint “B” occurred. Her employment was
terminated on 5 July 2010.
Respondent participated in a recorded interview with PSB pharmacists held on 6
February 2009, during which she admitted diversion
of steroids as particularised
in Complaint “A” and agreed to an
pursuant to Section
18AA of the PTG Act restricting her supplying steroidal agents and requiring her
to notify the Director-General
of Health, of her current employment details. She
was advised to notify her employer of these restrictions (C/F Exhibit
Attachment 5).
23 June 2009, the Respondent consulted Taree GP Dr. Echano for an eye problem
and on the following day she consulted at the same
practice, Dr. Nguyen whose
wife owned the Manning Pharmacy, again concerning the eye. The Respondent again
consulted Dr. Nguyen on
9 July 2009, on this occasion concerning depression. His
records include some aspects of the Respondent’s relationships:
away from partner
and family...not talking with parents,
boyfriend, always alone at school and uni. No friends to talk to...”
Precipitating factors were noted to be “
Relationship
difficulties...Financial issues...Work / Employment stressors.”
was referred to psychologist Janette Pheiffer (about which contact there is no
evidence before the Tribunal)
[Records, Dr. Nguyen, Exhibit
“C-2” at 29; & Agreed Chronology].
referred to psychiatrist Dr. Ian Fowler by her solicitor (then known as Guild
Lawyers) and later, formally referred by Dr.
Nguyen, the Respondent first
consulted Dr. Fowler on 6 August 2009; followed by another consultation on 2
September 2009 during which
she told him
hadn’t appreciated the roles and responsibilities of a
.” Dr. Fowler’s first report to the Respondent’s
solicitor expressed his opinion that “...
she is not mentally ill and
shows signs of remorse; financial and family problems
concluded she was “...
fit to practice...no treatment
(Records, Dr. Fowler, Exhibit “C-2” [at
a further report to the Respondent’s solicitor, dated 16 March 2010 Dr.
Fowler expressed his opinion that she would appear
fit to continue practice as a
pharmacist and that it was “...
only in recent
months that
...[she]...
has had any reported major difficulty
.” (Records,
the Respondent last saw Dr. Nguyen on 17 March 2010 she was advised to consult a
psychologist following which she consulted Ms.
Frances Fagan whose clinical
records were in evidence as Exhibit “C-2” (at 12).
24 April 2010, the Respondent was taken to the Manning Hospital by ambulance
after an emergency telephone call was received by
the Service from her boyfriend
to the effect that he was concerned for her welfare after she had earlier spoken
to him by phone and
told him she had taken ten (10) Diazepam tablets 5mg after a
panic attack
” also noted as the “diagnosis /
problem” on the Discharge Letter dated 24 April 2010. (Ambulance records;
and Hospital
records, Exhibit “C-2” [at 10]).
6 June 2010 the Respondent was again admitted to the Manning Hospital for a
suspected overdose during which, urinalysis identified
the presence of
amphetamine and benzodiazepines (Hospital records, Ibid. at Page 50). She
remained in hospital care until discharge
on 23 June 2010. The Discharge
Referral includes reference to the history taken on presentation on 6 June 2010
including Respondent’s
relationship break up
and to relevant past history including “...
major depression, panic
attacks, anxiety, anorexia (13 years ago) and Mitral valve repair
(Hospital records, Ibid. at Page 14)
8 July 2010, the Respondent’s employer Mrs. Nguyen, notified the
Department of Health that the Respondent had misappropriated
temazepam and
diazepam; and on 16 July 2010, PSB officers interviewed the Respondent—to
which interview, Complaint “B”
refers (at Particulars paragraph 6,
in each of Complaints 2B and 3B).
letter to the Council dated 5 August, 2010, the Respondent stated that she had
removed quantities of temazepam and diazepam on
5 June 2010 having received a
text message from her partner ending the relationship and telling her he did not
want her to contact
him anymore; she was “devastated”. In this
letter she described how she would travel to Sydney once or twice a month
to see my partner and my family
...[and]...
In retrospect I
was exhausted and not looking after myself
.” She sought guidance from
the Council as to what was embraced by “ unsupervised practice.”
(Exhibit “C-2”,
[at 16, Annexure “B”).
25 July 2011 the Council
the Respondent’s registration
consequent upon receiving reports—from Dr. Fowler dated 29 March 2011; and
from Dr. Samuels,
dated 29 June 2011. The Respondent’s registration
Medical evidence—Dr. Fowler & Dr.
only oral evidence before the Tribunal was that of Drs. Fowler and Samuels.
Their evidence was extensive. The Respondent had consulted
with Dr. Fowler on
seventeen (17) occasions. Dr. Samuels at the request of the Council, first saw
the Respondent on one occasion
only—on 29 June 2011, the date of his first
report in evidence before the Tribunal (as Exhibit “C-2” [at 31]).
He provided a second report, to the Complainant, as he had not seen at the time
of his assessment of the Respondent, Dr. Fowler’s
then, most recent report
dated 29 March 2011 (Report, 29 August, 2011: Exhibit “C-2” [at
32]). Dr. Samuels was present
at the Inquiry and able to hear Dr. Fowler’s
oral evidence.
Fowler told the Tribunal of his original, provisional diagnosis, that the
Respondent had been entrapped by an abusive relationship;
he thought she was
protecting the man concerned; and he considered whether she was being threatened
in some way. At that point, he
considered “reactive depression’ as a
differential diagnosis—reactive to her social circumstances and to the
to the Pharmacy Board.
respect to the Respondent’s overdose and admission to the Manning Hospital
(on 6 June 2010) together with the range of
medications in her possession, Dr.
Fowler saw these events as pointing towards a significant disorder. Until
shortly before the Tribunal’s
Inquiry commenced and before he had access
to the Westmead Children’s Hospital records (Exhibit “C-5”)
was unaware that as an adolescent, the Respondent had been treated
for an eating disorder. He believed this disorder to be still
present in and
troubling, the Respondent given his observations on some occasions and the
nature of some of the medications found
in the Respondent’s possession at
the relevant time, as particularised in the complaints.
Fowler told the Tribunal that apart from a major depressive illness he
” whether the Respondent had a poly-substance abuse
problem especially if there was an abuse of steroids, although he noted
Respondent did not admit to such self-administration. He also
” whether there was a Post-Traumatic Distress
Disorder; or given her physical presentation and manner of dress, whether there
were any issues related to her “self-image”, “body dysmorphic
or “gender identity disorder”. He saw
very much as background thoughts
.” [TS 69]. Being
now aware of her “...adolescent health issues...” he saw that the
elephant in the room
” is not the abusive relationship, but
rather her “
”; that “...
she has been
hiding herself.
Fowler also “
” whether the Respondent was unwell, not
only from “depression or severe anxiety” but whether her judgment
was “impaired”
by her eating disorder, “...which may explain
the recurrent thefts of medication.” [TS 72] He told the Tribunal he
...” with the Respondent,
his provisional diagnosis of body dysmorphic syndrome”. Asked about the
Respondent’s behaviour
in terms of veracity and honesty
versus it being part of her underlying disorders...
” Dr. Fowler could
not give a “...
clear answer
...” telling the Tribunal that the
Respondent’s “
pattern of denial
potentially
” be managed and treated by her treating
psychiatrist and that this would require “...
longer, long term
...” [TS 80]. It was Dr. Fowler’s opinion that
it will take a long...considerable time
...[for the
Respondent]...
to feel safe within a therapeutic relationship
Fowler told the Tribunal he was assisted by Dr. Samuels’ assessment of the
Respondent, he having had the opportunity of
considering relevant documentation
from a distance, instead of being caught in the
...” [TS 88].
cross-examination, Dr. Fowler told the Tribunal that the Respondent’s lies
may in part, result from her eating disorder
especially as the lies she told and
the nature of the relevant thefts”...
were not in any way
sophisticated
...” [TS 91] He suggested that the Respondent’s
depression diagnosed in 2008, was in effect causally connected to her
the steroids in July and August, 2008, which he likened to
shoplifting...and depressive illness
was Dr. Fowler’s evidence that the Respondent understood the nature of the
complaints made against her, the subject of the
Tribunal’s Inquiry; that
she had been able to keep all of her appointments with him; that she is
currently employed at several,
non-pharmacy retail outlets; and that the last
time he saw her in consultation was on 15 August 2011.
by the Tribunal whether during the time he had been treating the Respondent he
had observed any disturbance to her body weight,
extreme thinness or the like,
Dr. Fowler told the Tribunal he had noticed a loss of weight on one or two
occasions; and that “...
on the last consultation she looked—she
just didn’t look fit and healthy, she looked
...[and]...p
hysically very well
.” [TS 110] He was aware
conveyed to him by the Respondent, that regular attendance at a gym was an
integral part of her daily
activities.
to a further question from the Tribunal concerning the Respondent’s
troubled relationship with her boyfriend, Dr.
Fowler told how he had become
aware that she was considering selling her motorcycle to give him $10,000; and
he also became aware
from documents he had seen, that at one time the Respondent
was giving her boyfriend $600 weekly.
Fowler agreed that his diagnostic exercise is incomplete and “...
state of evolution
...”[TS 112] and he described the Respondent’s
state as a “...
complex co-morbidity
.” [TS 116].
Samuels’ only consultation with the Respondent was on 29 June 2011, the
date of his first report, during which he found
it difficult to interview her.
The Respondent denied personal use of the diverted steroids telling him they
were supplied to a “
” for the purpose of
minimisation
”. He described her appearance at
that consultation as “...
quite muscular
...” and she gave him
a history of going to the gym. [TS 123]. She appeared to Dr. Samuels, as quite
fit and of normal weight;
he did not detect “...
any preoccupation with
her body, her shape, her size, any unusual perceptions of her body or
.” [TS 124]
a question from Complainant’s Counsel as to the importance of honesty in a
therapeutic relationship, Dr. Samuels told
the Tribunal that without it, a
proper diagnosis cannot be made nor a treatment plan initiated. He saw this as
likely to be difficult
for Dr. Fowler who had first seen the Respondent in a
medico-legal
’ context; and there were major omissions by the
Respondent in later consultations with Dr. Fowler, as also during Dr.
consultation.
two stood out—a personality disorder and
substance abuse; and in respect
of the latter, he referred to the Respondent’s “
” suggesting a most likely cause as withdrawal from use of
benzodiazepines; he also cited anabolic steroids as capable of causing
agitation, anxiety and depression.
Samuels referred to his and to Dr. Fowler’s, observations in the context
of steroid use, as to the Respondent’s muscular
development and her
consuming ‘high protein’ foods which whilst a feature of an eating
disorder, was also consistent
with the use of steroids for muscle-building as
well. He concluded that he did think there is underlying depression and anxiety;
and whilst he thought there is some sort of eating disorder “...
picture...If we are going to speculate about anything, I think substance abuse
has to be high on the list and some sort of
personality dysfunction
particularised in the complaints before the Tribunal
and anorexia, Dr. Samuels
regarded substance abuse and personality disorder as the strongest link to such
behaviour. He agreed it
was unclear what “
Respondent but added that there is “...
something definitely wrong with
...” [TS132]
referred to some constraints on Dr. Fowler
due to his current
” role and the Respondent
withholding information from him. He emphasised that in his opinion, there is no
diagnosis; and agreed
with Dr. Fowler’s description of the word
” in describing the situation in the relevant,
diagnostic context.
respect to substance abuse, Dr. Samuels emphasised that the issues before the
Tribunal involved misappropriated substances upon
which there had not been a
great deal of focus, the Respondent having denied it to him and to Dr. Fowler;
and there were no “
blood tests
” or other “
”. He told the Tribunal that substance abuse might be
speculative but what is known, is that the Respondent has “...
constellation of symptoms
...” that could reflect such abuse. [TS
during cross-examination, he was asked for his view of the Respondent’s
present capacity to hold registration as a pharmacist,
Dr. Samuels noted that he
had not seen her since June 2011 and was unaware of her current mental state;
but given the uncertainty
of diagnosis and whether or not she has a significant
poly-substance abuse, the Respondent needs “...
therapeutically with somebody...her psychiatric and psychological
conditions...properly formulated and evaluated and a proper
treatment plan...put
in place...”
to which the Respondent needs to “...
demonstrate
some commitment and progress with
...[that]...”. He added that only
when her treating practitioners were satisfied that “...
she has made
progress and ...accepted...she has a range of problems and is willing to deal
with them...would...
see her as being fit to practise as a
” but obtaining an adequate diagnosis was “...
...” [TS140]
cross-examination, Dr. Samuels was taken to his evidence concerning the
Respondent and her steroid misappropriation: he told
the Tribunal it was
difficult to clarify for what purpose she had removed them but that
at the end of the interview, I had my own ideas...
Respondent had told him she had misappropriated them for somebody else. [TS
was Dr. Samuels’ evidence to the Tribunal, that the Respondent’s
depression was not well controlled and he agreed to
that extent, she is
undertreated. He suggested that her “...
abusing multiple, weight
reduction medications...certainly does suggest that an eating disorder remains a
prominent problem
.” [TS 149-150]
to Complainant’s Counsel during re-examination, Dr. Samuels agreed it
would be very difficult to quantify a period
during which the Respondent might
be for example, suspended from registration, in order to clarify her current
mental state and to
determine what her motivation for treatment is. He told the
Tribunal that time was needed given the “...
multiple diagnostic
possibilities
...[and]...
it is very difficult to know how long
...[was]...
going to take...for her to engage and...for some sign of
cogent diagnostic and treatment plan to evolve.
Complainant’s submissions—an outline
Complainant’s
Counsel submitted having regard for the respondent’s admissions, that the
complaints of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
in Complaints
“A” and “B”
satisfied the definition thereof in
the National Law [S. 139B (1) (a) and (b)] noting the unchallenged expert
opinion of Ms. Zwart
that the admitted conduct in each Complaint was
significantly below the standard expected of a pharmacist of an level of
or experience equivalent to that of the Respondent. Counsel emphasised
also, the definition of
professional misconduct
in Section 139E of the
National Law, to which the Respondent admitted in respect of each of Complaints
“A” and “B”.
respect of the removal and supply of steroids (complaints 1 and 2, Complaint
“A”), Counsel emphasised that a newly
registered pharmacist such as
the Respondent, would have been aware that this was contrary to the PTG Act and
Regulation and also,
amounted to theft. Additionally, it involved a breach of
trust she owed to her employers; and the fact that the steroids were removed
from three separate pharmacies increased the seriousness of the breach of trust.
Further, given the reasons for inclusion of steroids
within Schedule 4 Appendix
B of the PTG Regulation and the potentially dangerous adverse effects from their
use by the unauthorised
recipient or recipients thereof, without medical
supervision, coupled with the Respondent’s declared purpose of
harm minimisation
” to justify her supplying them, was a
serious abrogation of her professional responsibility. Counsel also emphasised
the deceptive
means the Respondent adopted to remove the steroids and disguise
her unlawful activities and included the creation of false prescriptions.
the Respondent’s admitted conduct the subject of complaints 1 and 2 of
Complaint “B”, Counsel submitted
that her removal of the drugs
particularised, was clearly in breach of the PTG Regulation concerning Schedule
4, Appendix D
prescribed restricted substances
and Schedule 4
restricted substances
and in the case of
(orlistat), Schedule 3 of the PTG Regulation. Such removal amounted to theft
and again, a breach of the trust owed to her employer.
The Respondent’s
conduct Counsel submitted, raised concerns about her suitability to be as a
pharmacist, a “
custodian of medications in the community
and, adding to the seriousness of her conduct, she was at the relevant time,
subject to an Order pursuant to Section 18AA
of the PTG Act prohibiting her from
supplying other
prescribed restricted substances
she was well aware of her responsibilities
...” relevant to such
medications. Further, Counsel submitted, removal of medications on more than one
occasion, further increased
the level of seriousness of her breaches.
Counsel submitted in effect, that the Tribunal could be comfortably satisfied
that these Complaints were proven.
Complainant’s
Counsel submitted in respect of complaint 3 in each of Complaints
“A” and “B” (
. the Respondent
a suitable person to hold registration as a pharmacist
) that factors to be
taken into account in considering such a complaint should not be restrictively
prescribed as there is no such
limitation in the National Law; accordingly she
submitted, a determination will depend upon the facts of each case. Counsel
the words of
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
in considering the
question whether a conviction rendered a barrister other than a fit and proper
person to practise at the Bar,
as relevant to the complaints against the
Respondent: “...
The answer must surely be that we must look at every
fact which can throw light on that question.”
Complainant
submitted that the above question as to the suitability to practise as a
pharmacist, should also take into account the
public interest in maintaining
confidence in the profession, well recognized as a relevant factor in
determining whether in a particular
case any ‘protective order’
should be made; and cited
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630
637-638 emphasising the need to protect the public and to maintain high
standards in the profession as recognised also by
Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
In considering the question of ‘
suitability’
registration, Counsel submitted regard may be had to the character of a
practitioner; and referred to a range of factors
described by
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
as guidance and which
may be of varying relevance depending on the circumstances of a case; cited also
HCCC v Pierce
[2010] NSWNMT 23
as a range of factors which may
be relevant to an assessment of character with respect to a Nursing / Midwifery
practitioner. These
factors include: the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct
and the motivation giving rise to it; whether it is atypical of the
practitioner’s normal qualities of character and an isolated event; and
whether such misconduct can be satisfactorily explained
as an ‘error of
judgment’ rather than a defect of character.
critical importance
...” for the Tribunal’s
consideration the Complainant submitted, “...
are the qualities of
obedience to the law and professional requirements, honesty and an acceptance of
personal responsibility
respect to the admitted complaint of
, Complainant’s
Counsel noted that such a finding by the Tribunal is not a basis for suspension
or cancellation of registration
pursuant to Section 149C of the National Law but
it was submitted, such a finding can “...
nonetheless bear upon
competence to practice
...” in accordance with that provision.
Following the Tribunal’s noting that there was no complaint of
lack of competence
’ pursuant to Section 144 of the National
Law before it; and after submissions on the point by both Counsel, the
Complainant
did not press the “...
...” point,
Complainant’s Counsel submitted that it is not
necessary to establish which mental condition or conditions precisely, is or
suffered by a practitioner, provided a conclusion is reached that
whatever it was that
...[the practitioner]...
was suffering
from was prejudicial to an orderly conduct of
practitioner’s]...
mental and physical
Grant v HCCC
[2003] NSWCA 73
Complainant emphasised the
nature of the Tribunal’s
—to protect the community; to
maintain proper and ethical professional standards and to protect the good
standing and reputation
of the Pharmacy profession; and noted also, the
important element of
in the exercise of the Tribunal’s
practitioners can have confidence and especially given their
privileged position in the community.
to a significant, ‘threshold’ issue—of considerable
significance in this Inquiry—whether the Respondent’s
conduct causally connected to
—Complainant’s Counsel emphasised
Respondent’s theft of the steroids from three pharmacies and of the other
relevant medications from the Manning Pharmacy;
her dishonesty, deception,
fabrication of false documentation
and lack of candour; and in respect of
steroids, their supply to another or to others—given the uncertain,
varying accounts.
Additionally, Counsel noted the Respondent’s refusal to
identify the person or persons to whom she supplied the steroids. Counsel
submitted that Respondent’s admitted conduct displayed a
continuous pattern of deceptive conduct that on the whole, exists
separate to and apart from, any mental health condition that
Respondent]...
appears to suffer from
...” and which cannot be
satisfactorily explained as an error of judgment rather than defect of
character. Counsel emhasised
that other than her prior excellent academic record
and experience, “...
no evidence of otherwise good character was
produced by the Respondent
...” placed before the Tribunal at its
It was further submitted, that without evidence from the Respondent, the
Tribunal could not be satisfied that she had rebutted an
assumption that each
act was intentional and deliberate. Nor in the absence of any such evidence, is
there any indication of ‘motivation’
giving rise to her admitted
conduct. It was also submitted, there was no evidence placed before the Tribunal
that the Respondent
was unfit to attend the Inquiry and to give evidence.
Counsel noted the evidence of Dr. Fowler, that the Respondent had attended
scheduled appointments with him despite the distance involved; and that the
Respondent was apparently, quite capable of working in
three (non-pharmacy)
retail outlets; and that she understood the nature of the complaints against
respect to the unlawful removal of relevant medications in Complaints
“A” and “B”, Counsel emphasised
the very serious nature
of the Respondent’s admitted conduct as breaches of the PTG Act and PTG
Regulation, reflected in the
penalties provided in the relevant provisions (C/F
Complainant submitted that Dr. Fowler’s evidence concerning impairment was
not definitive; and that Dr. Samuels evidence
was to the effect, there can be no
definitive diagnosis. It was submitted, that if she wishes to rely on her mental
condition to
explain admitted conduct—which amounts to
professional
—then there is an
on the Respondent to displace
the inferences that would ordinarily arise from the evidence, being
that such conduct was conscious, deliberate and wrongful
Complainant’s
Counsel submitted that the evidence before the Tribunal shows that the
Respondent is only partially responsive
to treatment; and that there is a
demonstrable lack of
into her conduct which she submitted, points
to the need for a strong protective order, in the community’s interest;
and further
submitted that the Respondent’s capacity for
into her admitted misconduct is unsupported by any evidence from her and hence,
remains untested.
to the absence of any evidence from the Respondent, Complainant’s Counsel
submitted that the Respondent also bears the
onus to establish that there is no
risk of recurrence or an acceptable risk, citing:
HCCC v Sayegh
HCCC v Larden
[2009] NSWPHT 1
and referred to
the passage cited therein from the judgment of
Society v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Whilst a practitioner’s expressed intention not to
re-offend is relevant to mitigation, it will have little weight unless
accompanied
by an understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct which was
the subject of the disciplinary charge.”
Complainant’s
Counsel submitted that the conduct particularised in the Complaints are
sufficiently serious to justify an order
cancelling her registration pursuant to
Section 149C (1) of the National Law; and a further order, pursuant to Section
that an application for review of the order (cancelling her
registration) under Division 8 of the National Law, cannot be made until
years from the date of the cancellation.
Respondent’s submissions—an outline
Respondent’s
Counsel submitted that there is insufficient evidence to satisfy the Tribunal to
the requisite standard that the
Respondent was self-administering the steroids
in 2008 and confirmed that the Respondent did not admit to such personal use
respect of the Respondent not giving evidence before the Tribunal at its
Inquiry, it was submitted that there is no support for
the proposition that a
specialist tribunal is obliged to draw adverse inferences in the absence of an
explanation from the Respondent
adopting in support thereof, the words of
Lucire v HCCC
[2011] NSWCA 99
, at [132].
submitted that (other than those particulars alleging her personal use of the
steroids) the Respondent had admitted the “...
entire factual
...” of the complaints; that she had participated in two recorded
interviews conducted by the PSB; and in another recorded interview
conducted by
her employer at the Blaxland Pharmacy, the transcriptions of each such interview
being in evidence before the Tribunal;
additionally, the Respondent admits that
her conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional misconduct
professional misconduct
was further submitted by Counsel that evidence about the “...
health issues surrounding the circumstances in which the offences were
committed...is more appropriate to come from professional
than from the Respondent. Counsel submitted that the absence of any evidence at
the Inquiry, from the
Respondent about her admitted conduct does not
prevent the Tribunal from “...
accepting the psychiatric evidence and
drawing inferences from it that are in effect, supportive of the
respondent’s position
...”: that her conduct was explained by the
effect of the mental illness she was suffering at the relevant times. Counsel
that any explanation from the Respondent would not
enlighten the Tribunal any further
noted in respect of complaint 3 in each of Complaints “A” and
“B” that the Respondent admitted only,
that she is currently not fit
to hold unconditional registration as a pharmacist; and further submitted that
the Tribunal should
make findings in respect of each such complaint, that the
Respondent “...
is currently not a suitable person to hold unconditional
registration as a pharmacist.”
was submitted that the evidence before the Tribunal about the Respondent’s
mental health issues surrounding the circumstances
in which the admitted conduct
occurred, inform the Tribunal notwithstanding the absence of any evidence from
the Respondent at the
Inquiry. Accordingly, it was submitted, the Tribunal is
entitled to rely on Dr. Fowler’s evidence as the Respondent’s
treating psychiatrist, as to the effect of her “...
underlying mental
disorders at the time that
...[her]...
conduct occurred.
Counsel further submitted that “
(t)his is not a matter which the
respondent ‘alone’ can explain
... [as]...
given the nature and
extent of her illness she is not likely to be able to explain the clinical
matters relevant to or to provide
evidence that helps, the Tribunal on this
it is a matter for expert evidence
submitted that there is evidence before the Tribunal showing that the
Respondent’s admitted conduct was pursued whilst
affected by mental
illness not then being treated or alternatively, were undertreated; and further
submitted that medical evidence
from Drs. Fowler and Samuels confirmed the
Respondent’s major depressive disorder and possibly other
co-morbidities
”; that Dr. Fowler’s evidence was to the
effect, that the relevant conditions are treatable; and that such treatment
according to Dr. Fowler’s evidence, cannot be rushed and will
therefore take time to “...
break through to the different factors that
might be affecting the Respondent’s mental illnesses
for the Respondent conceded that no evidence could be found of treatment of the
Respondent by a GP other than her father,
within the period October 1998 to May
2007 albeit within “
the selection of letters
” admitted as
part of Exhibit “R-2” (the contents of which are described above)
there may be an indication that
another GP was involved, but Counsel could not
take it any further. Counsel submitted that the Respondent’s presentation
Dr. Radojcic in February 2008 with a two-month history of depression for
which she was prescribed an anti-depressant Lexapro, demonstrates
Respondent is able to at least identify when she feels depressed.
referred to the Respondent’s admission to the Manning Hospital in June
2010 and submitted, that although initially–citing
as an example, a
psychiatric consultation with Dr. Keightley—the Respondent may have been
reluctant to provide relevant information
but as the interview progressed, she
provided more information. In this context Counsel also submitted that after a
number of contacts
during her admission, with Dr. Neale and his colleagues, a
relationship of trust had developed between them and the Respondent.
referred to Dr. Fowler’s evidence, to the effect that he wondered whether
at the time of the Respondent’s thefts
of medication (the subject of
Complaint “B”) she was unwell; and that he is confident about his
diagnosis of depression
that has fluctuated over time. Counsel accepted that
there is no evidence before the Tribunal of any diagnosis of depression prior
her consultation with Dr. Radojcic in February 2008, described above.
was submitted by Counsel that Respondent has further prospects for improvement
not yet explored; and accordingly, there is some
purpose in an Order for her
registration to be suspended rather than cancelled; that it is
Respondent’s position that treatment
first needs to take place before she
resumes practice as a pharmacist. Counsel submitted that “...
treatment options
...” have not yet been “...
explored and
” and that a lot more can be done; accordingly, Counsel
submitted, cancellation of the Respondent’s registration is not
appropriate. Counsel noted also, Dr. Fowler’s description of his
diagnostic exercise
” as being “...
in a state of
was submitted that up to June 2010 there was clearly, ‘substance
abuse’, the Respondent (relevant to Complaint “B”)
stolen medications, without prescriptions and used them inappropriately and
abusively; but that there is no evidence before
the Tribunal, of any substance
abuse or of inappropriate professional conduct, since June 2010.
the complaints (in each of Complaints “A” and “B”) that
the Respondent
is not a suitable person to hold registration as a
Counsel submitted, citing
(op. cit) that all facts in evidence must be considered; especially Dr.
Fowler’s evidence seeking to explain her conduct at
the relevant times,
which Counsel submitted, assists the broader question:
...[she]...
is a bad person, a person who lies for
gain, or lies because of a significant personality defect...”
respect of which Counsel submitted, there is no evidence. Rather, concerning
, it was submitted that at the time of the admitted conduct, the
Respondent was suffering mental illness that was not being appropriately
sufficiently, treated.
the element of
and how evidence thereof from the Respondent might
assist the Tribunal especially as to its consideration of what Orders it might
make, Counsel submitted that the Respondent’s “...
current state
of mental unhealthiness
...” should be taken into account by the
Tribunal “...
in terms of how helpful
...[such]...
evidence may be
delivered from the Respondent in that state of ill-health currently
Counsel noted the absence of any evidence before the Tribunal that the
Respondent “...
was mentally unfit to give evidence in some technical
...”; and absence of any evidence before the Tribunal from either
Dr. Fowler or Dr. Samuels, that the Respondent, through incapacity,
to attend the Inquiry or to give evidence, personally.
Complainant bears the onus of proof in relation to the Complaints before the
Tribunal, on the balance of probabilities according
to the standard enunciated
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct & Professional
respect of Complaint “A” the Respondent admitted the particulars of
complaints 1 and 2 with respect to the unlawful
removal and supply of steroids,
but for the allegation therein, that she had removed them for the purpose of her
own personal use.
She admits the complaints of
unsatisfactory professional
professional misconduct
admissions were also, formally made in a document signed by the Respondent and
dated 2 September 2011, entitled “
Response to the Complaint dated 7
December 2010
” and admitted into evidence (Exhibit “R-1”
to the Respondent’s admissions above, the Tribunal notes the unchallenged,
peer review
evidence of Pharmacist, Jennifer Zwart dated 5 December 2009,
admitted without objection (as Exhibit “C-1” [at 43]) and
conclusions concerning the Respondent’s removal of the steroids and
associated conduct as particularised in complaints
1 and 2 of Complaint
“A”, such admitted conduct in her opinion, falling significantly
below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of equivalent training
and experience. Ms. Zwart expressed the further opinion that the
Respondent’s denial
to her employers, of all knowledge on discrepancies in
anabolic steroid stocks “...
displayed that she is not of good
.” (Report, Ibid.)
respect to Complaint “B” the Respondent admits complaints 1 and 2
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional
respectively, as particularised also formally recorded in a
Response to the Complaint dated 4 August 2011
signed by the Respondent and dated, 2 September 2011(Exhibit “R-1”
further report from Ms. Zwart, pharmacist, (Exhibit “C-2” at [23])
admitted without objection, responded to the Complainant’s
consider the allegations within the complaints in Complaint “B” in
respect of the removal from the Manning
Pharmacy where she was employed, of
quantities of temazepam, diazepam, Duromine (phentermine) and Reductil
(sibutramine) without
a prescription and without payment; and of Xenical
(orlistat) without payment. Ms. Zwart expressed her opinion that such conduct
fell significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of
equivalent training and experience.
light of the Respondent’s admissions and having considered the evidence
before it, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied
to the requisite standard
articulated in
Bringinshaw
that the complaints of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
professional misconduct
as particularised in
each of Complaints “A” and “B” have been proven,
those particulars in each, which allege that the removal of the subject
anabolic steroids was for the Respondent’s
personal use
respect of which there is insufficient, probative evidence before the Tribunal
to be satisfied of such a finding. Ultimately, the
Complainant did not press the
particulars alleging
personal use
of the steroids.
Accordingly,
in respect of each of Complaint “A” and “B”, the
Tribunal finds that the Respondent has been
professional
misconduct.
Respondent admits
as particularised in complaint 4 of
Complaint “B”.
Tribunal has considered the evidence of psychiatrists Dr. Fowler and Dr. Samuels
including diagnoses including those dependent
upon further assessment and
treatment; and having regard for the Respondent’s admission to complaint 4
of Complaint “B”,
the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied to the
requisite standard, that the Respondent has an
as defined in
Section 5 of the National Law. It was suggested in medical evidence before the
Tribunal, that steroids might fall within
the Respondent’s
polysubstance abuse
as particularised in complaint 4 of Complaint
“B” but there is insufficiently probative evidence, especially the
of any objective evidence of such personal steroid use, to support the
suggestion.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of the Respondent’s treating psychiatrist
Dr. Fowler and that of psychiatrist, Dr. Samuels.
Accordingly, the Tribunal is
satisfied, that the Respondent has an
within the meaning of
Section 5 of the National Law, and as particularised in complaint 4 of Complaint
“B” and finds accordingly.
Not a suitable person to hold registration
3 in each of Complaints “A” and “B”—that the
Respondent is
not a suitable person to hold registration as a
—is not admitted. The Respondent admits only that
she is currently not fit to hold unconditional registration as a
pharmacist.
” During submissions, Complainant’s Counsel referred
to Respondent’s Counsel’s conveying to the Tribunal [TS
no submission
made...that
Respondent]...
is currently fit for practice...(o)ther than after a detailed
and concentrated review and treatment process
”—as in effect, an
acknowledgment that the Respondent had amended her admissions incorporated
within Exhibit “R-1
at [1] and [2]). The Tribunal is satisfied that the
Respondent’s admission remains as originally formulated and stated,
Respondent does not dispute the complaints of unlawful, dishonest removal of the
steroids and other scheduled medications and
relevant particulars of deceptive
and dishonest behaviour at all such times when registered as a pharmacist. Her
admitted conduct
is extremely serious and repugnant to a pharmacist’s
paramount, legal and ethical obligations, as the custodian of potentially
harmful medications scheduled pursuant to the PTG Act and Regulations, to
protect the community the profession serves.
1971, the NSW Court of Appeal in
Regina v. McGrath
2 NSWLR 181
in an appeal from a conviction for the unlawful supply of
amphetamine
under the then applicable,
Poisons Act
1966, considered
, the purpose of the legislation (relevant also, to the current PTG Act
and Regulation) and said (at page 187):
The subject matter...of the Act is one vital to the
welfare of the community and...designed for the protection of the public...The
clear purpose...is that...
[Poisons and restricted Substances]...
in the hands of persons who may be expected to know their purposes, effects and
evils and who would sell them for proper
and lawful purposes
as a registered pharmacist, the Respondent can only be assumed to have had at
the time of her admitted conduct, the requisite
knowledge of the requirements of
current legislation and of the nature and potentially adverse effects of the
medications particularised
in the complaints. The unlawful removal of the
steroids and its supply to an unnamed person or persons, is not only contrary to
legislative
prohibitions but also, professionally reprehensible, given the
potential dangers of their use without medical supervision as reflected
legislation, about which registered pharmacists are deemed to be knowledgeable
and to which they must be alert at all times.
purpose of the Respondent’s supply of the stolen steroids to such
unidentified person or persons, for the declared purpose
of in effect,
minimisation
—a description the Respondent adopted when suggested to
her during her first recorded interview with PSB officers—to minimise
to such person or persons who told the Respondent, apparently at a gym she
regularly attended, of their intention to obtain
and use steroids “off the
street ”—is a further, aggravating factor in the Respondent’s
conduct, likewise
repugnant to registration as a pharmacist and especially, when
the unlawful removal and supply took place in a period approximately
months after she became registered on 14 May 2008. Further to the
peer review
evidence of Ms. Zwart, the Respondent’s conduct as a registered
pharmacist is also considered by this Tribunal with two members—as
required by the National Law—being registered pharmacists; as such, the
Tribunal is an ‘
expert professional tribunal
’ adopting the
description of another professional disciplinary tribunal, by the NSW Court of
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
Respondent’s admitted, unlawful removal of the medications particularised
in Complaint “B” was not for the purpose
of supply to others but for
her own use; and involved consequences necessitating her admission on two
occasions, to the Manning Hospital,
the patient records of these admissions
being in evidence before the Tribunal. Those of the removed medications
indicated for weight
reduction may well have been associated with a possible
resurgence of the Respondent’s eating disorder diagnosed and treated
she was an adolescent as recorded in the Westmead Children’s Hospital
Records (Exhibit “C-5”) and discussed
in the medical evidence before
the Tribunal but the evidence is insufficiently probative to reach a conclusion
on that possibility.
further, aggravating feature of the Respondent’s admitted, unlawful
removal of the medications as particularised in each of
“A” and “B” is that her conduct was a flagrant breach of
the trust she owed to her employers.
Respondent did not attend the Inquiry or give any evidence before the Tribunal.
During the Inquiry the Tribunal reminded the Respondent’s
representatives of certain protections within the National Law relevant to an
Inquiry, which if deemed appropriate and necessary,
might be applied at this
Inquiry. The Tribunal does not adopt any ‘adverse inference’ from
the absence of any evidence
from the Respondent at the Inquiry, based on the
principle in
Jones v. Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Nor does it
disagree with Complainant’s Counsel’s submission that the failure of
the Respondent to attend the Inquiry
or to give evidence, in any way
bolsters’ or strengthens the Complainant’s
...”; nor does the Tribunal disagree with Complainant’s
submission that the Tribunal should not draw a “...
...” against the Respondent for not giving evidence, given
her admissions to the complaints.
absent evidence from the Respondent, the Tribunal is without anything personally
supportive of the effects on her from any
of the health issues discussed in the
medical evidence or explanatory of her conduct including what led to it.
Additionally, without
any evidence from the Respondent, it is made more
difficult for the Tribunal to be relevantly satisfied that the community would
be protected by her continuing registration or by an order suspending her
registration and if so, for how long and under what conditions
registration. More difficult also without her evidence, for the Tribunal to be
persuaded that she has sufficient
into her admitted behaviour.
The extremely serious nature of such conduct therefore remains for the Tribunal
to consider without
evidence from the Respondent and it must reach its findings
accordingly, on the evidence before it.
Tribunal notes, relevant to the complaints (in each of Complaint “A”
and “B”) that the Respondent
is not a suitable person to hold
registration as a pharmacist,
her Counsel’s submissions that in
effect, her admitted conduct is referrable to mental illness. Accordingly, an
important threshold
question for the Tribunal is whether at such relevant times,
The medical evidence has been outlined above.
There is a considerable lack of certainty in her treating psychiatrist’s
process and in whatever treatment is indicated given its state of
” according to the medical evidence.
Tribunal cannot but be impressed with the Respondent’s considerable,
academic achievements at school and university culminating
in her Honours
Degree; with her pharmacy and related working experience during her university
studies including her graduate pre-registration
year at the Orange Base
Hospital, all of which is included in her CV in evidence before the Tribunal.
Such achievements are in stark
contrast to the behaviour that commenced in 2008
shortly after she was registered. It is necessary for the Tribunal to consider
evidence before it without any from the Respondent, relevant to the issue of
causation given her Counsel’s submission, described
above by the Tribunal
as a ‘threshold’ question and noting the complaint of
Tribunal has already noted the short period of time from her registration until
the conduct particularised in Complaint “A”
first occurred. The
Tribunal notes in the Statement of her employer at the Blaxland Pharmacy, Ms Kim
Stubbs dated 7 July 2009 (Exhibit
“C-1” at [14]) how she was very
impressed with the Respondent’s “...
performance
...” and described how she “...
noticed she
didn’t seem to have much of a social life outside of work and she went to
the gym regularly...and became a real
gym junkie towards the middle of
.” Ms. Stubbs describes how “...
around July and August
...[the Respondent]...
seemed to come off the rails in her
.” She describes how she had to counsel the Respondent on her
appearance on a number of occasions and how “...
she had mood swings and
seemed to be either high or low.
” She also noted a change in her
appearance: “...
she bulked up and she constantly went to the
February 2008 the Respondent consulted GP Dr. Radojcic (whose clinical records
were admitted into evidence without objection (part
of Exhibit “C-2”
at [30]) with a two-month history of “depression” for
no particular reason that she can see
consultations with Dr. Radojcic have been summarised above, under the heading
Background to Complaints
from the records of Dr. Radojcic, those of the Manning Hospital and the Westmead
Children’s Hospital; and those of the
Respondent’s father (which
ceased in 2007) there are no other clinical (medical) records in evidence before
the Tribunal concerning
the Respondent after 2007 and prior to those of Dr.
Nguyen in Taree, commencing in June 2009.
considering Respondent’s submission to the effect, mental illness being
causally connected to her admitted conduct and any
possible explanation for such
conduct as particularised in Complaint “A” concerning the steroids,
the Tribunal notes
an entry in the Manning Hospital records admitted without
objection, as Exhibit “C-5”, commencing on page 73 of the exhibit
and dated 21 June 2010 under the heading “
Dr. Neale / Team
Dr. Brian Neale is a psychiatrist it would seem, under whose care the Respondent
was admitted. At page75 of the Exhibit,
the following is recorded:
Previously (few years ago) she got involved with the
wrong crowd and was taking medications from work. Agrees that by doing this,
it’s an act of self-sabotage because work is everything to her and
‘she has led to her own destruction.”
would seem with respect to the admitted conduct particularised in Complaint
“B” that the Respondent’s relationship
with her boyfriend
(“ Rob”) started in Sydney. According to the records of psychologist
Francis Fagan admitted without
objection, as part of Exhibit “C-2”
at [11], “Rob” was to go to where the Respondent was living on the
Coast but as at March 2010 (Exhibit, Ibid. at page 20) he was still in
Sydney. The Tribunal again refers to the clinical records
of GP, Dr. Nguyen
(Exhibit “C-2” at [29]) and notes that (after her first consultation
at the practice, with Dr. Echano;
and another with the former, concerning an
eye-related problem) she presented to Dr. Nguyen again, on 9 July, 2009 with the
for contact’ recorded as “
Depression”
in which were recorded her “...
being away from partner and
not talking with parents, boyfriend...Partner now lives with
sister...request counselling help. Referred to psychologist
...” and on
5 August 2009, the next consultation: “
Reason for contact:
Depressed...just separated from long time boyfriend.
...” (Exhibit,
Ibid. at page “P 10”); and (at “P11” Ibid.) after
recording “
Depression”
as the Respondent’s
Presenting Complaint
” there appears:
Precipitating Factor 1: Relationship Difficulties;...Precipitating
Factor 2: Financial Issues; Precipitating factor 3: Work / Employment
Samuels records (Exhibit “C-2” at [31], page 8) that the Respondent
told him during his only consultation with her,
on 29 June 2011, “
she was in a relationship for 2 years which ended in June 2010. She
was living in Taree and he was living in Sydney. She hoped that
and join her.
...”. From the report of Dr Fowler dated 11 September
2009 following his first consultation with the Respondent on 6 August
records the Respondent as having first met her boyfriend Robert in 2007 and who
still lives in Sydney (Exhibit “C-2”
at [11], Page 60). During the
Respondent’s second admission to the Manning Hospital on 8 June 2010, in
Progress / Clinical Notes
, it is recorded in effect, that her first
relationship with her boyfriend started in Sydney two and a half years ago (i.e.
the beginning of 2008) and which broke up in January (i.e. 2010); and
that she gives her boyfriend (what appears to be recorded as)
/ week to pay for child support, petrol...bought him car and
.” (Exhibit “C-2” at [[10], at page 43). Dr.
Fowler also refers to the financial pressures on the Respondent, in
dated 11 September 2009, included in Exhibit “C-4”.
noted by the Court of Appeal and cited by the Complainant’s Counsel, per
(40180/90) 4 October 1990, (an appeal from a decision of the NSW
Medical Tribunal including whether proof of bipolar mental disorder
sufficiently
explains the misconduct of a medical practitioner) at page 15:
There is no doubt that the complainant before the
Tribunal bore the onus of establishing that the appellant’s conduct
amounted to ‘professional misconduct’. But with the aid of
admissions and the evidence of patients, which was not challenged,
the proof of
facts warranting that conclusion, on a provisional basis at least, was
overwhelming. It then became necessary, if the
result of removal were not
automatically to follow, for the appellant to displace the inferences, which
would ordinarily arise,
that his misconduct as proved, was conscious, deliberate
and wrongful. The appellant tried to do this by establishing an alternative
explanation for the conduct proved...
But it was not the obligation of the complainant to disprove
the existence of a bipolar condition alleged by the appellant. Nor was
obligation of the complainant to prove the precise extent of that condition or
its effect on the appellant’s behaviour.
Such matters are within the case
of the appellant. A forensic onus rested upon him to disturb the conclusion
that would otherwise
flow the proof of the unadorned facts.
Respondent’s
Counsel submitted that the Respondent was entitled to rely on Dr. Fowler’s
evidence about her “...
underlying mental disorders...
time of her admitted conduct and it was submitted in effect, that nothing more
could be added usefully, by the Respondent.
In this context, the Tribunal
notes an entry in Dr. Fowler’s clinical records (Exhibit
“C-3”), made on 25 August
2011 (his seventeenth consultation with
the Respondent):
told the hearing ‘not an easy time, it will be
challenging’ will be asked every detail over
Don’t know how they are going to approach me...Should be
registered...Shouldn’t be registered at all. Realizes
has to prove to
them she can do. See only recognized for bad stuff—all the good stuff not
recognized. Only person destroyed
is myself ...haven’t harmed people in
Public Domain...”
Respondent’s
Counsel relied
, on an extract from
Lucire v. Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
JA at [132]:
the conclusion which...is that there is no support
for the proposition that a specialist tribunal (whether a jury or a
disciplinary
Tribunal) is
to draw adverse inferences in the
absence of an explanation from the respondent. Such an obligation (at least
expressed in such absolute
terms) would be inconsistent with the entitlement of
the Tribunal to take into account the circumstances in which the failure to
offer an explanation arose, including the importance of the matter in the
proceedings and the potential adverse consequences for
the practitioner of
failing to offer an available explanation”
the evidence before it, the Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied that the
Respondent’s admitted conduct particularised in
Complaint “A”
was causally connected to any mental illness as submitted by the Respondent. Nor
can the Tribunal be comfortably
satisfied that mental illness was the cause of
the admitted conduct particularised in Complaint “B” as submitted by
Respondent. It seems to the Tribunal, that those issues referred to above,
identified by Dr. Nguyen as “
Precipitating Factors”
more likely to have been involved in the Respondent’s admitted conduct
as particularised in Complaint “B” given
the undoubted pressures on
her at the relevant time which the Tribunal accepts, must have been a
considerable burden on her. Notwithstanding
the effect of such
“precipitating factors”
on the Respondent, they cannot
explain or excuse, her failures as a registered pharmacist and health
professional, to comply with
her legal and ethical responsibilities or the
breach of trust owed to her pharmacist employer, Mrs. Nguyen. The Respondent had
in the past, been reluctant, it seems, to approach medical practitioners
when necessary, as noted by her Counsel; and the Tribunal
notes in this context
also, the evidence of her approaches to Dr. Radojcic and to Dr. Nguyen.
Tribunal is not unmindful of the diagnosis of a major depressive illness as
seems to be agreed by Drs. Fowler and Samuels; nor
is it unmindful of the other
possible diagnoses discussed by them at considerable length, before the
Tribunal, embraced by the description
applied by Dr. Fowler—
co-morbidities
—included in his search to identify precisely what they
are; the diagnostic objective in his words, to identify “...
elephant in the room
...”; and the Tribunal notes again, the opinion
expressed by Dr. Samuels referred to above, that the first step is to obtain
adequate diagnosis.
is not possible on the evidence before it, for the Tribunal to be comfortably
satisfied whether and if so what “
complex co-morbidities
might have been present in the Respondent and if so to what effect if any, at
the relevant times of her admitted conduct as
particularised in Complaint
Accordingly,
contrary to Counsel for the Respondent’s submission, the Tribunal is not
comfortably satisfied with the evidence
of her treating psychiatrist Dr. Fowler,
disorders at the time she engaged in that conduct.”
The Respondent has
failed to displace the inferences available from the evidence that her conduct
was character-related.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Respondent
is not a suitable
person to hold registration as a pharmacist
and it finds accordingly.
made findings with respect to each of Complaints “A and “B”,
professional misconduct
that the Respondent
suitable person to hold registration as a pharmacist
, the Tribunal must
consider what Orders are appropriate and necessary, given its protective
other objectives mentioned below.
Sections 149C of the National law provides that in respect of each of such
findings, the Tribunal
may suspend or cancel registration.
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
176 CLR 239
at 250-251). Professional disciplinary proceedings are intended
for the protection of the community, to maintain proper and ethical
professional
standards and to protect the good standing and reputation of the profession of
pharmacy. Deterrence is another important
element in the exercise of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction both as to the Respondent personally and with
respect to the profession
observed by
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
The purpose of any order consequent upon a finding that a
complaint has been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of
public at large, but more particularly patients or potential patients of the
practitioner concerned. However the public interests
include indirectly, the
standing of the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence in
the high standards...of
practitioners. There is also an element of deterrence
or, to put it more positively, encouragement to other practitioners to
the importance of complying with professional standards and the risks
of failing to do so. The powers of a Tribunal having two members
of the medical
profession should, at least in relation to professional standards be accorded a
degree of flexibility which might
not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal
differently constituted.
Although directed to the medical profession and the Medical Tribunal, the above
words are apposite to pharmacists and to the Pharmacy
Tribunal. When an order
for suspension or removal is made, its purpose is “...
from the public
point of view, for the protection of those who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
104 CLR 186
, at 201-202.
the absence of any evidence from the Respondent at its Inquiry, the Tribunal
notes as also, apposite to the Respondent, the words
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
at pp 33-34, where her Honour
referred with approval, to a passage from the judgment of
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
“Whilst a practitioner’s expressed intention not
to re-offend is relevant to mitigation, it will have little weight unless
accompanied by an understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct which was
the subject of the disciplinary charge.”
As noted by the Tribunal in
[2009] NSWPHT 1
Respondent bears the onus to establish that there is no risk of recurrence or an
acceptable risk. The mere passage of time since
the misconduct has occurred
during which there is not evidence of any other instance of anything untoward,
is insufficient: C/F observations
Ex Parte Tziniolis; Re
Medical Practitioners Act
67 SR (NSW) 448
at 46. In the
Tribunal’s view the Respondent has failed to discharge that onus.
Bannister v Walton
(NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, 30 April 1992)
‘The right to practice [medicine]
affords to a practitioner privileges and opportunities which are not available
He is expected to maintain a relationship with patients who are
affected by his character. The relationship is one which touches
matters such as
trust, confidence, confidentiality and right conduct. Clinical capacity is by no
means the only consideration to
which regard is to be had in determining whether
a person is appropriate to practice medicine. It is necessary that the public be
protected against those who, though having the appropriate skills do not have
the character for the opportunities and privileges
which the right to practice
Although involving a medical practitioner the above words are applicable to a
pharmacist.
considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of Mahoney JA in
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Respondent:
In judging whether an applicant will, in the future,
act differently from the past, the Court
is not required to act on
psychological theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide
what a man will do and
the decision in a particular case is, to a greater or
lesser extent, dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant.
in making that assessment it may draw inferences from what he has done in the
past and, in particular, what led to his being
removed from the roll. An
understanding of that may assist the court to determine what are his standards
and his understanding...
[of his]...
responsibility and, from this, what
he is apt to do in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where
what has been done
in the past has been sufficient to indicate his
‘probably permanent unfitness’
Ex parte Lenehan
422; the court will require ‘
solid and substantial grounds’
for the conclusion that his standards have changed or that he will act
differently
.” (Emphasis added)
The Tribunal again notes,
that its consideration is not informed relevantly, by any evidence from the
Respondent.
noted earlier, the Respondent’s admitted
unsatisfactory professional
extremely serious and amounts to
professional
which is also admitted. It is especially of concern when
such conduct commenced so soon after becoming registered as a pharmacist
2008. There are no exceptions for pharmacists not to comply strictly, with their
legal and professional obligations at all
times. Their privileged role as
custodians of medications to protect the community cannot be overemphasized. The
Tribunal has found
that the Respondent is not a suitable person to hold
registration as a pharmacist.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal
that the Respondent’s registration as a
pharmacist is
pursuant to Section 149C (1) of the National Law
to take effect from the date of this Order.
to Section 149C (7) the Tribunal
that an application by the
Respondent under Division 8 of the National Law, for review of the Order
cancelling her registration,
may not be made until after a period of eighteen
(18) months has elapsed from the date on which the Order of cancellation takes
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
appropriate review body pursuant to Section 163 (1) (a) of the National Law, to
review any application for review of the
Order cancelling the Respondent’s
registration.
ordering that any application for review of its Order cancelling her
registration may not be made until after a period of eighteen
(18) months has
elapsed from the date of cancellation of the Respondent’s registration,
the Tribunal takes into account that
the Respondent’s registration has
been suspended since July 2011 and during which she has been maintaining
consultations with
Dr. Fowler and with her local GP, Dr.Tzanev.
made its orders, the Tribunal refers to the words of
Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
at 409, at [10]:
Improvement – The final consideration concerns an aspect of the public
interest to which, as I believe, insufficient attention
has been paid in these
cases. I expressed my views in this regard in Kotowicz v Law Society of New
South Wales (Court of Appeal,
7 August 1987, unreported). I was there in dissent
as to the result of the application. But, I hold to my opinion, as applicable
this case. It is an opinion which has enjoyed some favour in other Australian
‘Because the jurisdiction is for the protection of the public,
regard also may be had, to the public’s interests in the
restoration to
the Roll of such persons as have demonstrated, including by their work,
activities and life, a fitness to be restored.
For cultural and historical
reasons, redemption and forgiveness are important attributes of the shared
morality of our society. In
part, this is because of the teachings of religious
leaders who have profoundly influenced our community’s perception of
and fairness, reflected from the earliest time in the courts: see, eg.
St Matthews Gospel 18, 11ff; The Acts, 3, 19. In part, it
derives from the
self-interest which any community has to encourage the rehabilitation of those
who lapse and to hold out to them
the hope that, by diligent and honourable
efforts over a period, their past may be forgiven and they may be restored to
opinion of their family, friends, colleagues and society. The
public’s interest also includes the economic interest which is
involved in
utilising, to the full, the skills of talented people who have undergone years
of rigorous training but who, having misconducted
themselves, have had to be
removed for a time from positions of responsibility and trust.’"
formulating its orders, the Tribunal regards the words of
apposite to the present case to the extent that they address the encouragement
of rehabilitation and restoration to practice
and the importance in utilising to
the full, the significant skills of talented people such as the Respondent as
evidenced by her
impressive CV placed before the Tribunal. In any application to
the Pharmacy Council for review of the Tribunal’s Order of
cancellation,
the Respondent will need to place before it, satisfactory evidence of progress
from her treating medical and any other,
health practitioners together with
evidence of her fitness to be restored to the Register; importantly also,
persuasive evidence
into her admitted, past conduct and
acceptance of the need for compliance with the legal and professional
obligations of a registered
pharmacist. The medical evidence before the Tribunal
accepts the evolutionary nature of the process of determining precisely, the
diagnosis and treatment of the Respondent, as is accepted in effect, by her
Counsel’s submission seeking a period of twelve
(12) months continuing
suspension to allow for these processes to occur.
Tribunal orders accordingly.
ADDITIONAL DECISION:
Respondent’s application for an
order suppressing the
Respondent’s name and health-related
the final day of the Inquiry, Respondent’s Counsel during submissions,
made application for an Order in effect protecting
the privacy of health
information about the Respondent in evidence before the Tribunal at its Inquiry
and suppression of her name
from publication. Counsel relied primarily, not on
Clause 7 of Schedule D, to the National Law (which provides for directions which
may be given concerning release of information) but on an application of the
Health Records Information Privacy Act
(“the Privacy Act”)
2002. Counsel referred to the public accessibility to legal information sites
that publish decisions
such as that of the Tribunal,
accordingly, Counsel submitted, health information about the Respondent would
become available, publically. Having heard preliminary
argument, the Tribunal
granted leave to both parties to provide the Tribunal with written submissions
on the application of the Privacy
Act as contended by the Respondent, within a
certain period following conclusion of the hearing. Subsequently, written
submissions
were provided by each party and have been considered by the
Respondent’s
Counsel submitted that definitions of “
information
health information
Sections 5 and 6 respectively, of the Privacy Act, are applicable to the
information (above) about the Respondent; and
that simply because the Respondent
is participating in an inquiry by the Tribunal does not disentitle her to the
protections provided
by the Privacy Act. Rather it was further submitted, such
an inquiry is the type of case to which the Privacy Act should apply. Counsel
submitted that there is no provision in the Privacy Act which exempts the
Tribunal from compliance with it.
for the Respondent submitted that the Tribunal’s decision could be
‘de-identified’ and comply with the Privacy
Act and with its
statutory purpose. Counsel emphasised that pursuant to the National Law (Clause
7, Schedule 5D) there was a “
wide discretion
” available to
the Tribunal which should in the instant matter, be applied in order to
de-identify the Respondent and any family member referred to in the
evidence and in particular, her father
.” Counsel submitted that it was
not relevant to her application that no such request was made by the Respondent
for the Tribunal’s
proceedings to be closed during the hearing—her
application was in relation to the publication of the Tribunal’s
Complainant’s
Counsel submitted that in exercising its statutory powers in this Inquiry, the
Tribunal is exempt from the provisions
of the Privacy Act, this conclusion being
indicated from a consideration of the relevant Minister’s
Reading Speech
which demonstrates that the focus of the legislation is to
address community concerns
records concerning health information across both private and public sectors. It
further submitted that the Tribunal’s
does not fit within the Privacy Act and is otherwise excluded from its
was the Complainant’s submission that Schedule 1, Clause 11 of the Privacy
Act provides for an exception to disclosure relevantly,
reasonably necessary for the exercise of complaint handling
functions or investigative functions by investigative agencies...
and further submitted that the Complainant fell within the definition of an
“investigative agency” in Section
4 of the Act. It was also
submitted that the Privacy Act extended exemptions to a public sector official
defined as “
a person appointed by the Governor to a statutory
” such as the Chairperson of the Tribunal “...
investigating or otherwise handling a complaint...or that has been referred
from...an investigative agency
Complainant’s
Counsel referred to the release of information being governed relevantly in this
Inquiry, by Schedule D, Clause
7 of the National Law; and noted that no
application was made the Respondent for the proceedings to be closed to the
public during
the Inquiry. Counsel emphasised the discretion available to the
Tribunal to make a non-publication order; and referred to the serious
issues arising in the complaints “...
not just, impairment
for the Complainant cited
[2008] NSWMT (21 October 2008) which
emphasised the
function of the Medical Tribunal which does not
by its orders,
a practitioner; and that it is inherent in such
function, that information about the practitioner should be
available; also emphasised in the decision was the Tribunal’s upholding
professional standards and the profession’s reputation, to ensure that
public confidence in the profession is retained.
The Tribunal in that case did
not continue an interim
suppression
cited in support of the Complainant’s submissions was another Medical
Tribunal decision—
HCCC v Simring
[2010] NSWMT (29 April 2010) where
the Tribunal’s
, suppression order was lifted. As in
, it emphasised the Tribunal’s
function and
that its “...
findings and consequential orders are ‘for the
protection of those who require protection/ (Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
)...[and that]...
it is inherent in the protection of the
public that information about the practitioner be available should a potential
patient wish
to enquire as to whether the practitioner had been the subject of
an order under the medical Practice Act
.” The Medical Tribunal
emphasised that its role “...
is also to ensure that public and
professional colleagues can place their confidence in the
practitioner...
” and cited
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
34 NSWLR 408
at 441B, 471B “...
where it was said: ‘one element of
deterrence is providing an assurance to the public that serious lapses in the
conduct of...practitioners
will not be passed over or lightly put aside, but
will be appropriately dealt with.”
The Medical Tribunal emphasised the
importance also, that members of the public and of the profession
can have confidence that the Tribunal’s role has been
fulfilled. To make the determination of the Tribunal public, is part of
Respondent’s
Counsel referred to a decision of the Pharmacy Tribunal—
(22 April 2010) an appeal to the Tribunal from a decision of the (then)
NSW Medical Board which had imposed conditions on a pharmacist’s
registration / practice based on health-related grounds. In that matter, on
appeal, the Tribunal made a non-publication order as
to the pharmacist’s
name with the exception that it be included in the copy of the decision provided
to the appellant-pharmacist,
to the parties’ legal representatives, to the
Pharmacy Board and to the (then operative) Impaired Registrant’s Panel.
The Respondent in the instant matter seeks in effect, an order in the same terms
considered the submissions, the terms of the relevant legislation and the
Parliamentary
Second Reading Speech
, the Tribunal does not consider that
the legislative purpose of the Privacy Act intends that the Tribunal be subject
Tribunal notes that its decision in the matter of
concerned a
pharmacist’s appeal to the Tribunal and involved
whereas in the instant matter,
is but one, of a number of
complaints against the Respondent including professional misconduct and
unsuitability to hold registration
as a registered pharmacist.
the reasoning in the decisions referred to above, including the protective
disciplinary tribunals, the
Tribunal declines to make a non-publication order to suppress the name of the
Respondent in its decision
and in its reasons for decision.
the Tribunal:
....................................................
Chairperson
15 December 2011
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (541 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter