URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/139.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Golowenko [2025] NSWCATOD 139; (16 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Golowenko
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 139
Hearing Date(s):
10 - 11 March 2025
Date of Orders:
16 October 2025
Decision Date:
16 October 2025
Occupational Division
Acting Judge Levy SC, Principal Member
Dr G Yeo, Senior Member
Walker, Senior Member
S Lovrovich, General Member
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009 (National Law), the disclosure to
or entity of the name and the address of the person referred to as Patient A in
the Schedule to the amended complaint
and prohibition of the disclosure of the
names of the persons who made notifications to the regulator is prohibited. For
the avoidance
of doubt this order does not preclude the disclosure or
publication of the name of the respondent.
(2) Pursuant to
s 149C(1)(b) of the National Law, the medical registration of the respondent, Dr
Alexander Robert Golowenko is cancelled,
with a non-review period set at six
months from today’s date.
(3) Order (2) above is to
take effect from the close of business hours on the 7th day following
publication of these reasons.
(4) Pursuant to s 175B of the
National Law and clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law, the respondent
must pay the costs of
the Health Care Complaints Commission as agreed or
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONS – medical practitioners – admitted allegations of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
violation by general practitioner with vulnerable female patient –
appropriate protective orders having due
regard to the evidence – order
for cancellation - non-review period of 6 months
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009, s 3A, s 3B, s 40, s 139B, s
139E, s 150, s 149C(1)(b), s 175B
Health Practitioner (NSW) Regulation
2016, Schedule 4, s 2
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Bronze Wing International Pty
Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2017] NSWCA 41
Chen v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2017] NSWCA 186
Dawson v Law Society of NSW
Director General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home
Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
Health Care Complaints Commission v Buys
[2020] NSWCATOD 102
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
[2014] NSWCA
Health Care Complaints Commission v King
[2013] NSWMT 9
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) NSWLR 630
Care Complaints Commission v Schmaman
[2019] NSWCATOD 82
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Kruger v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1
Lucire v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
Mooney v Medical Council of
[2024] NSWCATOD 24
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
New South Wales Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2001] NSWCA 411
Qasim v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2015] NSWCA 282
Zepinic v Health Care Complaints
[2000] NSWSC 13
Texts Cited:
Good Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct for Doctors in Australia, Medical
Board of Australia & AHPRA, October 2020
Guidelines: Sexual Boundaries in
the Doctor-Patient Relationship, Medical Board of Australia, 12 December
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Alexander Robert
Golowenko (Respondent)
Representation:
O Jones (Applicant)
Dr P Dwyer SC
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Applicant)
Meridian Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00354505
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) 2009 (National Law), the disclosure to
any person or entity
of the name and the address of the person referred to as Patient A in the
Schedule to the amended complaint
and prohibition of the disclosure of the names
of the persons who made notifications to the regulator is prohibited. For the
of doubt this order does not preclude the disclosure or publication of
the name of the respondent.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Non-publication order
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
(NSW) 2009 (National Law), the disclosure to any person or entity of the
name and the address of the person referred to as Patient
A in the Schedule to
the amended complaint and prohibition of the disclosure of the names of the
persons who made notifications to
the regulator is prohibited. For the avoidance
of doubt this order does not preclude the disclosure or publication of the name
the respondent.
Introduction
proceedings involve a combined Stage 1 and Stage 2 professional conduct inquiry
concerning Dr Alexander Robert Golowenko, a
general practitioner practising in
Bowral, New South Wales. The jurisdictional focus of the proceedings is the
paramount and guiding
regulatory requirement of the protection of the health and
safety of the public: s 3A and s 3B of the National Law. As was foreshadowed
the hearing, these reasons have been delayed by the untimely receipt of the
transcript: T87.3.
The proceedings
proceedings follow an investigatory hearing conducted on 24 August 2023 by the
delegates of the Medical Council of New South
Wales pursuant to s 150 of
the National Law following notifications to the regulator by two mandatory
reporters and by a relative
of Patient A.
Complaints, responses
21 and 23 July 2023, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(AHPRA) received complaints about the respondent from
a relative of Patient A
and from two mandatory reporters. Those complaints were passed on to the Medical
Council of New South Wales
for consideration.
24 August 2023, pursuant to s 150 of the National Law, the Medical Council of
New South Wales convened a hearing in relation to
those complaints. At that
time, the emergency power of suspension in that provision was considered but not
invoked. Instead, a series
of stringent conditions were placed on the
respondent’s practice pending further investigations.
18 September 2023, after the reasons for decision of the s 150 delegates became
available, the Medical Council referred the factual
circumstances of the
notified complaints and the outcome of the s 150 inquiry to the Health Care
Complaints Commission of New South
Wales (HCCC) for investigation.
25 September 2024, the HCCC filed an application to this Tribunal raising three
particularised complaints concerning the professional
conduct of the respondent
concerning Patient A.
essence, those complaints concerned the respondent’s alleged failure to
observe the universally understood ethical requirements
for medical
practitioners to maintain the required professional boundary between doctor and
patient, where those requirement precluded
sexual and financial relationships,
and allegations that the respondent failed to comply with professional standards
regarding appropriate
prescribing practices and record keeping with regard to
his consultations with Patient A.
20 December 2024, in response to those three complaints the respondent filed a
reply to the complaints in which, with some minor
exceptions as to detail, he
admitted the substance of them.
7 March 2025, following a consideration of the respondent’s reply, the
HCCC filed an amended complaint which abandoned some
of the details
particularised in the original complaint.
abandoned particulars related to Complaint 1, particulars numbered 4, 8(a),
8(b), 10(a), and 12(b) to which reference will be
made at a later point in these
reasons concerning the onus of proof of contested factual matters.
respondent has maintained his factual admissions regarding the remaining
substance of the serious matters particularised against
him in the amended
complaint, and in doing so he has acknowledged that he has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
and professional misconduct.
first two complaints allege that the respondent had engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct in the practice of medicine
within the meaning of s 139B of
the National Law.
third complaint alleges the respondent was guilty of professional misconduct by
reason of the subject matter of the first two
complaints, which involved matters
of sufficient gravity concerning breaches of the professional boundary between
doctor and patient
which prohibited sexual and financial relationships such that
the respondent’s admissions require a finding that he has engaged
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 139E of the National Law.
Consequently,
the HCCC seeks a finding of professional misconduct within the meaning of s 139E
of the National Law, and pursuant to
s 149C(1)(b) of the National Law. The HCCC
also seeks the cancellation of the respondent’s registration as a medical
practitioner
with a non-review period of up to three years together with an
order that the respondent pay the HCCC’s costs as agreed or
pursuant to clause 13 of Schedule D of the National Law.
respondent acknowledges that a period of cancellation if not suspension of his
registration must necessarily follow these proceedings,
however he seeks a
lesser non-review period than the non-review period of between 2 and 3 years
sought by the HCCC. He relies on
evidence tendered on his behalf to support that
outcome. The parties made focussed submissions on those
Factual background
respondent is presently aged 52 years. Before he qualified as a medical
practitioner he had achieved other impressive accomplishments.
He first obtained
the degree of Bachelor of Information Technology (Computer Science) from the
University of Wollongong and then
a Diploma in Education from the University of
New South Wales. For a short time, he worked as a high school teacher, and he
operated a small business.
2003 and 2013 the respondent served his country as a commando in a special
forces unit of the Australian Defence Force. In
that capacity he saw active
service in two tours of duty in Afghanistan, during which he encountered some
dangerous and traumatic
circumstances which have led to a diagnosis of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
respondent qualified in medicine after completing his military service and
became a later age entrant into medical practice.
2013, the respondent graduated with honours from the University of Sydney with
the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor
of Surgery and became
registered as medical practitioner. In 2017, after completing the required
periods of internship and further
training, he became a Fellow of the Royal
College of General Practitioners. In 2019, he commenced working as a general
practitioner
in a group practice at the Eastbrooke Medical Centre in Bowral.
evidence discloses that practice was not a particularly supportive collegiate
environment for the respondent. That observation
is a relevant factor to be
considered in our deliberation of the issues raised in these proceedings.
fact of the respondent’s military service has been raised in these
proceedings as a matter of relevance, in that he claims
his professional
failings the subject of these proceedings has been in part influenced by his
PTSD which was undiagnosed at the time
of his impugned conduct.
respondent was aged between 48 and 49 years when his sexual and financial
relationship with a vulnerable female patient took place.
The patient is
identified in these proceedings as Patient A. She was then aged between 30 and
31 years. She identifies as indigenous,
and she has had an unfortunate and
troubled family background.
A prepared a factual statement dated 2 June 2023, which was included as part of
the applicant’s tender bundle of documents.
Patient A was not called to
give oral evidence. The ensuing summary of the factual background draws upon the
unchallenged portions
of the of Patient A’s statement and the related
tendered records.
2015, the respondent first met Patient A at [NOT FOR PUBLICATION]. At that time,
her ambition was [NOT FOR PUBLICATION].
2 September 2020, a doctor and patient relationship was established between them
when Patient A attended at the respondent’s
clinic for treatment of a
minor injury comprising a graze to her buttock. Thereafter, from time to time,
until 14 December 2021,
the respondent continued to see Patient A as her general
practitioner.
A has stated, without challenge, that at her first consultation with the
respondent, on 2 September 2020, she told him that
she was seeing a
psychologist, and a psychiatrist, Dr Adnan Younes, and that she needed to
consult a new doctor for prescriptions
of psychotropic medications. She told him
of some traumatic experiences in her childhood. She also related to him some
the trauma she experienced [NOT FOR PUBLICATION], her family history
of opioid abuse, and of wanting to improve her life and her
mental health. She
said the respondent told her that he thought she might have complex PTSD, the
treatment of which he would leave
to her psychologist. She felt she had
established a sympathetic rapport with him.
the course of the professional relationship the respondent became aware of
Patient A’s mental health diagnoses, which included
depression, insomnia,
complex PTSD, generalised anxiety, and a borderline personality disorder. It
appears that the respondent had
underestimated Patient A’s vulnerability
as a result of those conditions.
the course of their professional relationship the respondent gave Patient A some
Botox treatment as a continuum of cosmetic intervention
treatment she had been
having since her early 20’s due to her feelings of insecurity. He also
gave her his mobile telephone
number and suggested she could call if she
experienced any difficulty with the Botox treatment. This was a departure from
the standard
of practice that was expected of the respondent in those
circumstances.
flirtatious texting relationship between them soon commenced and continued.
Hundreds of text and other messages passed between them.
A large bulk of those
messages are in evidence in these proceedings. Patient A described how the
flirting continued in their appointments
and this soon turned to kissing,
hugging and touching.
a few further appointments, a full sexual relationship commenced and continued
at the times of booked appointments in the respondent’s
consulting room at
his clinic. Those appointments were bulk billed to Medicare even though no
medical services were provided on those
occasions. It is unnecessary to identify
the dates of those events other than to describe them as frequent occurrences.
Ultimately,
the doctor patient relationship ceased on 14 December 2021, but the
personal and intimate relationship continued, with greater frequency
encounters, until it ceased on 5 June 2022.
is undisputed that Patient A had a troubled background, and the respondent must
be taken to have known that she was a vulnerable
patient due to her disclosed
mental health diagnoses and her indigeneity. In the circumstances, the
respondent must also be taken
to have known that the relationship he was
pursuing with her was improper, professionally inappropriate, and
psychologically harmful
to her as his patient.
the respondent has admitted that he had misconducted himself in a manner that
constitutes professional misconduct it is unnecessary
to further describe the
intricacies and intimacies of the relationship. Apart from some matters of
disagreement which will be outlined
at a later point in these reasons, those
matters are more fully described in Patient A’s evidentiary statement, and
numerous messages, notes and other communications that passed between
them, copies of which are in the documentary evidence before
the Tribunal.
fact that a personal relationship had developed and continued between the
respondent and Patient A has attracted strong peer professional
criticism by an
expert witness engaged by the HCCC, Dr Michael Golding, a general practitioner.
The respondent’s conduct also
attracted strong professional comments of
ostracism from the Medical Council delegates who conducted the inquiry convened
to s 150 of the National Law.
the HCCC obtained Dr Golding’s expert report, on 1 February 2024, a
13-page letter was emailed to the respondent, enclosing
a copy of that report.
That letter informed him of grounds of a proposed disciplinary action that
might be taken against him, and
it invited him to take the opportunity of making
submissions on the proposed action within 28 days, a time frame provided by
s 40 of the National Law.
26 February 2024, the respondent replied to that letter confirming he had
carefully read Dr Goldings’ report. Whilst stating
that there were some
factual matters that he did not entirely agree with, and which he said were
ultimately inconsequential, he admitted
conduct relating to
his treatment and care of
[Patient A]
and his conduct to her was
significantly below the standard expected of
as a registered
practitioner
” and he admitted that “
this may amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct
that letter, the respondent also admitted that some of his patient record
keeping was below the professional standard expected
of him, and that this too
may amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct or misconduct on his part.
respondent’s letter of response went on to state that at the time he was
treating Patient A he was “
” from his experiences relating to his military service, and
from his professional involvement in responding to bushfires, floods,
Covid-19 pandemic. He admitted Patient A was a vulnerable patient and that he
had not been taking care of his own mental
health, and he had been seeing too
many patients. He disclosed that he had begun seeing a psychiatrist, Dr Robert
Gordon, and a psychologist,
Mr David Patton, for professional consultations and
treatment, and that in those sessions, he was being provided with an opportunity
to reflect on his professional failings.
respondent’s letter concluded with the statement: “
I truly regret
any harm I may have caused
[Patient A],
and regret failing my obligations
as a registered practitioner
”. It is salient to read that statement of
regret alongside Patient A’s rationale for pressing the complaint against
respondent when she wrote: “
I don’t want this to happen to
anyone else.
[The respondent]
is still practising and I’ve lost
”. [NOT FOR PUBLICATION].
A’s statement dated 2 June 2023 sets out the unchallenged detail of the
evolution of the relationship which developed
between them. It is clear from her
statement that she had an underlying vulnerability due to her experience of
childhood trauma,
a traumatic experience with the birth of her child, a
problematic relationship with her fiancée, and she was taking a range
prescribed psychotropic medications in conjunction with her history of anxiety
and depression.
statement from Patient A’s relative, another notifier, has charted the
changes seen in Patient A during the time of her relationship
respondent. In that time it came to notice that she had increased her medication
usage, she had undergone significant weight
loss, she had a relationship
breakdown with her fiancée, she had increased her alcohol consumption,
and there was a general
impression that she was increasingly stressed and that
her life was spiralling out of control in the lead up to the termination of
relationship with the respondent. In light of those observations, Patient A's
relative assisted her in achieving a termination
of her relationship with the
respondent, as it was thought to be an unhealthy situation for her.
The s 150 findings
21 September 2022, in the s 150 proceedings, the Medical Council delegates
published their reasons for decision in which they were
united in expressing
their strongest condemnation of the respondent’s actions, based on the
following findings:
“In his evidence during the hearing, Dr Golowenko admitted to having sex
with a vulnerable patient for about 10 months, at
times in his office, a car, a
motel and at her home. He also provided her cosmetic and other treatment and
prescribed various medications,
including drugs of addiction. In addition, in
conjunction with these “
consultations
”, he charged Medicare
for consultations during which he had sex with the patient. In our view, Dr
Golowenko’s actions
constitute flagrant and deplorable violations of the
Code and the Guidelines. ...”
s 150 Delegates gave consideration as to whether, in the interests of public
health and safety, the respondent’s medical
registration should be
suspended or whether conditions should be imposed on his practice whilst the
HCCC continued its investigation
as precursor to these proceedings. In their
deliberations, the delegates noted the following matters:
“We note that there is no evidence of previous history or complaints of
boundary violations. Given that Dr Golowenko admitted
to the sexual relationship
with [Patient A], demonstrated insight and contrition, recognising that the
relationship was unethical
and unprofessional, is currently seeing a
psychologist and a marriage guidance counsellor, we were not satisfied that
there was a
risk to the public interest, such that should take immediate action.
[Emphasis added]
Consequently,
and significantly, notwithstanding the admitted misconduct, the respondent was
not suspended. Instead, stringent restrictive
conditions were placed on his
practice pending these proceedings. The full details of those conditions are
replicated in
to these reasons.
HCCC relied upon a comprehensive and detailed evidence bundle marked Exhibit
“A”, pp 1 - 988, an evidentiary certificate
setting out the details
of the respondent’s registration and conditions of practice (Exhibit
“B”), and the CV of
Dr Michael Golding, the peer general
practitioner expert retained by the HCCC: Exhibit “C”.
respondent relied upon an evidence bundle marked Exhibit “1”, pp 1
– 52, comprising his evidentiary statement,
a reply to the complaint
filed, a series of references, and reports from his own treating and assessing
practitioners. In addition
to his own oral evidence, the respondent called oral
evidence from Dr Robert Gordon, a psychiatrist, and Mr David Patton, a clinical
psychologist. The CVs of those witnesses were marked Exhibit “2”.
The respondent’s supplementary evidentiary statement
was marked Exhibit
Review of evidence adduced by HCCC
review of relevant aspects of the evidence adduced by the HCCC now
The HCCC bundle of papers
material sections of the HCCC bundle of evidence comprised the evidentiary
statements of Patient A and Person A, Patient A’s
medical records, the
transcript of the s 150 proceedings before the Medical Council delegates, the
decision of the delegates, copies
of the numerous messaging records and other
notes that passed between the respondent and Patient A, the expert report of Dr
Golding, and annexed publications defining the appropriate standards of
practice applicable to medical practitioners.
Expert evidence
– Dr Michael Golding
Michael Golding, the peer general practitioner engaged by the HCCC to provide an
expert analysis and opinion on the respondent’s
actions, was asked to
consider the evidence presented to him in relation to the respondent and Patient
A and to provide opinions
on whether the respondent had departed from the
standard of care that was expected of a practitioner of similar training and
experience,
and if so, to indicate whether such departures fell significantly
below the expected standard.
response, Dr Golding issued a report dated 23 December 2023, in which he
identified a series of instances where in his opinion
the respondent’s
professional conduct critically fell significantly below the standard expected
of a practitioner of his standing
and training.
Golding’s comments made frequent reference to Good Medical Practice: A
Code of Conduct for Doctors in Australia published
by Medical Board of Australia
and AHPRA, October 2020, and Guidelines: Sexual Boundaries in the Doctor-Patient
Relationship, published
by the Medical Board of Australia, 12 December 2018,
respectively referred to as the Code and the Sexual Boundaries Code.
Golding’s peer criticisms of the respondent relate to two principal
categories,
his therapeutic management of Patient A, and
, the sexual relationship which had developed, and which was
maintained between them in the period 2 September 2021 to 5 June 2022.
following summaries of Dr Goldings opinions exclude references to the
particulars of complaint deleted from the original complaint
when it was
replaced by the amended complaint. Reference will be made to those matters in
the course of our consideration.
to the therapeutic aspect of the doctor and patient relationship
to the final version of the amended complaint, Dr Golding expressed the opinion
that, with the exception of the first two
consultations with Patient A on 12
August 2020 and 2 September 2020, the respondent’s conduct involving
Patient A should be
seen to have fallen significantly below the expected
standard in the following respects:
(1) The respondent continued to provide medical services to Patient A between 2
July 2021 and January 2022 whilst having a sexual
relationship with her, and in
that time, he inappropriately prescribed benzodiazepines, clonidine, and opioid
medications: Exhibit
“A”, pp 231 – 232; Exhibit
“A”, pp 232 – 235;
(2) The respondent gave Patient A advice concerning psychoactive medications
that was inconsistent with the opinion of her treating
psychiatrist without
consulting that practitioner: Exhibit “A”, pp 232 – 235;
(3) The respondent gave Patient A an iron infusion, being a second infusion,
without contemporary laboratory evidence of an existing
iron deficiency: Exhibit
“A”, pp 254 – 255;
(4) The respondent issued Schedule 4 and Schedule 8 prescriptions for Patient A,
namely benzodiazepines, nitrazepam, diazepam, alprazolam
quetiapine, in
excessive quantities. In that context he did not follow the advice of Patient
A’s treating psychiatrist to up-titrate
quetiapine to an effective dose
and he did not follow advice concerning the prescribing of clonidine; and he
prescribed quetiapine
in larger quantities than were required for the
recommended dosing regime: Exhibit “A”, pp 236 – 247;
(5) The respondent issued Patient A with prescriptions for fluoxetine,
tapentadol, codeine, paracetamol and promethazine hydrochloride
without making
appropriate notes in his patient records as to the clinical indications for
those prescriptions: Exhibit “A”,
pp 247 – 254;
(6) The respondent failed to appropriately consider Patient A’s family
history of substance abuse and her psychosocial circumstances
which represented
risk factors for addiction, whilst also being aware that Patient A was taking
medication at a greater rate than
was being prescribed for her: Exhibit
“A”, pp 255 – 256;
(7) The respondent inappropriately advised Patient A as to the combined use of
the medications Palexia and Valium; withdrawal issues;
provided her with
unmarked boxes of Panadeine Forte; and provided her with a syringe of Maxolon
for treatment of a hangover for the
use of another person he had not seen:
Exhibit “A”, pp 256 – 260;
(8) The respondent issued a prescription to Patient A for the management of a
Bipolar condition when he ought to have known from
specialist communication that
Patient A did not have that diagnosis: Exhibit “A”, pp 260 –
to the sexual aspect of the doctor and patient relationship
, relevant to the
final version of the amended complaint, Dr Golding expressed the opinion that
the respondent’s conduct involving
Patient A should be seen as having
fallen significantly below the expected standard in the following
(1) The respondent seriously breached the expected standard of trust required of
him as a cornerstone of the doctor and patient relationship
with Patient A in
breach of s 1.1 of the Sexual Boundaries Code: Exhibit “A”, pp 262
(2) The respondent’s actions in providing Patient A with his mobile
telephone number and engaging in a range of flirtatious
communications with her,
including by numerous messaging, were in breach of s 4, s 4.2.6, and s
10.2.1 of the Sexual Boundaries Code,
which respectively flagged the
propositions that the start of a sexual relationship between doctor and patient
may not always be
immediately obvious to either the doctor or the patient; where
boundaries are being or are about to be crossed; where it is the responsibility
of the practitioner to be alert to the warning signs which were present
regarding Patient A; where the practitioner ought to have
recognised that the
inherent power imbalance in his relationship with Patient A could lead to
physical, emotional and sexual exploitation
of the patient: Exhibit
“A”, pp 265 – 263;
(3) The respondent’s actions in using humorously suggestive language and
innuendos that might reasonably be interpreted as
being designed or intended to
arouse sexual interest, and his actions in kissing, hugging and touching Patient
A during medical appointments
in a non-therapeutic manner, were in breach of s
3.1 of the Sexual Boundaries Code: Exhibit “A”, pp 262 –
(4) The respondent breached s 3.1 the Sexual Boundaries Code by engaging in and
continuing to engage in a sexual relationship with
Patient A, where engaging in
or seeking to engage in a sexual relationship with a patient irrespective of
whether the doctor believed
there was consent for the relationship constitutes a
breach of that Code: Exhibit “A”, pp 262 – 266;
(5) The respondent, by bulk billing Medicare for appointments on multiple
occasions where medical services were not provided, where
instead, sexual
intercourse took place in his consulting rooms, failed to meet the professional
standard of s 2.1 of the Good Medical
Practice Code which calls for
practitioners to act with honesty, integrity and truthfulness: Exhibit
“A”, pp 263 –
(6) The respondent’s documentation of his treatment of Patient A was
deficient and in breach of s 10.5.1 and 10.5.4 of the
Good Medical Practice Code
requiring him to keep clear, up to date, legible and accurate medical records as
an essential element
of good patient care that were sufficient to facilitate
continuity of patient care: Exhibit “A”, pp 269 – 272;
(7) The respondent was in breach of s (2) of Schedule 4 of the Health
Practitioner (NSW) Regulation 2016, which required him to maintain
A’s medical records in such way that included any relevant information
known to him, the particulars of any clinical
opinion he had reached, and the
particulars of any medication prescribed to the patient: Exhibit
“A”, pp 270 –
(8) The respondent, by continuing his inappropriate sexual relationship with
Patient A after her medical care had been transferred
to another medical
practitioner in his practice, was in breach of s 5 of the Sexual Boundaries Code
which identified such conduct
as unethical, unprofessional, and a misuse of the
power imbalance between doctor and patient: Exhibit “A”, pp 264
(9) The respondent, failed to recognise, as was required by s 4.9.6 of the Good
Medical Practice Code, that Patient A had additional
needs that placed her at
greater risk: Exhibit “A”, pp 271 – 272;
(10) The respondent, by conducting a sexual relationship with Patient A,
(knowing she was a vulnerable patient who had been diagnosed
with depression,
insomnia, complex PTSD, generalised anxiety, and a borderline personality
disorder, who also identified as indigenous,
raised additional issues of burden
for her concerning social and health inequality), was in breach of 4.2.6 of the
Good Medical Practice
Code which required practitioners to recognise the
existence of a power imbalance in the doctor and patient relationship when
interacting
with patients: Exhibit “A”, pp 265 – 263;
respondent has not challenged those aspects of Dr Golding’s peer
criticisms of his admitted misconduct.
Review of evidence adduced
by the respondent
review of relevant aspects of the evidence adduced by the respondent now
Respondent’s evidence
respondent’s evidentiary statement dated 20 December 2025, and his
supplementary statement dated 3 March 2025, were reviewed
alongside his oral
evidence: T13 – T44.
respondent’s statement dated 20 December 2025 recounted the history of his
professional practice. He also described the
commencement of his professional
relationship with Patient A. In brief terms, he confirmed that he had engaged in
an intimate relationship
with Patient between July 2021 and May 2022, and he
expressed his sincere regret at having harmfully failed in his professional
obligations
to her by having engaged in that relationship.
that statement, the respondent identified as part of his background a series of
his traumatic experiences whilst he was engaged
in special forces commando
duties in Afghanistan and his subsequent involvement in treating his community
for the stresses associated
with bushfires in his area and in relation to the
Covid-19 pandemic and the effect those matters had on him.
respondent’s supplementary statement dated 3 March 2025 was more expansive
and set out the details of a series of professional
consultations that preceded
the intimate relationship with Patient A. This statement took issue with aspects
of the terms of Patient
A’s stated recollections of some of the exchanges
that took place between them in the course of their personal relationship,
he nevertheless expressed his deep regret at harming Patient A by his
acknowledged professional failings as her health practitioner
without seeking to
minimise the harm so caused.
the respondent’s supplementary statement, following some deep reflections
on the events in question, he set out further details
of some of the traumatic
and stressful experiences that had affected him to explain the context of his
professional offending. These
included an excessive workload, marital stresses
in a chaotic family situation, professional burnout, trauma management, and
medically to an extremely challenging fatality which occurred at an
equestrian event. He emphasised that he had set out that commentary
in order to
explain the factors that were influential in the shortcomings in his
professional behaviour without seeking to minimise
or excuse the harm he had
caused to Patient A.
that supplementary statement the respondent also provided details of some
significant remedial steps he had been pursing since
the events in question came
to light, namely therapy to assist in dealing constructively with his marital
separation, and his consultations
with a treating psychologist and a treating
psychiatrist since recognising that he has PTSD.
his oral evidence, the respondent confirmed the content of his evidentiary
statements and confirmed the beneficial effects of the
psychological therapy and
the benefits of the professional supervision he has been receiving in his
practice since 2022. The following
matters of significance emerged from his
(1) He acknowledged that following the insights he has developed since the
events in question, a cancellation if not suspension of
his registration was
necessary because his admitted professional conduct, which was serious,
horrendous, and unacceptable.
(2) He acknowledged the detail of his professional offending with Patient A
included sexual encounters with her in his consulting
rooms on multiple
occasions, for which he wrongfully bulk-billed Medicare, thereby profiting from
those payments;
(3) He acknowledged his completely inappropriate prescribing in relation to
psychoactive prescriptions he had issued to Patient A,
along with his inadequate
and poor record keeping contrary to accepted standards in relation to those
matters, thereby placing her
at risk of exacerbating an already established
dependency and placing her psychological state at risk;
(4) He did not seek to justify those shortcomings in his professional conduct,
and acknowledged the harm he had occasioned to Patient
A, and to his own family
without seeking to attribute blame to Patient A for his professional
shortcomings;
(5) He explained that his insight into his misconduct started from a baseline of
zero at the time, and had developed into a very
clear understanding through the
painful process
” of therapy;
(6) He convincingly explained that as a result of therapy, the shame he has
experienced, and the insights he has gained into his
unacceptable misconduct,
are sincere. He also stated that as a result of his understanding on how PTSD
has manifested itself in his
case, his professional offending is unlikely to
(7) He became profoundly visibly distressed in explaining his circumstances to
the extent that the Tribunal was left in no doubt
that he was involuntarily
displaying a behavioural manifestation of his PTSD when under the pressure of
uncomfortable questioning:
(8) He stated that he has come to realise that in taking on an excessive
workload to the point of workaholism, that in pushing himself
without thought of rest breaks for self-care, he had been drawing upon his
commando training in a way which was, in that
setting, in hindsight,
”, and not appropriate for his own wellbeing or to
good medical practice;
(9) He has been open about his impugned conduct and embarrassingly, he has made
relevant disclosures to his practice manager, his
medical colleagues and the
specialists with whom he works in a variety of settings, including to several
colleagues when he has been
a regular surgical assistant. He has described
having undertaken appropriate courses aimed at reinforcing a proper
understanding
of the professional boundaries that must be maintained between
doctor and patient, and of the need to keep proper records and notes;
(10) He has been engaging appropriately with recommended treatments and
(11) In seeking to explain that he did not at the time understand how he could
have let the events in question occur, gave the following
evidence in emotional
Q. Does that mean in summary that you were blinded to the process at the time it
was occurring?
A. During the time that this was occurring I was blinded to what was happening.
[Patient A] had been a patient of mine for nearly
12 months, about nine months
prior to this occurring and this was something that had built up during this
time. At this time, and
I think as noted by both Dr Gordon, Dr Patton and Dr
Roche(?), my treating doctors, I was, as hard as it is to accept, I was
from severe PTSD and burnout. Part of the nature of, from what I
understand now of combat-related PTSD and particularly in the counterinsurgency
operations in Afghanistan, it's not the traditional Hollywood version of
nightmares and flashbacks and the craziness that occurs
but it seems that
fighting an embedded and hidden enemy, embedded within a civilian population
creates an element of hypervigilance
and hyperarousal and severe risk-taking.
From discussions I've had with my peers and fellow veterans at this time most of
experienced this and it's not until there is a crisis that on
reflection you can see how out of control you were and that this diagnosis
this illness creates vulnerability within myself as it does with any veteran and
unfortunately being a doctor, it doesn't make
me immune to this vulnerability
and there was a PTSD risk-taking, adrenalin-seeking component potentially to how
this occurred.
Q. The tribunal understands that process well and your exposure to combat and
trauma can produce these feelings. I want to come back
to the question of being
blindsided to the process and what was happening between you and Patient A. Did
you ever along the timeline
of your intimate relationship pause and recognise
that what was happening was both - was deleterious to both you and to her?
A. At this time, speaking honestly, I was in love with Patient A. I felt that,
that t[h]ere was a future together. I felt a very
strong connection to her. I
felt she was understanding or sympathetic to who I was at that time. I felt
that, that we were - that
there was a future for us and that our feelings for
each other was (as said) get use through any of the hard times. So, I think I
was vulnerable, and I feel in love with Patient A, and that I felt that she was
going to be the one and that we'd have a future together.
Which completely
clouded and changed every from my usual practice; how I would ever treat anyone
else, and again, this wasn't - didn't
occur over a matter of weeks, this was a
matter of months.
Q. In that process did you ever pause to analysis (sic for analyse) whether this
evolving relationship was based on equality or involved
a power imbalance?
A. Yes. There's a power imbalance between - in any doctor/ patient relationship.
At the time of the affair the relationship developed
with Patient A, I felt we
were more friends and potentially developing feelings for each other rather than
doctor/patient.,
Q. But in that process did you not recognise that because of the age difference
and the status difference and the socioeconomic difference
that there was a
power imbalance between you?
A. I did recognise there was a power imbalance.
Q. And was that not accentuated by your knowledge of her underlying
vulnerability due to the factors that have been identified such
as her family
background, her trauma history, her anxieties and which Dr Unis (sic for Younes)
identified as her borderline personality
A. This adds to the vulnerability it was something that I was aware of. Again,
there was a risk-taking element to what was occurring
as well. Umm, this was
exciting, and adrenaline based which now I know was just fuelling the PTSD demon
which was giving me an outlet
for something that had been going on for, since my
service in Afghanistan in 2008, 2009.”
[T23.40 – T25.1]
[Emphasis added]
the course of cross-examination, it was initially suggested to the respondent
that he had given untruthful evidence, a proposition
which he denied. However,
it was later noted that after reflecting on the evidence, counsel for the HCCC
later withdrew that assertion:
Associate Professor
Vincent Roche’s evidence
respondent relied upon a report dated 30 December 2024 provided by Associate
Professor Vincent Roche, his treating general practitioner
whom he had known
since about 2015 during his time as a registrar. A/Professor Roche had been
provided with a copy of the original
complaint filed by the HCCC along with Dr
Golding’s report (with which he was in general agreement), the NCAT
Procedural Direction
concerning the requirements of expert evidence, and he
consulted his own medical records concerning the respondent: Exhibit
A/Professor
Roche related his understanding of the respondent’s background of military
service and his exposure to stressors,
and of having discussed those matters
with him informally as a collegiate mentor rather than as a treating doctor.
11 April 2023, A/Professor Roche formed the view that the respondent likely had
PTSD, and referred him to Dr Robert Gordon, a consultant
psychiatrist in the
region. He has stated that the respondent seems to him to have acquired a
growing awareness of the effects of
PTSD on his life and on his professional
life, and that he has enthusiastically embraced PTSD therapy. He expressed the
opinion that
the respondent has acquired significant insight into his admitted
misconduct and in relation to the harm that he has likely caused
A/Professor
Roche was impressed by the fact that the respondent has been able to freely
discuss his professional failures and admit
that, unlike his earlier state of
denial, he is now able to accept he has had severe PTSD.
A/Professor
Roche agreed with Dr Golding’s views that the respondent’s
prescribing for Patient A was undertaken inadequately
without consideration of
possible side effects and complex drug interactions and without appropriate risk
monitoring in view of the
patient’s family history of drug abuse and her
vulnerability. He was critical of the fact that a boundary violating sexual
relationship had taken place. He also agreed that the medical records kept by
the respondent in relation to Patient A were inadequate.
In expressing those
views, he highlighted the obvious need for sanctions in view of the evident
breaches by the respondent in relation
to the required standard of
Dr Robert Gordon’s evidence
Robert Gordon, a consultant psychiatrist who also has specialist qualifications
in general practice, has provided the respondent
with a report dated 15 January
2025: Exhibit “1”, pp 34 – 40.
respondent first consulted Dr Gordon in April 2023, at which time he confirmed
the respondent’s PTSD diagnosis stemming
from his military service in
Afghanistan. He also noted some catalytic family dynamics which have
subconsciously activated the respondent’s
PTSD symptoms. He concluded his
report with the opinion that the respondent’s psychological condition
remains unchanged despite
his conscious attempts to at achieving some
equilibrium. He said that in his view respondent has insight into the
significant mistake
he has made with regard to the management of Patient A.
Gordon gave oral evidence in these proceedings: T46 – T65. In that
evidence, he made the following points of significance:
(1) The respondent’s symptoms of PTSD which he incurred in Afghanistan
have never abated, and those symptoms are at times not
apparent to him when they
appear; they are extremely difficult to treat; the success of the available
treatments is very poor; the
condition is ever present in the background and can
flare according to triggering circumstances;
(2) The respondent appreciates that his impugned conduct, a major problem for
him, was inappropriate, and he is in need ongoing treatment,
preferably with a
psychiatrist who is not involved in dealing with the family dynamics;
(3) The respondent’s insight into the events in question is still
evolving, and because of his PTSD, whilst he is aware that
logic usually does
not play a significant part, there is a probability of a risk of a recurrence of
the behaviour in question;
(4) The respondent would be advised to enter into lifelong psychotherapy with a
therapist he can trust in order to have the ready
facility for open discussion
which would serve as mitigation against a risk or diminish the risk of a
recurrence of the impugned
(5) On the question of insight into the causes of the breach of the professional
boundary between doctor and patient, he considered
the respondent had
underestimated the severity of Patient A’s underlying problems;
(6) He supported the suggestion that the respondent should have EMDR treatment
for his condition;
(7) He said he valued and would defer to the treatment suggestions provided to
the respondent by Mr Patton, the treating psychologist;
(8) He noted that an important mitigation strategy against a risk of recurrence
would be for the respondent to continue to accept
his PTSD diagnosis and to
continue with treatment for that condition.
overall impression gained from Dr Gordon’s evidence is that whilst the
respondent’s PTSD is a lifelong condition,
it could be managed with
appropriate treatment, and of itself, it was not a barrier to future medical
Mr David Patton’s evidence
David Patton, a clinical psychologist, provided the respondent with a report
dated 15 January 2025: Exhibit “1”, pp
respondent first consulted Mr Patton in a professional capacity in March 2022
and since then there have been 21 consultations
prior to the issue of the
report. Mr Patton summarised the details of each of those consultations
Beforehand, since 2017, they had
a professional association through referrals,
in that the respondent had been referring approximately 8 to 10 patients per
him for psychological assistance.
July 2022, Mr Patton noted the respondent had felt lonely in his medical
practice, the inference being he was not in an open or
a supportive collegiate
practising environment. By August 2022, Mr Patton recorded a history of the
respondent feeling regret and
remorse after an in-depth discussion on the
inappropriateness of his relationship with his patient.
summarising subsequent consultations, Mr Patton recorded the respondent as
having expressed self-blame, taking personal responsibility
for his untoward
actions, feeling burnt out, continuing to exhibit hypervigilance, speaking about
traumatic incidents in his deployment
in Afghanistan, speaking about related
distressing memories, discussing boundary issues, feeling stress from a pending
suit, being very reactive to situations, and requesting EMDR therapy,
to which he was responding positively.
Patton described the applicant has having exhibited a high degree of compliance
with psychological treatment and also exhibiting
a high level of help seeking
behaviour and openness about his aberrant and unacceptable conduct towards
Patient A in having breached
the doctor and patient boundary.
Patton recorded that the respondent was responding well to EMDR treatment for
his PTSD symptoms, and was demonstrating willingness
to adhere to treatment
recommendations, and was also exhibiting an increasing self-awareness regarding
his impugned behaviour and
Patton concluded his report by agreeing with Dr Golding’s opinion, and by
saying that the respondent would benefit from ongoing
peer support from medical
practitioners.
Patton also gave oral evidence in the proceedings: T56 – T68. In that
evidence, he made the following points of significance:
(1) He explained EMDR therapy as involving the identification of stressful
memories or parts of memories associated with a traumatic
experience and
desensitising such memories by bilateral stimulation through eye movements to
achieve the desensitisation process;
(2) The timing of the respondent’s full disclosure of his boundary
violation occurred in the third treatment session, and this
was consistent with
his growing awareness of the enormity of what he had done;
(3) The respondent’s insight into the events, although full, evidenced by
a high degree of self-awareness, remains an ongoing
process that will probably
never cease to evolve because of his feelings of shame and regret that he
continues to have over the events;
(4) The respondent has demonstrated a great willingness to engage in therapy and
has shown a capacity to moderate his working hours
and to accept professional
supervision;
(5) His recommendation is for the respondent to continue to have treatment until
the symptoms cease, and as such, treatment should
be viewed as a work in
progress, where there may be a range of potentially triggering circumstances
that may be likely to evoke symptoms
of reactivity and the associated
behavioural pathologies;
(6) The respondent has developed a level of awareness about professional
boundaries in the context of “
not getting himself into that sort of
situation again in the future
(7) He has been supporting the respondent through the Tribunal process in
circumstances where the respondent realises that he will
be suspended (sic) from
impression gained from Mr Patton’s evidence is that the respondent’s
PTSD is a manageable condition that of itself
was not inimical with future
medical practice if supporting measures are in place.
Wilson’s evidence
Mark Wilson, a general practitioner since 1994, has provided the respondent with
a character reference dated 12 January 2025: Exhibit
– 41. He has known the respondent and has worked with him at the same
practice between 2019 and 2021.
He has been the respondent’s medical
supervisor since May 2023 as required by the Medical Council as a result of the
complaints. He made no negative comments on the respondent’s
capacity and performance as a general practitioner.
Dr Michelle
Mulvihill’s evidence
Michelle Mulvihill, a senior practising psychologist who has had a professional
referral relationship with the respondent who has
been sending her patients
since 2016, provided the respondent with a character reference dated 19 January
2025: Exhibit “1”,
pp 44 – 48. Dr Mulvihill described the
circumstances in which the respondent disclosed to her the nature of the
against him. She stated that he had expressed his extreme remorse,
embarrassment, sorrow, distress, guilt and shame over those events.
those events, she regarded him as a general practitioner of the highest
standards, clinically observant, always doing
the right thing for his patients
in helping them, and being a man of the highest character. She noted the complex
trauma he might
be carrying due to his time in Afghanistan.
Andrew Foote’s evidence
Andrew Foote, a consultant obstetrician, gynaecologist, and urogynaecologist,
provided the respondent with a character reference
dated 23 December 2024:
Exhibit “1”, pp 49 – 52. His experience of the respondent has
been in the context of the
respondent having been his monthly surgical assistant
since 2016 as well as being a source of patient referrals. He wrote positively
the work setting. He had not witnessed any unprofessional
behaviour on the
respondent’s part. He indicated he would be happy to have the respondent
as his general practitioner of choice
if his current general practitioner was
unavailable.
Dr Rui Niu’s evidence
Rui Nui, an orthopaedic surgeon, provided the respondent with a character
reference letter dated 22 January 2025: Exhibit “1”,
52. He has known the respondent for 6 years as a professional colleague in
Bowral. He considered the respondent’s
misconduct to be incongruous with
the professionalism and empathy he had observed in the respondent in multiple
clinical settings,
including as his surgical assistant. He formed the opinion
that the respondent was otherwise of good character. He said the respondent
demonstrated genuine remorse for his actions and has demonstrated understanding
of the gravity of his impugned actions.
Ms Katherine
Armstrong’s evidence
Katherine Armstrong, the current practice manager of the Eastbrooke Medical
Centre, provided the respondent with a character reference
dated 8 January 2025:
She wrote positively of the respondent’s medical interactions and
professionalism. She has referred her
own family members to him and felt
comfortable working with him: Exhibit “1”, pp 42 –
Submissions of the parties
essential points made in the HCCC submissions, the respondent’s
submissions, and the respondent’s submissions in reply,
are summarised
HCCC submissions
initial submissions by the HCCC were focussed on “
MFI ”1”, paragraph 2. In oral submissions this required refocus to
the correct issue, namely protective orders: s 3B
of the National Law: T69.37.
HCCC submitted that the cancellation of the respondent’s registration was
required, with the imposition of a non-review
period of 2 to 3 years in light of
the extreme seriousness of the nature of the respondent’s departures from
accepted standards
of practice, which have been conceded as justifying findings
of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct.
making that submission, the HCCC pointed to the following five uncontroversial
factors of relevance
(1) The need to protect the public, and in particular future patients of the
practitioner, against further misconduct by the practitioner;
(2) the need to protect the public for general deterrence of other
practitioners;
(3) the need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional standards
and denouncing transgressions;
(4) the maintenance of public confidence in the profession;
(5) the desirability of making available to the public any special skills
possessed by the practitioner.,
the course of oral submissions, the HCCC placed emphasis on the need for
cancellation in cases of serious misconduct. The HCCC
submitted that objectively
very serious misconduct has been made out in this case by reason of the
respondent’s reckless prescribing
of drugs to Patient A, which created a
dependence in his vulnerable patient, and this called for a general deterrence
that required
the denunciation of such conduct by cancellation rather than by
means of a suspension.
HCCC also pointed out that whilst the respondent has expressed regret over his
misconduct and is receiving appropriate treatment
for his PTSD, a lifelong
condition, that process still remains a journey for him in circumstances where
the fact that diagnosis has
been made does not necessarily mean the reactivity
risks of aberrant behaviour associated with that condition are alleviated and
will not recur in the future.
those circumstances, the HCCC submitted public confidence requires that
following cancellation, there should be a non-review period
of between 2 to 3
years. The effect of that submission was that during that time the respondent
would have the reflective opportunity
to address the difficult issues he faces
in his life with regard to the chaos in his family circumstances and consolidate
his insights
into the events in question.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent’s submissions highlighted the fact that from an early stage, he
had acknowledged his professional failings and
has admitted the substance of the
matters alleged against him concerning unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct
save for a series of particulars relating to Complaint
exceptions respectively related to particular 4, alleged but disputed advice as
to pregnancy termination; particular 8(a), a
disputed lascivious comment;
particular 8(b), a disputed conversation concerning Patient A’s
appearance; particular 10(a),
a disputed remark about another practitioner; and
12(b), a disputed assertion over drug dependency involving diazepam.
that regard, despite those disputed matters, the respondent submitted that he
has not shied away from the serious substance of
the complaints made against
him, as can be seen from his answers to questioning at the s 150 hearing, and
from his early admissions
concerning serious nature of his misconduct.
maintaining his denial of the matters raised by those particulars, reasonably,
the respondent placed emphasis on the need for the
HCCC to discharge its onus of
proof in the face of such denials, where Patient A was not called to give oral
evidence to dispute
those denials. In those circumstances, it was submitted that
the Tribunal would have no reason to dismiss the respondent’s
those limited matters, and that a finding should be made that those matters have
not been proven to the required standard
of comfortable satisfaction.
to the substantive matters which the respondent accepts as his professional
failings and wrongdoings as being embarrassing, horrendous,
and shameful, he
accepts that these matters have had an untoward impact on Patient A and on the
reputation of the medical profession.
It was submitted that those failings were
out of character and were influenced by his PTSD which stemmed from the
traumatic experiences
he incurred in the military whilst serving his country,
and subsequently.
respondent’s submissions drew upon the supportive remarks from the
practitioners and persons who provided references as
to his professional skills,
his otherwise good character, and his expressions of guilt, regret, shame and
remorse, to argue that
these factors suggest that a pathway had been established
working towards insight and the unlikelihood of a recurrence of his past
aberrant behaviour in light of the insights he has gained from therapy,
supervision, and reflection.
submissions were made in the context of the unique and isolated practice
circumstances of the offending conduct and the respondent’s
PTSD, where
his subsequent realisation of the latter factor was pointed to as having made
him insightful, whilst also recognising
a potential vulnerability for
professional transgressions.
the question of protective orders, the respondent’s primary submission was
to argue for a period of suspension rather than
cancellation. On the alternative
premise that a cancellation order would be made, the respondent’s
submissions argued for a
non-review period of between 6 and 12 months on the
basis that it should be recognised that a renewal application involves an
6 month delay comprising an administrative time lag factor which
should be added into the equation.
HCCC’s submissions in
HCCC accepts that in such cases there are no pre-set tariff considerations that
fetter the exercise of the discretion in relation
to the setting a non-review
period following a cancellation order: T86.28. That said, the respondent
summitted that the respondent’s
PTSD and volatile family environment, and
the related triggers, continued to pose risk factor such that public confidence
that there be an emphasis on the factor of general deterrence
associated with cancellation in this case.
Relevant principles
for consideration of Stage 1 concerning disputed matters
applicant has admitted the substance of the misconduct complaints against him,
save for Complaint 1, particulars numbered 4, 8(a),
8(b), 10(a), and 12(b) as
detailed at paragraph [
] above. The HCCC referred to those matters of gravity
in the course of submissions.
A was not called to elaborate on those allegations. Counsel for the respondent
therefore did not have the opportunity to challenge
and test those allegations.
In the face of the respondent’s denials, those disputed matters stand to
be determined according
to which party bears the onus of proof on such
onus of proof concerning such matters of gravity must be discharged by the HCCC
on the balance of probabilities according to a
state of comfortable satisfaction
based on an actual persuasion, which may vary according to the nature and
gravity of the alleged
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
such cases the gravity of the conduct must be assessed according to the extent
to which it departs from the proper standards of
conduct, not according to
comparisons with a worst-case scenario:
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) NSWLR 630
, at p 638.
decisions in Bronze Wing International Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2017] NSWCA
, at [126]-[128] and
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
, at [43] confirmed the limited applicability of the
principle in
Briginshaw v
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, also confirming that the rules of evidence do not strictly apply in this
principles will be applied in determining our Stage 1 findings as identified
Consideration: Stage 1
to Complaint 1, particulars numbered 4, 8(a), 8(b), 10(a), and 12(b) as
described at [
above, on the state of the disputed evidence which has not been tested we are
not persuaded or comfortably satisfied that the respondent
has been guilty of
the subject matter of those allegations either as to alleged unsatisfactory
professional conduct or alleged professional
misconduct.
the balance of the particulars of complaint, the respondent has properly
admitted that he has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and
professional misconduct,
is therefore sufficient for us to simply note that on the evidence presented,
those admissions were appropriately made in circumstances
where the respondent
had the benefit of appropriately skilled legal advice.
Accordingly,
as to the balance of the admitted matters, in our Stage 1 findings we are
comfortably persuaded, satisfied, and find
that the respondent has been guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct within the
respective meanings
of s 139B(1)(a) and s 139E of the National Law in
respect of those admitted matters.
Relevant principles for
consideration of Stage 2 protective orders
is no dispute between the parties as to the relevant legal principles to be
applied in relation to a Stage 2 consideration of
appropriate protective
paramount and guiding principle to be applied in determining the appropriate
protective orders in this case is the protection
of the health and safety of the
public: s 3A and s 3B of the National Law. The application of those principles
should not be punitive
on the individual, although the effect of such orders may
have a punitive effect:
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
identifying those principles, and in weighing the need to protect the public,
there is scope to allow for the fact that the harrowing
effect of the process of
disciplinary proceedings and the threat of loss of a livelihood may have opened
the eyes of the individual
concerned to the seriousness of the subject matter of
the conduct so as to, on balance, diminish significantly the likelihood of
repetition where a level of insight has been reached, whereas beforehand,
insight did not exist:
Director General, Department of Ageing, Disability and
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
, at [83]-[84].
decision to exercise the discretion to cancel the respondent’s
registration on the ground of professional misconduct involves
an assessment of
matters of degree and judgment:
Sabag v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2001] NSWCA 411
, at [82]. Decisions along those lines require that an
assessment be made of the gravity of the proven professional misconduct and
considerations of remorse and insight, if any, demonstrated by the practitioner,
for example, as in
Health Care Complaints Commission v King
[2013] NSWMT
of the kind conferred on the Tribunal with regard to protective orders must be
exercised reasonably, in the sense that
it must be appropriately reasoned, and
it must proceed according to recognised principles of fairness to the persons
affected, according
to the justice of the case:
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
, at pp 503; 505;
Kruger v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1
[1997] HCA 27
Chen v Health Care Complaints
[2017] NSWCA 186
cases such as this there is a need to appropriately denounce professional
misconduct as a deterrence to others in the interest
of maintenance of
standards, public confidence and the general standing of the profession in the
eyes of the community:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
formulation of protective orders involves a discretionary consideration that
recognises the potentially punitive effect of such
orders so it is necessary to
ensure that such orders are limited to providing the required level of public
protection without imposing
more serious consequences for the practitioner than
is reasonably necessary
: Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
, at [101];
New South Wales Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
, at [113];
Health Care Complaints Commission v Do
supra, at [34];
Health Care Complaints Commission v Schmaman
NSWCATOD 82
the existence of distinguishing features in individual cases decided by
differently constituted Tribunal members, there is
a need, where reasonably
possible, for consistency and comity in the Tribunal’s decisions.
said, in some extreme cases, where the offending conduct was deliberate and
insightfully conscious, the harsh impact of protective
orders on a practitioner
and the practitioner’s family, and the potential for damage to the
reputation of the practitioner,
may require the characterisation that
practitioners at fault should be seen as being the authors of their own
misfortune:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Buys
[2020] NSWCATOD 102
our view, that statement has only very limited application in this case because
of the respondent’s undiagnosed PTSD and
because of his related lack of
insight which influenced his aberrant behaviours at the relevant time.
against such factors is the rehabilitative consideration that in appropriate
cases, the scope for a return of a denounced
practitioner to the profession at a
later point in time should be permitted as it is not in the public interest that
a deregistered
former practitioner be forever barred from reinstatement if it
can be satisfactorily shown that there has been an insightful and
acceptance of past flaws such that, on reinstatement, the health and safety of
the public would be appropriately protected
if a second chance to practise were
to be afforded to the practitioner: s 3A and s 3B of the
Mooney v Medical Council of NSW
[2024] NSWCATOD 24
Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
, at p 7, lines
Zepinic v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2000] NSWSC 13
our view, on the facts of this case, without seeking to bind a subsequent
Tribunal tasked with considering the merits of an application
re-registration, the door should be left open for such an application at the
appropriate time.
principles will guide our consideration of the required protective orders in
Consideration: Stage 2 – cancellation of
registration
Stage 2 consideration, (in which we have concluded that cancellation rather than
suspension of the respondent’s registration
is the necessarily required
outcome), proceeds according to the following structure:
(1) A preamble, emphasising the protective purpose of our consideration;
(2) A review of the material facts and consequences;
(3) Mitigatory factors;
(4) Balancing the relevant factors
(5) Determining the appropriate non-review period to follow cancellation.
primary focus of these proceedings is not concerned with concepts of harshness
or leniency which may guide decisions in other
although Patient A and those who support her might reasonably feel aggrieved
because she has been the victim
of the respondent’s professional
misconduct, notions of retribution, compensation, punishment, or relative
degrees thereof,
are outwith the required consideration of the objectives
required by the regulatory scheme with which we are concerned.
we remind ourselves that the paramount focus and public interest objective of
the regulatory scheme with which we are concerned
is that of the protection of
the health and safety of the public, and that the guiding operational principles
of the scheme that
must be borne in mind in making of decisions under the scheme
include the requirements of transparency, accountability and fairness:
s 3B of the National Law.
considerations of transparency and accountability are already evident in this
process by reason of the public nature of the proceedings
respondent’s conduct has been exposed and scrutinised from both peer and
disciplinary perspectives and he has been
denounced by our findings of
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct.
consideration of the justice of the case, here being the remaining issue of
appropriately just protective orders, is not only concerned
with justice to the
complainants and to the respondent, but also with regard to the public interest,
where it is known that appropriately
skilled general practitioners in rural
areas are in high demand and short supply.
consideration involves matters of discretion to be decided in accordance with a
reasoned assessment of the justice of the case:
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
,at pp 503; 505;
Kruger v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1
[1997] HCA 27
Chen v Health Care Complaints
[2017] NSWCA 186
that regard, Patient A has been heard in that the HCCC has ably represented both
the public interest and her interests within the
limited ambit of issues
permitted to be raised within this regulatory scheme. Similarly, the interests
of the respondent have also
been ably represented. Both parties have been heard
on the issues calling for decision.
Review of the material facts
and consequences
details of the respondent’s professional shortcomings comprising his
therapeutic mistakes and his ethical transgressions
of the sexual boundary
between doctor and patient, are set out in Patient A’s statement
summarised at paragraphs [
matters have also been critically examined by Dr Golding as summarised at
paragraphs [
] above. As those
matters have already been identified, they do not require further repetition at
this point, other than to say that
they represent egregiously significant
shortfalls and departures by the respondent from the standards of practice that
were expected
of him according to the standard of a practitioner of similar
training and experience.
respondent’s offending conduct, which also included making fraudulent
financial claims on Medicare for sexual trysts where
no medical services were
provided, and which have ultimately caused harm to the health and well-being of
Patient A, has resulted
in the respondent being publicly denounced for such
our view, the necessary public interest consequence of those circumstances must
be an order for the cancellation rather than the
suspension of the
respondent’s registration to satisfy the immediate expectation of the need
for the protection and the safety
of the public and for the protection of the
reputation of the medical profession.
that regard, the salutary need for the cancellation of the respondent’s
registration serves several purposes, namely, protecting
the health and safety
of the public, the denunciation of the conduct as a professional rebuke to the
respondent, a deterrent to other
practitioners who may find themselves faced
with the opportunity and inclination to similarly transgress, and to maintain
confidence in the high standards of medical practice expected of the
profession.
Mitigatory factors
reviewing the evidence as a whole, we consider that there are some significant
mitigatory factors. In that regard, we record our
impression that the respondent
is an intelligent and otherwise good person who, in the informed eyes of his
professional referral
circle is regarded as having been a skilled general
medical practitioner.
consider that the respondent’s inexcusable professional transgressions and
poor professional judgments in relation to Patient
A occurred under stressful
conditions which included a chaotic domestic situation and his unrecognised and
therefore unmanaged PTSD
resulting from his military service.
Relevantly,
the respondent has from the outset and on successive occasions, expressed his
regret, guilt, shame and remorse over his
professional transgressions, including
an acquired insight relation to the harm incurred by his vulnerable patient as a
consequence
of his aberrant professional behaviours. He continues to reflect on
this case we advisedly use the expression acquired insight in light of the
respondent’s candid concession that he had “
insight at the time of the events due to his PTSD, and in light of the
professional assessments of his subsequently acquired
insight, as remarked upon
by Dr Gordon and Dr Patton.
interpret the question of insight as being a threshold issue in this case, in
that at one point it did not relevantly exist, and
at a later point it emerged,
leading to the respondent’s expressions of remorse and regret:
General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v Lambert,
at [83]-[84].
respondent’s evidence has been consistent from the time he was first
confronted over his professional wrongdoings, and we
accept his expressions of
guilt, regret, shame and remorse as being genuine, appropriate, and indicative
of an acquired level insight
into his professional wrongdoings.
reaching that conclusion we have not overlooked the effect of Dr Gordon’s
view that the respondent’s insight has been
evolving. We read that
evidence as showing the respondent has reached the required level of insight and
that as he continues to consider
the ramifications of his misconduct, his
insight continues to evolve and consolidate in his thoughts in a positive way
most likely act as a deterrent against a repeat of such misconduct,
particularly as this process has been scarifying for him.
the respondent’s credit, he has been consistently candid and remorseful
from the outset. He has accepted responsibility for
his inappropriate actions
without seeking to shift blame. His explanations for his aberrant behaviour did
not extend to seeking to
make excuses and he did not seek to justify his
inappropriate actions.
our view, in summary, the following factors have operated to influence the
respondent’s aberrant conduct:
(1) His underlying undiagnosed and unrecognised PTSD which had its origins in
the traumatic experiences he encountered during his
military service between
2008 and 2009 as a commando in the special forces the service of his country in
Afghanistan;
(2) His chaotic and triggering domestic and family situation which has led to a
marital separation and a pending divorce;
(3) The limited collegiate support in his medical practice;
(4) His previous coping mechanism of recourse, namely, his “
” attitude ingrained from his military training when dealing with
the stress of his day-to-day practice environment without
due regard to his own
mental health;
(5) His emotion driven belief that he was in love with Patient A, where he
thought his future would be with her, which blindsided
him in relation to his
professional obligations to maintain the required professional boundary between
doctor and patient, where
he was otherwise required to be more vigilant and
assiduous in relation to his prescribing and record keeping practices in
to Patient A;
(6) The historical absence of insight regarding the inappropriateness and
harmfulness of his boundary crossing behaviour.
consider that the confluence of those factors served to blindside the respondent
and this led to him into a spiralling descent
of offending professional
misconduct, including to the misguided extent of making fraudulent claims on
Medicare in circumstances
where no medical services were
Balancing the relevant considerations
the HCCC submissions, attention was properly drawn to the seriousness of the
respondent’s prescribing misconduct, and to
the following longstanding
observations in
Spicer v New South Wales Medical Board & Ors
(unreported, New South Wales Court of Appeal, 19 February 1981) as apt
concerning cases involving the prescription of drugs:
“... it is clear beyond argument that the proper handling and prescribing
of drugs by medical practitioners are of the greatest
importance to the
community. If a medical practitioner handles or carries out that very great
responsibility in a way which is reckless
and which shows a disregard to the law
it cannot be said that he is fitted at such a time to be a medical practitioner.
In my opinion
the view expressed by the Tribunal has implicit in it that not
merely was he presently unfitted to treat those addicted or habituated
but that that unfitness in itself demonstrated his present unfitness to be a
medical practitioner.”
our view those remarks are distinguishable from the respondent’s present
circumstances for several reasons.
the respondent’s impugned behaviour occurred when he was blindsided by his
relationship with Patient A, whilst he was
significantly affected by his
unmanaged PTSD, which fuelled his obsession with that relationship.
he has not only openly acknowledged his past failings once they were exposed,
but he has disclosed and spoken about them
freely to other practitioners in
circumstances that indicate he now has the requisite insight into such issues.
those circumstances, following the respondent’s denunciation, we consider
that it is unlikely that his problematic prescribing
and inadequate record
keeping will recur as he now clearly understands the likely severe consequences
for him of a repetition of
such prior inadequacies and misconduct.
our view, a similar assessment applies to the insight the respondent has gained
into his boundary crossing behaviour with Patient
A. In that regard, we consider
that the salutary scarifying and shaming experience of the exposure of that
relationship has been
harrowing for him and has made him vigilant to the risks
of a repetition of that behaviour now that his PTSD diagnosis has been confirmed
and he has been obtaining professional assistance in recognising and managing
that condition. In those circumstances we consider
that the respondent’s
boundary crossing behaviour and misuse of the power imbalance between doctor and
patient is unlikely
to be repeated.
factor that requires consideration is the fact of the respondent’s actions
in wrongfully billing Medicare. This was
a matter raised with counsel for the
respondent’s counsel in submissions, where the non-repayment of the
amounts billed could
be seen as being a relevant character flaw. Having heard
submissions on the administrative complexities of restitution of those amounts,
we conclude that factor need not be weighed in exercising the discretionary
fixing of a non-review period as the restitution of the
sums in question
involves a separate administrative pathway.
Appropriate
non-review period to follow cancellation
HCCC has called for a non-review period of two to three years whereas the
respondent’s ultimate submission was for 6 months
consider that the factors pointing to an acceptance of the respondent’s
submissions on fixing the non-review period are the
insight gained by the
respondent in to his offending, the treatment and management of his PTSD as
explained by Dr Gordon and Mr Patton,
his otherwise acknowledged skills as a
general practitioner and surgical assistant, and the shortage of general
practitioners in
rural practice.
regard to those considerations, in this unusual case, we consider that a
non-review period of 6 months would assuage the need
for deterrence, acknowledge
reputational harm to the profession, and at the same time provide the public
with the required protection
in the secure knowledge that a reregistration order
would inevitably be subject to stringent conditions of practice involving
supervision
for a time, together with some necessary health conditions, along
the lines imposed following the earlier s 150 inquiry pending these
proceedings.
Determination
respondent’s registration should be cancelled on account of his admitted
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct, with a
non-review period set at 6 months.
the HCCC has been successful in securing the orders it seeks, and absent any
evidence of disentitling conduct on its part, costs
must follow the event in the
usual manner:
Qasim v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2015] NSWCA 282
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW), and clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
(National Law), the disclosure to
any person or entity of the name and the address of the person referred to as
Patient A in the Schedule
to the amended complaint and prohibition of the
disclosure of the names of the persons who made notifications to the regulator
prohibited. For the avoidance of doubt this order does not preclude the
disclosure or publication of the name of the respondent.
(2) Pursuant to s 149C(1)(b) of the National Law, the medical registration of
the respondent, Dr Alexander Robert Golowenko is cancelled,
with a non-review
period set at six months from today’s date.
(3) Order (2) above is to take effect from the close of business hours on the
7th day following publication of these reasons.
(4) Pursuant to s 175B of the National Law and clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law, the respondent must pay the costs of
the Health Care Complaints
Commission as agreed or assessed.
Appendix A - Conditions of practice following s 150 hearing
1. To obtain Medical Council of NSW approval prior to changing the nature or
place of his practice.
2. To practise only in a group practice approved by the Medical Council of
NSW where there are at least 2 practitioners (excluding
the subject
practitioner):
• Where the patients and patient records are shared
between the medical practitioners.
• Where there is always one other registered medical
practitioner on site.
a) This condition does not preclude the practitioner from undertaking
surgical procedures as a surgical assistant.
3. To practise under category C supervision in accordance with the Medical
Council of NSW's Compliance Policy — Supervision
(as varied from time to
time) and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review body.
a) The terms of the Council's Compliance Policy —
Supervision are varied so that the practitioner is:
i. To meet with the Council-approved supervisor on a
fortnightly basis for the first 6 months, and monthly thereafter.
ii. To authorise the Council-approved supervisor to provide
reports to the Council in a Council-approved format on a 2-monthly basis
first 6 months, and quarterly thereafter.
b) At each supervision meeting the practitioner is to review
and discuss his practice with his approved supervisor with particular
• Medical record keeping
• History taking
• Clinical reasoning/diagnosis
• Management including follow up and safety
• Appropriate prescribing practices
c) To authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide
proposed and approved supervisor with a copy of the decision which imposed
condition or any relevant decision or report.
d) The practitioner must have a supervisor approved by the
Medical Council of NSW within 3 months of 20 March 2023. The practitioner
to practise after this date until a supervisor has been approved by the
4. To complete within 6 months of 20 March 2023 the Health
records eLearning module organised by MIGA.
a) Within 2 months of 20 March 2023 he must provide evidence
to the Medical Council of NSW of his enrolment in the abovementioned
b) Within 1 month of completing the abovementioned course,
he is to provide documentary evidence to the Council that he has satisfactorily
completed the course.
c) To bear responsibility for any costs incurred in meeting
this condition.
In the event that the Health records eLearning module is unavailable, he must
propose to the Council for approval a similar course
to be undertaken in
accordance with the requirements of this condition no later than 2 months from
date of conditions.
5. To submit to an audit of his medical practice, by a random selection of
his medical records by a person or persons nominated by
the Medical Council of
a) The audit is to be held within 12 months from 20 March
2023 and subsequently as required by the Council.
b) The auditor(s) is to assess his compliance with good
medical record keeping standards and legislative requirements and compliance
with conditions. The auditor(s) should pay particular attention to:
• Clinical reasoning/diagnosis
• Management including follow up and safety
• Appropriate prescribing practices
c) To authorise the auditor(s) to provide the Council with a
report on their findings.
d) To meet all costs associated with the audit(s) and any
subsequent reports.
6. These conditions may be altered, varied or removed by the
Medical Council of New South Wales and the Medical Council is the appropriate
review body for the purposes of Part 8 Division 8 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW).
7. Sections 125 to 127 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law are to apply whilst the practitioner's principal place
of practice
is anywhere in Australia other than New South Wales, so that a review of these
conditions may be conducted by the Medical
Board of Australia.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
17 October 2025 - Paragraph 25 - redacted and marked [NOT FOR
PUBLICATION]
Paragraph 27 - redacted and marked [NOT FOR PUBLICATION]
Paragraph 39 - redacted and marked [NOT FOR PUBLICATION]
The word 'that' removed from Paragraph 64 (8)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (417 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter