URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/294.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Eldridge v Director General of the Department of Finance and Services [2013] NSWADT 294 (20 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Eldridge v Director General of the Department of Finance and Services
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 294
Hearing Date(s):
5 June 2013
Decision Date:
20 December 2013
General Division
P H Molony, Judicial Member
The decision under review is affirmed
Catchwords:
Motor Vehicle Repairs - tradespersons' certificate - fit and proper
Legislation Cited:
Motor Vehicle Repairs Act 1980
Cases Cited:
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1990/33.html" \o "View Case"
(1990) 170 CLR 321
Clearihan v Registrar of Motor Vehicle Dealers
HYPERLINK "http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/act/ACTSC/1994/101.html" \o "View
[1994] ACTSC 101; (1994) 122 ACTR 25
Drake v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409
Grenfell v Director General of the
Department of Finance and Services
[2013] NSWADT 57.
Haining v Commissioner
of Police, NSW Police Service HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/1999/6.html" \o "View
(1999) NSWADT 6
In re Davis HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1947/53.html" \o "View Case"
(1947) 75 CLR 409
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No. 2)
HYPERLINK "http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/HCA/1955/28.html" \o "View
[1955] HCA 28
(1955) 93 CLR 127
Law Society of NSW v Bannister
(unreported Court of Appeal, 27 August 1993, BC930181)
Raymond Robbins v
Business Licensing Authority HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2000/457.html" \o "View Case"
(2000) VCAT 457
Sobey v Commercial and Private Agents Board
Trlin v Department of Fair Trading HYPERLINK
"http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/1999/72.html" \o "View Case"
[1999] NSWADT 72.
Principal judgment
Respondent - Director General of the Department of Finance and
Representation
Applicant - C O'Neil instructed by Esplins
Respondent - B Burke, Legal
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR
Eldridge has applied to the Tribunal to review a decision of the Department of
Finance & Services (the Agency) made on internal
review on 6 March 2013 to
cancel his tradesperson's certificate under the provision of the provision of
Motor Vehicle Repairs Act 1980
(the MVR Act).
Eldridge who is now 28 years old first obtained his tradesperson's certificate
on 8 June 2007. He was granted a repairer's licence
under the MVR Act on 5 July
2007 and operated a business under the business name "Diesel
Mr Eldridge renewed his repairers licence in August 2010 he was required to
answer the following questions -
Has any individual ... or person ... referred to in this statement in New
South Wales or elsewhere:
- been convicted of any offences that was recorded in the last 10 years?
- Subject to a charge pending involving fraud or dishonesty?
Mr Eldridge answered both question by ticking boxes marked "No". Between the
two boxes he wrote, "Not yet." That form was dated 9
August 2010.
January 2010 Mr Eldridge was arrested by Police and charged with 29 offences.
There is no dispute that he was fully co-operative
with Police. When the matter
came to court a number of charges were withdrawn. On 12 November 2010 Mr
Eldridge was convicted and
sentenced by the Nowra Local Court with respect to
the following offences:
Two counts of
larceny of property of a value less than or equal to $2,000.00. He was placed on
a 3 year section 9 bond and fined $500.00.
Concealing a
serious indictable offence of another person. He was placed on a 3 year section
9 bond and fined $500.00.
Two counts of
receive/dispose of stolen property of a value less than or equal to $5,000.00.
He was placed on a 3 year section 9 bond
and fined $500.00.
Goods suspected
of being stolen (not motor vehicle). He was placed on a 3 year section 9 bond
and fined $500.00.
Goods suspected
of being stolen (motor vehicle). He was placed on a 3 year section 9 bond and
fined $500.00.
Concealing a
serious indictable offence of another person on 7 January 2010. This related to
the theft of a stolen aluminium oyster
boat by Jeremy Saunders. Mr Eldridge was
sentenced to 12 months imprisonment to be served concurrently with other
Concealing a
serious indictable offence of another person on 7 January 2010. This related to
the theft of a John Deer tractor by Jeremy
Saunders. Mr Eldridge was sentenced
to 12 months imprisonment to be served concurrently with other offences.
Steal a motor
vehicle between 6 September 2007 and 7 January 2010. Mr Eldridge was sentenced
to 12 months imprisonment to be served
concurrently with other offences.
Steal a motor
vehicle on 19 November 2009, being a 1978 Dodge D5N Tilt-Tray truck. Mr Eldridge
was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment
to be served concurrently with other
Dishonestly
having in his possession a motor vehicle (the Tilt-Tray truck) of which a unique
identifier had been interfered with.
Mr Eldridge was sentenced to 12 months
imprisonment to be served concurrently with other offences.
Steal a motor
vehicle on 17 September 2009, being a 2006 New Holland Excavator. Mr Eldridge
was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment
to be served concurrently with other
offences. He was also ordered to pay compensation of $46,000.00.
Steal property
to the value of $14,000 on 1 November 2009, being two converted shipping
containers the property of National Parks
NSW. Mr Eldridge was sentenced to 12
months imprisonment to be served concurrently with other offences. He was also
ordered to pay
compensation of $643.50.
I do not have
precise details of the dates or circumstances of the offences for which he was
placed on a bond and fined.
Eldridge was ordered to serve his sentence of imprisonment by way of an
Intensive Corrections Order (ICO) for a period of 12 months
commencing 19
November 2010.
early July 2011 Mr Eldridge submitted his licence renewal application in which
he answered yes to questions relating to convictions
and pending charges. The
application was accompanied by a letter in which he wrote -
... I have been convicted for theft on 12th November 2010. I am currently
serving a community service order that will finish on 12th
November 2011.
If you wish to discuss this further please contact ...
November 2011 Mr David Krauss from the Agency interviewed Mr Eldridge. According
to Mr Krauss' notes Mr Eldridge told him only
from a customer who would not pay his bill. Mr Krauss indicated he would be
getting a show cause
notice regarding whether he should continue to hold a
25 August 2012 Mr Eldridge received a letter from the Agency advising that his
repairers licence had been cancelled due to his
failure to lodge an annual
return and pay the fee. Mr Eldridge rang the Agency and was told to lodge his
annual statement and pay
the fee late. He sent the statement on 27 August 2012
and paid the fee on 17 September 2009. In the annual statement he answered
to question relating to convictions and pending charges.
18 September 2012 Mr Eldridge was issued with a show cause notice asking him to
show why his tradesperson's certificate should
not be cancelled. Mr Eldridge
made submission in response but on 9 January 2013 the Agency determined to
cancel his tradesperson's
certificate.
5 February 2013 Mr Eldridge applied for internal review of that decision. On 6
March 2013 the decision to cancel his tradesperson's
certificate was affirmed on
internal review.
8 March 2013 the Agency wrote to Mr Eldridge advising that it had decided not to
reinstate his licence as he was no longer a fit
and proper person to hold a
licence. Mr Eldridge made submissions in response. On 9 January 2013 the Agency
determined to cancel
his tradesperson's certificate.
3 April 2012 Mr Eldridge applied to the Tribunal for a review of the decision to
cancel his tradesperson's certificate. That application
was listed before me on
5 June 2013. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision and made
orders requiring the production
of Mr Eldridge's 2010 annual renewal statement
and allowing written submissions in respect of it.
issue to be determined in this case is whether or not Mr Eldridge is a fit and
proper person to hold a tradesperson's certificate
under the MVR
note that in submissions Mr Eldridge's counsel has advanced a number of other
arguments more suited to a judicial review of the
Agency's decision than a
merits review. These concern alleged bias affecting the internal reviewer and
denials of procedural fairness.
As I have no power or jurisdiction to consider
those matters I will not do so.
Nonetheless
I think it appropriate to note that
Administrative Decisions
Tribunal Act 1997
requires that internal reviews be conducted, as far as is
practicable, by "an individual who was not substantially involved in the
of making the decision under review." The separation of the internal review in
this case, from the processes involved in
making the original decision, is by no
means clear.
The applicable law
Relevantly,
section 22(1) of the MVR Act requires a licensed motor vehicle repairer or the
owner of a commercial vehicle, not to employ
a person to do repair work unless
that person holds a tradesperson's certificate, or is an apprentice under the
supervision of a
certificate holder. Applications for certificates are made
pursuant to Section 23 of the Act. Before granting a tradesperson's certificate
the agency must be satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to
hold a certificate: s 24(3)(a).
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales
(1955) 93 CLR 127
the High Court discussed the meaning of the term `fit
and proper' (at 156-7):
"The expression `fit and proper' is of
course familiar enough as traditional words when used with reference to offices
and perhaps
vocation. But their very purpose is to give the widest scope for
judgment and indeed for rejection. `Fit' (or `idoneus') with respect
office is said to involve three things, honesty, knowledge and ability ... When
the question was whether a man was a fit and
proper person to hold a licence for
the sale of liquor it was considered that it ought not to be confined to an
inquiry into his
character and that it would be unwise to attempt any definition
of the matters which may legitimately be inquired into; each case
must depend
upon its own circumstances."
meaning of "fit and proper" is dependent on the nature and purpose of the
activities that the person will undertake:
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v
(1990) 170 CLR 321
at 380 where Chief Justice Mason said that:
"The question whether a person is fit and proper is one of value
judgment. In that process the seriousness or otherwise of particular
a matter for evaluation by the decision maker. So too is the weight, if any, to
be given to matters favouring the person
whose fitness and propriety are under
consideration."
Sobey v Commercial and Private Agents Board
Walters J said:
"In my opinion what is meant by that expression is that the
applicant must show not only that he is possessed of a requisite knowledge
the duties and responsibilities evolving upon him as the holder of a particular
licence ... but also that he is possessed of sufficient
moral integrity and
rectitude of character as to permit him to be safely accredited to the public
... as a person to be entrusted
with the sort of work which the licence
the nature of the industry, in which the person concerned wishes to operate,
affects a consideration of whether a person is a
"fit and proper person" to
operate in that industry. In
Haining v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
(1999) NSWADT
President of this Tribunal made the following comments on the issue, in the
context of the security industry:
`Whether a person is `fit and
proper' to hold a licence in a regulated industry will be affected by general
considerations relating
to the character of the person, special considerations
that take account of the nature of the industry in issue and the public policy
objective leading the legislature to regulate the industry.'
nature of the role that a person wishes to undertake in a regulated industry
impacts on an assessment of fitness and propriety.
Thus the character, knowledge
and experience that an application for a taxi -operators licence has to
demonstrate in order to be
considered fit and proper for that role, is different
to the character, knowledge and experience required of a person who simply
wishes to drive taxis. This is so because what is fit and proper varies in
accordance with the nature and purpose of the role the
person seeks to
a distinction is recognised in the provisions of the MVR Act which set out
different requirements a person has to satisfy if
he or she wishes to be a
licensed motor vehicle repairer, as opposed to a certificate holder: see
sections 18 and 24. The reason
for this distinction is clear; a licensee is
running a business and providing a service to the public, with concordant
accountabilities
and responsibilities, whereas a tradesperson is a qualified
individual in the employ of a licensee or the owner of a commercial vehicle.
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, the President of the Tribunal,
Kellam J, in
Raymond Robbins v Business Licensing Authority
(2000) VCAT
"The nature, the number and the date of the
convictions is relevant to the issue of whether or not the applicant is a fit
person to be permitted to deal with the public in a motor car sales
capacity ... In the circumstances of this case the conduct of
the applicant is
such that he cannot be seen as presently fit to deal with members of the public
in the motor car trade. The convictions
and his behaviour go to the very heart
of matters of honesty, integrity and reliability of a motor car trader. The Act
has established
a system which entitles a purchaser of a motor car to rely upon
the honesty and integrity of a motor car trader or salesperson. If
undermined, the very structure of the Act is eroded. The offences in this case
were not of a trivial or minor nature such
as, some minor failure to keep proper
books or records or of trading outside hours which were not permitted. The
offences in this
case are such that they are capable of eroding the confidence
the community should have in relation to the motor car trade and in
relation to
the legislation which is structured to protect the public who might buy or sell
motor cars."
These comments raise similar considerations to those discussed by Judicial
Member Fleming in
Trlin v Department of Fair Trading
[1999] NSWADT
person, who has been found to be of bad character and not a fit and proper
person to operate in an industry, may redeem him or herself.
In re Davis
(1947) 75 CLR 409
was a case in which a Barrister, who was admitted to
practice in 1946, was disbarred in 1947 because he had failed to disclose that
in 1935 he had pleaded guilty to breaking entering and stealing, when applying
for admission to the Barristers Admission Board. He
argued that he was a
reformed character. In dismissing his appeal to the High Court, Latham CJ said
"It was submitted that the appellant, by his good
behaviour since 1934, had redeemed himself, and that it was not unreasonable for
him to take the view that in 1944 and 1946 that he was then a person of good
fame and character. It may be that he had by that time
become a person of good
fame, i.e., of good reputation among those who knew him. But intrinsic character
is a different matter. A
man may be guilty of grave wrongdoing and subsequently
become a man of good character. If the appellant had frankly disclosed to
Board ... of the fact of his conviction, that disclosure would have greatly
assisted him in an endeavour to show that he had
retrieved his character. But
the failure to make such disclosure in itself, apart from the conviction,
excludes any possibility of
holding that he was in 1946, or had become in 1947,
a man of good character."
Clearihan v Registrar of Motor
Vehicle Dealers in the Australian Capital
Territory [1994] ACTSC
101; (1994) 122 ACTR 25 Miles CJ considered an appeal against a decision
the ACT AAT to affirm the refusal by the Registrar to issue a motor vehicle
dealer licence on the basis that the appellant was
not of "good fame and
character". Chief Justice Miles said (at 30 -31):
"It is a matter
of common experience that a person's character is capable of development over
time. At one end of the scale, a person
who commits an isolated act of
misconduct may afterwards indicate that he or she has learned from the
experience, so that any mark
on character brought about by that lapse may fade
relatively quickly. At the other end of the scale, even people who have
demonstrated
evil character are capable of reform. A whole philosophy of
sentencing for serious criminal offences is built on that principle.
character is under consideration for a purpose connected with a trade or
profession different considerations apply according
to the nature of the trade
or profession.
issue of whether a person is fit and proper in the light of past criminal
conduct is a matter of judgement. In considering that
issue the Tribunal is
required to take into account the nature and seriousness of the original
misconduct, any events relevant to
an assessment of the applicant's fitness
which have occurred since then, the candour with which the applicant has
approached the
issue of past misconduct, the applicant's explanation of the
misconduct, the impact of the effluxion of time, and the applicant's
circumstances and reputation: see
Grenfell v Director General of the
Department of Finance and Services
[2013] NSWADT 57.
Tribunal should bear in mind the warning sounded by the Court of Appeal in
Law Society of NSW v Bannister
(unreported Court of Appeal, 27 August
1993, BC930181) where Sheller JA, delivering the judgment of the Court,
"... absent some acceptable explanation of how greed and
opportunity led the Solicitor to carefully plan a course of action which
was dishonest and deceitful, character evidence is not particularly helpful to a
court or tribunal in determining whether
it can be confident that there will not
be a repetition."
the Agency determines to cancel a certificate, as is the case with Mr Eldridge,
s 45(1) of the MVR Act gives the holder a right
to seek a review of that
decision in this Tribunal. When read with
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act
(the ADTA) it confers jurisdiction on the
Tribunal to review such decision on the merits.
of the ADTA says that in determining an application for review the Tribunal
is to make the correct and preferable decision having
regard to the material
before it, and any applicable written or unwritten law. It is well established
that in considering an application
for review the Tribunal may have regard to
any relevant material before it at the time of the review:
Drake v Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409.
The Evidence
considering Mr Eldridge application I have had regard to the following
Mr Eldridge's
application to the Tribunal for review and attachments.
Mr Eldridge's
affidavit dated 24 May 2014 with attachments that include a psychological report
dated 10 September 2010 from Sam Borenstein,
Clinical Psychologist, and ten
references (two undated, six dated before his criminal charges were heard, and
two dated recently).
The affidavit of
Lynn Alburquerque, solicitor, dated 4 June 2013. This concerns issues in the
proceeding.
The affidavit of
Kenneth Neil Hutt dated 30 May 2013. In short this goes to Mr Eldridge's
character and contrition.
documents lodged by the Agency.
The 2010 annual
statement lodged by Mr Eldridge with the Agency.
Mr Eldridge's
submissions generally and following production of the 2010 annual
The Agency's
submissions generally and following production of the 2010 annual
the hearing I heard sworn evidence from:
Mr Eldridge
Goodall, a Property Manager with the Bundanoon Trust
Mr Kenneth Neil
his evidence Mr Eldridge confirmed that he had completed annual returns with
respect to his repairers licence annual from 2008
to 2011. He said that he had
disclosed his convictions and advised the agency that he was under an ICO in
2010 he had answered the questions concerning conviction and charges by ticking
"No" but had also written "Not yet." He said he
had not raised this in his
submissions to the Agency, because he was not aware it would
his affidavit Mr Eldridge outlined how in 2009 he had become friends with and
fell under the influence of an older man, Jeremy
Saunders. Saunders is in his
mid-40s and ran a local excavation business. Mr Eldridge did work for Saunders,
and Saunders showed
him how to operate various types of machinery. With time he
shared his ambitions with Saunders and took his advice with respect to
his business.
way of example he noted that in 2009 Saunders had advised him to buy a tilt tray
truck with a crane, which would earn "a lot of
money" and be used in both their
businesses. He said he purchased a truck in 2009. He had also purchased vehicle
parts from Saunders,
without inquiring where they came from. He would recommend
Saunders to others, in return for a kick back.
Eldridge said that with time he began to realise that Saunders "got what he
wanted and always left me feeling that it was good
for me." He said that he now
realises that Saunders was manipulating him and taking advantage of his youth
and inexperience.
Eldridge says that at one time, which he did not specify, some of his customers
had not paid their bills. He sought Saunders' advice
and together they stole an
excavator belonging to a customer. They both got it going and Saunders
transported it. Mr Eldridge said
that following this it became clear to him that
Saunders had "no conscience or feeling for others". As a result in late December
2009 he told Saunders that he had to stop thieving and did so.
7 January 2010 Police arrested Mr Eldridge. He made full admissions to numerous
offences and disclosed and alerted Police to offences
committed by Saunders, and
assisted them in obtaining evidence against him. He was charged with 29 offences
and was convicted of
12 of them, with seven resulting in sentences of
imprisonment. He has since completed his ICO under which he was required to
32 hours of community service each month.
Eldridge said that his conduct was uncharacteristic and at odds with his
previously unblemished character. He deeply regrets his
conduct and has ceased
all contact with Saunders. He has approached the owners of the tilt-tray truck
and of the Holland excavator
regarding his conduct.
Eldridge said he had been supported by his parents following his convictions and
has successfully rebuilt relationships within
his local community, despite being
the subject of some ridicule and deserved criticism. He has publicly
acknowledged his offences
and never sought to hide them. He believed that he
offers a professional standard of work and has never done sub-standard
Eldridge said he sincerely regretted his offences and has made great efforts to
demonstrate that he has changed. He wished to continue
working as a tradesperson
and believed he could make a real contribution in the industry.
cross-examination Mr Eldridge was asked whether he had done mechanical repair
works since his repairer's licence and certificate
was cancelled. He denied
doing so. He did agree that he had worked for a number of clients since his
certificate was cancelled, but
insisted that he had not done mechanical report
work for them.
also heard evidence from Mr Hutt, a landscape contractor and café owner,
and a friend of Mr Eldridge. He was aware of Mr
Eldridge's convictions and
considered them to be out of character with his usual self. Since the
convictions his observations of
Mr Eldridge showed a man who was striving to put
his past behind him, and to build trusting business relationships. He has
participated in his local community, and has patiently put up with
harsh criticism. He considered Mr Eldridge a competent tradesman,
ethical and hard working. He thought him to be of good character despite his
convictions.
references Mr Eldridge relies on all express surprise at his convictions,
suggest that they are out of character for him, and
evidence his
contrition.
cross-examination Mr Hutt said that Mr Eldridge had not done any mechanical
repair work for him since January or February 2013.
When it was suggested to him
that he was lying about that, and that he had told Mr Krauss of more recent
work, he denied it.
Respondent called Mr Goodall. He was one of the referees for Mr Eldridge. He was
shown his reference and did not resile from it.
He was asked about work done by
Mr Eldridge since his tradesperson's certificate was cancelled. He said he had
been asked about this
by Mr Krauss and had told him that Mr Eldridge has done no
work for the Bundanoon Trust in the last three weeks. He thought that
time Mr Eldridge had done work for the trust was in December.
report from Mr Borenstein was prepared for the hearing of Mr Eldridge's criminal
charges. In his report Mr Borenstein outlined
a history of the offences
consistent with that given by Mr Eldridge. He expressed the view that Eldridge
was clearly under the influence
of Saunders. He said that Mr Eldridge when he
met Saunders in 2009 Mr Eldridge was in an emotionally vulnerable state as a
of the end of a four year relationship with his girlfriend. He noted that
Mr Eldridge had reached his own conclusion with respect
to Saunders and had
acted to stop stealing and put an end to their relationship on his own
Borenstein said that Mr Eldridge did not suffer from any psychological disorder,
although he presented as distressed and anxious.
Consideration
O'Neil who appeared for Mr Eldridge submitted that in the circumstances of his
case the correct and preferable decision was not
to cancel his tradespersons'
certificate. He sought to align the circumstances of Mr Eldridge case with those
I considered in the
Grenfell v Director General of the Department
of Finance and Services
[2013] NSWADT 57
to argue that the public interest
did not require cancellation.
accept that -
Mr Eldridge
co-operated with Police, made full admissions and notified them of offences they
were not aware of.
Mr Eldridge
pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity
Mr Eldridge
period of criminality was not long
Mr Eldridge has
no other convictions.
Mr Eldridge
served his sentence under an ICO and continued to be self -employed throughout
Mr Eldridge
notified the Agency of his convictions when he completed his 2011 annual
Mr Eldridge was
significantly younger that Saunders with whom he committed offences.
A number of the
offences were committed in aid of Mr Eldridge motor vehicle repair
Mr Eldridge has
given uncontested evidence that he terminated his criminal relationship with S
in December 2009.
At the time of
the offences Mr Eldridge was aged 24.
the heart of Mr Eldridge's submission is that he is a young and immature
mechanic, who was taken advantage of by an older, unscrupulous
business man, who
led him down a path of criminality that was entirely at odds with his usual
self. He had realised this, but not
before he had committed a series of serious
offences while in league with Saunders. He had then taken action to terminate
his relationship
with Saunders and had made full disclosures to Police when
confronted with his criminality. He was said to have learned from his
and to have faced up to it, pleaded guilty, paid the price for his conduct, and
is now a different man to the youth who committed
the offence. In those
circumstances Mr Eldridge submitted, like the Applicant in
Tribunal could be satisfied that he is now fit and proper to hold a
tradespersons certificate. In that case I wrote, at [40]
reality is that young people show a degree of immaturity, poor judgment and risk
taking, which can lead to difficulty with
the law. They are more susceptible to
peer pressure, and do not have a depth of experience to inform their decision
making. Their
characters are not as formed or entrenched as those of adults. In
contrast mature adults are more set in their ways, informed by
experience, and
usually better able to make independent decisions.
Mr Eldridge's case I do not agree that he is a fit and proper person to hold a
tradesperson's certificate. While I accept that
the evidence demonstrates a
defined period of criminality on his part, that criminality is in my view
considerably more serious than
Mr Eldridge is a far
more mature individual than was Mr Grenfell who was aged 19 or 20 at the time of
his offences. At 24 Mr Eldridge
could not be described as a youth. Mr Grenfell
was yet to embark on his career as a qualified motor mechanic and was still
at home when he committed his offences, whereas Mr Eldridge had advanced
in his career to the point that he had been running his
own licensed motor
vehicle repair business for two years. The crimes committed by Mr Grenfell,
while undoubtedly serious, were neither
as numerous nor as serious, in the terms
of the values of goods to which they relate, as those for which Mr Eldridge has
been convicted.
At the time he committed the offences Mr Grenfell's family
circumstances were in turmoil, his parents had separated and his father,
been charged with sexual assault, was threatening him.
contrast, Mr Eldridge had completed his apprenticeship and then started his own
business in 2007. He committed offences during
2009. Unlike Mr Grenfell, Mr
Eldridge's criminal conduct was undertaken in aid of his business as a licensed
vehicle repairer. While
I accept Mr Eldridge was suffering grieving the loss of
a long-term girlfriend at that time, I do not think this can be reasonably
equated with the personal difficulties confronted by Mr
in Mr Eldridge's case while he has offered some explanation for his conduct,
which he attributes to being led along by and
relying on Mr Saunders, in his
evidence he has not addressed the particular circumstances concerning each
offence of which he was
convicted, so that I can satisfy myself that this
explanations are correct. Rather he has made global statements, and had not set
out the details relating to a number of the offences he was convicted of. While
an examination of the police fact sheets in the
documents - which do not
relate to all the offences he was convicted of - does show that Mr Saunders was
also involved in at least
four of those offences, his involvement in them all is
not apparent.
am mindful of the warning sounded by the Court of Appeal in
Law Society of
NSW v Bannister
and am not satisfied that, in the absence of clear evidence
from Mr Eldridge relating to the circumstances of each of offence, that
provided a clear explanation of his conduct relating the each of the offences he
was convicted of. I do however accept that
Mr Eldridge now regrets his conduct,
and has made contact with a number of his victims to express his
contrition.
also acknowledge, as I did in Grenfell, the question of whether a person is fit
and proper varies in accordance with the nature
and purpose of the role the
person seeks to undertake. Thus what is expected of the holder of a
tradesperson's certificate under
the MVR Act differs from the requirement on a
licence holder. In this case Mr Eldridge is not seeking to maintain his licence,
his certificate.
my opinion, contrary to the submissions made for Mr Eldridge. The extent of his
criminality and its close associations with his
role as a tradesperson is such
that I cannot be satisfied that he is a fit and proper person to hold a
tradesperson's certificate.
would add that I am reinforced in the conclusion by what I consider to be a
failure by Mr Eldridge to deal honestly with the Agency
and its representatives.
I reach this conclusion for a number of reasons.
when Mr Eldridge completed his 2010 annual statement in August 2010 he answered
the questions concerning conviction and charges
by ticking "No" but he also
written "Not yet." This was plainly wrong. At that time he had been charged with
a number of theft offences
and an offence of dishonestly having in his
possession a motor vehicle of which a unique identifier had been interfered
my view, contrary to Mr Eldridge submissions, these can only be
regarded as charges relating to offences involving dishonesty, which
Mr Eldridge
should have disclosed at that time. That he did not do so reflects poorly on his
honesty and integrity.
Mr Eldridge did not make full disclosure to the Agency when he wrote in July
2011 advising of his convictions. He disclosed
a conviction for theft for which
he was serving an ICO, but made no mention of the other charges he had been
convicted of. While
he did tick yes to the question asking whether he has been
convicted in the last 10 years, his disclosure to the Agency was by no
full or candid.
Importantly
these concerns regarding Mr Eldridge's honesty when dealing with the Agency all
arose after he had terminated his relationship
with Mr Saunders, and when he
says he had commenced to change his ways. They reinforce my concerns relating to
his conduct and his
present level of reform and contrition.
a result of all of the above considerations I am not satisfied that Mr Eldridge
is a fit and proper person to hold a tradesperson's
certificate. As a
consequence the decision under review is affirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter