URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v KREFT (No. 2) [2012] NSWPST 1 (25 January 2012)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
MATTER NUMBER: PSY 004/2010
PS0001018222
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86a
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE ORDERS)
IN THE MATTER OF
STEPHEN FRANK KREFT
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
__________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
[2012] NSWPST
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Mr T Saunders of Counsel, instructed by Ms P Hook, Solicitor
Stephen Kreft
(Respondent)
represented by Mr P Strickland of
Senior Counsel, instructed by Ms S Doherty, Solicitor - HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
FILE NUMBER: 004/2010
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller
(Chairperson)
Ms Kristin Young (Psychologist
Dr Megan Brock (Psychologist Member)
Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 28 & 29 November 2011 (Phase Two)
DATE OF DECISION: 25 January 2012
Having made findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct with respect to Particulars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.4, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
and 7 and professional misconduct with respect to Particulars 1 - 4, and 5, 6
and 7, the Tribunal Orders that the Respondent is reprimanded,
suspended for a period of six months and thereafter that conditions on his
Registration are imposed - minimum periods
of two to five years. Costs reserved.
CATCHWORDS: registered psychologist – unsatisfactory professional
conduct – professional misconduct – two female
inappropriate conduct during counselling sessions – failure to maintain
professional boundaries – inappropriate
personal relationship.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No. 86a (National Law – NSW) –
s139B, s139E, s226(3),
schedule 5D – clause 7;
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Health Care Complaint Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
HCCC v Kreft
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Tribunal convened at the Health Professional Councils Authority’s Hearing
Room on 28 & 29 November 2011 (Phase Two)
to complete an Inquiry into
complaints made by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC),
dated 3 November 2010 in relation to a registered
psychologist, Stephen Kreft (the Respondent). The Inquiry with respect to
regarding the Particulars of Complaint and the Complaints were held
over nine days during which an application for leave to have
the Inquiry proceed
as a ‘two phase’ process was granted. The Reasons for Decision for
‘Phase One’ are
HCCC v Kreft
document deals with ‘Phase Two’. Evidence relevant to ‘Phase
Two’ issues was heard by the Tribunal. Submissions
were then made by both
The Complaints
Complaint alleged that Mr Stephen Kreft, being a person registered as a
psychologist under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law, in that the psychologist
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all material times between about 1 February 2008 and about 12 July 2008
the psychologist was employed as the principal psychologist
at the NSW Anxiety
Disorders Treatment Centre.
Client A was under the care of the psychologist between about 1 February 2008
and about 12 July 2008.
psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in relation to
Client A in that the psychologist engaged in inappropriate
discussions of a
personal nature with Client A in which:
commented on Client A's appearance in that:
1.1.1 He complimented Client A about her appearance
referring to her petite size, her short height and thin build and likening her
to his girlfriend Client B; and/or
1.1.2 Commented on Client A wearing Bonds underwear and said that his
girlfriend wore those.
1.2 He asked Client A to comment on his physical appearance; and/or
1.3 He disclosed details of his personal life
1.3.1 The number of sexual partners he has had, namely
that he had slept with eighty people; and/or
1.3.2 That his girlfriend, Client B, would have her girlfriends over and they
would sleep in the same bed together; and/or
1.3.3 That he had been in love five times; and/or
1.3.4 He thought about homosexuality when he was younger but was straight;
1.3.5 He and his girlfriend, Client B, had waited the appropriate amount of
time of two years before they entered into a personal
relationship; and/or
1.4 When discussing Client A's sexual relationship with an older man the
psychologist stated "You and I could do it over the desk"
or words to that
effect and then said that he was joking.
practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic practice and/or
failed to observe proper professional boundaries
in that during counselling
sessions on or about 10 and 22 April 2008 the psychologist made a request of
Client A for photographs
of her and obtained from the client a photograph of her
head and shoulders and a photograph of the client in her underwear which
was to be for a study or exercise whereby other people would rate Client A's
appearance.
practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic practice in
that he failed to record in Client A's clinical notes
the request or acceptance
of photographs or the exercises discussed with Client A on or about 10 April
2008 or 22 April 2008 referred
to in Particular 2 above.
psychologist failed to maintain the confidentiality of Client B in that he
disclosed to Client A that his girlfriend Client B,
who was known to Client A,
was a previous client and that he had "cured her".
At all material times between about 5 July 2006 and about 8 August 2006 the
psychologist, was employed as the principal psychologist
at the NSW Anxiety
Disorders Treatment Centre.
Client B was under the care of the psychologist between about 5 July 2006 and
Between August and December 2006 the psychologist sought and/or obtained
advice in relation to his feelings for Client B from senior
colleagues Dr Amanda
Gordon, Ms Cheryle Clothier, Dr Anthony Nicholas and Mr Robert Bust.
psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in relation to
Client B in that:
5.1 The psychologist engaged in inappropriate discussions of a
personal nature with Client B in that on about 9 August 2006, at the
commencement of the counselling session with Client B, in response to the client
saying, "I am feeling attracted to you. I can't
get you out of my thoughts. I
don't want you to send me off to someone else", that psychologist said "We have
a problem now because
I have feelings for you as well" or words to that effect;
5.2 On about 10 August 2006, the psychologist allowed Client B to enter his
motor vehicle and travelled to and attended a cafe with
Client B; and/or
5.3 After 9 August 2006 the psychologist spoke with Client B by telephone in
relation to personal matters not concerning the therapeutic
relationship;
5.4 On about 1 September 2006 the psychologist kissed Client B.
after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate personal
and sexual relationship with Client B.
When after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship with Client B he did
so contrary to the advice
of senior colleagues including Dr Amanda
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law, in that the psychologist has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint One.
Suppression Order
Tribunal made Orders, in accordance with Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of
, that the name and any details that tend to identify Client
A and Client B not be published. A schedule marked ‘Annexure B’
containing names suppressed will be attached only to the original Decision and
the copies that are forwarded to the parties. This
schedule should not be
reproduced if copies of the Decision are made for any purpose other than to
provide it to an appeals court.
The parties are directed to take care to ensure
that the schedule is not copied. If the transcript of the proceedings is legally
provided to any entity, the Registry must ensure that it is appropriately
de-identified in accordance with the annexed Schedule.
In making this Order the
Tribunal notes that details contained herein identify Client B as Mr
Kreft’s current partner and
such identification is not suppressed.
following people gave oral evidence during this phase of the Inquiry: Client
B’s father (Mr B), Ms Cheryl Clothier, Dr Steven
Kelly (by telephone), and
the Respondent.
Documentation
further documents came into evidence on behalf of the Respondent (exhibits R26 -
R29 as set out in annexure A hereto).
Relevant Law
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the Complaint have been established. In
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was), at 362–363, said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, a case concerning a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
Psychologists Registration Board (Board) published a Code of Conduct dated 1 May
1990. This was superseded by the Code of Ethical
Conduct dated 3 November 1997,
which in turn was superseded by the Code dated 1 November 2004 (which was
provided to all registered
psychologists in June 2005). It is this most recent
Code that applies to the conduct alleged in this matter. The Psychology Board
Australia (PsyBA) became the registration authority for psychologists on 1 July
2010. The PsyBA has adopted the Australian Psychological
Society Code of Ethics
(APS Code). The current APS Code is dated September 2007.
Background Material
background material is recorded in
HCCC v Kreft
Evidence of the Complainant
Evidence of Ms Cheryl Clothier
Clothier is a registered psychologist. She provided treatment to Client B both
before and after she received treatment from the
Respondent. She also had a
conversation with the Respondent and spoke to other relevant people regarding
the situation. It was Ms
Clothier who initiated the complaint to the
Psychologists Registration Board of NSW (as it then was) on 31 May 2008
concerning the
Respondent’s conduct with respect to Client B.
Clothier gave evidence during Phase One of the Inquiry; the Tribunal noted that
she may be recalled in Phase Two and she was in
fact recalled.
Clothier gave evidence again in Phase Two of the Inquiry. It is noted that the
Respondent’s counsel made a number of objections
as to the relevance of Ms
Clothier’s evidence to Phase Two, including a “blanket
objection” to the entirety of
her evidence.
her oral evidence, Ms Clothier described Client B’s presentation in
therapy, that the therapy was terminated following a
difficult session (at which
Client B’s mother was present) and that it was subsequently resumed. She
further stated that she
considered that Client B continued to have psychological
difficulties in the period following the commencement of her relationship
the Respondent but that these
“fluctuated”
. She recalled
having the impression, from Client B’s account, that the Respondent was
behaving in a
“manipulative”
way at times and confirmed that
she had not received any formal referral of Client B to her from the
Respondent.
Clothier also gave an account of her efforts to establish her ethical
obligations with respect to her knowledge of the Respondent’s
conduct and
to raise her concerns directly with the Respondent himself. These steps
included contacting the Psychologists Registration
Board of NSW (Board), the
Australian Psychological Society (APS) and a former President of the Board, a
senior member of the profession.
also stated that Client B had reported that her panic attacks had abated as a
result of the Respondent’s support. When asked
to provide further details
of this matter she clarified that Client B stated it was as a result of the
support the Respondent provided
to her while she was consulting him as her
Clothier’s evidence was that Client B suffered a good deal of turmoil
regarding her relationship with the Respondent and
in particular felt guilty
with respect to the termination of her relationship with her previous boyfriend
for whom she said she still
had feelings.
Peer Review Report - Mr Sam Borenstein
Borenstein is a registered psychologist. He provided a report at the request of
the HCCC regarding matters raised in the Particulars
relating to Client A. His
report dated 17 November 2009 forms volume 1 – exhibit 18 and a
supplementary report dated 7 December
2009 forms volume 1 – exhibit 20.
With the benefit of having heard evidence in Phase Two, the Tribunal does not
view as to the general acceptance of the opinions expressed by Mr
Borenstein.
Peer Review Report - Dr Gary Banks
HCCC v Kreft
, Dr Banks provided a
report dated 19 June 2009 dealing with the conduct of the Respondent with
respect to Client B (volume 2 –
exhibit 21).
having the benefit of additional evidence during Phase Two, the Tribunal still
accepts the opinions expressed by Dr Banks.
Tribunal notes the comments made by Dr Banks regarding observations and
resultant differential diagnosis of Client B from the
early stages of her
therapy with the Respondent (see page 5 of exhibit 21).
Tribunal notes at this point that there were further indicators identified in
the evidence that should have reinforced to the
Respondent the need for Client B
to be referred to an independent and appropriately skilled and qualified
psychologist for the purpose
of identifying and dealing with issues arising from
the nature of the origin of their relationship. Another example is Client
distress with aspects of the manner in which the Respondent pursued
her after 11 December 2006 (the date on which they consulted
Dr Gordon).
Evidence – the Respondent
Reference - Dr Steven Kelly
Steven Kelly, a GP, provided a personal reference for the Respondent dated 5 May
2011 (exhibit R5). Evidence was taken from Dr
Kelly during Phase One of the
Inquiry. The Tribunal did not take his evidence into consideration with respect
to the findings of
Phase One, as it was relevant only to Phase Two. Reference
should be made to the summary of his evidence found in
HCCC v Kreft (No 1)
[2011] NSWPST 2.
his oral evidence during Phase Two, Dr Kelly confirmed that, since last giving
evidence, he had received and read copies of the
Complaint, the Response, the
Amended Response and the Findings of the Tribunal.
Kelly gave evidence that, while
“the findings have had some impact on
, his reference, based on his experience of the Respondent’s
treatment outcomes had not changed. He stated he held no concerns
referring patients to the Respondent in the future, nor about his skills as a
therapist. Based on his readings of the materials
provided, Dr Kelly stated he
had formed the impression that the Respondent had accepted that his conduct was
“unacceptable”
“learned from this transgression”
. He stated he had not
seen the Respondent in person since last giving evidence.
Reference from Mr Leigh Budden
Budden, a registered psychologist, provided a personal reference dated 29 April
Budden stated that he met the Respondent when they were both psychology students
at Newcastle University in the late 1980s. He
worked for the Respondent as a
contract psychologist (only on Saturdays) for 11 months through to the end of
the 2009/10 financial
recounts that the Respondent’s professional supervision and counselling
was excellent and he found him to be very supportive.
The practice had a very
broad referral base with a lot of repeat business, which Mr Budden considered to
be indicative of the success
of the practice. Mr Budden found the Respondent to
be down to earth, enthusiastic and a genuine person, passionate about his work
and one who brings a positive approach to it. He believed that the Respondent
had good communication skills and was very engaged
with his work.
Budden became aware of the complaints made about the Respondent and the
Respondent spoke openly to him about the two complaints.
Budden has written that the allegations are not consistent with the
Respondent’s character in any way. He considers that
the Respondent is
not someone who would intentionally offend anyone or would take advantage of
anyone, particularly a patient. Mr
Budden stated that he had only seen the
Respondent on two occasions since he ceased working for the Respondent in June
Reference and evidence of Mr B
B provided a written a written reference dated 4 May 2011 (R4) and gave oral
evidence before the Tribunal during Phase Two.
B is the father of Client B. He gave oral evidence during Phase Two that,
sometime in early 2006, he received a phone call from
Client B’s then
boyfriend, who told him that the Respondent was ‘taking advantage’
of Client B. The boyfriend was
concerned at the developing relationship between
the Respondent and Client B because of the age difference between them and
the Respondent was Client B’s treating psychologist. Mr B was told
by the boyfriend that the Respondent was, in his opinion,
psychologist”
“driving around in fancy sports cars
and had all this money”
B gave evidence that he was very angry and upset about this situation and had
concerns about the relationship at first. He left
messages on the
Respondent’s telephone, wanting to talk to him. He described these
messages as
“threatening”
gave evidence that he left messages saying that the Respondent’s behaviour
“unconscionable”
, that he was
“absolutely
by the Respondent’s behaviour and that he
“wanted it to stop”
. Mr B also told the Respondent that if
the relationship continued he [Mr B] would be
“taking it further,
taking it to my solicitors”
. He also had a telephone discussion with
his daughter’s former psychologist (Ms Clothier).
B said in evidence that he first met the Respondent in the company of Client B
in a coffee shop in Newcastle in August 2006. At
this meeting Client B was in
tears and revealed to Mr B that she had broken up with her boyfriend and had
for the Respondent. The Respondent told Mr B that
“under the guidelines of his practice”
, he and Client B would
“wait two years”
, so Mr B suggested they
“sit back and wait”
B said in evidence that he now believes that it was Client B who was
the Respondent. He said Client B is
“determined”
“when she wants something she
will do it”
. He believes she
“kept chasing”
Respondent. Mr B did not see the Respondent as a victim, but stated that the
relationship developed because his daughter
“gets what she
B said in evidence that recently the Respondent showed him
in relation to Client B and told him he had been
“found guilty of misconduct”
. Mr B said that the Respondent
“done the wrong thing”
. He added that at the time, the
Respondent thought it was the right thing, but now he (the Respondent)
“realises it was wrong”
the complaint in relation to Client A, Mr B gave evidence that the Respondent
had told him about this complaint. From what
the Respondent had told him, Mr B
understood that the Respondent had
“supposedly asked for photos,
flirted with [Client A] and encouraged her in some way”
B was taken to the statement in Ms Clothier’s clinical notes that her
“struggling financially”
in 2006 and was grateful
“Stephen is supporting [Client B] at this time”
(Vol 2 tab 6
p 3-4). Mr B gave evidence that his daughter had
“always been an
independent girl”
“never relied on [him]
financially”
. He further stated that she had worked to support herself
while at university and lived in a house provided by the parents of her
boyfriend when she was in a relationship with him.
taken to the evidence in Ms Clothier’s clinical notes (volume 2 tab 4,
p41) that there had been a period in 2005 when she
had no contact with her
father, Mr B stated that he had been
“very, very close”
his daughter
“since she had been born”
. He denied the
evidence that there had been a period during which his daughter did not speak to
B stated further that
“there were arguments
[between his daughter
and Mr Kreft]
in the first twelve months”
of the relationship, but
he put this down to the fact that they were both studying at university at the
time and to
“financial pressures”
. Mr B stated that they are
“very much in love with each other”
the reference (R4) Mr B stated:
I have watched and listened to Stephen over a number of years
now and believe he is a person of exceptional character, honesty and
He is a patient and loving man who my wife and I would be proud to call our
taken to this reference under cross examination and asked if he stood by this
reference, Mr B replied that he still believed
the Respondent to be a
“sincere and honest person”
. He added that he
differently if I didn’t know him”
Dr Roger Peters
Peters is a registered psychologist. Two letters were provided to the Tribunal.
They are both dated 22 November 2011. The first
letter was a draft that was
emailed to the solicitors acting for the Respondent on 22 November 2011 and the
second letter is on letterhead
and it was forwarded to the Respondent’s
solicitors on 23 November 2011 (exhibits 27 and 28).
letter (on letterhead) provided by Dr Peters reads:
I refer to your email regarding Stephen Kreft.
I am a qualified psychologist in private practice. I have Arts and
Science Degrees. In addition I have a Masters degree in psychology,
PhD, my dissertation investigated the stress of irregular working hours. I am
63 years of age and I have worked in the
field of psychology for more than 30
years. I have been working in private practice for 27 years.
I currently work in a full time practice in the clinical field of
psychology, mainly dealing with clients who have been traumatised.
I also have
an interest in training and in particular personal development.
Stephen approached me to be his supervisor on 14 June 2011 to comply with
his professional requirements. I agreed to do so at that
time. I have seen him
on 5 subsequent occasions interrupted twice while I travelled overseas in July
and November. Each session
is a clinical hour of 50-60 mins duration.
I initially made arrangements to see Stephen on a fortnightly basis but
later adjusted that to a monthly basis, which could continue
on but I will
present myself to the Tribunal to demonstrate
I am a fit and proper person. I
am not prepared to do that, given that I have an enormous workload at present
made heavier due to
my absence twice this year overseas. Nor was it part of the
agreement that I undertook in providing Stephen supervision.
Thus as indicated I will relinquish my supervision as soon as an
alternative becomes available. I consider this is both in Stephen’s
my interest.
In respect to my role as a supervisor I see myself as having a mentoring
role. I have discussed this with him, in the same way as
my supervisor does
with me, and addressing some of the more complex clinical issues that arise from
time to time in private practice.
Obviously these sessions have allowed Stephen to monitor his anxiety
levels especially in relation to the matters that are before
the Tribunal. The
opportunity to ventilate is an important component of any supervision program.
We have in addition discussed
his clinical practice and his intervention with
clients using a sampling of cases that he has provided professional
intervention.
Stephen has been a willing participant and seems to disclose both frankly
and honestly his concerns and this I believe has assisted
his professional
development. His field of expertise is in Cognitive Behavioural therapy and he
provides me with examples of intervention
techniques that he uses. Stephen
strikes me as a well motivated highly competent therapist.
Stephen has a sound expectation of clinical supervision having been
previously supervised by one of Newcastle’s most experienced
psychologists Tony Nicholas. A mentoring program should assist Stephen map out
attainable personal and professional goals.
Identify and analyse existing
problems, formulate realistic solutions and make constructive decisions. Plan
out together workable
strategies for pursuing professional, vocational training
and educational development. Implement positive actions to achieve stated
objectives in the areas of spiritual; physical, family, social and personal
growth. I have found this approach very useful in my
own supervision over the
last 20 years. I would think it also appropriate that even though Tony Nicholas
has moved to Sydney that
Stephen seek monthly supervision with Tony, given his
knowledge and experience of Stephen and his awareness of the matter before
I hope this is of some assistance. Please don’t hesitate to call me
if I can be of any further help.
Further Statement of the Respondent dated 23 November 2011
Respondent provided a further statement dated 23 November 2011 (exhibit 26). In
this statement the Respondent detailed the agreement
he had made with Dr Roger
Peters for him to be his supervisor. This was the Respondent’s
understanding up until 22 November
Respondent details the topics covered in the five supervision sessions that he
had with Dr Peters.
Respondent stated that the supervision was intended to continue on a fortnightly
basis. When asked about the comment made by Dr
Peters that these sessions had
been adjusted to a monthly basis the Respondent gave oral evidence that the
fortnightly sessions were
the outcome he had wanted with Dr Peters and that he
was trying to ‘nudge’ him into that frequency. The Respondent added
that he also had considered obtaining a second supervisor to ensure fortnightly
supervision continued.
Respondent lists a number of matters that he would like to cover with a new
supervisor. These are set out in sub-paragraphs (a)
to (g) of paragraph 5 of his
statement as follows:
of the results of my recently completed Private Practice Management Standards
(PPMS) (version 2) assessment. I attach an
email I sent to Dr Peters on 14
November 2011 regarding this. I plan to discuss the results of this assessment
with new supervisor
and have begun implementing recommended changes to my
practice. I have identified a number of areas that require improvement. One
change that I have already implemented is to reduce my client load as
recommended in PPMS. I am also reviewing my procedures for
referring clients to
other psychologists.
systematic review by the supervisor and myself of the therapeutic methods and
procedures I employ in my interactions with clients.
To facilitate this process
I will use recordings I have made (with consent for the purposes of peer review)
of client consultations;
my current practice in relation to differential diagnosis and history taking, to
ensure that my treatment plans are appropriately
tailored to client
presentation. This will also ensure and I make appropriate referrals to other
mental health professionals when
my current record keeping practice to ensure it meets appropriate professional
of specific client consults where I have noted that specific issues have arisen
or might arise in terms of transference,
power differentials and blurring of
therapeutic boundaries;
with the assistance of the supervisor, formal documented guidelines for me to
use in dealing with unusual client interactions,
particularly in relation to any
identified positive and negative issues, and;
and implementation of self monitoring strategies to enable early identification
by me of any issues that may adversely
affect my ability to interact
appropriately with clients.
Respondent reports (and provides a copy of an email he had sent) that he has
offered to facilitate a monthly peer supervision
group in his local area and had
made contact with a representative of the local Branch of the APS to that end.
Respondent reports that he continues to consult Dr Diamond on a monthly basis
“been exploring my developmental history and any unconscious
effects this history may exert in my therapeutic interactions with
Paragraph 7 concludes with the following:
I have also had discussions to improve my knowledge of potential
issues that may arise in my practice with regard to professional
boundaries and
how my psychological makeup may, at times, lead to detrimental interactions with
Respondent also details the manner in which the proceedings of the Tribunal had
caused him hardship. The Respondent included the
following statement (paragraph
The stress has meant that I have not followed up on clients and
referrers like I normally would....
Tribunal notes the following statement made by the Respondent at paragraph
I lost the opportunity to obtain professional membership to the
APS College of Health Psychologists. An offer of nomination for membership
afforded me by a member of the College executive. If accepted, I would have
obtained specialist registration that would have
enabled a higher Medicare
rebate entitlement to my clients. I can no longer make this application and
cannot obtain specialist registration
without completing further post graduate
respect to the content of paragraph 9(d), the Tribunal notes that membership of
the APS College of Health Psychologists alone
does not entitle a practitioner to
specialist registration as a Clinical Psychologist that enables a higher
Medicare rebate entitlement
to be paid to clients.
to the statement of the Respondent is an email to Dr Peters dated 14 November
2011. The email annexes a copy of the APS Professional
Practice Management
Standards for Psychologists (PPMS) – Self Assessment Instrument he had
completed. It also attaches a copy
of the APS Professional Practice Handbook
that he states he had read. In his oral evidence to the Tribunal, the Respondent
that he had not read this document comprehensively, rather he had read
parts of it and intended to read it all.
attached to the statement is a document titled
‘Professional
Education/Employment Experience Synopsis
’. In his oral evidence the
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his continuing professional
development requirements
for registration (T941-943):
Q. Can you explain your understanding of what the CPD
requirements were for July 2010 to 30 November 2011?
A. Thirty points we had to accrue.
Q. Broken into?
A. Ten was for the Medicare provider, had to be allocated Medicare
provider and 10 for peer supervision.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. How are you going to meet the ten for peer supervision?
A. Well, there was five with Dr Peters and there were the previous
consults with Dr Nentwich(?), which I think span back to the previous
cycle, if it's included. This is something I've just done in the last two days,
started to upload my--
Q. In the cycle 1 July 2010 to 30 November 2011, you've got
five hours with Dr Peters?
A. That's correct, and one hour with Catherine Tiffen, but I guess that's
iffy about whether we can call that a supervision.
Q. So when you said that you have met your CPD requirements for this
A. I meant training, as in workshop training hours. It's over by a
number of hours.
Q. Can we ask the question again: if you have to fill in your
registration form and you have to answer the question about whether
your CPD requirements for the cycle, what would your answer be?
A. Well, actually up until you brought this up it would have been yes,
but I've still got to complete those on the APS website.
I've gone through most
of the process and again I plan on doing that tonight, tomorrow night, just
before the end. There's more
to log on my log there. I've got to sign off on
my learning plan and log that--
Q. When was that learning plan to be written?
A. The learning plan was written earlier this year and I've been back and
looked at it. I just have to write it up. So I think
I've achieved most of the
learning goals that are on that plan, but the actual hours, maybe I've got this
confused, and I know there
has been a lot of confusion from people since the
changeover to this half system and full year system, but Dr Nicholas, the
with him may be in the form before the June period or the July 1st
period, but I was assuming they would be used as they haven't
been logged
Q. Have you logged any hours on the website, the APS website? Have you
done any logging of your hours?
A. Not actually on the website. So I've logged - documented
Q. Yes, but logged it onto the website?
Q. You have?
A. Yes. I've logged six hours of supervised consults.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. Just to be clear, that's your five hours with Dr Peters?
Q. One hour with someone else called Cathy Tiffen?
A. Catherine Tiffen, yes.
Q. T-I-F-F-I-N?
Q. E-N, thank you. So you've had six hours of supervision?
A. That's right.
Q. The requirement is ten?
A. That's right.
Q. So I'm just wondering how it is you're going to meet that
A. Well, this is - maybe I'm not going to be able to. This
is - I believe that Dr Nicholas's consults towards the end of
he indicated I'd certainly considered those supervision, but that
might be outside of the cycle.
was little in the evidence before the Tribunal regarding any recent contact
between Dr Nicholas and the Respondent. The last
entry in the notes kept by Dr
Nicholas that came before the Tribunal indicate the last meeting between the
Respondent and Dr Nicholas
occurred on 20 March 2009.
APS Professional Practice Management Standards for Psychologists
(PPMS) – Self-Assessment Instrument
Respondent also provided a copy of a PPMS Self-Assessment Instrument he
completed on 13 November 2011 and forwarded to Dr Peters
on 14 November 2011.
The Respondent self-assessed as not meeting some of the criteria.
Oral evidence of the Respondent
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal. He underwent cross-examination and
answered questions from the Tribunal. Much of
his evidence is summarized under
the relevant Particular below.
Dr Michael Diamond
Diamond, Psychiatrist, provided a report dated 1 May 2011 (R2). The report
records that he commenced treating the Respondent in
August 2010. In April 2011
the Respondent’s solicitors asked Dr Diamond to provide a report. Aspects
of this report were summarized
HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
Respondent submitted that the proposed conditions on registration detailed in Dr
Diamond’s report were the appropriate conditions
for the Tribunal to
impose (and further stated that the Respondent would accept any conditions
placed upon his practice by the Tribunal).
Tribunal is of the view that it is not the role of a treating psychiatrist to
define conditions on practice that should result
from a disciplinary Inquiry.
Given Dr Diamond’s work in the area of disciplinary matters and the nature
of the request made
by the Respondent’s legal advisers, it is however
understandable that his report went beyond the bounds of a treating report.
any case, the comments made by Dr Diamond regarding his observations of the
Respondent are of assistance to the Tribunal for the
purpose of formulation of
potential conditions that may address the deficits identified by Dr Diamond
during therapy. They may also
act as assistance to the Approved Supervisor and
the treating psychologist/psychiatrist referred to in the Orders made herein.
Diamond records that the Respondent had received
‘high quality
instruction in the technical carriage of cognitive behavioral therapy that
enables him to be a competent and effective
therapist in that domain’.
The Tribunal does not have evidence before it that specifies where or how
this instruction was received by the Respondent.
report of Dr Diamond continues (page 6):
It is also clear to me from our ongoing discussions that Mr
Kreft has relied on informal instruction and informal supervision in order
try to gain some understanding and insight into the interactions that occur
between therapists and patients.
Dr Diamond notes in his report that the Respondent had no regular clinical
supervision:
...that directly addresses the interaction between therapist and
patient in the course of the therapeutic interaction.
report continues:
His peer review experience has focused more on the technical
aspects of the cognitive behavioral therapy. His ongoing personal continuing
education has focused on technical aspects of cognitive behavioral therapy and
refining his therapeutic expertise in that regard.
Tribunal accepts these observations of Dr Diamond as it is apparent from the
evidence of the Respondent that he has focused on
anxiety and delivery of CBT
rather than looking to the complexity of the whole presentation of the client.
Tribunal notes the comments made by Dr Diamond (as recounted in
that the Respondent is ‘rule and
procedure driven’ when it comes to the management of clients.
Tribunal also accepts the observation of Dr Diamond that the Respondent placed
himself in vulnerable situations in the clinical
setting as he attempted to rely
on his narrow skill base to deal with broad and complex clinical problems.
Diamond further comments (at page 7) about the issues that have arisen for the
Respondent due to his practicing in an environment
where he is the senior
clinician. The Tribunal is also of the view that the Respondent’s practice
would benefit from access
“more senior, more extensively trained and
more experienced clinicians who could have pointed out to him those areas where
may have become overconfident and perhaps vulnerable in his attempts
to try and provide assistance to too broad a range of referred
Diamond’s comments regarding the Respondent’s present state (at
times being anxious and with low mood) reflecting the
current stressors (of the
complaints) are also noted.
Diamond’s comments regarding the Respondent’s personality traits and
vulnerabilities are noted by the Tribunal. Dr
Diamond also made comments
regarding a number of psychologically challenging experiences the Respondent had
faced in his life and
the Respondent’s understanding of his (alleged
– now proved) misconduct. Dr Diamond expresses the following view (page
Some attempt at linking his own personal development and past
experiences with his current outlook was made earlier on in the treatment
process. This essential part to long term psychotherapeutic intervention is
likely to be addressed more deeply in the future once
the current pressing
issues of the Tribunal have been dealt with. The treatment process therefore,
in more recent times, has understandably
been more focused on the specific
matters contained in the complaint as alleged.
Tribunal accepts that the misconduct of the Respondent supports Dr
Diamond’s view that the Respondent has issues that require
whether that be by way of psychotherapeutic intervention or by some other means.
Dr Diamond also comments at page 13 that
the Respondent was only in the early
stages of such therapy and that he would continue to benefit from such
course is decided upon by a treating practitioner, the Tribunal concurs with Dr
Diamond’s view that it will need to
be long term and of significant
intensity (as required for psychodynamic interventions). The Tribunal also notes
that it is the view
of Dr Diamond as at 1 May 2011 that the treatment required
by the Respondent
“would involve regular attendance at a
psychotherapist over a period of years rather than months.”
“it is difficult to know exactly how long such therapy would
take but, in my experience, two years or more of therapy has proven
Tribunal notes that the treatment of the Respondent by Dr Diamond commenced in
August 2010 but has focused on dealing with issues
arising from this Inquiry.
Diamond makes the following comments regarding the lack of knowledge of the
Respondent (page 10):
Mr Kreft has made significant insights into appreciating that
not all patients address cognitive behavioural therapy from the same
that he assumes them to have. He understands that his knowledge and exposure to
the appreciation of psychodynamic principles
is deficient and undeveloped. He
appreciates that without better understanding of how these factors operate in
the interactions
between therapists and patients, there is strong potential for
misperceiving and misunderstanding the communications, both verbal
non-verbal, that are made by patients in the therapy setting. The
considerations form a significant part of the interaction
he has had in his
treatment to date. He is gaining useful practical understanding of how such
entities function as a matter of course
in the interactions that occur
therapeutically.
Diamond’s comments regarding his understanding of the Respondent’s
conduct with respect to Client B include the following
He was overwhelmed, flustered, unable to exercise his repertoire
of coping skills to deal with a situation like that, and was in need
of external
consultation and counsel. He was dealing with complicated psychological
dynamics with a patient who was intent on having
a relationship with him and
displayed persistence to the point of maintaining his engagement in a process
where they both sought
external counsel together to see how the Code of Conduct
was relevant in their case.
The emphasis was on the required two year timeframe as stipulated in the
Code of Conduct without gaining a deeper understanding of
the profound
inappropriateness that exists when therapists have relationships with their
patients at any stage after a period of
Insight that Mr Kreft is gaining into this issue is as yet incomplete.
Much emphasis is placed upon the success subsequently of the
relationship with
Client B and their current happiness and sense of unity that exists despite the
trying times that face Mr Kreft
at present.
Tribunal accepts these comments and is of the view that this underpins the
requirement for a condition on registration for strict
supervision of the
Respondent’s practice.
Diamond’s comments regarding the Respondent’s lack of appreciation
that Client A’s presenting problems were outside
of his competence and
treatment experience is accepted by the Tribunal and is another reason why
strict and close supervision of
the Respondent’s practice is required.
Tribunal notes that Dr Diamond also sees the issue of the Respondent gaining a
deeper psychological understanding of his own functioning
as being different
“more practical and proactive methodology involved in his area
of expertise consisting of the delivery of cognitive behavioural
techniques”
. The Tribunal endorses these views and adds that therapy
should also aim to facilitate the Respondent putting in place behavioral
allowing him to separate the needs arising from his own personal issues and the
needs of the clients in a therapy session.
Tribunal shares Dr Diamond’s concern that the Respondent did not recognise
the scenario in which he became complicit with
Client A (page 16). The Tribunal
also notes Dr Diamond’s observation that the Respondent is becoming
increasingly aware of
the limitations of his overall abilities as a therapist,
in particular in those areas dealing with the underlying psychopathology
clients and the issues underlying particular behaviour and that this results
from his lack of training and experience.
Diamond comments that the Respondent’s skills are very limited. At this
point the Tribunal notes that a person’s skills
may be limited but there
should always be an understanding of ethical issues.
Diamond expresses the view that the Respondent’s approach is somewhat
“mechanistic”
and comments as follows (at page 17):
He has gone to some lengths to try to reflect on what he does
and to build in safeguards. His approach is sometimes mechanistic in
expresses beliefs that by limiting certain aspects of his practice or conduct
within the therapy setting that he can remove
any potential for harm or
complaint from his practice. Whilst the intent is laudable, the steps that he
proposes cannot be sufficient.
Practice in relative isolation and lack of clinical supervision and
peer review remain as relevant concerns.
[Emphasis added]
Tribunal agrees with the view expressed by Dr Diamond that, with the history of
transgression (now proved), the Respondent would
pose a danger to the public if
he continued to practice in the manner and setting of his former practice.
Tribunal accepts Dr Diamond comment that strict compliance with conditions on
registration are required for the Respondent to
practice safely.
Evidence and Submissions with Respect to Orders
the Respondent and the HCCC provided the Tribunal with a written outline of
submissions which was supplemented by oral submissions.
Subsequently, a draft
set of conditions was provided to the Tribunal by the Respondent and comments
made upon those by the HCCC.
All of these written documents are annexed hereto
General Comments Relevant to Orders
Tribunal’s view of a significant number of the issues submitted as
relevant by the parties has been dealt with by the Tribunal
above in this
document. These should be read with the comments in this section.
nature of the Respondent’s misconduct is substantial. Appraisal of the
seriousness of the conduct found to have amounted
to professional misconduct
should not be diminished by the mere effluxion of time between the conduct and
the making of the protective
orders herein.
Respondent’s conduct as a registered psychologist more generally should
also be considered. In this regard, there are also
factors that weigh heavily
towards a finding of permanent unfitness, with the resultant order being
de-registration. However, on
balance, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent has
commenced to address the deficits in his practice to an extent which allows this
Tribunal to make Orders imposing Conditions on his Registration rather than
ordering removal from the Register.
is not to say that the Respondent could not have demonstrated a higher level of
commitment and more application and timeliness
to remedying defects that he
avoided facing for a significant period of time due to their inconvenience and
lack of fit with his
purpose. It may well be that the delay in the completion
of the Inquiry has worked in the Respondent’s favour as it has created
opportunity for a modicum of reflection and for the process of remediation to
have commenced (significantly due to the contribution
of Dr Diamond).
Tribunal notes that the evidence of the Respondent during Phase Two supported
there having been an improvement in the Respondent’s
understanding of the
Code as being a document that has the purpose of acting to protect both
practitioners and clients and a document
to which regard must be had. However,
as also noted by Dr Diamond, the Respondent still need to develop greater
insight into the
application of the Code.
conduct of the Respondent with Client A was disgraceful. She was a young women
presenting with a number of issues causing her
considerable turmoil. The
Respondent acknowledged that some of her presenting issues were beyond the scope
of his practice. This
is a view shared by Dr Diamond and the Tribunal.
Respondent employs a limited range of treatment modalities and, by his own
account, uses examples from his own personal life as
a tool to illustrate points
while conducting CBT with clients (volume 1 – exhibit 12). The Tribunal is
as perplexed as Mr Borenstein
(peer reviewer) regarding the photo exercise
undertaken by the Respondent with Client A (volume 1 – exhibit 18). This
a matter for further exploration with the Approved Supervisor.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Client A that, in his sessions with her, the
“often made sexual jokes to each other, and innuendo was a
key feature of our conversation”
(volume 1 – exhibit 3). The
Tribunal accepts this evidence and is of the view that this is never appropriate
in a therapeutic
relationship. Such an embargo should be in the forefront of a
registered psychologist’s mind when providing care especially
to a client
with the presentation of Client A.
same comments are repeated by the Tribunal with respect to the disclosing to
Client A of details of his intimate life.
Respondent’s lack of appreciation of Client A’s presenting issues
was detailed by Dr Diamond (as summarised above).
Conditions on Registration ordered below relating to supervision are designed,
in part, to address deficits of this nature in
the Respondent’s practice.
Tribunal also notes the observations made by Client A that the Respondent was
‘often disorganised at our meetings, leaving my files at his home or
seeming distracted’
(volume 1 – exhibit 3)
Client A also
stated (volume 1 – exhibit 4, paragraph 16) that when the Respondent
would appear very knowledgeable and keep saying how he
was an expert in anxiety and how great he was.
I found he talked a lot
and I felt I was there to do the talking and he would bring everything back to
himself, saying we had similar
personalities. Stephen would say things like we
are both Aries; he would compare his own life to mine. Particularly self-esteem
these matters have not resulted in the making of any Orders herein they are
certainly issues that are appropriate for exploration
during supervision.
Tribunal is also concerned about matters that tend to indicate the lack of depth
of mastery of the practice of psychology demonstrated
by the Respondent. Client
A’s evidence was that the Respondent used the term
“Nymphomaniac”
with reference to her. The use of comments
such as this would be demonstrative of a lack of understanding of contemporary
and such matters can also be explored in structured supervision. The
Tribunal has not used this matter as a basis for imposing conditions,
notes it as a matter that can be explored with the luxury of time in the
appropriate setting of supervision in a more effective
manner than in the
circumstances of a formal Tribunal Inquiry. One of the benefits of supervision
would be to support the Respondent
to develop his treatment approaches and to
guard against him attempting novel treatments or treatment approaches in which
neither experienced nor competent.
conduct of the Respondent with respect to Client A has adversely impacted upon
her confidence in interactions with health professionals.
The Tribunal notes
that Client A stated that she knew her mental health problems were complicated
and ongoing (volume 1 – exhibit
3). Hopefully she will continue to seek
any assistance recommended by health practioners.
of this nature brings disrepute upon the profession of psychology. It has a high
potential to erode the level of trust that
is reposed in members of the
profession by members of the public.
Tribunal notes the record made by Ms Clothier that the Respondent helped Client
B come off her medication (volume 2 – exhibit
2). Further, there are
entries in her notes for treatment sessions provided throughout 2007 regarding
the Respondent helping Client
B with her anxiety. Such matters are indicative of
the continuation of a dimension of the therapeutic relationship. While it may
expected that a partner will provide assistance with such matters, it arises by
way of the personal relationship rather than as
a continuation of the
therapeutic relationship formed during the professional consultations.
aspect of the Respondent’s practice which is of concern to the Tribunal is
the content of the letter to Client B’s
referring general practitioner.
While the Tribunal accepts in part the explanation of the Respondent that it was
a letter that in
effect was automatically sent, the letter represented to the
general practitioner that as at that date, further treatment was to
be provided
to Client B by the Respondent. This contrasted with the evidence given by Client
B, not contradicted by the Respondent
that, on either 9 or 10 August 2006, the
Respondent informed her that he could no longer see her as a client and that all
appointments were cancelled (see T311). Not only does the letter to the
general practitioner record something different to this
position, there are no
further records that indicate the situation was corrected at any point. This
does not accord with good practice
nor is it likely to comply with requirements
of referrals under the relevant scheme.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent was aware that he found Client B to be an
“attractive woman”
during the first consultation (volume 2
– exhibit 19, page 3). In the Respondent’s letter to the HCCC dated
2008 he stated that he
‘quickly dismissed’
thought at the commencement of the consultation. It is common ground that
during the third consultation there was a declaration
made by the Respondent of
his feelings for Client B (prompted by Client B’s declaration of feelings
for the Respondent).
is an unequivocal example of a situation where the Respondent failed to maintain
appropriate professional boundaries. The Respondent
declared his feelings in
circumstances where he should have been ‘on notice’ that there was
potential for these boundaries
to be breached given his initial feelings of
attraction. Clearly he was aware of his own feelings and he should have been on
in that respect. At page 7 of this letter, the Respondent records that he
had never before had difficulty
“politely and professionally rejecting
the advances”
of other clients and at most he had only ever felt
“flattered by client advances”
. Supervision and therapy could
also deal with such matters.
pages 4 - 5 of the Respondent’s letter dated 21 August 2008 (volume 2
– exhibit 19), the Respondent recounts how he
encouraged Client B to
discuss her feelings with
“her other psychologist”
Clothier) shortly after this third consultation. Other evidence came before the
Tribunal regarding Client B’s return
to Ms Clothier’s care. There
was no evidence of a formal or even informal referral of Client B to Ms Clothier
or any other
psychologist after the incident at the end of the third
consultation. Apart from two telephone calls initiated by Ms Clothier to
Respondent (to discuss his professional position), there was no communication
from the Respondent to any other psychologist from
whom Client B received
treatment. It is the view of the Tribunal that the Respondent failed to refer
Client B on in an appropriate
manner. This is not a matter that formed part of
the consideration of the Findings or Orders made herein, however, it is a matter
that should be explored in supervision.
essence of the various codes of conduct that have applied to members of the
profession of psychology require careful and controlled
management of a
situation where feelings develop between a psychologist and a client and when
any other type of relationship is contemplated.
It always remains the
responsibility of the registered heath professional to manage the relationship.
Consideration needs to be had
to the nature of the therapeutic relationship. In
most cases a personal relationship of the type currently existing between Client
B and the Respondent should never be allowed to develop. For some types of
therapeutic relationships, after a period of two years
has elapsed from the
(appropriate) termination of the therapeutic relationship, advice can be sought
from a senior member of the
profession. It may well be that no other
relationship will ever be appropriate. Assessment of the client, and possibly
the psychologist,
will usually be involved prior to any further steps towards a
personal (or any other type of) relationship.
consideration is made by the Council as to whether or not to approve the senior
registered psychologist put forward by the Respondent
for approval as a
supervisor in accordance with the Orders below, the Tribunal is of the view that
it would not be appropriate for
any of those psychologists who have already
provided advice to the Respondent to fulfil this role. Ms Clothier and Mr Bust
both appropriately
counselled the Respondent against the relationship with
Client B and were, in essence, ignored.
evidence given by Dr Nicholas regarding his involvement with the
Respondent’s situation is disjointed. In his statement,
he talks of
“consultations”
with the Respondent and, on at least one
occasion, the Respondent was accompanied by Client B (volume 2 – exhibit
8). Dr Nicholas
attributes his failure to report the relationship to his feeling
that there was no predation and to it being
circumstances’
. His statement continued:
I understand that these matters can lead to de-registration and
I didn’t feel this was justified when everything was pout (sic)
context. I believe Stephen knows it is unethical and does not need to be told
this but this degree of punishment is unnecessary.
from a misapprehension that Orders and Conditions made by Tribunals are punitive
rather than protective, it also appears that
there was no clear outcome from the
interaction between the Respondent and Dr Nicholas and no steps were initiated
to have Client
B assessed by an independent psychologist (as would be the usual
outcome should the Code of Professional Conduct be applied). Ultimately,
appeared to the Tribunal that Dr Nicholas saw himself as providing treatment to
the Respondent and that he considered the role
of supervisor was, not
unreasonably, inconsistent with this former role. Clarity as to the relationship
at the relevant time would
have made a positive contribution to the difficult
position the Respondent found himself in during this time.
respect to Dr Gordon, at the very least, there was a grave failure in
communication between them which would not be conducive
to the future
development of an effective supervisory relationship.
Tribunal is of the same view as Dr Diamond as to the requirement for the
Respondent to undertake supervision
“that directly addresses the
interaction between therapist and patient in the course of the therapeutic
interaction”.
Tribunal has accepted the observation of Dr Diamond that the Respondent placed
himself in vulnerable situations in the clinical
setting as he attempted to rely
on his narrow skill base to deal with broad and complex clinical problems. This
is another matter
to be addressed in supervision and therapy.
Tribunal endorses the view expressed by Dr Diamond that the Respondent’s
practice would benefit from access to:
....more senior, more extensively trained and more experienced
clinicians who could have pointed out to him those areas where
have become overconfident and perhaps vulnerable in his attempts to try and
provide assistance to too broad a range of referred
Orders placing Conditions on the Respondent’s Registration with respect to
not acting as a supervising psychologist, engaging
in intense and close
supervision and not acting as the principal of a practice are in part put in
place by the Tribunal to address
the issue above defined by Dr Diamond.
Condition on Registration imposed by the Orders below requiring the Respondent
to undertake ongoing therapy should address his
current mental health status as
identified by Dr Diamond (anxious and with low mood). Therapy should also
address the personality
traits and vulnerabilities identified by Dr Diamond as
well as develop his understanding of his misconduct and the psychologically
challenging experiences he has faced. As to the length of time such treatment
will be required, the Tribunal has significantly relied
upon the evidence of Dr
Diamond to define the minimum period. Thereafter it will be a matter for the
Council to consider the opinions
expressed by the treating
psychologist/psychiatrist as to whether this condition can be safely lifted.
Condition on Registration ordered below increasing the number of hours of
continuing professional development is aimed, in part,
at improving the
Respondent’s knowledge base. The Tribunal notes that Dr Diamond expressed
views regarding the Respondent’s
lack of knowledge (set out on page 10 of
his report). It should also serve to improve his understanding of ethical
conduct, all aspects
of professional practice and most importantly encourage him
to engage more effectively with professional colleagues.
respect to the condition preventing the Respondent from providing professional
supervision, the Tribunal does not restrict the
Respondent from providing line
management in the workplace in which there is no psychological content.
the Tribunal’s findings and the Conditions placed upon the Registration of
the Respondent by the Orders made herein, the
Tribunal has some disquiet with
respect to the name of the Respondent’s practice – the NSW Anxiety
Disorder Treatment
Centre. The Tribunal is of the view that, although this is a
matter for the Respondent, it does tend to create expectations for members
the public, including this being a state-wide service, which should be
considered by the Respondent.
Tribunal is of the view that the Approved Supervisor, in accordance with the
Orders made below, is to be a senior practitioner
(having more clinical
experience than the Respondent) and holding expertise in supervision and
professional practice. Further, the
Approved Supervisor is not to be a person
employed by or in a business relationship with the Respondent. During the first
of supervision, the Respondent is required to attend the practice of
the Approved Supervisor on at least four occasions. This is
facilitating the observation of a wider professional practice.
regard to the nature of the misconduct, the Tribunal is of the view that it
would not be appropriate for the Psychology Board
of Australia to exercise the
discretion in accordance with section 226(3) of the National Law. Given there
were a number of findings
of misconduct and that the misconduct extended to his
interactions with two patients, the reprimand issued should remain on the
Tribunal is also of the view that there is little room for the Respondent to
depart from anything other than strict compliance
with the Conditions on his
Registration. Any failure to comply with Conditions should be viewed as
significant by the Council. The
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s history of
not being open to professional advice when it does not suit his purposes.
Tribunal notes the difficulties encountered by Ms Clothier having her concerns
regarding the Respondent’s conduct with Client
B appropriately heard.
While quite clearly there is an ethical requirement not to inappropriately
criticise other psychologists (or
indeed any other health professional),
particularly to clients, this must be balanced against the need to be able to
draw the attention
of appropriate bodies to questionable conduct.
Tribunal notes that the National Law has made progress in this regard with the
introduction of mandatory reporting requirements
so that the difficulties
encountered by Ms Clothier in bringing the conduct to the attention of the
appropriate authorities may not
be repeated in the future.
Tribunal emphasises that it remains important for decisions regarding the
characterisation of conduct to be undertaken by the
bodies created by the
Parliament (e.g. the Council, the HCCC, the Board) to do so rather than
decisions being taken into the hands
of individuals, no matter how senior they
are in the profession.
Tribunal notes the submission made by Senior Counsel for the Respondent that it
was essential to reserve the matter of costs until
after the handing down of
this Reasons for Decision. The Tribunal therefore reserves on the matter of
If the Respondent moves into another jurisdiction within Australia the relevant
body to monitor these conditions will be the Psychology
Board of Australia. The
Tribunal Orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter as the
Practitioner):
Practitioner is hereby reprimanded in the terms of Annexure C to
HCCC v Kreft
Practitioner is suspended for a period of six months commencing from the date of
the decision in
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
During the period
of suspension, the Practitioner is prohibited from providing Health Services in
accordance with
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
is a condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that, when his name is
restored to the Register he is not to practice psychology
until he complies with
Order 5, has an Approved Supervisor in accordance with Order 7 and has provided
all requirements in accordance
with Order 12. Once Orders 5, 7 and 12 have been
complied with, the Council may lift this Condition.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he must provide a
copy of the Reasons for Decision documents in
HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
any person working in his practice providing a health service (
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
), or to any employer should he work in an
employed capacity, whilst any conditions imposed in
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
remain on his Registration. Within 14 days of the date of
publishing of
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
and thereafter within
14 days of the engagement of a new employee, or entering into a new practice
relationship or entering into
new employment, the Practitioner is to forward
written confirmation to the Council from the health care provider or employer
they have received and read the Reasons documents,
HCCC v Kreft (No.
[2011] NSWPST 2
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
This Condition is to remain on the Practitioner’s registration until such
time as all other Conditions on Registration (except
for the reprimand) are
lifted by the Psychology Council of NSW, in accordance with these Orders.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration, that prior to resuming
work as a registered psychologist in private practice
(after the expiration of
the six month suspension of Registration), the Practitioner is to provide a
written supervised practice
plan, endorsed by the Approved Supervisor for
approval by the Psychology Council of NSW in accordance with these Orders. The
Practitioner
is not to resume working in private practice until he receives
written confirmation from the Psychology Council of NSW that the supervised
practice plan has been approved by the Council. If not approved, the
Practitioner must re-submit the plan until it meets with the
approval of the
Council. If the Practitioner is to commence work as an employed psychologist, he
is to provide a copy of his duty
statement and conditions of employment to the
Approved Supervisor. A copy of these documents, endorsed by the Approved
Supervisor,
must then be provided to the Council for approval. The Practitioner
is not to commence working as an employed psychologist until
he receives written
confirmation from the Psychology Council of NSW that his duty statement and
conditions of employment have been
approved by the Council. The endorsement of
the Approved Supervisor should be indicative of his/her approval thereof. The
defined in this Order is to be repeated on each occasion the
Practitioner changes the nature of his private practice or changes employer.
This Condition may be lifted by the Council when the Condition requiring
supervision of practice by the Approved Supervisor is lifted.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he work in a
practice with at least one other registered psychologist,
whether he is working
in a group practice or as an employed psychologist. The Practitioner may write
to the Council seeking this
Condition be lifted from his Registration after
completing the equivalent of four years of full time practice if the Council is
it is appropriate in the circumstances to do so.
is a condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that from the time the
Practitioner commences working as a registered psychologist
(whether in private
practice or as an employee) he is to undertake at his own cost a minimum of
three hours of individual supervision
(face to face) a month with a Psychology
Council of NSW approved supervisor (Approved Supervisor) for the initial period
of six months
and then for a minimum of two hours a month for a minimum period
of 18 months. The Practitioner is to forward the name, contact details
relevant details of a proposed registered psychologist to be a Supervisor. The
Practitioner is to provide the name, contact details
and relevant details of
other registered psychologists in the event approval is not granted by the
Psychology Council of NSW or if
the Approved Supervisor is unable or unwilling
to continue acting in the role at any time. The Practitioner is to authorise and
in writing the Approved Supervisor to forward reports to the Psychology
Council of NSW every two months after approval by the Psychology
Council of NSW
and to advise the Council if at any stage concerns regarding the
Practitioner’s compliance with Conditions on
his Registration or his
practice generally arise. The Practitioner must forward a copy of this written
direction and authorization
accepted by the Approved Supervisor to the
Psychology Council of NSW. The Practitioner is to put in place appropriate
arrangements
to allow the Approved Supervisor to have access to clinical notes
and recordings and any other records requested by the Approved
Supervisor. The
Practitioner is not to commence working as a registered psychologist until such
time as he receives written confirmation
of the Psychology Council of
NSW’s approval of the Approved Supervisor. During the first six months of
supervision the Respondent
is to attend the Approved Supervisor’s
workplace on at least four occasions. The supervision undertaken and reported
the Supervisor is to include all of the following areas:
Legal, ethical
and professional conduct
Professional
practice procedures
Communication
and interpersonal relationships
Professional
particularly in times of stress or stressful situations
Requirements for
registration under the National Law (NSW)
Competencies in
professional practice
A broad range of
evidence-based treatment models and therapeutic techniques
consultation and peer networking
Professional
workload management
This Condition may be lifted by the Psychology Council of
NSW after a minimum period of two years if the Psychology Council of NSW
satisfied with the professional progress made by the Practitioner.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s registration that he complete an
additional 10 hours of Continuing Professional Development
activities (CPD) in
the 12 months after his name is restored to the Register (after the six month
suspension period) in accordance
with these Orders. This is in addition to the
30 hours of mandatory Continuing Professional Development activities required
maintenance of registration. The Practitioner is to bear the costs of
all CPD. The Practitioner is to take advice from his Supervisor
appropriate CPD to undertake and have regard to the PsyBA Standards and
Guidelines for CPD. The Practitioner is to provide
written confirmation of
satisfactory completion of all CPD undertaken to the Psychology Council of NSW.
This Condition may be lifted
by the Psychology Council of NSW after a minimum
period of two years if the Psychology Council of NSW is satisfied with the
professional
progress made by the Practitioner.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he comply with all
directions made by the Approved Supervisor in accordance
with the Conditions
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
This Condition may
be lifted by the Psychology Council of NSW at the time the Condition requiring
supervision of his practice by
an Approved Supervisor is removed or at some
later date as determined by the Council.
Practitioner is to provide a self-report on his practice from commencement of
work as a registered psychologist every two months
for a minimum of two years
and thereafter at a frequency and for a duration determined by the Psychology
Council of NSW. This Condition
may be lifted by the Psychology Council of NSW at
the time the Condition requiring supervision of his practice by an Approved
is removed or at some later date as determined by the Council.
is a Condition on the Registration of the Practitioner that he is not to provide
professional supervision (as detailed in
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
for a minimum period of five years and then until such
time as the Council lifts this Condition.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he comes under the
care of a psychologist or a psychiatrist for the
purpose of addressing the long
term issues stemming from his developmental and family background that underlie
many aspects of his
personality makeup (as noted in the report of Dr Diamond
dated 1 May 2011). The Practitioner is to forward the name and contact details
of the psychologist/psychiatrist to the Psychology Council of NSW prior to
commencing work as a registered psychologist and at any
time he changes his
treating psychologist/psychiatrist for a minimum period of two years and until
such time as the Psychology Council
of NSW decides this Condition is no longer
required. The Practitioner is to forward to the Psychology Council of NSW an
and direction addressed to the treating psychologist/psychiatrist to
provide reports to the Psychology Council of NSW every six months.
Practitioner is to attend the treating psychologist/psychiatrist on a minimum of
ten occasions per year and at the direction
of the treating
psychologist/psychiatrist. Any cost involved in compliance with this condition
is not to be borne by the Council.
The Psychology Council of NSW may remove this
condition after a minimum period of two years should it consider this condition
longer required, having regard to the nature of the issues identified in
HCCC v Kreft
HCCC v Kreft (No.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that whilst the
Condition requiring him to undertake supervision with the
Approved Supervisor
remains in place, he is not to provide treatment past the initial two
consultations for any new referrals for
any client without having the assessment
and management plan approved by the Approved Supervisor in writing. This
Condition may be
lifted by the Council when it lifts the Condition requiring the
Practitioner to have an Approved Supervisor.
is a Condition of the Practitioner’s Registration that he not hold himself
out as the principal of any practice whilst the
Condition requiring him to have
an Approved Supervisor remains on his Registration. The Council may thereafter
lift this Condition.
the Practitioner remains in his private practice (i.e. not as an employed
psychologist in another practice), it is a Condition
of the Practitioner’s
Registration that he submit all policies and procedures of the practice to the
Approved Supervisor for
evaluation against the standard prescribed in the
Professional Practice Management Standard published by the Australian
Psychological
Society (APS). This Condition is to remain in place whilst the
Condition requiring an Approved Supervisor remains on the Practitioner’s
Registration and may thereafter be lifted by the Council.
the Practitioner remains in his private practice (i.e. not as an employed
psychologist in another practice), it is a Condition
of the Practitioner’s
Registration that he submit all contractual agreements with all staff members of
the practice to the
Approved Supervisor for evaluation and comment. This
Condition is to remain in place whilst the Condition requiring an Approved
remains on the Practitioner’s Registration and may thereafter
be lifted by the Council.
the Practitioner remains in his private practice (i.e. not as an employed
psychologist in another practice) it is a Condition of
the Practitioner’s
Registration that he submit all complaints (formal and informal) regarding his
professional practice and
conduct to the Approved Supervisor in addition to any
other usual arrangements for the handing of complaints. This Condition is to
remain in place whilst the Condition requiring an Approved Supervisor remains on
the Practitioner’s Registration and may thereafter
be lifted by the
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he submit to a
professional performance assessment if requested by
the Council during the
period that the Condition requiring an Approved Supervisor remains on the
Practitioner’s Registration.
This Condition may be lifted by the Council
when the Condition requiring an Approved Supervisor remains in place.
Practitioner is ordered to bear all the costs associated with compliance with
the Conditions placed upon his Registration in
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
Publication
A copy of this document should be forwarded to the Respondent, his legal
advisers, the HCCC, the Psychology Council of New South Wales.
The Psychology
Board of Australia and otherwise as the Council and Board sees fit.
Dated: 25 January 2012
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Kristin Young
___________________
Megan Brock
___________________
Noel Greenaway
Annexure A - Index of Exhibited Documents - Phase Two
Annexure B - Written Outline of Submissions and other submissions re draft
conditions proposed by Respondent
Annexure C - Reprimand
Annexure D -
Schedule of Names Suppressed
HCCC v STEPHEN KREFT
INDEX TO THE DOCUMENTS – PHASE TWO
R26 Statement of the Respondent dated 23 November 2011
R27 Draft letter
of Dr Roger Peters dated 22 November 2011
R28 Letter of Dr Roger Peters dated
22 November 2011
R29 Professional Practice Management Standards (PPMS) – An APS document
completed by the Respondent 13 November 2011
HCCC v STEPHEN KREFT
SUBMISSIONS
HCCC -v- STEPHEN KREFT
“PHASE TWO” SUBMISSIONS
Introduction:
Complainant submits that the Tribunal should de-register the Respondent
primarily on grounds of public safety (including lack
of insight) and general
deterrence.
powers of the Tribunal on proof of complaint are found in Division 3,
Subdivision 6 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
(“the National Law”) namely sections 149-149D.
power to impose conditions on a practitioner’s registration is at
s149a(1)(b) of the National Health Law.
power to suspend or cancel registration of a practitioner’s registration
where the practitioner is guilty of professional
misconduct is at
s149C(1)(b).
this matter, Particulars 1-4 related to Client A.
particulars and sub-particulars were found proved in relation to Client A and
particulars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.4 2, 3, and
4 were found to constitute
unsatisfactory professional conduct. Particulars 1.3.3, 1.3.4 and 1.3.5 were
found to be below the expected
is noted that the Respondent had denied some of the particulars. Particulars
1.3.1 was denied to the extent of the number of partners
he allegedly stated he
had slept with, 1.3.4 was denied outright, 1.3.5 was denied outright, 1.4 the
content and context was denied,
and 4 was denied outright.
Tribunal found that particulars 1-4 cumulatively constituted professional
misconduct.
Particulars
5-7 related to Client B. Professional misconduct was admitted and found proved
for each of these particulars. The only
disputed part of particular 7 was the
account of Dr Gordon which was accepted and found proved by the Tribunal.
only issue is the relevant protective orders to be made. The starting point is
de-registration. The Complainant contends that
the gravity of the breach of
ethical and professional standards is such that it is necessary for the Tribunal
to de-register the
practitioner.
Purpose of Disciplinary Proceedings
protective of the public and the profession. See
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 637D and F. In protective
practitioner from repeating
his misconduct and deterring others who might be
tempted to behave in a similar way. See, for example,
NSW Bar Association v.
(1999) NSWCA 404
NSW Bar Association v Smith
(Court of Appeal, unreported, 9.5.91) Samuels
J.A. said at 37 in
case that it was “
necessary to
bear in mind that the disciplinary jurisdiction exercised by this Court is
wholly protective, designed to protect public
interest and the due
administration of justice. No question of punishment arises. But it is
legitimate to consider the possible deterrent
effects upon practitioners of
orders made, and thus the protection of the public by that means
Clyne v The N.S.W. Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
the Full Court of
the High Court said in a joint judgment at 210-202 that although “
sometimes referred to as ‘the penalty of disbarment’, it must be
emphasised that a disbarring order is in no sense
punitive in character. When
such an order is made, it is made from the public point of view, for the
protection of those who require
protection, and from the professional point of
view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to loss of
degree of trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the
client to disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. See the
Psychologist’s Tribunal
Graeme Ronald Schubert
at para 17. In a passage cited with approval in Health Care
Complaint’s commission v Lichfiedl
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestly JA
said in Richter v Walton (Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported):
The degree of trust which patients
necessarily give to their doctors may vary according to the condition which
takes the patient to
the doctor. Even in regard to the moist commonplace medical
matters, the trust a patient places in a doctor is considerable. In some
of which the present seems to be an example, the patients trust cannot help but
be almost absolute. The doctor’s power
in regard to the patient in such
cases is also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a
matter of fact; the extent
of the power will vary according to the temperament
of the patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited periods,
of the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a
position to do whatever the doctor wants with the body of the patient.
one of the reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations
and are expected to maintain high standards;
all this being very much in the
public interest
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
, where a very contrite, remorseful doctor
who apparently posed little risk of repeat offending was de-registered, the
Tribunal stated
that in the exercise of its functions under the Act are for the
paramount purpose of protecting the health and safety of the public,
Tribunal may consider five matters bearing on protection:
need to protect the public against further misconduct by the practitioner;
need to protect the public through general deterrence (of other
practitioners);
need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional standards and
denouncing transgressions;
maintenance of public confidence in the profession;
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner
there is a finding of professional misconduct, the Tribunal has a wide
discretion in relation to disposition of the complaint.
The full range of
disciplinary powers is available. The conduct in question and the circumstances
of the individual case will determine
the appropriate disposition.
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
per Basten JA at [67].
looking at the practitioner’s behavior the totality principle should be
applied. In arriving at the ultimate sanction to
be imposed, the whole of the
practitioner’s conduct is relevant to be considered. See
Gad v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2002] NSWCA 111
is important to bear in mind that the question of fitness to practice must be
determined at the date of the hearing:
A Solicitor v Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
an order of suspension (rather than deregistration) to be made the Tribunal
would have to be satisfied that at the end of the
period of suspension the
practitioner would be a fit and proper person to resume practice as a
Psychologist:
Law Society of New South Wales v Walsh
BC 9706885 a
decision of Powell, Beazley JJA and Clarke AJA of 15 December 1997 at pp
Respondent’s Position on the Law
principle sometimes cited in these matters is that an order striking off the
Roll should only be made when the probability is that
the solicitor is
permanently unfit to practise:
Prothonotary v Richard (NSWCA 31.7.1987 per
McHugh JA) and see NSW Bar Association v Maddocks (NSWCA 23.8.1988).
principle was touched on by Counsel for the Respondent in his opening remarks,
and some authorities in relation to the general
principles as they apply to the
Legal Profession were referred to at T42.22: “
Namely, Spigelman J in
Cummins's case - it's New South Wales v Brian Cummins where the Chief
Justice said this
“An order for the involuntary
removable of the name of the practitioner from the roll of solicitors is made
only because the
probability that the solicitor is permanently unfit to
practice. Unless the Court is persuaded that the probability exists the proper
order is usually one of suspension or fine instead of removal”.
for the Respondent then mentioned the case of NSW Bar Association v Maddocks,
per Kirby J:
“Normally removal is taken to imply a judgment
that a person is forever or at least indefinitely disqualified from practicing.
If this is not a conclusion which the Court has reached it should stop short of
Respondent’s Counsel continued, “
That in my submission is law
that ought to be applied in this case. In other words is this Tribunal
satisfied - I withdraw that -
is it persuaded that the
probability exists that Mr Kreft is permanently unfit to practice. If the
Tribunal is not satisfied of
that then it should not order his removal or
de-registration.
is submitted that this only in part states the applicable law in this
cases mentioned above should be tempered by those in this jurisdiction which
deal with the unique relationship afforded health
professionals and the special
nature of those relationships with clients. The Complainant is unaware of a case
of a Solicitor or
Barrister being struck off for having a sexual relationship
with a client in the course of his professional practice (cf. cases where
practitioner has failed to report criminal convictions for sex offences to the
respective law society or bar association eg.
A Solicitor v Law Society of
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253).
is submitted, this view is reinforced by the view taken of solicitors and
barristers in disciplinary proceedings being treated
perhaps more harshly, in
circumstances where they have been proved to not have told the truth or to have
sat idle. This is explained
by virtue of their unique role and relationship to
the Court and their ability to advocate and be accepted as credible and
trustworthy.
NSW Bar Association v Livesey
[1982] 2 NSWLR 231
at 233, Moffit P. said
a member of the legal profession acts in a way which is a
departure from the professional standards, so he is exposed to being found
guilty of some professional misconduct, liable perhaps to be dealt with in a
minor way, what was minor may become serious if the
barrister or solicitor is
unfrank about the matter or gives a false explanation concerning it.”
His Honour says that an honest and frank response in the adversity of being
exposed to such an inquiry “
may well demonstrate that he is a person
truly to be relied on
”. His Honour goes further and says that
it has been a common experience in cases before this Court that
professional unfitness would not have been established by the initial
misdemeanour, but is revealed by the wrongful conduct which follows in an
endeavour to rectify or conceal the initial wrong or error
N.S.W. Bar Association v Maddocks
(Court of Appeal, unreported, 23.8.88)
Kirby P said at 4 that “
it is more likely, in cases of professional
misconduct, that the Court will withhold disbarment or suspension where the
practitioner
has admitted guilt
” and this is because “
barrister is more likely to be accepted by Judges and fellow practitioners if,
despite lapses, he or she acknowledges frankly a
recognition of the errors that
led to them.
” Note in particular that in
N.S.W. Bar Association v
Thomas (No.2)
(1989) 18 NSWLR 193
, Kirby P said that the “
honesty and frankness on the part of a barrister under investigation extends to
the consideration of a case by the court or
a tribunal appointed for that
N.S.W. Bar Association v Kalaf
(Court of Appeal, unreported,
11.10.88), Mahoney J.A.
said at 6 that a barrister “
entitled merely to stand mute or ‘to put to proof’ the body
proceeding in the matter
is submitted that these constraints are not placed on health professionals. In
this jurisdiction, similarly, it is submitted offences
of a sexual nature are
similarly treated differently to that of a solicitor or barrister in a similar
position for example.
the Tribunal accepts that these principles applicable to Solicitor’s and
Barristers similarly apply in this jurisdiction
in the manner in which the
Respondent’s Counsel argues, then it is submitted that the Tribunal would
in any event, be satisfied
for the reasons enunciated below, that the Respondent
is probably permanently unfit to practice. It is noted here that the comment
permanently unfit to practice has been commented on in the decision of
Stanoevski v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
at para 54 where it was held “
rather in my view, it has the
shade of meaning of being likely to be unfit to practice for the indefinite
Seriousness of Breach
critical two questions for consideration are (a) the seriousness of the
professional misconduct or in other words, the seriousness
practitioner’s breach of professional and ethical standards; and (b) the
response of the practitioner to his wrongdoing,
in particular his lack of
candour and insight in his evidence, both written and oral, before this
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, NSW, 15 July 1993,
unreported at page 8). Lack of contrition is also a fundamental and relevant
consideration.
Childs v Walton
(Court of Appeal 40252 of 13 November
1990 referred to below.
is the view of the Complainant that the only appropriate protective order in
this matter is deregistration. The reasons for this
are as follows:
is submitted that in relation to the complaint applicable to Client A, the
seriousness of the breach is high. It involved exchanges
between the Respondent
and client, who was vulnerable and very young, who presented with psychological
problems which became sexualized,
and involved unidentified issues of
transference and counter transference and unorthodox practices which involved
serious boundary
transgressions.
is submitted that in relation to the complaint applicable to Client B, the
seriousness of the breach is very high, as it involves
an ongoing sexual
relationship with a former patient who presented to the respondent’s
practice with psychological issues for
treatment, and where there was an
exploitation of this situation, with evidence of manipulation by the Respondent
of a vulnerable
young woman.
cumulative effect of these complaints in relation to two separate persons is
that the seriousness of the breach is at the most
serious end of the scale.
Responses of Practitioner
responses to the complaint were filed by the Respondent (R1 dated 5 May 2011 and
R6 dated 16 May 2011) and a further letter dated
23 November 2011. There was
also material sent to the Complainant by the Respondent in volume 1 tab 12 and
volume 2 tabs 14, 16 and
19 of exhibit 1.
Looking individually at the Parajuli considerations:
need to protect the public against further misconduct by the
practitioner
submitted that the Respondent has continued to demonstrate a lack of insight
into his offending conduct.
Respondent has admitted on numerous occasions that his
“insight’’ in relation to his offending conduct is still
developed (T746.23 and T746.31). His treating Psychiatrist, Dr Michael Diamond
confirmed this repeatedly in his report dated
1 May 2011 at exhibit R2 (my
underlining added).
“His attitude has been one of
trying to make sense
of what has
occurred and particularly to try to understand what he has done that has
precipitated the complaints in each case
regard to his insight in relation to the allegations in the complaint, I can
comment that Mr Kreft
is in the process
of gaining a far more
comprehensive and deep appreciation of those principles that apply to
maintaining appropriate professional
understands that his knowledge and exposure to the appreciation of psychodynamic
principles is
deficient and undeveloped
that Mr Kreft is gaining into this issue is
as yet incomplete
It flows from the above comment that his insight into what occurred in the
clinical interaction with Ms Mayer was clearly deficient”
Kreft is engaged in a therapeutic process where he is
sequentially
further insight”. P12
approach remains one of
seeking to understand
what the causes of the
complaint are...” P12
Diamond went on to state that in his view “
the nature of the
(to remedy Mr Kreft’s deficiencies in this regard)
involve regular attendance at a psychotherapist
over a period of years rather
than months
”. He went on to state 2 years or more has been proven
for other individuals. P13
the Respondent in relation to Client A, only conceded that particulars 1.3.1
– 1.3.3 constituted unsatisfactory professional
conduct. This demonstrates
a lack of insight on behalf of the Respondent. The tribunal in their findings
consistently recorded that
his clinical techniques with Client A were not just
errors of judgment made in a therapeutic context
rather serious boundary violations.
Contrition and
relation to Client A, the responses to complaint at R 1 dated
May 2011 and the subsequent response at R6, late in
the investigation at commencement of proceedings on
May 2011, constituted evolving admissions. This
demonstrates a lack of contrition and remorse in relation to Client A.
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
the Tribunal
accepted that the practitioner’s acknowledgement of wrongdoing,
contrition, remorse and the active steps that he
has taken to gain a greater
appreciation of patient/practitioner boundaries suggest that the risk he will
repeat his behavior is
. Then at para [35]: “
Nevertheless the
Tribunal is concerned that the practitioner lacks complete insight into the
impact of his conduct on the patient.
The Tribunal doubts the practitioner
appreciates that the patient was vulnerable
lack of appreciation that Client B was “vulnerable”, it is submitted
should be a cause for ongoing concern for this
It is noted here
that the Respondents Counsel made a concession from the bar table in Phase Two
that it is agreed that Client B was
a vulnerable woman)
examination at T743.4:
Q. Do you accept that when she presented
to your consultation practice this was a woman who was vulnerable?
A. She did not present as vulnerable.
Q. Well, by virtue of her presenting to your practice, do you accept that
she was a woman with psychological issues?
A. Yes and no.
Q. Well what do you mean by yes and no?
A. Well, look it was explained but I have a philosophical basis for my
treatment where anxiety disorders are things that occur typically
with normal
high functioning people. At last count I consulted with 16 doctors, three of
them psychiatrists, eight psychologists
- these are high functioning
people. I've never dealt with a developmentally delayed person with panic
disorder. It's a part of
the make up of anxiety disorders. The more strong
minded you are, the more you tend to fight the anxiety and it gets
Q. So did you consider that she was a strong minded person at the initial
consultation?
Q. Did that ..(not transcribable) (note: our recollection of word missed
in transcript was “view”).. of her being strong
minded, did that
influence your decision in regard to the relationship?
A. I don't believe so, no.
Remedial Measures
Respondent states he is a specialist in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy yet failed
to refer Client A to a more appropriate specialist
when she presented with
psychological issues of a sexualized nature. The Respondent has acknowledged
this failing.
Respondent has until very recently been a sole practitioner and owner of the
practice in which he works in Newcastle.
Respondent gave evidence in Phase Two that he has very recently employed an
additional three psychologists at his practice, two
due to commence in December
2011 and one further in January 2012. He agreed he placed an advertisement as
November 2011.
Respondent was unable to recollect with precision their level of experience
despite having interviewed the candidates 2 weeks
prior for an “hour and a
half each” (ie. mid November 2011)
Respondent identified that they may require further training and supervision, as
was stated in the advertisement, although when
cross examined on this, he stated
he would refer them to an external 3
party trainer
from the Australian Psychological Society website.
Respondent stated in evidence in Phase Two that he has been implementing
systemic changes in his practice since October 2010.
When questioned further in
relation to this, the first measure implemented in October 2010 he said was to
remove his former client
and girlfriend Client B, from employment within his
practice. Other examples he gave were of anonymous feedback questionnaires which
he emails patients at the start of the session, which he has had in place for a
long time but this practiced “dwindled”
and then he restarted in
August 2011 – he stated in cross examination that no complaints have been
made in relation to his
Respondent further stated that after the first 4 days of hearing of Phase One,
he implemented self referrals and differential
diagnosis procedures and in June
2011 ceased consulting clients on Saturdays. He stated that he has wound down
his practice to nil
patients as of Wednesday 23
November 2011 (as he completed the course referred to in his statement dated
November 2011 exhibit R26 in “training
courses completed” namely the “Art of Science of Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy”
November 2011, which he conceded was misleading to
state that he had completed it as at the date of his statement ie.
November 2011.
submitted that the Respondent is still in a continual process of learning about
the issues which have arisen in these complaints,
as is evident by the amount of
reading and courses he is currently undertaking (see exhibits R26 and R6). This
it is submitted would
be a cause for concern to the Tribunal in his ability to
continue practice. His insight is still in a stage of development. His current
understanding of transference and counter transference is still being developed
– see for example his attendance on the course
in the paragraph above as
November 2011.
Diamond in his report at R2 page 7 also acknowledges this where he states
my understanding is that Mr Kreft’s qualifications in the
clinical domain are limited overall especially in those areas that
fall outside
his area of expertise involving cognitive behavioral therapy for primarily
anxiety disorders and sometimes for the management
of mood disorders
He goes on to state that he is “
increasingly aware of the extent of
the deficiencies
in his understandings of psychodynamic theories,
interpersonal interactions between therapists and patients and in more complex
that include transference-based phenomena that occur in the course of
therapeutic interaction
” (my underlining added).
page 16, Dr Diamond noted (in relation to Client A) that “
acknowledges freely that his training and experience is deficient with regard to
having a deeper understanding of such issues
Respondent also stated he has improved his documentary referrals of clients, has
administrative staff present at all times when
he consults, and now videos his
consultations which he first commenced in September 2009.
Respondent also stated he has decreased his level of self disclosure and has
implemented monitoring tools to look for physical
indicators of transference in
sessions. He cited an example several months ago of an “eroticised”
transference which
“resolved itself” in the subsequent session. It
is submitted given the complaints before this Tribunal, the Respondent
have raised this immediately with his supervisor but failed to do so at the
time. He said he “thought about” disclosing
supervisor.
is submitted that apart from the video taping of clients and removal of his
girlfriend, Client B from his practice, all these other
measures implemented
have only since occurred after the initial stage of Phase One of the hearing in
May 2011. This would cause ongoing
concern to the Tribunal in that these
remedial measures have not be properly “bedded down” and used for a
time period
to accurately gauge whether they are effective or not. It is noted
he has yet to receive negative anonymous feedback and has had
only one example
of “eroticized” transference to report of.
Respondent also tendered a Professional Practice Management Standards
“self assessment instrument” which on the Respondent’s
assessment standard, identified deficiencies in his own practice – for
example in the section on Risk Assessment and Client
Care at page 13, he gave
himself a score of 11/20, barely a “pass
Supervision
Respondent is presently without supervision, his previous supervisor Dr Roger
Peters having withdrawn his services (Exh R 28).
It is conceded the present
situation is through no fault of the Respondent. However, the fact remains he
presently has no supervisor
in place and this should nevertheless be a cause of
ongoing concern for the Tribunal.
need to protect the public through general deterrence (of other
practitioners)
determination made by the Tribunal will have a deterrent effect on both the
respondent and others who may fall short of the high
standards required of
psychologists in their profession:
[2010] NSWPHT 4
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
per Basten JA.
deterrence here is of paramount importance. This is compounded by the fact that
at the time of the offending conduct, client
year psychology student. A message needs to be sent
to the psychology profession and student community that this behaviour is
unacceptable
and repugnant.
need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional standards and
denouncing transgressions
Tribunal has found professional misconduct in relation to particulars 1-4 for
client A and particular 5-7 for client B. It is
submitted that the level of
professional misconduct for both clients is at the serious end of the
submitted that there are a number of aggravating factors in relation to the
finding of professional misconduct against the complaints
relation to Client A
and Client B, which mark this matter as a very serious case of professional
misconduct.
general, this matter involved two separate persons, Client A and Client B, which
is a matter of aggravation in itself.
aggravation in relation to Client A
allegations of Client A in relation to Particulars 1.3.1 was denied to the
extent of the number of partners he allegedly stated
he had slept with, 1.3.4
was denied outright, 1.3.5 was denied outright, 1.4 the content and context was
denied, and 4 was denied
it was only conceded that particulars 1.3.1 – 1.3.3 constituted
unsatisfactory professional conduct and particulars
2 and 3 represented conduct
that fell significantly below the standard expected.
Accordingly,
the complaint in relation to Client A was contested on the remaining particulars
and Client A was subjected to lengthy
cross examination. (see Holmes Case at
para 55 – which cites this as a relevant consideration). This was despite
the fact that
most of the complaint had been admitted in the second response
(exhibit R6).
significant part of the cross examination was in relation to the private journal
entries and their effect. The Tribunal rejected
the Respondent’s
submission that they should be treated as form of contemporaneous record of
events of the therapy between
Client A and the Respondent.
submitted that the direct challenges to the account of Client A in relation to a
number of the disputed particulars, had the
effect of a partial retraction of
the apologies made to Client A in the R6 response and is also an indicator of a
lack of contrition
and remorse in relation to Client A.
as previously stated, the responses to complaint at R 1 and the subsequent
response at R6, constituted evolving admissions,
late in the proceedings, the
second response being prepared as late as 16
2011. This again demonstrates a lack of contrition and remorse in relation to
Childs v Walton
(Court of Appeal 40252 of 13 November
An accused who has strenuously denied that she had
anything to do with the crime charged may well find it embarrassingly difficult,
when the question of penalty arises, to seek the mitigation that might be found
in the final admission of guilt and the expression
of contrition. But this is no
more than an inevitable consequence when, as in the present case, there has been
a clear conflict of
fact resolved in favour of the complainant. (Pg 21)
The Court went on to say:
The law does not require the expression of contrition as the satisfaction
of some arcane ritual. In cases such as this, where the
protection of the
community is the paramount interest, contrition, if accepted as honest, may
indicate that no occasion for protection
exists. (Pg22-23)
Matters of aggravation in relation to Client B
Respondent first kissed Client B in his practice rooms on or about 1 September
2011 (T235.35 and T671.27)
submitted that the Respondent portrayed himself as somewhat of a
“victim” – certainly in the initial stages
of the relationship
with Client B, whom he characterized as “strong minded” (T743.4).
The Respondent did not agree she
presented to him as a “vulnerable”
woman (T743.4) although this was conceded by his Counsel in Phase Two that she
a vulnerable woman. Recall here the evidence of Cheryl Clothier in Phase Two
of Client B being a vulnerable woman with significant
psychological issues.
Respondent represented that Patient B imposed herself on him and then was the
driving factor in seeing multiple senior psychologists
to interpret what was an
explicitly clear part of the code of conduct, as conceded by the Respondent
(T676.33) – contained
in the APS Code of Ethics and NSW Psychologists
Registration Board Code of Professional Conduct, which both prohibit
psychologists
from having any sexual relationships with clients for a minimum of
2 years following cessation of treatment (see Tab 23 and 25 of
submitted that the Respondent engaged in manipulative and even predatory conduct
in relation to Client B. The Respondent in
his submissions in reply conceded
that from some time after the meeting with Dr Gordon when the sexual
relationship commenced:
“the respondent was manipulative in
that he wished to pursue a relationship with client B when she was, at times,
ambivalent”
(para.82 of the Respondent’s Reply).
submitted that this manipulation manifested in the Respondent’s offer to
client A for her to move in with him in March
2007, to work for him in June 2008
at his practice and his offer of security to assist her to buy a car. It is
submitted these are
aggravating features of the professional misconduct.
Respondent in his reply conceded that “
B’s emotions at this time
are captured by Ms Clothier in Tab 4
is therefore within just weeks of the commencement of the sexual relationship
[see note for 11.1.07, volume 2, Tab 4, p.12].
The Respondent was challenged on
this note made exactly 1 month after the meeting with Dr Gordon at tab 4 page
12, where Cheryl Clothier
contemporaneously recorded a conversation with Client
B where the Respondent’s behaviour was described as
manipulative over the last few months
” and he denied this
(see T779/45 – 782/1). The Respondent gave evidence that the inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship
with Client B commenced “some time”
December 2006, when he met with Dr Gordon
(see T676/42 and paragraph 14 of exhibit R6).
Complainant submits that the Respondent was manipulative and exploitative of
Client B in the very early stages of their sexual
relationship. His offers of
accommodation, employment and financial assistance must be seen in that light.
His manipulative behavior
evidently caused Client B distress and was frequently
reported to Ms Clothier in their therapy sessions. The Commission submits that
the turbulent nature of the relationship in the early stages merely underlines
the rationale for the prohibition against sexual relationships
psychologists and their former clients. The Commission submits that the
Respondent was also manipulative prior to the commencement
of the sexual
relationship in that he admittedly circumvented the requirements of the Code of
Ethics to pursue what he wanted.
the Tribunal has made a finding against the Respondent and accepted the version
of Dr Gordon in relation to particular 7.
This finding is a matter of
aggravation it is submitted in relation to the Respondent and the complaint
relating to Client B.
noted here that the challenge to Dr Gordon’s reflections on the
application of the Code of Conduct should be made when
considering the
respondent’s evidence in chief at T676.33:
Apart from that, would you agree with this: that whatever the advice was given
by professional colleagues, the New South Wales
Psychologist Registration Board
code was crystal clear that entering into such a relationship was prohibited? A.
Yes. Q. You didn't
need the advice of colleagues to tell you that, did you? A.
That's correct.
Respondent admits that there was a power differential between himself and Client
B that he exploited. He failed to recognize this
initially, but did so later
(T667.14, T669.30, and T679.15)
Continuing relationship with
fact that the Respondent is still in a relationship with Client B does not
mitigate the seriousness of his conduct. The Respondent
accepted this in cross
examination in Phase Two. This also is in accordance with the Australian
Psychological Society guidelines
on this issue.
the contrary, it prevents him from reaching a true appreciation of the
seriousness of his misconduct and in fact hampers the kind
of reformation and
growth, it is submitted that the Tribunal would want to see to have confidence
this sort of conduct will not reoccur.
maintenance of public confidence in the profession;
decision of the Tribunal is paramount to the question of the maintenance of
public confidence in the profession:
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR
at 702E – F;
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
per Basten JA.
Psychologist’s
occupy a privileged position in society and have access to patients in highly
vulnerable settings. So that they
may be able to perform their duties
properly, clients and the public in general must be able to trust them. If
the reputation of
the Psychology profession falls into disrepute, members of the
community will not use or trust it, and their health may suffer:
matter of Dr David Charles Lindsay
, Medical Tribunal of New South Wales, 20
August 2008, at [1] – [3] (and the cases cited).
decision of the Tribunal ought to have the effect of encouraging the maintenance
of high standards within the profession of psychology
and public confidence in
the profession:
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner
is no evidence that the Respondent possess any “special skills” in
the practice of Psychology. On the contrary,
the three new starters at his
practice, will be practicing in a similar field as stated by the Respondent in
Complainant’s Comparatives:
(Note - see also
page 15 of the Holmes Case, where further cases were summarised)
v Graeme Ronald Schubert
[2009] NSWPST 6
– no deregistration
– similar in some respects to the complaint against Client A in part, with
some particulars which
were similar to the initial exchange with Client B–
reprimand and 2 month suspension then conditions imposed – distinguished
from this matter in that there was a single complainant, the Tribunal also noted
at para [424] and gave the Respondent full credit
for co-operation with the AHS
while they investigated the matter (compared with this matter where first
response to complaint R1
was not filed until just before the hearing and second
response R 6, on first day of hearing of Phase One), the admissions made by
Respondent and his co-operation with the Tribunal. Also see [421] where only
come to attention of the Tribunal on this one occasion,
highlighting the
distinguishing fact that in this matter there are 2 separate complainants.
referred by Chairperson:
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSWNMT 12
deregistered – case before Nurses and Midwives Tribunal of NSW
– where a Nurse developed a therapeutic relationship with
Client A when he
was a client of the Drug Court Program, and subsequently commenced a sexual
relationship with him and failed to
inform her employer in contravention of
applicable Code of Conduct. The relationship continued and they had a baby
together. Nurse
was found guilty of professional misconduct and was deregistered
for 1 year. See in particular the comments at para’s 201-205
in relation
to the special therapeutic relationship that exists for health practitioners
(including Psychologists) and their clients.
referred to by Chairperson:
Phillip Eric Newlyn
dated 1 May 2001 –
sexual relationship with a client whom he later married - where a Psychologist
was reprimanded and placed
on conditions for 20 months – this involved a
single complaint and the psychologist had relatively little experience as a
psychologist
[2008] NSWPST 2
– in this matter a Psychologist amongst
other things (see page 3) failed in relation to her client to provide adequate
plan, used inappropriate methods, disclosed personal information to a
party about the client and entered into a personal
and/or sexual relationship with Client A. Professional misconduct was found and
the Tribunal ordered the name of the Respondent be removed from the Register of
Psychologists for a period of 3 years, plus awarded
costs to the HCCC.
Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
– where a Doctor engaged in sexual
relationship with a former patient and was deregistered for at least 6 months.
v Jean Michel Mazaleigue
– PST 3 (20 August 2009)
– Psychologist upon realising he had feelings for a client failed to
seek advice, terminate the relationship, and refer the
client to a another
psychologist – entered into a sexual relationship – the client was
intending on becoming a nun –
the psychologist was deregistered for a
minimum period of 4 years.
(Court of Appeal of NSW, 19 December 1991, BC9101315).
Psychiatrist engaged in sexual relationship with client, having initially
his interest in her in a session. Relationship was long term and
ongoing – Psychiatrist was de-registered and on appeal this
order was upheld.
Respondent’s Evidence
of Dr Michael Diamond:
Diamond’s findings have been commented on previously. It should be noted
that some of Dr Diamond’s opinions are based
on self reporting by the
Respondent. In light of the findings of fact made against him by Tribunal, the
Tribunal should be wary of
those opinions as applicable and accordingly little
weight be placed to opinions where findings of fact have been made against the
Respondent.
of Mr Brian Brown
reference of Mr Brown states that when the Respondent became initially involved
with his daughter, Client B, “
due to his position, did initially
” – this is coming from a lay member of the public and
reflects in general the public perception of such relationships
developing from
this situation. He said in evidence he was initially “outraged” by
Mr Kreft’s behaviour toward
his daughter.
submitted that Mr Brown’s portrayal in his evidence of the early stages of
the relationship is akin to Mr Kreft’s
portrayal as Client B being the
initiator and driver of their relationship and in some respects an unwilling
participant. In other
words this wouldn’t have happened but for Client
B’s actions.
of Dr Stephen Kelly (see T271-282 on 20.5.11)
his own admission, Dr Kelly didn’t know the Respondent personally and has
only actually met the Respondent for 45-60 minutes
(T271.45) at a friend’s
hair dressing salon on one occasion, he never saw the complaint or the response
to complaint when he
made his reference and he has only referred 10-12 woman to
the Respondent in the last 3 years (T272.19) .
note is his evidence that the Respondent had an unusually and disproportionately
high number of clients giving him positive feedback
(ie. about the Respondent)
(T277.22). “
Rarely will they say something very positive about
” (ie. Psychologists) (T277.24). This may be explained by the
techniques of self disclosure which the Respondent admits he was
practicing at
the time and which it is submitted, risked issues of transference between client
and practitioner. Dr Kelly disagreed
with this proposition but this is a matter
on which the Tribunal can form its own view.
is submitted that little weight should be placed on this reference.
and draft letter of Dr Roger Peters
submitted that for the paragraph commencing “
Stephen has been a willing
participant
” in exhibit R28 and R29, that little weight should be
afforded to the disputed paragraph by the Tribunal. It is noted that
Respondent admitted that he was not sent the decision from Phase One, although
he stated in cross examination that he did discuss
the results with him. The
statement of the Respondent at paragraph 4 of Exh 26, illustrates that Dr Peters
did not have sufficient
material to enable a proper assessment of the matter.
The balance of the disputed paragraph was not able to be tested by the
Complainant,
although it is conceded this was not the fault of the
Respondent.
Protective Orders: Why conditions not appropriate
Diamond in his report dated 1 May 2011 at R2 pages 18-19, proposed a number of
strict conditions on the Respondent. It is noted
here the proposed condition at
(v) on page 19, that the Respondent should “
not practice alone or in a
setting that could identify him as an isolated practitioner
evidence of the Respondent in Phase Two should be noted, of his very recent and
it is submitted inadequate attempts to
date to employ additional staff at his
practice, the experience levels of whom are still in doubt.
proposed conditions of Dr Diamond, significantly constrain the nature of
practice of the Respondent and require strict ongoing
supervision. The
conditions by their inherent nature reflect concern about the Respondent’s
current fitness to practise.
JA (Priestley and Meagher JJA agreeing) said in
Buttsworth -v- Walton
(Court of Appeal of NSW, 19 December 1991, BC9101315 at
“...there is a significant want of logic in evidence
which asserts firstly, that there is no risk or only a very slight risk,
further offence at this time, but which goes on to recommend that if the
Appellant is permitted to continue to practice, it
would be desirable that
‘he be in either treatment or supervision with a senior
colleague’. Treatment or supervision
suggests, of course, that the
Appellant is no longer fully in command of his professional resources and, more
to the point, indicates
the underlying assumption that contrary to the statement
made, there is in fact a risk that he will offend again.”
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 639, where the Court stated: “
With the greatest of respect the
necessity for imposing such conditions on the appellant’s registration
demonstrated that he
was unfit to practice medicine and in those circumstances
the only appropriate order was one dismissing his appeal” (ie. against
deregistration).
proposed conditions by the Respondent demonstrate that these conditions will not
protect the public, the psychology profession
and the public interest in the
circumstances of this case. This is particularly evident where as submitted
above, there is a lack
of insight and contrition on behalf of the Respondent and
he does not have a Supervisor in place to assist in the implementation
conditions.
stated by Dr Diamond himself, on page 18 of his report at R2, the Respondent
could pose a danger to the public if he continued to practice in the
manner and setting of his former practice
”. Despite his view that this
danger is diminished if the proposed conditions implemented, it is submitted
that this risk combined
with the onerous conditions proposed which question the
logic of permitting hi to remain in practice, warrant de-registration.
Proposed Orders
the above mentioned reasons, the Tribunal should order that the
Respondent’s name be removed from the register of Psychologists,
to s149C(1)(b) of the National Law.
the Tribunal make an order cancelling the Respondent’s registration, the
Tribunal is also permitted to make a prohibition
order pursuant to s.149C(5)(a)
of the National Law. An appropriate prohibition order would be in terms such
that the Respondent is
prohibited from providing any of the following health
services until at least the time he is re-registered as a psychologist:
Psychotherapy;
Hypnotherapy;
health service; and/or
Counseling.
to Clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law, the complainant seeks an order
for costs from the Respondent, to be agreed
or failing agreement, to be
assessed. If costs are not to be awarded to the Complainant as the successful
party in these proceedings,
then it is requested that written submissions on the
question of costs, be permitted to be filed.
Submissions on behalf of the Health Care Complaints Commission
on the protective orders proposed by the Respondent
Commission relies on submissions made before the Tribunal on 29 November 2011.
The Commission repeats the submission that in the
circumstances of the present
case suspension of the Respondent’s registration accompanied by conditions
on the Respondent’s
practice when it resumes, or the imposition of
conditions alone, would be insufficient to protect the health and safety of the
in light of the seriousness of the misconduct and the level of concern
to the relevant
principles, it is respectfully submitted that an order of cancellation is the
only appropriate order.
Notwithstanding
the Commission’s submission, we take the opportunity to make the following
brief submissions on the draft conditions
proposed by the Respondent.
a general sense, the cumulative effect of the proposed conditions, if imposed,
strongly indicates that the Tribunal could not be
satisfied that there is no
risk of the repetition of the conduct that brought the Respondent before the
Tribunal and indeed that
there is a real and great risk. The proposed conditions
reflect significant concern about the Respondent’s current fitness
practise and significant misgivings about his future behavior [see the
principles in
Buttsworth v Walton
(Court of Appeal of NSW, 19 December
1991 BC9101315 at 15) and
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41NSWLR 630 at 637-638].
Commission notes with particular concern the proposed conditions numbered
“2” and “8” in the proposed
conditions.
its face the proposed condition numbered “2” in effect constrains
the Respondent’s scope of practice in a very
significant way by limiting
him to the provision of only one treatment modality as a psychologist –
cognitive behavioural therapy
(“CBT”). There is a suite of
methodologies and treatment techniques which this condition must prevent the
from providing to prospective clients. Such a limitation would
potentially significantly impede the value of the therapy offered
and may indeed
prevent or limit appropriate treatment of a client for whom CBT is not the most
effective modality.
is submitted that the proposed limitation on the Respondent’s scope of
practice would operate in a practical sense to prevent
the Respondent from
practising psychology and be tantamount to suspension or cancellation [see
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
Further, the Commission submits that the workability of this condition and its
ability to be monitored is problematic.
relation to the proposed condition numbered “8”, the Commission
submits that the closeness and level of supervision
of practice contemplated by
the proposed condition would cause the Tribunal concern about the
Respondent’s fitness to practise.
The Commission refers the Tribunal again
to the principles in
(above). In the
Medical Tribunal case of
HCCC v Dr Potts
(17 August 2007) the Tribunal
considered that the level of supervision required to enable the Respondent to
practise medicine safely,
in effect to be monitored and supervised one on one in
every aspect of his practise, was tantamount to being “chaperoned”
sense of demonstrating his unfitness to practise. The
Commission submits the same considerations are apposite here.
is submitted that the proposed conditions only serve to underline the risk posed
by the Respondent and current concern about his
fitness to practise psychology.
It is submitted that the proposed conditions could not protect the public or the
psychology profession
and the most appropriate course is to order cancellation
of the Respondent’s registration.
SUBMISSIONS BY RESPONDENT
PART 1: TRIBUNAL’S STATUTORY POWERS IN PHASE TWO
. Relevantly
for this purpose, its jurisdiction to inquire into complaints and determine
complaints is limited by the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
(the National Law). The two complaints have been referred to
the Tribunal pursuant to section 145B of the National Law. Under section
the National Law, the Tribunal must conduct an inquiry into
complaint, matter or application referred to it”.
The Tribunal may
conduct proceedings on an inquiry as it thinks
to section 149 of the National Law, the Tribunal may only exercise a
disciplinary power under Subdivision 6 of Division 3
(which deals with
Complaints) “
it finds the subject matter of a complaint against the
practitioner ... to have been proved
“complaint”
in the above provisions of the National Law
refers to the complaint made by Client A by letter dated 9 August
and in relation
to Client B, the letter of complaint by Ms Clothier dated 31 May 2008, and any
matter arising out of the investigation
complaints.
149C of the National Law provides that the Tribunal may cancel the
respondent’s registration if the Tribunal is satisfied
the practitioner is
guilty of professional misconduct.
virtue of the definition of “professional misconduct” and
“unsatisfactory professional conduct” within
the meaning of section
139E and 139B of the National Law and the terms of section 149 of the National
Law, the Tribunal’s focus
in determining an appropriate disciplinary order
is the nature and extent of the “conduct” that is the subject of the
The Tribunal has conducted an inquiry under 167 of the National Law
and has given reasons for its decision dated 4 November 2011 (the
decision). The
Inquiry was said to be at [1]
“with respect to the Particulars of
Complaint.”
The Tribunal made four findings of professional
misconduct.
In assessing the gravity of the misconduct in relation to patients A and B,
the Tribunal should only consider facts relevant to the
complaints against A and
B. The concept of “aggravating features” or “mitigating
features” is used to characterise
criminal conduct. Those terms are
incorporated in
section 21A
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(NSW). However, the terms are inapt to characterise the severity of misconduct,
the subject of a complaint. First, such language
does not appear in the National
Law. Secondly, the issue in determining appropriate disciplinary powers is what
matters favour and
what matters do not favour the practitioner’s ongoing
competence or fitness to provide health
WHY THE TRIBUNAL SHOULD NOT CANCEL OR SUSPEND THE
RESPONDENT’S REGISTRATION
2.1 Legal Principles
respondent acknowledges that the Tribunal has the power under section 149C of
the National Law to (a) cancel the respondent’s
registration; (b) suspend
the respondent’s registration for a specified period. The Tribunal should
decline to make those orders.
Instead, it should exercise its powers under
section 149A(1)(a) and (b) to reprimand the respondent and impose conditions it
appropriate on the respondent’s registration.
principles to be applied in determining the appropriate disciplinary orders are
well known. They include:
protection of the public;
maintenance of standards of the
not only the respondent but other psychologists who may be tempted to stray from
appropriate standards;
reminder to the profession of the unacceptability of the conduct
A Solicitor v Law Society
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
the High Court held [at
“Professional misconduct may not necessarily require a
conclusion of unfitness to practise, and removal from the roll. In that
it is to be remembered that fitness is to be decided at the time of hearing.
Misconduct, whether or not it amounts to professional
misconduct may have
occurred years earlier.”
scheme of Subdivision 6 does not create any presumption that suspension or
deregistration will
follow a finding of professional
misconduct. The discretion to impose any disciplinary order remains at large.
This was explained
by Basten JA in
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
[67] The first aspect of this challenge is based on an
assumption that the Tribunal should start with the possibility of
deregistration,
once a finding is made of professional misconduct, because, by
definition, such conduct is of its nature sufficiently serious to
suspension or removal of the practitioner’s name from the register: the
However, it is clear that the definition is focused on the nature of
the conduct, which must have the capacity to justify such an
order, whether or
not such an order should be made in particular circumstances. That such an order
need not be made is clear from
the terms of
, which provide that the
full range of disciplinary powers is available on a finding of professional
misconduct. The statutory constraints
operate differently. Thus, a person may
not be suspended or deregistered unless the Tribunal finds the person is not
competent to
practice medicine, is guilty of professional misconduct, is not of
good character or has been convicted of an offence which renders
unfit in the public interest to practice medicine:
Further, the power
to impose a fine depends upon a finding that the person is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct:
Otherwise, the discretion of the Tribunal is at large and will depend upon
the circumstances of the individual case
: see, in relation to legal
practitioners, Walsh v Law Society of New South Wales
[1999] HCA 33
(1999) 198 CLR 73
(McHugh, Kirby and Callinan JJ). [underlining added]
cancellation of the respondent’s certificate should only be made if the
Tribunal is persuaded that he is permanently unfit
to practise as a
psychologist. The nature and extent of the respondent’s misconduct should
not lead to a finding that the respondent
was permanently unfit. In the
alternative, if the Tribunal does not apply the ‘permanent
unfitness’ test, the circumstances
of the case including the nature and
extent of the misconduct together with his steps at rehabilitation do not
justify cancellation
of his registration.
NSW Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Spigelman CJ
agreed with the observations of McHugh J in
Prothonotary v Pritchard
where his Honour stated:
“An order for the involuntary
removal of the name of the practitioner from the roll of Solicitors is made only
because the probability
is that the Solicitor is permanently unfit to practise.
Unless the Court is persuaded that the probability exists, the proper order
is make or usually be one of suspension or fine instead
Kirby P stated in
NSW Bar Association v Maddocks
(Court of Appeal, 23
August 1998, unreported):
“Normally removal is taken to
imply a judgment that a person is forever, or at least indefinitely disqualified
from practising.
If this is not the conclusion which the court has reached, it
should stop short of removal.”
149C (7) of the National Law provides that the Tribunal may specify that an
application for reinstatement (which is an application
for order under Division
8) may not be made until after a specified period of time. Under section 163
(which is part of Division
8) of the National Law, a psychologist whose
registration has been cancelled can reapply after a period of time to be
reinstated.
The existence of those statutory powers does not alter the
applicability of the ‘permanent unfitness’ test. When
was decided, the fact that a solicitor was struck off did not prevent the
solicitor from reapplying for admission. However, the solicitor
applying for
readmission carried the onus (in practice a heavy onus) of demonstrating that
there had been a reformation to permit
him to be readmitted to the profession:
Ex parte Tziniolis
(1966) 67 S.R. (NSW) 448
at 461. The same onus applies
under the National Law.
was applied by the Medical Tribunal in
HCCC v Holmes
Furthermore,
as a matter of logic, if the Tribunal finds that the respondent is not
permanently unfit to practise, it follows that,
provided that he is supervised
under the appropriate conditions, his continuing to practise will not pose such
a danger to the public
that justifies the most severe sanction of cancellation
of his certificate.
HCCC v Holmes
[2010] NSWMT 19
, Dr Holmes was found to have engaged in
professional misconduct when he had sexual intercourse with client A on 3 or 4
per year between 1998 and 2004, after which patient A separated from
her husband. The misconduct involved:
The relationship
was initiated after taking a PAP smear;
The relationship
was conducted over five or six years in the Practitioner’s consulting
rooms where the power imbalance was at
its highest;
Dr Holmes was
clearly aware of the seriousness of what he was doing;
He knew at the
time that it was improper and potentially harmful for him to continue the
relationship;
He broke the
trust a client has with a doctor;
The relationship
continued through a highly tumultuous time for patient A;
The Practitioner
did not bring the relationship to the Medical Board until he was in a position
where he knew patient A had made a
The Practitioner
provided counselling to patient A on a number of occasions in 2002 within the
sexual and personal relationship with
At the time of
the hearing he understood the gravity of the misconduct. He had seventeen
consultations with Dr Johns and he had gained
significant insight into his
misconduct;
The Practitioner
was contrite for what he had done. The Tribunal found it to be a telling fact
that the Medical Board had not considered
it appropriate to hold a
Inquiry prior to the matter being determined. (Paragraph 56).
the circumstances, the Tribunal suspended the doctor from practising for a
period of twelve months and ordered certain conditions
to be imposed.
respondent does
submit that it is appropriate to compare the facts of
‘similar cases’ with the respondent’s case in order to
the appropriate order. That approach invites error because it
diminishes the task of focussing on the “circumstances of the
Karalasingham
at [67]. The correct approach is to apply
legal principles in cases that bind or are of persuasive authority for the
The nature and extent of the respondent’s
Tribunal should opinion of Dr Diamond that it is important to distinguish
between the conduct in relation to client A and client
B because a different
analysis is required for the respondent’s conduct towards both clients
because “they were truly
two quite different
scenarios.”
Diamond did not believe that there was sexually predatory behaviour in relation
to either client.
respondent did not commence a sexual relationship with Client B whilst she was a
current client. There was a five month gap between
the termination of the
therapeutic relationship and the commencement of the sexual relationship. During
that period, the respondent
made attempts to persuade client B not to pursue a
relationship with him. The respondent also made attempts to comply with the
Professional
Code of Ethics as he construed it. He went to professional
counsellors to seek advice, and at least for a period of months, followed
respondent accepts Dr Diamond’s comment that he misunderstood the
rationale of the Code and focused too heavily on the two
year prohibition period
rather than the underlying rationale of the code that a sexual relationship with
a former client should not
be undertaken. He accepts that he did not comply with
nature of the ongoing relationship between Client B and the respondent is a
relevant fact in assessing the gravity of the
misconduct.
an exploitative relationship. It is a loving relationship. This submission is
not inconsistent with his admission that
the conduct constitutes professional
misconduct.
core of the respondent’s misconduct in relation to Client A has been
succinctly analysed in Dr Diamond’s report,
the substance of which is
summarised at paragraph 59 of the Respondent’s Submissions dated 1
September 2010. At the time of
his misconduct with client A, the respondent had
no regular clinical supervision which directly addressed interaction between
and client. He had deficiencies in his understanding of psychodynamic
theories and personal interactions between therapist and clients
transference based phenomena that occur commonly in the course of therapeutic
interaction. He practised in an environment
where he was the senior clinician
and did not have access to more senior or more extensively trained or more
experienced clinicians
who could have remedied the deficiencies in his skill and
knowledge: Dr Diamond page 7.
the reasons stated in its Submissions in Reply dated 5 October 2011 at [2]-[20],
and in addition for the reasons stated in these
submissions at [1]-[8], it is
not open for the Tribunal to find that the respondent’s conduct was
sexually predatory or was
engaged in for the purposes of sexual gratification.
The respondent repeats its request for a direction from the Chairperson to
Tribunal to disregard the HCCC’s submissions concerning this
cause and basis of the respondent’s misconduct in the case of Client A was
his treatment of a client where he lacked the
skill and training to do so. This
led the respondent to make inappropriate comments to the client in an attempt to
counter or challenge
her beliefs about a range of matters (self image, extra
marital affairs etc...) It also led to inappropriate techniques (the
photographic
rating exercise) to deal with her beliefs about her self-image.
Rehabilitation
respondent has demonstrated remorse. The HCCC’s challenge to the
respondent’s contrition has been dealt with in the
respondent’s
submissions in reply dated 5 October 2011 at [75].
events in relation to Client A occurred between 3 ½ and 4 years ago, and in
relation to Client B occurred 5 years ago.
respondent has taken important steps in rehabilitation.
Diamond gave unequivocal evidence, which was not challenged, concerning the
contrition of the respondent. Dr Diamond observed
the respondent during his
consultations with him – both what the respondent said and the emotions he
demonstrated during the
consultations with him. Dr Diamond noted the following
matters about the respondent:
openness to a process of remediation;
candour in discussing his misconduct as distinct from digging his heels in and
absence of minimising his misconduct;
absence of seeing himself as a
absence of being belligerent or expressing outrage in relation to the complaints
made against
deepening insight into his
misconduct;
respondent’s insight into his misconduct, and his steps at remediation
would satisfy the Tribunal that he is highly unlikely
to engage in any repeat
conduct of the type engage in with client A. On this critical issue, the
Tribunal should give significant
weight to Dr Diamond’s opinion. In
relation to client A, he
But the account that Mr Kreft had given me not once but
throughout our interactions as we returned to this issue in many different
and that's part of my treatment style, is to return to issues of apology or
aberration and to clarify them further with deepening
My view was that he had consistently stated how he perceived the
interaction and the basis that lay behind his intent conducting her
field that was outside of his training and experience and expertise.
concern was that he failed to recognise the scenario in which he had become
complicit and I think in the course of therapy with
me he has gained a deeper
understanding and a clearer understanding of just how inappropriate it was for
him to engage in those areas
where he lacked the training and the skill to work
with somebody who was there for problems of that nature. So I think that has
evolved in the time that I have been seeing him. Certainly he's I don't believe
in the same state of insightlessness and unawareness
to become engaged in an
interaction of that nature again. I think there is a deepening
important changes that the respondent has made to his practice during the last
12 to 18 months should significantly minimise the
opportunity for the respondent
to treat a client (such as Client A) where he lacks the training and skill to do
the respondent’s insight into his misconduct would satisfy the Tribunal
that he is highly unlikely to engage in any
repeat conduct of the type engage in
with client B. Again, as Dr Diamond has pointed out, having explored the topic,
there is no
evidence of sexually predatory behaviour by the respondent.
Furthermore, the respondent now has a much better understanding of and
deal with how his own emotional state can impinge on therapeutic interactions
with clients.
Diamond has linked his satisfaction that the respondent will most probably not
repeat his misconduct with the need for the respondent
to change the setting and
manner of his former
of setting, Dr Diamond expressed concern about the respondent continuing to
practise where he is the principal psychologist.
The respondent has stated that,
should he continue to practise, he will practise with a two full time
psychologists and one part
time male psychologist. They have all been informed
of these proceedings and the Tribunal’s findings made against the
respondent.
respondent has done extensive reading on the topics central to the complaints:
boundaries, self-disclosure and transference.
He has made changes to his mode
of practice to minimise inappropriate self-disclosure, to ensure that he only
treats clients whose
requirements are within his area of expertise and to be
vigilant against instances of counter-transference or transference interfering
with the therapeutic process.
has also taken practical steps to ensure that events the subject of the
complaints will not be repeated. He has done the following:
after obtaining
client consent, he video and audio records all consultations,
he takes more
detailed clinical notes,
he documents
referrals to other practitioners
anonymous feedback from clients;
he has reduced
the number of clients he sees in a day from an average of 10 to 8 clients per
day. If he continues to practice, he
will further reduce that number to 6
clients per day
facilitated
readier access to the APS policies and guidelines.
Diamond has also expressed concern that the respondent was not suitably placed
to “take on all comers”. He believes
that the respondent needs to
carefully assess which clients would best match his skill base. The respondent
has admitted that his
skill base was narrow during 2006 and 2007. Dr
Diamond’s opinion is that a condition of the respondent’s
registration
should be that he practises under
supervision.
respondent acknowledges that opinion.
respondent has taken steps to establishing a framework for supervision. He has
already undergone supervision by Dr Peters, who
has reviewed with the respondent
his therapeutic methods and procedures. He has reviewed his current practice in
relation to (a)
differential diagnosis of history taking to ensure that his
treatment plans are tailored to require presentation; (b) his current
keeping practice; (c) issues relating to terms of transference, power
transference and the blurring of therapeutic boundaries.
Punitive factors
numerous authorities which confirm the jurisdiction exercised by the Tribunal
need to be seen in the light of the High Court’s
decision in
[2004] HCA 42
[2004] 220 CLR 129.
In that case, the High Court eschewed the
“supposed distinction” between “punitive” and
“protective”
proceedings or orders. It held at [35]:
“Just as a law may bear several characters, a proceeding
may seek relief which), if granted, would protect the public but would
penalise the person against whom it is granted. That a proceeding may bear
several characters does not deny that it bears “each
characters”.
corollary of that decision is that the Tribunal should take into account those
matters such as hardship to the respondent as a
result of these current
proceedings. The fact is that an order cancelling the registration of the
respondent together with the associated
costs of these proceedings would be
financially ruinous to him. It is not submitted that this is a decisive factor
in determining
the appropriate order, but it is a relevant factor.
HCCC v KREFT
Stephen Kreft, you have been found guilty of professional misconduct in
relation to two female clients and are hereby reprimanded
for your conduct.
The Tribunal finds that, with respect to Client A, you demonstrated
knowledge, skill and judgment so far below that reasonably expected
psychologist with equivalent level of training and experience that it
constitutes professional misconduct. You made inappropriate
comments, made
inappropriate self-disclosures, violated professional boundaries and failed to
follow appropriate therapeutic practices
with a young and vulnerable woman who
presented with complex issues. As a result of your actions, this young woman
feels she has
suffered harm to her psychological health.
With respect to Client B, you permitted the development of an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship with another young and
vulnerable woman,
disregarding the explicit directions of the Codes governing Psychologists’
conduct, the standards of your
profession and advice of your experienced peers
in doing so. The Tribunal does not have confidence in your assertions of
of responsibility for your actions as these assertions have evolved
and changed over time.
The Tribunal acknowledges that you have begun to develop insight into your
conduct and made changes to your practice, but notes that
it was nearly a matter
‘too little too late’
You are reprimanded by this Tribunal for your conduct towards both Client A
and Client B as you breached the trust placed in you by
the clients and the
community to place clients’ wellbeing above all other considerations,
including your own personal needs
and desires.
The Tribunal acknowledges that you have practiced for a number of years and
appear to have a strong skill set in limited areas. The
Tribunal notes your
undertaking to comply with any conditions placed upon your registration if you
were allowed to remain on the
Register. The Tribunal has made Orders placing
rigorous Conditions on your Registration. Your commitment to vigorous
remediation
and strict compliance with Conditions is expected by the Tribunal so
that the safety of the public is protected and the reputation
of the profession
may be restored to good standing.
Section 165(4) of
the National Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a (the
National Law).
Section 167B(1) of the National
Ex 1 Tab 3;
HCCC v King
[2011] NSWCA 353
Exhibit 2 Tab 2; Section 139F of National
Medical Practitioner v The Medical Board of Australia
[2011] ACTSC
Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA
Ibrahim v Medical Board of Queensland
[2005] QHPT 002 paragraph
Submissions
in reply paragraph
566.10-566.21
17/8/11 p 568 lines
568 lines 37-569 line
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (972 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter