URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maria (a pseudonym) (No 2) [2025] NSWCATGD 3; (29 April 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Maria (a pseudonym) (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 3
Hearing Date(s):
29 April 2025
Date of Orders:
29 April 2025
Decision Date:
29 April 2025
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
The guardianship order for Maria made on 25 May 2023 has been reviewed. The
order now is as follows:
1. The Public Guardian is appointed as the
2. This is a continuing guardianship order for a period
of six months from 29 April 2025.
3. This is a limited guardianship
order giving the guardian(s) custody of Maria to the extent necessary to carry
out the functions
4. The guardian
has the following functions:
To decide what
access Maria has to others and the conditions of access.
To advocate generally for Maria.
Accommodation
To decide where Maria may reside.
guardian may authorise others including members of NSW Police and the Ambulance
Service of NSW to:
i) take Maria to a place approved by the
ii) keep her at that place.
iii) return her
to that place should she leave it.
e) Health care
decide what health care Maria may receive.
f) Medical/Dental
To make substitute decisions about proposed minor or major
medical or dental treatment, where Maria is not capable of giving a valid
g) Services
To make decisions about services
to be provided to Maria.
h) Legal services
decisions for Maria in relation to access to legal services.
To make decisions about whether or not Maria can travel to
any place outside Australia.
j) Passport
decision about whether or not the passport of Maria should be surrendered to the
guardian or some other authority the guardian
nominates pending a decision by
the guardian concerning travel.
k) Restrictive
To give or withhold consent to restrictive practices used
to influence Maria’s
CONDITIONS:
5. The conditions of
this order are:
a) Standard Condition
In exercising
this role the guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Maria to an
understanding of the issues and to obtain
and consider her views before making
significant decisions.
b) Aged Care Restrictive Practices
The guardian(s) may only consent to the use of
restrictive practices to influence Maria’s behaviour:
a last resort to prevent Maria harming herself or others; and
where the restrictive practice is used in the least restrictive form, and for
the shortest time necessary to prevent harm to
Maria or other
(iii) after consideration of the likely impact of the use
of the restrictive practice on Maria; and
(iv) in accordance with a
behaviour support plan devised in accordance with the Quality of Care Principles
2014 (Cth), after consultation
with a health practitioner with expertise
relevant to Maria’s behaviours of concern and which is reviewed regularly
soon as practicable after any change in Maria’s
circumstances.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – review of guardianship order – whether the
subject person continues to be a person in need of a guardian
the Tribunal should undertake any action on review and, if so, who should be the
guardian, what functions should
be given and how long should any further order
last – the utility of making a further order where the subject person and
appointed guardian are overseas – guardian considered necessary should
the subject person be repatriated to Australia –
the Public Guardian
PROCEDURAL ISSUES – standing – whether the
NSW Trustee has standing to bring the application – service of the review
application – whether service was properly effected – personal
service not necessary – participation of subject
person and appointed
guardian – in circumstances where neither the subject person nor the
appointed guardian attended the hearing
– no procedural fairness issues
arise as notice of the hearing was provided – jurisdiction – whether
the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to hear the application where both the subject
person and the appointed guardian are overseas – extra-territorial
operation of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is warranted.
Legislation Cited:
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth), ss 54-1(f), 54-9(1)
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
of Sch 6, 38(5)
Domicile Act 1979
Guardianship Act 1987
Interpretation Act 1987
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
Quality of Care Principles
2014 (Cth), s 15FA
Cases Cited:
[2007] NSWGT 15
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the
Public Guardian (Supreme Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
[2007] NSWGT 23
Jumbunna Coal Mine v Victorian
Coal Miners’ Association
[1908] HCA 95
(1908) 6 CLR 309
Kertesz v Kertesz
VicLawRp 28
Kumagai Gumi Co Ltd v FCT
[1999] FCA 235
(1999) 161 ALR 699
NSWCATGD 40
[2004] WAGAB 6
[2011] NSWGT 7
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
[2007] NSWGT 12
[2011] NSWSC 1075
Re S (Hospital Patient: Foreign curator)
[1995] 4 All ER 30
Texts Cited:
NSW Trustee and Guardian, “The NSW Trustee and Guardian Annual Report
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/noindex/2024-12/NSWTG_23-24%20Annual%20Report.pdf
14 July 2025
Principal judgment
008: Requested Review of Guardianship Order
NSW Trustee and Guardian (applicant)
Lana (appointed
Public Guardian
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2018/00056320
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
is an 89-year-old woman who, at the time of the Hearing, was residing in rental
accommodation in Taiwan with her niece and carer,
16 May 2018, the Tribunal appointed Lana as Maria’s financial manager,
subject to the authorities and directions of the NSW
Trustee and Guardian
(herein referred to as “the NSW Trustee”). On the same date, the
Tribunal appointed Lana as Maria’s
guardian. This order has subsequently
been reviewed. On 25 May 2023 the Tribunal reappointed Lana as Maria’s
guardian for a
period of three years with the functions of accommodation,
services, health care and medical/dental consent.
11 December 2024, the Tribunal received an urgent request from the
NSW Trustee seeking a review of the financial management order
16 May 2018. This application was considered by the Tribunal on
20 December 2024. On this date the Tribunal revoked the appointment
as Maria’s financial manager and committed the management of Lana’s
estate to the NSW Trustee.
7 April 2025, the Tribunal received an application from NSW Trustee requesting
that the guardianship order made on 25 May 2023
be reviewed, namely, to revoke
the appointment of Lana as Maria’s guardian, appoint the Public Guardian
in her place, and vary
the functions to be exercised by the guardian. The
application was submitted by Brian Woods (“Brian”),
Chief Executive
Officer of NSW Trustee.
application was listed for Hearing on 10 April 2025, at which time the
application was adjourned to a date to be fixed. The Tribunal’s
for Decision relating to the interlocutory orders made on 10 April 2025 identify
(1) Neither Lana nor Maria were in attendance at the Hearing.
(2) The Tribunal had received communication from Lana acknowledging that the
application had been made to the Tribunal and listed
for Hearing but disputed
that service having been appropriately effected.
(3) The Hearing was ultimately adjourned as a consequence of the unavailability
of the applicant (the NSW Trustee) and the unavailability
of a substitute
application was subsequently listed for Hearing on 29 April 2025.
Reasons for Decision relate to the application to review the guardianship order
made on 25 May 2023, such application having
been heard and determined by the
Tribunal on 29 April 2025.
THE HEARING
Hearing was listed at 2:00pm (AEST) on 29 April 2025. The Hearing was conducted
remotely from the Tribunal’s Sydney Registry.
accordance with
of Sch 6 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NSW), the Tribunal was constituted by a single member,
being an Australian lawyer.
Hearing was attended by the following people:
(1) Brian Woods (“Brian”), Chief Executive Officer of the NSW
Trustee and Guardian, in person;
(2) Cathryn Turnbull (“Cathryn”), The Public Guardian, in person;
(3) a Senior Client Service Officer of the NSW Trustee and Guardian (“NSW
Trustee SCSO”), by video;
(4) a Duty Guardian of the Public Guardian, by video.
Maria nor Lana attended the Hearing. By correspondence dated 25 April 2025
and 29 April 2025 Lana advised the Tribunal that
neither Maria nor Lana
would attend the Hearing. Although the correspondence did not include an
explicit request for the Hearing
to be adjourned, the Tribunal was nonetheless
required to consider whether or not the Hearing should be adjourned.
Hearing was also attended by an interpreter to assist Lana’s participation
in the Hearing, however the interpreter was excused
when it became apparent that
Lana would not be joining the Hearing.
the reasons outlined below, the Tribunal formed the view that the Hearing ought
to proceed in the absence of Maria and Lana.
Tribunal has had regard to the following evidence and submissions with respect
to the current application:
(1) Oral evidence and submissions provided by Brian, Cathryn, the
NSW Trustee SCSO, and the Duty Guardian at the Hearing.
(2) “Application for Request to review a guardianship order”
submitted to the Tribunal on 7 April 2025.
(3) Bundle of documents submitted by the NSW Trustee on 7 April 2025 consisting
of written submissions and annexures A to X.
(4) Financial Management Report submitted by NSW Trustee on 9 April 2025,
authored by the NSW Trustee SCSO.
(5) DNA test results (submitted by Lana on 10 April 2025) confirming
relationship between Maria and Lana, certified by Dr Z, dated
(6) Written submissions prepared by Lana, submitted to the Tribunal on
9 April 2025.
(7) Email from Brian Woods to Lana dated 3 April 2025 (submitted by Lana on 10
April 2025).
(8) Written submissions prepared by Lana, submitted to the Tribunal on
25 April 2025.
(9) Written submissions prepared by Lana, submitted to the Tribunal at 1:16pm on
29 April 2025.
Tribunal has also had regard to previous Reasons for Decision issued by the
Tribunal, including those in relation to orders made
on 10 April 2025,
20 December 2024 and 5 May 2023.
the conclusion of the Hearing the Tribunal decided to vary the existing
guardianship order by appointing the Public Guardian as
Maria’s guardian
for a period of six months (at which time the order will again be reviewed by
the Tribunal) with the following
(1) Access – To decide what access Maria has to others and the conditions
(2) Advocacy – To advocate generally for Maria.
(3) Accommodation – To decide where Maria may reside.
(4) Authorise others – The guardian may authorise others including members
of NSW Police and the Ambulance Service of NSW to:
(a) take Maria to a place approved by the guardian.
(b) keep her at that place.
(c) return her to that place should she leave it.
(5) Health care – To decide what health care Maria may receive.
(6) Medical/Dental consent – To make substitute decisions about proposed
minor or major medical or dental treatment, where
Maria is not capable of giving
a valid consent.
(7) Services - To make decisions about services to be provided to Maria.
(8) Legal services - To make decisions for Maria in relation to access to legal
(9) Travel – To make decisions about whether or not Maria can travel to
any place outside Australia.
(10) Passport – To make a decision about whether or not the passport of
Maria should be surrendered to the guardian or some
other authority the guardian
nominates pending a decision by the guardian concerning travel.
(11) Restrictive Practices – To give or withhold consent to restrictive
practices used to influence Maria’s behaviour.
functions are to be exercised in accordance with the conditions outlined on the
face of the Tribunal’s orders.
THE SUBSTANTIVE APPLICATION
– WHAT DID THE TRIBUNAL HAVE TO CONSIDER?
application before the Tribunal is an application to review the guardianship
order made on 25 May 2023, submitted by the NSW Trustee
pursuant to
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) (“the
substantive application”).
determine the substantive application the Tribunal the Tribunal is required to
consider the following:
(1) Is Maria someone for whom the Tribunal could make a further guardianship
order? Namely, does Maria continue to be “a person
in need of a
(2) Should the Tribunal undertake any action on review? Namely, should the
Tribunal vary, suspend, revoke, confirm, renew, or renew
and vary the order?
(3) In the event that the Tribunal determines to vary the order (as requested by
the NSW Trustee), who should be the guardian, what
functions should be given to
the guardian, and how long should any further order last?
PRELIMINARY ISSUES
material before the Tribunal outlines a number of important preliminary issues
which must be determined by the Tribunal prior
to determination of the
substantive application. These include the following:
(1) Does the NSW Trustee have standing to bring the current application
(“the standing issue”)?
(2) Are there any issues regarding service of the application which would
preclude the Tribunal from conducting the Hearing (“the
(3) Should the Hearing proceed in Maria and/or Lana’s absence (“the
participation issue”)?
(4) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to determine the current application
(“the jurisdictional issue”)?
The Standing Issue
Correspondence
received from Lana on 9 April 2025 states the following: “
In this case,
is it appropriate to apply directly to NSWTG
if I am unsuitable to be
a guardian, the matter should be dealt with by the Private Guardian Support
Unit... which oversees private
.” When read in context, it is
possible that Lana may dispute the standing of the NSW Trustee to bring the
current application,
and accordingly it is appropriate to address the issue of
accordance with
Guardianship Act
, an application to review a
guardianship order may be made by the appointed guardian, the person under
guardianship, the Public Guardian
or “any other person who, in the opinion
of the Tribunal, has a genuine concern for the welfare of the person under
guardianship”.
As the application was made by the NSW Trustee, who does
not have automatic standing to bring the application, the Tribunal must
satisfied that the NSW Trustee is a “person” with a “genuine
concern” for Maria’s welfare.
“person” for the purposes of the
Guardianship Act
need not be
a “natural person”. Schedule 4 of the
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) defines a “person” to include “an individual, a
corporation and a body corporate or politic”. The NSW
Trustee is a
corporation with the corporate name of “the NSW Trustee and
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act
Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the NSW Trustee is a
issue of standing therefore turns on whether or not the NSW Trustee has a
genuine concern for Maria’s welfare.
a general sense, the NSW Trustee is mandated to protect, promote and support the
rights of vulnerable people. The NSW Trustee and
Guardian Annual Report
outlines the
“NSW Trustee and Guardian is an agency within the Communities and Justice
Portfolio. Our purpose is to protect, promote and
support the rights, dignity
and wishes of our customers... Our services help protect some of the most
vulnerable people in the community
as well as supporting people at critical
moments in their life... We are constituted under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian
. The statutory functions of the NSW Trustee and the Commissioner of
Dormant Funds are carried out by the Chief Executive Officer,
statutory functions of the Public Guardian are carried out by the NSW Public
a specific sense, the current application arises from concerns identified by the
NSW Trustee (in the course of its supervisory
role, prior to 20 December 2024,
and in the course of its role as Maria’s appointed financial manager,
since 20 December 2024)
making decisions that are consistent with Maria’s best interests. Steps
obtain better particulars from Lana as to Maria’s welfare and medical
needs (inter alia, to ensure that the NSW Trustee
are making appropriate
arrangements for the payment of Maria’s medical and living expenses) have
been met with resistance.
In addition to the written evidence provided to the
Tribunal, at Hearing Brian identified that the application had been motivated,
in part, by concerns identified by the NSW Ombudsman (following a complaint made
to the NSW Ombudsman by Lana) as to the need for
steps to be taken to have Maria
repatriated to Australia.
[2007] NSWGT 15
[2007] NSWGT 12
the Tribunal held that
a genuine concern for the welfare of the subject person required that:
(1) the applicant is bringing to the attention of the Tribunal a fact situation
in which the subject person’s interests may
call for intervention by the
(2) the applicant is sincere in seeing the situation as one that may call for
the intervention of the Tribunal in the interests of
the person; and
(3) the application is motivated by a desire to advance the welfare of the
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is bringing to the Tribunal a factual
situation in which Maria’s interests may
call for intervention by the
Tribunal. The evidence supports a finding that the application by the NSW
Trustee was motivated by a
desire to advance Maria’s welfare, and that the
NSW Trustee is genuine in seeing Maria’s situation as one requiring
intervention
by the Tribunal.
The Service Issue
written submissions provided to the Tribunal, Lana also raises issues about not
having been served with the application “as
required by the NCAT hearing
regulations”.
completeness the Tribunal notes that as this application relates to a requested
review of an existing order, there are no personal
service provisions associated
with the application.
Guardianship Act
requires that the Tribunal serve a notice
on the parties advising them of the review, however,
of that Act
provides that the decision of the Tribunal is not vitiated by a failure to serve
such notice.
review of the file confirms that a notice was provided by the Tribunal to Lana
in accordance with
Guardianship Act
. The file review also
confirms that Lana, by way of return emails to the Tribunal, has repeatedly
acknowledged both the application
and the various listings of the
application.
The Participation Issue
Maria nor Lana were in attendance at the Hearing.
Tribunal is required to take such steps as may be reasonably practicable to
ensure that the parties understand the nature of proceedings
reasonable opportunity to be heard or otherwise have their submissions
considered:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
provisions of
Guardianship Act
require the Tribunal to have regard to
the views of the subject person, and in the case of a guardianship order, their
carer (amongst
other people).
Tribunal was required to consider whether it was appropriate to proceed with the
Hearing in the absence of Lana and/or Maria,
or otherwise whether it was
necessary for the Hearing to be adjourned.
in attendance at the Hearing opposed the Hearing being adjourned.
submissions made by Lana evidence that Maria was medically unfit to participate
in the Hearing. The Tribunal notes that Maria
attended the December 2024 Hearing
and was unable to actively participate in the Hearing on account of the extent
of her cognitive
decline. There is no evidence to suggest any improvement in
Maria’s cognitive functioning since this time (and to the contrary,
reports a decline in Maria’s cognitive and functional decline). The
Tribunal was satisfied that the Hearing should proceed
in Maria’s absence
and that Maria’s ability to actively participate in the Hearing would
likely have been compromised
in any event to the extent that the Tribunal would
have been unable to elicit her views had she attended the Hearing.
respect to Lana’s participation in the Hearing, the Tribunal notes that in
correspondence sent to the Tribunal (including
correspondence received shortly
prior to the commencement of the Hearing) Lana acknowledges the listing and
confirms that she will
not be participating in the Hearing. The Tribunal
was satisfied that Lana has been afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard,
and has elected to exercise that right by the filing of written submissions
rather than attendance at the Hearing. The Tribunal was
satisfied that the
Hearing should proceed in Lana’s absence.
issue arises as to whether or not the Tribunal retains jurisdiction to make
orders of the nature proposed by the NSW Trustee.
This issue arises in
circumstances where Maria is not currently present in New South Wales (or
indeed, in the country), has not been
in New South Wales for a period exceeding
twelve months prior to the date of the Hearing, and where there is no evidence
to suggest an intention for Maria to be returned to New South
issue of whether the
Guardianship Act
may have extraterritorial operation
has been considered in detail by the Tribunal on many occasions (see, for
[2007] NSWGT 23
[2011] NSWGT 7
[2017] NSWCATGD 40).
is a common law presumption against extraterritorial operation of State
legislation. In
Jumbunna Coal Mine v Victorian Coal Miners’
Association
[1908] HCA 95
(1908) 6 CLR 309
, O’Connor J (at [363]) states:
“In the interpretation of general words in a statute there is always a
presumption that the legislature does not intend to
exceed its jurisdiction...
Most statutes if their general words were to be taken literally in their widest
sense, would apply to
the whole world, but they are always read as being prima
facie restricted in their operation within territorial limits.”
presumption is re-enforced by
Interpretation
Kumagai Gumi Co Ltd v FCT
[1999] FCA 235
(1999) 161 ALR 699
it was held that if
the application of the presumption against extra territoriality would defeat the
purpose, object or policy of
the legislation, then it can be assumed that it was
the intention of the legislature to override the presumption.
outlined in
(at [35]), “
only a court can determine the
meaning of legislation authoritatively. We are not deciding whether the Tribunal
could ever make an
order in relation to a person who is a resident outside NSW
but whether we may now do so in relation to [the person subject of the
application]
the Tribunal’s understanding there are no binding authorities which
conclusively determine the issue of extra territorial
operation of the
Guardianship Act
as a matter of law.
principles applied in
appear to have been consistently applied by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal is satisfied that those principles (and the line of
authorities
which have adopted those principles) remain an accurate summary of
the appropriate legal principles, and accordingly it is prudent
for the current
Tribunal to apply the same principles to the current matter.
Essentially,
to determine the issue of whether the Tribunal retains jurisdiction (in the
context of a guardianship order rather than
a financial management order) it is
necessary for the Tribunal to apply a two-limb test. In relation to persons
located outside the
State of New South Wales, the Tribunal must be appropriately
satisfied of each of the following matters before it may exercise its
(1) That the application of the presumption against extra territoriality would
defeat the purpose, object or policy of the legislation;
(2) That there is sufficient connection to New South Wales for the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to be exercised.
Tribunal was assisted by written submissions prepared by the NSW Trustee.
Those written submissions helpfully addressed the second
limb of the test, but
were limited so far as they relate to the presumption against
extra-territoriality. At Hearing, the NSW Trustee
was invited to provide further
oral submissions on this issue.
relation to the first limb, the NSW Trustee’s arguments can be summarised
as follows:
(1) The general principles of the
Guardianship Act
include, inter alia,
that Maria’s welfare and interests should be given paramount
consideration, and that she should be protected
from neglect, abuse and
exploitation.
(2) The actions of Lana, as Maria’s guardian, conflict with these
principles. Maria has acted contrary to professional advice
in removing Maria
from the country, which has potentially had a detrimental impact on
Maria’s wellbeing.
(3) Concerns were raised by the Official Visitor (which were contained in the
NSW Trustee Tender Bundle) that:
(a) Lana had been unable to obtain suitable medical treatment for Maria whilst
in Australia; and,
(b) Travel outside of the country (for the purpose of medical treatment or
otherwise) was not in Maria’s best interests.
(4) The NSW Trustee had been unable to obtain any reliable evidence from Lana as
to Maria’s condition or the nature of any
treatment being provided to
Maria in Taiwan. The concerns raised about Maria’s welfare abroad were
significant to the point
where the NSW Trustee was required, with Consular
assistance, to arrange for Taiwanese authorities to conduct a welfare check on
(5) The Tribunal exercises a protective jurisdiction. Maria should not be
precluded from such protection on account of Lana’s
unilateral and
unsanctioned removal of Maria from the county.
(6) There remains an absence of reliable evidence for the Tribunal to be
satisfied that Maria’s welfare and interests are being
prioritised since
her removal from the country.
prior to the commencement of the Hearing the Tribunal received further
evidence/submissions from Lana in the form of a letter
and photographs depicting
Maria receiving medical treatment in a hospital setting. As this evidence had
not been received by other
parties the Presiding Member read the contents of the
letter onto the record and provided the opportunity for those attending the
Hearing in person to review the photographs.
response to the late documents Brian indicated that the evidence does
not change the position of the NSW Trustee. Brian reported
that Lana has
been obstructive and has failed to cooperate with requests for appropriate
and pertinent information regarding Maria’s
circumstances. Despite the
assertions contained in the late submissions (including an assertion that the
Taiwan Kaohsiung Family Court has already appointed me as
[Maria]’s legal guardian through an official guardianship declaration
under Taiwanese law
”), Brian contended that, on account of
Lana’s actions to date, little weight could be attributed to her
assertions in
the absence of independent, objective evidence.
Tribunal is satisfied that the purpose, object or policy of the
Guardianship Act
includes to protect those subject to the Act from
abuse, neglect or exploitation, and that the Tribunal has an obligation to
its functions under the Act in a manner which promotes Maria’s
welfare and interests.
was afforded protection under the
Guardianship Act
on the basis that her
guardian would make decisions (including but not limited to decisions about her
accommodation and the health
care and support services she receives) in a manner
that promotes Maria’s welfare and interests.
as Maria’s appointed guardian, has failed to exercise her functions in a
manner consistent with the
Guardianship Act
. Prior to removing Maria from
the country she failed to obtain necessary and appropriate interventions to
promote Maria’s health
and wellbeing. When faced with objective
professional evidence recommending against Maria’s removal from the
country to Taiwan,
Lana chose to ignore that evidence and exercised her
functions contrary to what, objectively, was in Maria’s best
has failed to provide any evidence that would satisfy the Tribunal that she is
currently making decisions which promote Maria’s
welfare and interests.
This is not to say that she is not, but her lack of transparency and engagement
(both with the Tribunal and
the attempts made by the NSW Trustee prior to
these proceedings) is deeply concerning to the Tribunal.
Tribunal accepts the submissions of the NSW Trustee so far as they relate to a
cautious approach being taken to Lana’s evidence
in the absence of
independent corroborative evidence.
ability for an interested party to apply to the Tribunal to review the
appointment of a guardian is an important safeguard in
circumstances where there
is reliable evidence that a guardian may not be appropriately exercising their
functions. In Maria’s
case, this important recourse should not be lost as
a consequence of Lana’s actions.
Tribunal is satisfied that if the presumption against extra-territoriality were
to apply it would defeat the purpose of the
Guardianship Act
, namely, to
ensure that Maria’s interests and welfare are protected. Accordingly, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the presumption
is rebutted in this instance.
Tribunal is, therefore, required to consider whether there is sufficient
connection to the jurisdiction to enliven the Tribunal’s
written submissions the NSW Trustee identifies that Maria has been domiciled in
New South Wales since her arrival to Australia
in the late 1950s and became an
Australian citizen in 1966. In oral submissions the NSW Trustee identified
that aside from being
physically present in Taiwan at the current time, there
are no known connections between Maria and Taiwan (i.e. she did not live
Taiwan prior to her migration to Australia and is not known to have extended
family living in Taiwan aside from Lana and her husband).
position both at common law and by virtue of
Domicile Act
(NSW) is that persons with an incapacity will be unable to acquire a
new domicile of choice if they lack the mental capacity to form
the requisite
intention. A person’s domicile cannot be changed by his or her guardian:
Kertesz v Kertesz
[1954] VicLawRp 28
[1966] NZLR
the extent that it may be suggested that Maria has acquired a new domicile by
choice, the Tribunal finds that Maria lacks the requisite
capacity to acquire a
new domicile by choice (and has lacked such capacity since well-prior to her
removal from Australia).
Tribunal finds that Maria’s domicile of choice is New South Wales. This is
evidenced by her prolonged residence in New South
Wales (since the 1950s), her
Australian Citizenship (since 1966) and her continued home ownership in New
South Wales (including the
majority of her personal belongings remaining in her
nationality as “Australian”.
domicile of a person proposed to be protected by an order has been used as a
sufficient connecting factor to validate the extra
territorial exercise of a
protective jurisdiction: see
Re S (Hospital Patient: Foreign curator)
[1995] 4 All ER 30
[1966] NZLR 1028
[2004] WAGAB
relation to the current application, the Tribunal expressly finds as
(1) The presumption against extraterritoriality is displaced.
(2) Despite Maria’s current absence from the state of New South Wales, she
remains domiciled in New South Wales and does not
have the requisite capacity to
acquire a new domicile by choice.
(3) Having regard to the Tribunal’s protective jurisdiction and the facts
surrounding Maria’s removal from New South
Wales, the Tribunal is
satisfied that Maria’s continued domicile in New South Wales is a
sufficient connecting factor to validate
the extra territorial exercise of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
(4) The Tribunal is satisfied that it retains jurisdiction to review the
guardianship order made for Maria on 25 May 2023 and to
make a further
guardianship order.
the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal does not contend that any further order
made by the Tribunal will have effect in Taiwan absent
a mechanism for such an
order to be recognised and/or enforced in Taiwan. No such mechanisms are known
to the Tribunal.
DETERMINATION OF THE SUBSTANTIVE
APPLICATION
Is Maria someone for whom the Tribunal could make a further guardianship
Guardianship Act
provides that we may make a guardianship order
for a person if we are satisfied that the person is “a person in need of a
person in need of a guardian is “a person who, because of a disability, is
totally or partially incapable of managing their
Guardianship
The disability must restrict them in one or more major
life activities to the extent that they require supervision or social
habilitation:
Guardianship Act
, 3(2). Commonly, we consider the
person's ability to make important personal, health and lifestyle decisions, the
ability to make
such decisions being a major life activity that impacts on the
person's ability to function normally in the community with others.
Tribunal has previously accepted that Maria is a person in need of a guardian by
virtue of the functional and cognitive impacts
of her diagnosis of progressive
dementia (of mixed aetiology).
medical evidence provided to the Tribunal includes the Authorised Visitor Report
(prepared by a Clinical Psychologist, dated
20 January 2024). This report
outlines that Maria’s responses to the Cognitive Impairment Scale of the
Psychogeriatric Assessment
Scales (conducted on 15 March 2023) indicates
significant/severe cognitive impairment. He reports that in his own interactions
Maria “she appeared to be confused and unable to comprehend the
simplest of questions”.
a “Certificate of Diagnosis” authored by Dr Y from Kaohsiung
Veterans General Hospital (“Dr Y”) and dated
17 March 2025
(contained as an annexure in the NSW Trustee Tender Bundle), Dr Y reports that
Maria has been diagnosed with “
dementia, severe stage
comments that
“...she was diagnosed with dementia and limited response
to question. She also need total care by others....”
the material available to the Tribunal there does not appear to be a dispute
ability to manage her
the absence of any evidence to disturb the Tribunal’s previous findings
the Tribunal is satisfied that Maria continues to
be a person in need of a
guardian. She is, accordingly, a person for whom the Tribunal could make a
further guardianship order.
Should the Tribunal make a further
guardianship order?
Guardianship Act
outlines a number of equally important
factors for us to consider and balance in the exercise of our discretion. These
matters have
no hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory consideration.
However, the Tribunal must undertake a balancing exercise for its
consideration
of the matters in
Guardianship Act
. When undertaking this
task the Tribunal may be guided by the principles that are set out in
Guardianship Act
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
Tribunal does not have the benefit of Maria’s views, however on account of
her significant cognitive decline the Tribunal
is satisfied that Maria is
incapable of expressing her views.
is inferred from Lana’s written communication to the Tribunal that she
does not support a further guardianship order being
made, or in the alternative,
that she supports her continued appointment as guardian. In any event it is
evident that Lana is opposed
to any proposal for the Public Guardian to be
appointed as her guardian.
Tribunal has considered the importance of preserving Maria’s existing
family relationships and the importance of preserving
her existing cultural and
linguistic environments. There is limited evidence available to the Tribunal
regarding these matters, and
accordingly the Tribunal has placed little weight
on these matters.
reasons outlined more fully below, the Tribunal is satisfied that it would be
impracticable for services to be provided for Maria
upon her return to Australia
in the absence of a guardian being appointed.
satisfied that Maria is a person for whom a guardianship order could be made
(and being satisfied that there is no jurisdictional
impediment to the making of
such an order), the Tribunal was required to consider, in the exercise of its
discretion, whether or
not a further order should be made, and if so, the terms
of such an order.
relevant consideration for the Tribunal in the exercise of its discretion was
the utility of a further guardianship order being
Lana’s assertion at the December 2024 Hearing that she had initially only
intended for Maria to travel to Taiwan for
a period of three months, this does
not appear to have been her genuine intention. Material provided to the Tribunal
notes that Lana
entered into a 12-month lease in April 2024 upon her arrival in
Taiwan, and Lana may not have the ability to return to Australia
on account of
her immigration status. Accordingly, there are no clearly identifiable plans for
Maria to be returned to New South
Hearing, the NSW Trustee and the Public Guardian confirmed that there are no
reciprocal arrangements for any orders made by this
Tribunal to be recognised
and enforced in Taiwan. Accordingly, there is no ability for the Public
Guardian, if appointed as Maria’s
guardian, to make and enforce any
decisions relating to Maria’s care and medical treatment in Taiwan.
Notwithstanding
this, the NSW Trustee and the Public Guardian made compelling arguments in
support of the making of a further guardianship
it was contended that the appointment by this Tribunal would enliven potential
avenues, through international health information
sharing protocols and through
consular/diplomatic avenues, for the Public Guardian to access and assess
relevant health information
pertaining to Maria to inform any decisions about
whether further steps should be taken to repatriate Maria to Australia (noting
that the Public Guardian would not intend to pursue such actions if
contraindicated by reliable medical evidence).
acknowledging that the making of a guardianship order of itself would not result
in any internationally recognised authority
for the Public Guardian to force
Maria’s repatriation to Australia, it was contended at Hearing that should
such action be
considered to be in Maria’s best interests, the
NSW Trustee, in the exercise of its financial management responsibilities,
may be able to take steps to leverage Lana’s agreement to return Maria to
the event that Maria is returned to Australia, it is envisaged that there will
be a number of decisions that will need to be promptly
made by a guardian on
Maria’s behalf (as discussed below).
these circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that there is practical utility in
making a further guardianship order in order to
enable steps to be taken in an
effort to secure Maria’s return to Australia (if appropriate) and to
ensure that appropriate
decisions can be made to support Maria upon her
What functions should be given to the guardian?
determined that a further guardianship order should be made for Maria, it was
necessary for the Tribunal to consider what functions
ought to be allocated to a
guardian. There was no dispute at Hearing as to the necessary functions to be
included in a further order.
was proposed at Hearing that the existing functions (i.e. accommodation,
services, health care and medical/dental consent) be retained
in a further
order. The inclusion of an accommodation function will enable the guardian to
decide where Maria should live upon her
services function will enable a guardian to have an ACAT assessment conducted,
be determined that Maria should enter residential aged care, or
otherwise to access and implement any support services Maria may
live safely in the community. The inclusion of the health care function will
enable a guardian to access and exchange
relevant information about
Maria’s health and organise any allied health services that Maria may
require. It may also assist
in enabling a guardian to access relevant health
information in other jurisdictions. The medical/dental consent function will
that a guardian is able to consent to any necessary and appropriate
treatment Maria may require should she be unable to provide her
own consent to
was proposed that an advocacy function be added to any further order. Although
the function of advocacy is inherent in the role
of the Public Guardian, it
was identified at Hearing that other organisations may not readily accept this
to be the case. The inclusion
of an advocacy function may add gravitas to the
Public Guardian’s role in advocating on Maria’s behalf, particularly
at a diplomatic/consular level if required.
was proposed that the inclusion of travel and passport functions would be
necessary to ensure that any issues around Maria’s
international travel
are appropriately managed, and to mitigate against the risk of Maria again being
removed from the country.
was proposed at Hearing that an authorise others function (i.e. the ability to
enlist the assistance of authorities such as the
police or ambulance service)
may be needed to assist in the implementation of any accommodation decisions
made, as well as preventing
unauthorised removal of Maria from any accommodation
approved by the guardian.
was also proposed that an access function may be required to regulate the access
others may have to Maria. Following enquiries
from the Tribunal, it was
identified at Hearing that the inclusion of this function would assist to ensure
appropriate arrangements
are implemented to support Maria’s contact with
relatives outside the country whilst also ensuring that any in person contact
with relatives is meeting Maria’s needs and not undermining the decisions
made by the guardian.
the suggestion from the NSW Trustee and Public Guardian that Maria may require
accommodation in a residential aged care setting,
the Tribunal queried whether
Maria may be subject to any restrictive practices. Although limited evidence is
available regarding
Maria’s current condition, it was identified that she
may be subject to mechanical restraints (bed rails) and environmental
(placement in a Memory Support Unit). It is unclear whether Maria is receiving
any medication that would constitute a
chemical restraint.
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) and the
Quality of Care Principles 2014
(Cth) (“the Principles”) govern the use of restrictive practices in
residential aged care. A restrictive practice is
defined as any practice or
intervention that has the effect of restricting the rights or freedom of
movement of the care recipient:
Aged Care Act
, s 54-9(1). An aged care
provider must ensure that a restrictive practice is only used in accordance with
the circumstances set out
in the Principles:
Aged Care Act
, s 54-1(f).
Section 15FA of the Principles lists the requirements for the use of a
restrictive practice.
NSW a restrictive practice may only be used if informed consent is provided by
the person subject to the proposed restrictive practice,
or in circumstances
where the person is unable to provide informed consent, by a guardian who is
conferred a restrictive practices
decision-making function, and in accordance
with any conditions associated with the guardian’s appointment.
Tribunal was satisfied that there is an appropriate basis for a guardian to be
appointed with authority to consent (or withhold
consent) to the use of
restrictive practices.
it was proposed at Hearing that a legal services function may be necessary,
particularly for the purpose of complementing
other functions designed to ensure
that Maria can be safely repatriated to Australia.
all of the circumstances the Tribunal was satisfied that the proposed functions
were appropriate and necessary to promote Maria’s
best interests.
Accordingly, the Tribunal appointed a guardian with the functions outlined
above, as reflected on the face of the
Who should be the guardian?
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements in accordance with
Guardianship Act
. He or she must:
(a) have a personality generally compatible with the personality of the person
under guardianship;
(b) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of
the person; and
(c) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
of the Act (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the
Public Guardian
(Supreme Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep),
[2011] NSWSC 1075
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
, the Supreme Court noted the importance
of a proposed guardian being able to demonstrate insight and explain plans for
as guardian objectively and without conflict of interest.
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed:
Guardianship Act
Supreme Court has held that:
“the proper meaning to be given to the section is to read it as saying
that the Public Guardian should not be appointed in
circumstances in which an
order can properly be made in favour of another person. That requires not only
that the person be willing,
reliable and responsible, but that the appointment
will result in the policy considerations and principles set forth in the Act
given effect (
[2003] NSWSC 1170
the evidence available to the Tribunal, Lana failed to obtain necessary and
appropriate health care for Maria whilst she was in
Australia, rejected
independent evidence recommending that she pursue treatment options in
Australia, and acted contrary to clear
and unambiguous recommendations from an
independent assessor that removing Maria from the country would be contrary to
her interests.
Furthermore, Lana has failed to cooperate in any meaningful way
with attempts made by the NSW Trustee to obtain appropriate evidence
nature of Maria’s current treatment. This supports a finding that
Lana is unable to demonstrate insight and perform
the functions of guardianship
objectively, and accordingly, that she is not “able and willing”
to undertake the functions
of the order as required by
Guardianship Act
her written submissions Lana denies any wrongdoing in her role as Maria’s
guardian. Lana did not attend the Hearing for the
purpose of the Tribunal
assessing her ongoing suitability for appointment.
determined that Lana is not “able and willing,” it was unnecessary
for the Tribunal to make any express findings
as to whether Lana and Maria have
“generally compatible” personalities or whether there may be a
conflict of interest
that precludes Lana’s ongoing appointment.
Lana’s absence, the Tribunal could not be positively satisfied that she
remains a person suitable to be appointed as Maria’s
the absence of a suitable private person, the Tribunal decided to appoint the
Public Guardian as Maria’s guardian.
How long should the
order last?
review, a guardianship order can be renewed for a period of up to three years
from the date on which it was made.
Hearing, the Public Guardian proposed that the order be reviewed by the Tribunal
within six months. It was outlined that this should
be a sufficient period of
time for the Public Guardian to explore the viability of Maria being repatriated
to Australia and further
assess what further decisions may need to be made.
Tribunal accepted this recommendation and ordered that the guardianship order
again be reviewed within six months.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/noindex/2024-12/NSWTG_23-24 Annual
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter