URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/52.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chrisis v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force (GD) [2013] NSWADTAP 52 (22 November 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Chrisis v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (GD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 52
Hearing Date(s):
9 October 2013
Decision Date:
22 November 2013
Judge K P O'Connor, President
P Molony, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
Appeal dismissed
Catchwords:
FIREARMS LICENSING - Revocation - Public Interest - Affirmed by Tribunal -
Appeal - Whether revocation invalid due to estoppel - rejected
question of law - application for leave to extend to merits - refused -
observations favourable to the appellant made
for administrator to take into
account if further application
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Firearms Act 1996
Firearms Regulation 2006
Cases Cited:
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1977) 139 CLR 54
Attorney General (NSW) v Quin
[1990] HCA 21
(1990) 170 CLR 1
Chrisis v Commissioner of Police
[2013] NSWADT 142
New South Wales
Trotting Club Ltd v Glebe Municipal Council
[1937] NSWStRp 14
(1937) 37 SR (NSW) 288
Principal judgment
Konstantinos Chrisis (Appellant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
Force (Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
In person (Appellant)
Mr C Zoppo, Sparke Helmore Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
General Division
- Date of Decision:
18 June 2013
- Citation:
Chrisis v Commissioner of Police
[2013] NSWADT 142
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Commissioner, as administrator of the
Firearms Act 1996
(Firearms Act),
issued a category ABH firearms licence to Konstantinos Chrisis on 23 February
2012 for five years for the genuine
reasons of target shooting (category ABH)
and recreational hunting/vermin control (category AB). Mr Chrisis had previously
firearms licence between 31 March 2000 and 10 December 2010 (initially
category AB, and from 17 May 2002, category ABH). On 8 September
Commissioner revoked the licence relying on the power of the Commissioner to
revoke a licence if the Commissioner was satisfied
that it was 'not in the
public interest for the licensee to continue to hold the licence':
Regulation 2006
Chrisis applied for review of the decision to the Tribunal. His application was
unsuccessful. The Tribunal affirmed the decision:
Chrisis v Commissioner of
[2013] NSWADT 142
(18 June 2013). He now appeals. (We will refer to
Mr Chrisis subsequently as the appellant in these reasons.)
appellant had failed to renew his licence before it expired on 10 December 2011.
The Firearms Registry had sent him the usual
notice and the renewal application
form. It is unlawful to possess firearms or ammunition without a relevant
licence or permit. On
24 January 2011, his licence having expired, police
attended his home with instructions to seize any firearms or ammunition in his
possession. They discovered in his storage not only firearms and ammunition of a
kind authorised by his expired licence but also
firearms and ammunition not
covered by the licence. He was formally interviewed, and charged with a number
of offences. On 27 January
2011 he attended the police station and handed in
further ammunition in his possession. He submitted an application for renewal of
his licence, received 31 January 2011.
Burwood Local Court dealt with the charges on 13 February 2012. He was found
guilty of possessing ammunition without holding a
licence/permit/authority, and
of not surrendering firearms to police when his licence was not in force. The
court exercised its discretion
not to enter a conviction. Five other charges
relating to unauthorised possession of a pistol and four firearms were
withdrawn. The
appellant has no other offence history. The appellant received
his new licence 12 days later, and understandably thought that he
would now be
free to resume using weapons in the ways that he enjoyed, in particular target
shooting in a club environment.
his reasons for revoking the licence, the Commissioner's delegate relied on
intelligence material indicating associations in the
past between Mr Chrisis and
members of an outlawed motorcycle gang, the inadequacy of his explanation for
not observing his obligation
to ensure that he held a current licence when in
possession of firearms and ammunition, the holding of ammunition that could be
in high calibre pistols which were not covered by his licence, and his lack
of insight into the seriousness of his omissions.
its review hearing, the Tribunal examined the material on which the
Commissioner's delegate had relied, heard oral evidence from
Mr Chrisis, and
considered material he put forward in his support. Constable Baxter of State
Crime Command, Strike Force Raptor (the
informant in the prosecution that gave
rise to the findings of guilt at Burwood Court) gave detailed evidence to the
Tribunal. The
evidence traversed the concerns held in relation to his
association with outlawed motorcycle gang members and the risks to public
arising from unlawful possession of ammunition, and replied specifically to
opinions Mr Chrisis had expressed over the acceptability
of using the high
calibre ammunition he was found to possess in the kind of pistol for which he
was licensed.
Tribunal dealt comprehensively with both the appellant's case and that of the
Commissioner. It referred in detail to the scheme
Firearms Act
referred to the inherent breadth of the concept of the public interest. It
approached the question of what matters might reasonably
be regarded as relevant
to the public interest having regard to the legislative scheme and the important
public safety and community
protection goals of the firearms laws.
Tribunal agreed with the Commissioner in relation to the implausibility of the
appellant's explanation at the police interview
for why he was in possession of
the high calibre pistol ammunition. The Tribunal also accepted that he showed
little insight into
the seriousness of his conduct in that regard, nor the
seriousness of his failure to return the firearms and any ammunition when
licence expired. The Tribunal accepted the Commissioner's case that he failed to
display contrition and remorse for his actions.
appeal may be made on a question of law, and, with the leave of the Appeal Panel
extended to the merits:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
The two points in the notice of appeal that may be seen as
questions of law appear at item (m) under the section headed question
item 2 of the reasons given in support of an extension of the appeal to the
item (m), the appellant submits that the Commissioner 'having accepted my
application for a licence deferred issuing the licence
until after the hearing
and then issued it, was estopped from suspending or revoking that licence and
the Tribunal should have reinstated
the licence.' At item 2, as part of his
application for extension of the appeal to the merits, the appellant submits
that there is
'no' or 'insufficient' evidence to conclude that the revocation
was in the public interest. The appellant did not file any submissions
developing either point.
reply the Commissioner submitted that Australian law did not recognise any
principle of estoppel in public law, citing
New South Wales Trotting Club Ltd
v Glebe Municipal Council
[1937] NSWStRp 14
(1937) 37 SR (NSW) 288
at 307 and 313, and
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1977] HCA 71
(1977) 139 CLR 54
appellant appeared in person at the appeal hearing (as he had before the
Tribunal below). He pressed again the case he had put
to the Tribunal. In
particular he referred to his unblemished history in the period 2000-2010 when
he had held a licence. He referred
to the enjoyment that he gets from being able
to use firearms for hunting and recreational purposes. He noted that when his
was inspected by police in 2004 and 2009 he was found to be compliant.
He referred to his long and good work history with the one
employer. He drew
attention to the positive testimonials that he had placed before the Tribunal,
including from the Club Captain
of the Kemps Creek Pistol Club. He noted that
the Tribunal had not regarded the association he had once had with members of
motorcycle gangs as having any continuing significance. He referred to
the specific findings made in that regard by the Tribunal
at paras [60] and [61]
of his reasons.
is a well-established principle that statutory bodies can not take action
incompatible with the due exercise of their powers or
the discharge of their
duties. Accordingly, an administrator is not precluded by the mere fact of
granting a licence from revisiting
that decision. A licensee always runs the
risk that an administrator may reappraise information that was known or
available at the
time of the issuance of the licence, and move to exercise any
negative powers that are permitted to be used during the currency of
licence. This case has no special feature, such as evidence of an undertaking in
relation to restoration of the licence (say
given as part of any deal that may
have led to the dropping of charges at the Burwood Court) which might give some
strength to an
administrative estoppel case. In any case Australian law has been
firmly resistant to the recognition of estoppel in public law.
See further,
Attorney General (NSW) v Quin
[1990] HCA 21
(1990) 170 CLR 1
; Aronson, Dyer, Groves,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(4th ed, 2009), [6.300] ff.
there is no substance to the appellant's submission that the Tribunal acted on
no, or no sufficient, evidence. The Tribunal
had a wide range of relevant
material before it, and heard evidence directly from Constable Baker and the
is a case where the appellant is, in essence, seeking to reopen the merits of
the decision.
Appeal Panel is an oversight body. The ADT Act does not give the appellant an
unconstrained right of appeal, inviting the possibility
of a full retrial. The
leave discretion must be exercised with caution. We decline to grant leave in
we do think that the appellant has a greater insight into his situation than was
the case when he appeared before the Tribunal.
In our view there has been a
tangible positive change. In its decision the Tribunal did make some points
favourable to the appellant.
The Tribunal said at [77] of its reasons:
The tribunal does note however that involvement in recreational
shooting is a significant activity for the applicant. The tribunal
notes there
is no evidence that the applicant used and stored firearms unsafely. It is open
to the applicant to reapply at a future
date for a licence, and the respondent
could consider any such application on the evidence available at such a future
time. It might
be useful, if any further application was made at a future date,
for the applicant to be able to demonstrate knowledge of the regulatory
and commitment to complying with same, perhaps through attending training on the
legal obligations of a firearms licence holder.
the appeal hearing (held 9 October 2013) the appellant acknowledged in what we
consider to have been a genuine way, the gravity
of his conduct, the risk his
conduct posed to the community and was now contrite. He referred to his personal
circumstances (which
we will not retail at length here) in particular the
support he gives to his aged parents.
has, we consider, now reflected on the reasons given by the Tribunal for its
decision, and begun to absorb them. He told us that
he had sought advice from a
doctor, and accepted that he was wrong in what he said about there being a
person 'Joe', in his explanation
given to the police in the record of interview,
one of the negative considerations that influenced the Tribunal to its decision.
He referred to his attempts to join civic organisations such as the SES, and the
difficulty he had encountered because of the criminal
record he had now
he had before the Tribunal, he spoke of his enjoyment of the sporting activities
of shooters' clubs and the associations they provide.
He referred to his success
in competitions, and his ambition to reach a high level in sports shooting. He
said he was willing to
have his weapons held in safe storage at, for example,
club premises.
also informed us that, in light of the comments of the Tribunal at para [77] he
had made a fresh application for a licence on 1
July 2013, he had sat the
required test, and wanted to do the required training, but his application was
rejected on 15 July 2013.
(He lodged this appeal three days later.)
recommend to the Commissioner that if and when the appellant makes further
application for a firearms licence, the change to which
we have referred be
given favourable consideration.
we note that this case has been approached throughout as one where he should not
be permitted any weapons. The appellant had
until 10 December 2011 an
unblemished history of use of both category AB weapons (such as non-self-loading
shotguns, and non-self-loading
centre-fire rifles) and category H weapons
(pistols). While any possession of weapons carries with it a risk to public
safety, pistols
represent a more serious threat. We note that at hearing he said
that restoration of a long arm licence would enable him to pursue
his interest
in hunting.
may be that some graduated reinstatement of categories could be considered, for
example, the category AB (recreational hunting/vermin
control) licence. The
'public interest', as the Tribunal has noted in the past, is an inherently broad
concept, and it may vary in
the way it is applied across the various categories
of weapons.
Appeal dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter