URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/857.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v El-Awadly [2025] NSWPICMP 857; (5 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v El-Awadly [2025] NSWPICMP
Hesham El-Awadly
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
REVIEW PANEL
Elizabeth Medland
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Mohammed Assem
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
DATE OF DECISION:
5 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of
medical assessment of single Medical Assessor; dispute as to whole person
impairment (WPI) arising from physical injuries
caused by the motor accident;
pain behaviours, and range of motion not a reliable method of assessment of
shoulder impairment; discretion
exercised in applying analogy to assess
impairment;
Huni v Allianz Insurance Ltd
Nguyen v The Motor
Accidents Authority of NSW & Zurich Australian Insurance Ltd
considered;
issues of causation reliance on report of biomechanical engineer; DRE category
II impairments found in respect of lumbar
and cervical spine, consistent with
other examiners; 2% WPI of right shoulder based on analogy assessment;
– original certificate certifying a 12% WPI confirmed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
ASSESSMENT OF WHOLE PERSON IMPAIRMENT
Certificate issued under
Accident Injuries Act 2017
The Review Panel:
the certificate of Medical Assessor Alan Home dated 4 December 2024.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
El-Awadly, (the claimant) is a 42-year-old male who suffered injury on
August 2022 as a result of a motor vehicle accident.
claim was lodged upon Allianz Australia Insurance Limited (the insurer) who is
the compulsory third party insurer of the vehicle
considered at fault. The
insurer has a liability to pay statutory benefits and/or damages under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
issue in dispute between the parties is whether the “degree of permanent
impairment as a result of the injury caused by
the motor accident is greater
is a review of a medical assessment pursuant to s 7.26 of the MAI Act. The
medical assessment the subject of this review was
conducted by Medical Assessor
Alan Home. He issued a certificate dated 4 December 2024. The Medical Assessor
certified that injuries
caused by the motor accident give rise to a permanent
impairment of 12% which is greater than 10%.
Medical Assessor also issued a combined certificate dated 8 April 2025 which
certified a 12% whole person impairment (WPI) with
reference to his own
certificate of
4 December 2024, a certificate of Medical Assessor Garvy (0%
irritable bowel syndrome) and Medical Assessor Grainge (0% sleep
insurer sought a review of the medical assessment in accordance with s 7.26 of
the MAI Act (review). On 26 June 2025, the President’s
delegate determined
that there was reasonable cause to suspect the medical assessment was incorrect
in a material respect. As such
the review application was accepted and referred
to a Review Panel (the Panel).
review panel consists of two Medical Assessors and a Member assigned to the
Motor Accidents Division of the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission).
review of the medical assessment is not limited to a review of only that aspect
of the assessment that is alleged to be incorrect
and is to be by way of a new
assessment of all the matters with which the medical assessment is concerned: s
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules
2021 (Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A Review Panel determines how it conducts and
determines the proceedings
and may determine the proceedings solely based on the
written application: Rule 128 of the Rules.
Panel issued interim directions dated 30 June 2025 requiring the parties to
lodge paginated and indexed bundles of all documents
relied upon. The parties
lodged bundles in compliance with those directions.
an initial preliminary conference, the Panel issued directions dated
August 2025 advising that it required the claimant to attend a re-examination
with Medical Assessor Assem on 21 October 2025 at
the Commission’s medical
suites in Darlinghurst. The examination took place as scheduled.
Panel reconvened via teleconference on 3 November 2025 to discuss the clinical
examination findings of Medical Assessor Assem,
and the material relied upon by
the parties. These reasons have been prepared by all three Panel members as a
collective adopting
the clinical examination findings of Medical Assessor Assem.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Permanent impairment assessment
7.21 of the MAI Act provides that the degree of permanent impairment of
injured person
assessed in accordance with the Motor Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines).
Guidelines are issued pursuant to s 10.2 of the MAI Act. The Guidelines adopt
the fourth edition of the
American Medical Association’s Guides to
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
(AMA 4 Guides). Where there is
any difference between AMA 4 and the Guidelines, the Guidelines are
definitive.
of injury is addressed from cl 6.5 of the Guidelines. Whilst the clauses are set
out in respect of permanent impairment
they are relevant to a dispute as to
threshold injury.
Clause 6.6 to 6.7
“6.6 Causation is defined in the Glossary at page 316
of the AMA4 Guides as follows:
Causation means that a physical, chemical or biologic factor contributed to
the occurrence of a medical condition. To decide that
a factor alleged to have
caused or contributed to the occurrence or worsening of a medical condition has,
in fact, done so, it is
necessary to verify both of the following:
1. The alleged factor could have caused or contributed to worsening of the
impairment, which is a medical determination.
2. The alleged factor did cause or contribute to worsening of the impairment,
which is a non-medical determination.'
This, therefore, involves a medical decision and a non-medical informed
6.7 There is no simple common test of causation that is applicable to all
cases, but the accepted approach involves determining whether
the injury (and
the associated impairment) was caused or materially contributed to by the motor
accident. The motor accident does
not have to be a sole cause as long as it is a
contributing cause, which is more than negligible. Considering the question
this injury (or impairment) have occurred if not for the accident?' may
be useful in some cases, although this is not a definitive
test and may be
inapplicable in circumstances where there are multiple contributing
determining the issue of causation, the Panel is to also have regard to s 5D of
Civil Liability Act 2002
General principles
(1) A determination that negligence caused particular harm comprises the
following elements;
(a) that the negligence was a necessary condition of the occurrence of the harm
factual causation
(b) that it is appropriate for the scope of the negligent person’s
liability to extend to the harm so caused (
scope of liability
(2) In determining in an exceptional case, in accordance with established
principles, whether negligence that cannot be established
as a necessary
condition of the occurrence of harm should be accepted as establishing factual
causation, the court is to consider
(amongst other relevant things) whether or
not and why responsibility for the harm should be imposed on the negligent
(3) If it is relevant to the determination of factual causation to determine
what the person who suffered harm would have done if
the negligent person had
not been negligent—
(a) the matter is to be determined subjectively in the light of all relevant
circumstances, subject to paragraph (b), and
(b) any statement made by the person after suffering the harm about what he or
she would have done is inadmissible except to the
extent (if any) that the
statement is against his or her interest.
(4) For the purpose of determining the scope of liability, the court is to
consider (amongst other relevant things) whether or not
and why responsibility
for the harm should be imposed on the negligent party.”
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT THE SUBJECT OF REVIEW
Assessor Home examined the claimant on 29 November 2024 and in a certificate
dated 4 December 2024 found a 12% WPI.
Medical Assessor remarked the examination of the claimant was marked by pain
Examination
of the cervical spine revealed normal spinal curvature without muscle spasm loss
of range of motion was noted with evident
dysmetria. The Medical Assessor noted
mild muscle guarding in left-sided motion.
respect of the lumbar spine, examination is recorded as showing loss of range of
motion. Neurological examination of the lower
extremities revealed normal lower
limb power in all muscle groups. There was no muscle wasting and normal
sensibility throughout.
and right shoulder examination revealed inconsistency with the Medical Assessor
remarking that range of motion of the right shoulder
was not internally
consistent with a wide variance between the range of motion demonstrated at
separate attempts. The Medical Assessor
found the claimant to be consistent
other than the right shoulder movements.
Medical Assessor noted a report of Dr MacIntosh relied upon by the insurer. The
Medical Assessor found that the mechanism of
the accident could “well
cause” an injury to the cervical spine, lumbar spine and right shoulder.
He noted disagreement
as to the aetiology of the right shoulder condition and he
found that the claimant’s right shoulder condition is primarily
by neck pain and related guarding behaviour. He found:
identified right shoulder pathology which would be expected to cause only mild
restriction of motion. Whilst there is a
behavioural component to the
presentation of disability, there is restriction of shoulder motion secondary to
neck pain that I have
assessed by analogy in this case...”
respect of WPI, the Medical Assessor found a DRE category II impairment of the
cervical spine due to asymmetrical spinal motion
(dysmetria) giving rise to a 5%
WPI. In respect of the lumbar spine, a DRE category II was found also giving
rise to a 5% WPI.
right shoulder injury was assessed by analogy, with reference to cl 6.50 of the
Guidelines, due to the inconsistent range of motion
of the right shoulder. He
“due to symptom referral from the neck, there could
reasonably be a small impairment of the right shoulders skin to the presence
mild AC joint synovial hypertrophy.
Table 20, page 59, AMA4 provides 10% joint impairment for mild joint
swelling. Table 18, page 56, AMA4, provides a maximum whole person
impairment of
15% for the AC joint. 10% of 15% is 1.5% or 2% whole person impairment after
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s review submissions dated 6 May 2025
insurer submits that the assessment of the lumbar spine by Medical Assessor Home
did not comply with the Guidelines. With reference
to the Guidelines,
specifically Table 6.8 that provides that non-verifiable radicular symptoms that
follow the distribution of a
specific nerve root without objective findings.
insurer submits that the Medical Assessor has not complied with the definition
of non-verifiable radicular complaints and are
not substantiated by his reported
examination.
insurer also submits that the Medical Assessor’s assessment of the right
shoulder includes multiple errors. The insurer
notes that the incorrect
Guidelines are referred to at some points within the reasons.
is submitted that cl 6.24 of the Guidelines has not been complied with because
the analogy approach requires an objective clinical
finding and it is submitted
that in this instance there were none. It is submitted that the only findings
were subjective loss of
range of movement. The insurer then submits:
“secondly, he did not identify a condition that is not
covered by the guidelines or the AMA 4 guide. Instead, he diagnosed a
tissue injury and restriction of movement due to an injury to the cervical spine
(via application of the
principle). This condition is covered by
the Guidelines and AMA4, which mandate assessment by ranges of movement, and
there is no
reason to adopt an analogy method.
Instead, as per Clause 6.50(e) he should have determined if an impairment was
present. The Assessor determined the restricted motion
displayed could not be
attributed to discomfort from the neck or scapular area. He therefore should
have used assessed (sic) 0% WPI.
The Assessor also found the observed restriction could not be considered
permanent. He therefore should have assessed a 0% WPI noting
he found no
permanent impairment.”
is further submitted that the Medical Assessor failed to provide a clear path of
reasoning in support of the finding that the claimant’s
condition had
stabilised and the claimant had reached maximum medical improvement.
this regard, the insurer points out that the Medical Assessor remarked in
respect of the variable shoulder movements that it could
not be considered a
permanent impairment.
Claimant’s review submissions in
reply dated 23 May 2025
claimant’s submissions refer to the insurer’s assertion that the
Medical Assessor did not comply with the definition
of non verifiable radicular
complaints. The claimant submits that there is no requirement to specify with
dermatomal distribution
is in issue and that it is well established that a
Medical Assessor is only required to provide brief reasons. It is submitted
if the Medical Assessor “...was unable to find a medical explanation
for symptoms complained of in the claimant’s right
leg he would have said
respect of the right shoulder, the claimant submits that the
“insurer’s submission proceeds on the incorrect assumption
assessment by analogy can only be applied in the context of Clause 6.24 of the
Guidelines. There is no basis for this submission”.
claimant refers to cl 6.50 of the Guidelines which provides that if range of
motion cannot be used as a valid parameter of impairment
evaluation then the
Medical Assessor should then use discretion “...in considering what weight
to give other available evidence
to determine if an impairment is
submissions refer to cl 6.40 of the Guidelines and assert that the Medical
Assessor complied with same which confers a wide discretion
to him as a
respect of the Medical Assessor stating that the restriction of movements could
not be considered permanent the claimant submits:
fairly, Assessor Home’s remarks were in the context of discounting the
observed higher levels of restrictions which
he was unable to explain from a
medical basis. The claimant indicated that pain was the reason for the
variability, but given its
subjective nature, pain alone does not give rise to
whole person impairment.”
respect of the insurer’s failure to provide a path of reasoning ground,
the claimant submits there is no reason for the Medical
Assessor to delay the
assessment on account of pain behaviours.
submissions in support of original application dated 18 June 2024
following physical injuries were listed for assessment:
(a) injury to right shoulder – right shoulder rotator cuff tear;
(b) injury to left shoulder – left shoulder impingement syndrome;
(c) injury to cervical spine – C5/6 disc prolapse and radiculopathic
symptoms to the left upper limb;
(d) injury to lower back – L4/5 disc prolapse and annular tear with
radiculopathic symptoms to the right lower limb;
(e) sleep disorder, and
(f) gastrointestinal pain and discomfort.
claimant relies on the opinion of Dr Herald. He assessed a 17% WPI.
submissions refer to the insurer’s reliance on the opinion of Dr McIntosh,
biomechanical engineer. The claimant relies
on Dr Herald’s observations
in this regard, and notes that
Dr McIntosh does not appear to have been
privy to relevant medical material. The claimant
“...that little weight can be afforded to Dr
McIntosh’s report, and it certainly cannot supplant the opinion of several
qualified medical practitioners on the question of causation of injury. The
claimant contends that the insurer’s sole reliance
upon Dr McIntosh, and
what is effectively a statistical analysis of the chance of injury, to deny
causation and dispute that the
claimant’s injuries give rise to a WPI of
greater than 10, is misconceived.”
Insurer’s submissions dated 31 July 2024
insurer notes the claimant complaining of prior right shoulder issues in the
past with an entry of his general practitioner (GP)
Dr Hwai on 12 November 2013
noting right neck pain for one month, having woken up with it. There was no
injury or fall. There was
complaint of it radiating to the right shoulder with
constant pain, worse when still.
insurer notes that an ultrasound of the right shoulder of 8 September 2022 did
not reveal a rotator cuff tear. There was a note
of mild supraspinatus
tendinosis and mild subacromial bursitis.
insurer relies on the opinion of Dr McIntosh that the claimant could not have
sustained a right rotator cuff injury as a result
of the accident.
respect of the left shoulder, the insurer notes that the ultrasound revealed the
same pathology as the right suggesting a degenerative
GP entry of 12 November 2013 is again mentioned in reference to the alleged
cervical spine injury. Also relied upon is the opinion
of Dr McIntosh who found
that the accident could not have given rise to a structural injury to the spine
as a result of the accident.
respect of the lumbar spine, the insurer notes the claimant making complaint of
back pain to his GP on 5 July 2018. The insurer
relies upon the opinion of Dr
McIntosh in respect of causation.
DOCUMENTATION
Panel has considered all material provided by the parties in their respective
bundles of documents lodged in compliance with Panel’s
directions. This
includes a bundle lodged by the insurer on 31 July 2025 comprising of 126 pages
– “PIC – El-Awadly
– Insurer’s Review Bundle
(103366541)” and a bundle lodged by the claimant on 18 August 2025
comprising of 562
pages – “Claimant’s index of Documents for
Review Panel – as Review Application on the Certificate of Assessor
considered the documents included in an application
to lodge additional
documents lodged by the claimant on 1 October 2025 comprising of 33 pages
– “Combined PDF –
Letter to PIC encl. clinical records of Dr
Kuljic & Dr McKechnie”.
not every document has been referenced within these reasons, some documents have
been referred to where directly relevant to
findings, and the certificate and
reasons have been issued in the context of all documentation having been
considered by the Panel.
Application for personal injury
benefits dated 13 September 2022
this claim form the claimant details injuries to the shoulders, back “from
top to bottom”, neck, head hitting steering
wheel, headaches and upper leg
General practitioner records
records indicate that the claimant has been a patient of Greenoaks Medical
Centre, since at least March 2010.
noted by the insurer, the claimant attended upon the practice on 12 November
2013 complaining of neck pain. No injury or fall
is noted. The claimant is
recorded as working as a security guard. The pain was radiating to his right
shoulder with constant pain,
worse when sitting still. There had been no prior
episodes. A limited range of motion is noted, especially to the left, with pain
noted on palpation of the trapezius muscle on the right side. The claimant was
prescribed Diazepam.
are no further attendances at the practice until August 2016 when the claimant
complained of poor energy, with aches and pains
and difficulty sleeping.
claimant attended on 5 July 2018 complaining of back pain.
are no other complaints of neck, shoulder or back pain until the claimant
attends the practice on 1 September 2022 giving a
history of the motor accident.
The notes record complaints of lower back, mid back, both shoulders, neck and
legs cramps/pain. Complaints
in the shoulders is noted to be especially to the
addition, the claimant is noted to have impacted his head in the accident and he
was feeling dizzy/lightheaded with headaches.
The claimant was given imaging
referrals for the shoulders, thoracolumbar spine and the brain.
is noted the consultations around the time of the accident occurred during the
COVID-19 pandemic and notes are made in this regard.
The claimant attended on
24 September 2022 and notes of chronic pain are made.
7 October 2022 the claimant attended the practice with a record of it being five
weeks post accident and the neck pain was still
severe with right upper limb
neuropathic features. He complained of pain, weakness and numbness
intermittently. The claimant was
referred to Dr McKechnie and given referrals
for MRI scans of the cervical spine and right shoulder.
report of Dr McKechnie notes the claimant was first reviewed on 19 December
2022. A record of neck pain radiating across the
right shoulder, intermittently
through the arm towards the hand, intermittent left sided neck pain and lower
back pain with radiation
intermittently into the right leg is noted.
doctor noted the MRI results and recommended the claimant continue with
physiotherapy and commenced the claimant on a trial of
Lyrica for neuropathic
Medico-legal reports
claimant relies on the opinion of Dr Herald. He assessed a DRE category II
impairment in both the lumbar spine and cervical spine,
equating to a 5% WPI
each. In respect of the shoulders, utilising the range of motion method he
found a 7% WPI – 12% upper
extremity impairment for the right shoulder and
0% to the left.
insurer relies on the opinion of Dr Gothelf as set out in his report of 26
August 2024. On examination the doctor noted the claimant
complained of neck
pain being constant which radiates down to the right shoulder and to the hand
and gets pins and needles. The
lumbar spine was noted to be painful radiating
to the right leg and foot and toes with pins and needles. Right shoulder pain
noted to go with the neck pain and does not occur separately. The claimant
is said to have indicated that he did not have left shoulder
pain at the
examination.
doctor found no inconsistencies at the examination.
diagnosed a soft tissue injury in respect of the cervical and lumbar spine. At
the cervical spine the doctor noted the examination
revealed positive
asymmetrical loss of motion with no radiculopathy as defined by the Guidelines,
and positive non-verifiable radicular
complaints.
Gothelf recorded the lumbar spine examination to reveal no guarding, no
asymmetrical loss of motion, and non-verifiable radicular
complaints.
doctor did not consider the right rotator cuff tendinosis and partial rotator
cuff tear to be caused by the accident. In so doing,
the doctor noted the were
complaints of right shoulder pain with the symptoms being along the right
shoulder which seemed to be caused
by the cervical spine pain with radicular
symptoms down the arm.
doctor also found the left shoulder rotator cuff tendinosis to not be related to
the accident.
found a DRE category II impairment in respect of both the cervical spine and
lumbar spine, giving a 5% WPI for each. A total of
10% WPI was assessed.
RE-EXAMINATION
Hesham El-Awadly was examined by Medical Assessor Assem at the
Commission’s medical suites on 21 October 2025, with his wife
throughout the consultation for support and
assistance.
Pre-accident medical history and relevant personal details
El-Awadly is a 42-year-old, right-hand-dominant man, born in Egypt and migrated
to Australia in 1986 at approximately three years
of age. He lives with his wife
and three children in a property at Yagoona. From 2017 he was employed by ACES
Group as a security
officer and concierge at Customs House, a position he states
he held continuously and full-time through to 2023.
Past medical
12 November 2013, when he presented with right-sided neck pain of one
month’s duration radiating to the right shoulder, with
limited abduction,
trapezius tenderness, and reduced cervical range of motion. He recalls that, at
that time, he often slept with
the air-conditioner on and would wake with stiff
5 July 2018 he re-attended for back pain, was prescribed Panadeine Forte, and by
13 December 2018 was documented as “progressing well.” He states
there was minor aches that did not interfere with his
work. He did not undergo
any radiological imaging or receive physiotherapy treatment.
were no other relevant medical or surgical conditions
History of the accident
30 August 2022 at approximately 5.00pm, Mr El-Awadly was driving his grey 2017
Toyota Camry north-west along the Hume Highway,
Yagoona (NSW), approaching the
bus stop near Yagoona Station. The weather was fine and the road dry. He was the
sole occupant and
wearing a seatbelt. Ahead of him, a white Yutong bus operated
by a private charter company was stopped in the bus zone. As he pulled
stopped behind the bus to allow traffic to merge, the bus suddenly
describes the bus driver as having briefly left the bus to buy water, returning
to the vehicle and accelerating in reverse—mistakenly
believing the
transmission was in “Drive.” He estimates the sequence unfolded
within about five seconds. He states his
stationary Camry was struck from the
front, pushed backwards approximately 5m, up over the kerb and onto the
footpath/garden bed,
where the rear of his vehicle contacted a roadside tree. He
therefore reports two impacts: the initial frontal impact from the reversing
and a secondary rear impact against the kerb/tree. He is clear that this was not
a “roll-back”; he maintains the
bus accelerated in reverse.
pushed his car back onto the road. Police and ambulance did not attend. The
vehicle was drivable; he drove to work at Customs
House and completed the shift.
He did not perceive pain immediately at the scene; however, during the shift he
developed back and
neck pain and noted difficulty sitting for prolonged periods.
He also believes the seatbelt load across the right chest/shoulder
initiated right shoulder pain, which he noticed later that evening.
History of symptoms and treatment following the accident
1 September 2022, the day after the collision, he attended his GP, Dr Ahmed
Youssef (Green Oaks Medical Centre). He reported neck,
mid- and lower-back pain;
bilateral shoulder pain (right worse than left); leg cramps; headache with
dizziness and nausea after a
head strike. Dr Youssef arranged immediate
investigations (CT brain, MRI thoraco-lumbar spine, and bilateral shoulder
ultrasound)
and certified him unfit to work.
8 September 2022, ultrasound of both shoulders demonstrated mild supraspinatus
tendinosis and subacromial bursitis bilaterally,
without a tear. On 4 October
2022, MRI thoracic and lumbar spine showed a right paracentral L4/5 disc bulge
with annular tear, causing
foraminal narrowing and minimal contact of the right
L4 nerve root; the thoracic study was otherwise unremarkable. On 20 October
2022, MRI cervical spine showed a broad-based left paracentral C5/6
disc-osteophyte complex with left C6 root compression; MRI right
recorded a partial-thickness infraspinatus tear (~5.3 mm) with diffuse
supraspinatus/subscapularis tendinosis and mild subdeltoid
4 November 2022 the GP documented “right L4 nerve-root impingement”,
prescribed temazepam, melatonin, tramadol and
ibuprofen, and referred him to
orthopaedic surgeon
Dr John Trantalis. He received physiotherapy treatment
for approximately six months without any significant benefit.
was seen by Dr McKechnie on 19 December 2022. He recalls being told that a
steroid injection might help for several months, whereas
surgery was an
alternative; he did not proceed, citing cost and a desire to continue
conservative care.
Current symptoms
describes constant neck pain, typically 8/10 in intensity even after taking
Tramadol on the morning of review. Neck pain is exacerbated
by movement and
sustained postures, with short-lived relief in a supine position. He notes
morning stiffness and the need for a prolonged
hot shower (20 minutes, seated)
to reduce stiffness before taking medication. There are intermittent ‘pins
and needles’
involving his right first and second digits.
also reports constant low-back pain, also rated about 8/10 after medication.
Pain increases with sitting or walking for more than
10-15 minutes. He describes
episodic muscle cramps/spasms in the back and legs. The pain radiates down his
right leg to involve the
right first and second toes.
right shoulder is only painful on movement. He continues to guard the right
upper limb during activities of daily living. He reports
overuse of the left
shoulder for compensatory tasks has produced intermittent discomfort on that
reports poor sleep and states he “sleeps on the couch” most nights
because the backrest allows a more comfortable,
supported position and reduces
nocturnal pain. He estimates that he can stand/ walk for approximately
10–15 minutes. He relies
on his wife for assistance with some aspects of
his personal care and all of his domestic activities of daily living.
Current treatment
currently takes CBD oil, Tramadol and Lyrica.
Findings on
examination
El-Awadly ambulated with a slow, stooped and cautious gait. He appeared
uncomfortable while sitting. There was prominent pain behaviour
throughout—breath-holding, grimacing and occasional
vocalisation—necessitating frequent pauses. Height was recorded as
and weight 81kg. He was advised at the outset not to perform any manoeuvre
beyond tolerance and to avoid actions that might
exacerbate symptoms. The
examination was prolonged as he requiring regular rest breaks.
Cervical spine
was tenderness to palpation over the cervical spinous processes. No paracervical
muscle guarding or spasm was detected. Flexion,
extension, lateral flexion and
rotation were each reduced to approximately one-quarter of normal. There was no
asymmetry of movement
or spinal dysmetria observed.
tendon reflexes were brisk and symmetrical bilaterally. Power was globally
reduced in both upper limbs, more pronounced on the
right. Light-touch sensation
was reduced over the right first and second digits. Mid-arm girth showed the
right upper arm approximately
1cm greater than the left (inconsistent with
marked restriction in right shoulder motion), with no difference at the
forearms. Neural
tension signs were negative.
Lumbar spine
was reported tenderness to palpation over the lumbar region. No paraspinal
guarding or spasm was detected. Lumbar movements
were restricted to about
one-half of normal in flexion. Extension was absent. Lateral flexion was
symmetrically reduced to about
one-quarter of normal bilaterally. Axial rotation
was reduced to about one-half of normal. He had difficulty getting on and off
examination couch, requiring physical assistance from his wife. Active
straight-leg raise in supine was 40° bilaterally. Neural
tension signs
(SLR/Slump) were negative. Knee and ankle reflexes were brisk and symmetrical.
Power and tone were normal throughout
both lower limbs. Sensation was reduced
over the right great toe. Calf girth showed the right calf larger than the left
by approximately
3cm (he reported that it was due to a congenital deformity
involving his left leg).
Upper extremities
had marked difficulty removing his shirt before and after the assessment and
required assistance from his wife, including unbuttoning.
He grimaced and
vocalised with several movements and required a rest break before formal
right-shoulder range testing. He repeatedly
stated that pain “coming from
the neck” prevented right shoulder movement.
and left shoulder active range of motion (goniometer), repeated measures.
Testing was performed multiple times due to inconsistent
effort and pain-limited
stops. Values below are active ROM in
Internal rotation
External rotation
recording the above values, I explained that other medical examiners had
documented substantially greater shoulder ranges on
prior assessments. In
response, he stated he has not been moving his right shoulder at all since the
accident and that his left shoulder
has deteriorated from compensatory overuse.
Consistency of presentation
El-Awadly entered the room with a slow, stooped, and guarded gait, appearing
uncomfortable even while seated. There was pronounced
pain behaviour
throughout—frequent grimacing, breath-holding, and audible expressions of
discomfort. His limitations were disproportionate
to the underlying pathology
and inconsistent with the range observed by other medical examiners. The
inconsistencies have been brought
to his attention and his response noted.
DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS
above clinical examination findings of Medical Assessor Assem were discussed by
the Panel at the teleconference of 3 November
2025. It was agreed by all Panel
members that the findings would be adopted as part of these reasons, forming the
basis for the
Panel reasons and certificate, in conjunction with consideration
of the documentation provided by the parties.
claimant was involved in a motor accident on 30 August 2022. He was seat-belt
restrained in a stationary 2017 Toyota Camry when
a reversing Yutong bus struck
the front of his vehicle and pushed it rearwards up the kerb and into a tree,
i.e., two impacts in
rapid sequence. Although he was able to drive to work, his
vehicle was subsequently repaired at a cost of $12,152.
two days (1 September 2022) his GP documented the same two-impact mechanism and
new multi-region symptoms—neck, mid-/low-back
and bilateral
shoulders—with head-impact symptoms and lower-limb neuropathic features.
Imaging soon afterwards showed a right
L4/5 annular tear with foraminal
narrowing and minimal contact of the exiting right L4 root. On 20 October 2022
MRI cervical spine
showed a broad-based left paracentral C5/6
disc–osteophyte complex compressing the left C6 root and an MRI of the
right shoulder
showed a small (≈5.3 mm) partial-thickness articular-sided
infraspinatus tear with tendinopathy and mild bursitis.
Panel has considered the report of Dr McIntosh, biomechanical engineer dated
30 December 2022. He concluded that the motor accident could not have given
rise to the alleged injuries, as set out in his report
of 30 December 2022. He
concludes that the mechanics of the collision could have reasonably led to
general soreness and a soft tissue
injury of the cervical spine with symptoms of
a closed period.
Panel notes that it would appear that Dr McIntosh was not privy to all relevant
medical documentation. Further, the Panel agrees
with the opinion of Dr Herald
“positioning of arms and the back can cause varying
degrees of injuries depending on whether he was prepared for the impact
provided muscular support to stop that from happening or whether he was
unprepared and whether he was in a position to be susceptible.”
Panel gives greater weight to contemporaneous medical records and imaging within
the first six weeks after the accident, over
the biomechanical report of Dr
McIntosh which was seemingly provided without full access to all of the clinical
materials. It is
further noted that both Dr Herald and Dr Gothelf are in
agreement that the accident has given rise to a cervical spine and lumbar
injury, with it at least accepted that the cervical spine injury has given rise
to right sided shoulder symptoms.
regard to the mechanism of the accident, and in the clinical judgement of the
two Medical Assessors, the Panel accepts that
the motor accident could have
given rise to an injury to the cervical spine and lumbar spine, including the
pathology noted on MRI
contemporaneous complaint of pain to the neck, back and shoulders, in the
absence of any evidence of ongoing significant pre-existing
complaint is such
that the Panel is persuaded that the motor accident, on the balance of
probabilities, did in fact cause the injuries
to the cervical spine and lumbar
respect of the right shoulder, the Panel is not persuaded that the claimant has
suffered pathology to the shoulders caused by the
motor accident. In this
regard, the pathology seen bilaterally would suggest a degenerative condition
rather than a cause of traumatic
Panel is satisfied, however, that on the balance of probabilities the claimant
is suffering a restriction of movement related
to the cervical spine pursuant to
principle. This
is consistent with the clinical findings of Medical Assessor Assem and follow
the complaints to, and findings of
Dr Gothelf. Dr Gothelf, whilst making a
finding that the accident did not cause shoulder pathology, does seem to accept
in the right shoulder arising from the cervical spine injury.
respect of the left shoulder, it is noted the claimant suggested to Medical
Assessor Assem that he did not injure the shoulder
in the accident and instead
his symptoms are related to an overuse syndrome. The Panel notes, however, that
the claimant made complaints
of bilateral shoulder pain in the days after the
motor accident, albeit more pronounced on the right. The Panel accepts that the
claimant is likely to have suffered referred pain from his cervical spine to the
left shoulder in the months after the motor accident,
however, such symptoms
caused by the motor accident are more than likely to have resolved. Consistent
with this finding, is the
record of Dr Gothelf that the claimant did not have
any left shoulder symptoms at the time of his examination.
Panel has had regard to the fact that the claimant presents with pain behaviours
and inconsistencies at the assessment conducted
by Medical Assessor Assem and at
the assessment with Medical Assessor Home. The Panel observes that pain
behaviours complicate the
assessment of impairment and makes the task more
challenging, however, that does not mean that the occurrence of a genuine injury
is to be dismissed.
Assessment of whole person impairment
Cervical spine
claimant has a symmetrical restriction of cervical motion with non-verifiable
radicular complaint involving his right hand. This
is a DRE Cervicothoracic
Category II or 5% WPI (AMA4, 3/104). This is consistent with the findings of
Medical Assessor Home, Dr
Herald and Dr Gothelf.
demonstrated asymmetry of lumbar movements with non-verifiable radicular
complaints giving a DRE Lumbosacral Category II or 5%
WPI (AMA4, Table 72, p
110). This is consistent with the findings of Medical Assessor Home, Dr Herald
and Dr Gothelf.
Right shoulder
discussed above, the Panel accepts, on the balance of probabilities, that the
claimant suffers from a secondary restriction of
shoulder motion arising from
the cervical spine injury (
principle). Impairment is therefore
assessed under cl 6.50 of the Guidelines. Given that repeated measurements were
inconsistent
with the ranges observed by other examiners, range of motion was
not a valid and reliable method of assessing his level of impairment
(cl 6.50(d)
of the Guidelines). Accordingly, exercising the discretion in cl 6.50(e), the
impairment is assessed by analogy. The
Panel further observes that, consistent
with the findings of Garling J in
Huni v Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1584
, a Medical Assessor is obliged to make an assessment of
impairment with reasons.
regard to the consistent contemporaneous complaints and the conclusion that the
motor accident has given rise to right shoulder
symptoms, the Panel accepts the
claimant suffers a genuine restriction of movement owing to the referred
cervical spine symptoms,
albeit being a case that the restriction of movement
method of assessment cannot be utilised in the circumstances. An analogous
would be mild crepitations of the right AC joint giving 10% joint
impairment (AMA4, Table 19, p 59) which is multiplied by 15% WPI
(AMA4, Table
18, p 58) to obtain 1.5% WPI rounded to 2% WPI.
claimant indicated that the left shoulder was not injured in the accident. He
indicated that he has developed pain secondary to
compensatory overuse. As
noted above, the Panel accepts that the claimant more than likely suffered
referred left sided shoulder
symptoms after the motor accident which would have
resolved in the months after the accident. This is in the context of normal
and nil complaints recorded by other medical examiners. Accordingly,
a secondary impairment due to pain arising from the cervical
spine was also not
applicable.
the basis of the above findings, the certificate of Medical Assessor Home dated
4 December 2024 is confirmed.
Section 4.11 of the MAI
Section 7.26(5A) of the MAI
Clause 6.2 of the
Guidelines.
Briggs v IAG Limited
t/as NRMA Insurance
[2022] NSWSC 372
See s 3B(2) of the CL Act.
Nguyen v The Motor Accidents
Authority of NSW & Zurich Australian Insurance Ltd
[2011] NSWSC 351.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (504 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter