URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/659.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gonzales v Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd (General) [2013] NSWCTTT 659 (30 December 2013)
Gonzales v Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd (General)
[2013] NSWCTTT 659
December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER & TENANCY TRIBUNAL
APPLICATION
GEN 13/32742
Joe Adrian Gonzales
RESPONDENT:
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
APPLICATION:
Costs on the Papers Written Submissions
18 October 2013 at Liverpool
respondent’s application that the applicant pay its costs of the
proceedings in whole or part is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an application by the respondent that the applicant pay the respondents costs
of the proceedings, in whole or part.
proceedings were commenced by the applicant in the Tribunal on 13 June 2013.
The applicant sought orders that the respondent
pay the applicant $30,000.00.
Relevantly, the respondent was at all relevant times the insurer of the
applicant’s motor vehicle,
a 2011 model Holden Commodore
applicant’s vehicle was involved in a collision on 4 May 2012. The
applicant asserted that the airbags did not deploy.
The respondent insurer
assessed the vehicle. The applicant asserted that the vehicle should be written
off by the insurer, in part
because the airbag did not deploy and consequently
must be faulty. The respondent had the vehicle assessed by an insurance
and decided that the vehicle should not be written off. The applicant
sought compensation on the basis that the insurer should
“pay market
value for my car at the time of the accident”.
matter was listed before the Tribunal on 16 July 2013. In
accordance with the usual practice of the Tribunal,
a conciliation occurred
before a Conciliator. The matter did not resolve. The Member set the matter
down for hearing and made orders
that the parties file and serve evidence. The
respondent was given leave to be legally represented. Prior to the matter being
before the Tribunal on 16 July 2013, the respondent had written to the
applicant seeking that they have an opportunity to inspect
the vehicle (by way
of letter dated 9 July 2013). The orders of 16 July 2013 included an order that
the applicant grant access to
the respondent to inspect the vehicle; prepare a
report; and provide a copy of the report to the applicant by 30 July
4 September 2013, the matter was listed for hearing in the Tribunal. The
applicant had not filed and served evidence. On 28 August
respondent’s representative had wrote to the Tribunal complaining that the
applicant had only made his vehicle available
for inspection on 27 August 2013,
and the respondent was unable to comply with the timetable for filing and
serving evidence.
4 September 2013, both parties appeared. The Member made orders adjourning the
matter, and ordering the respondent file and serve
its assessor’s report
by 18 September 2013. The Member further ordered that the applicant file and
serve evidence by the
2 October 2013 and the respondent file and
serve evidence in reply by 9 October 2013. Importantly, the orders contain
following notation (stated in the written orders):
“The Tribunal has advised the applicant that failure to comply with
this direction will most likely result in the matter being
dismissed on the next
occasions”.
respondent asserts that it served its assessors report on 17
September 2013. A copy of the report was filed with
the Tribunal on 17
September 2013. The matter was listed before the Tribunal on 18 October
2013. There was no appearance by
the applicant. The Solicitor for the
respondent appeared. The Tribunal dismissed the proceedings under
Section 30(2)
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
, due to the
applicant’s failure to comply with repeated directions of the Tribunal in
respect of the filing and serving of
evidence, which had caused disadvantage to
the respondent. The respondent sought a costs order. The Tribunal made orders
the filing and serving of submissions by the parties in respect of the
application for costs.
1 November 2013, the Tribunal received the respondent’s written outline of
submissions on costs. The respondent requested
the issue be determined on the
papers. The respondent’s submission can be summarised as
The applicant
had failed to comply with the timetable for the filing and serving of evidence,
incurring costs to the respondent;
The cost of the
expert’s report engaged by the respondent was $825.00;
The Tribunal
Member had made clear to the applicant on 4 September 2013 that if
he did not comply with the timetable for
serving evidence, the proceedings would
likely be struck out;
The proceedings
were misconceived and lacking in substance.
respondent seeks their whole costs and disbursements on a party/party basis, or
in the alternative the cost of the expert’s
18 November 2013, the applicant sent an email to the Tribunal opposing the
application for costs, stating in essence that the fault
for the proceedings was
with the respondent’s decision not to write off the vehicle; that the
respondent had never provided
him with an “assessment” report in
respect of the air bag, and without that document he could not proceed against
dealer”’; that NSW Fair Trading and “advised”
him to take proceedings in the CTTT; and that he and his family
had financial
difficulties.
RELEVANT PRINCIPLES
relevant provisions on costs are contained in
Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
and Clause 20 of the
Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Regulations 2009
53 of the Consumer ,Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001 (“the CTTT
Act”) relevantly states:
(1) Subject to this section and the Clauses, the parties in any proceedings are
to pay their own costs.
(2) The Tribunal may, in accordance with the Clauses, award costs in relation to
any proceedings
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Regulation 2009
CTTT Regulations’)
relevantly provides:
20 Costs generally
(1) This clause applies to the awarding of costs by the Tribunal as provided by
Section 53 of the Act.
(2) The Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings in respect of which
the amount claimed or in dispute is not more than
$10,000.00, or in respect of
which no amount is claimed or in dispute, only if the Tribunal is satisfied that
there are exceptional
circumstances that warrant the awarding of costs.
(3) In any proceedings in respect of which the amount claimed or in dispute is
more than $10,000.00 but not more than $30,000.00
the Tribunal may award costs
in relation to the proceedings, but only if:
(a) the Tribunal is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances that
warrant the awarding of costs, or
(b) the Tribunal has made an order under section 30(2) of the Act in relation to
the proceedings.
(4) In any proceedings in respect of which the amount claimed or in dispute
is more than $30,000.00, the Tribunal may award costs
in relation to the
proceedings in such circumstances as it sees fit.
(5) Despite any other provision of this clause, the Tribunal may order:
(b) that the costs of any proceedings that the Tribunal considers to be
frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance,
or that otherwise
should not be heard or proceeded with, be paid wholly or in part by the person
who instituted the proceedings.
relevantly provides:
30 Proceedings causing disadvantage
(1) This section applies if the Tribunal is of the opinion that a party in
any proceedings is conducting the proceedings in such a
way that unreasonably
disadvantages another party in the proceedings by any conduct (including by
failing to comply with an order
or directions of the Tribunal).
(2) The Tribunal may:
(a) if the party causing the disadvantage is the applicant-order that the
proceedings (or part of the proceedings) be dismissed or
struck out, or
APPLICATION OF LEGAL PRINCIPLES
relevant legal principles regarding “exceptional circumstances”
under Clause 20 of the CTTT Regulations, and whether
proceedings are
misconceived or without substance are discussed in
Johnson v Allianz
Australia Limited
[2013] NSWCTTT 389.
It is unnecessary to repeat the
relevant legal principles in respect of this application.
in this matter, the proceedings were dismissed by reason of the
applicant’s failure to file and serve evidence, pursuant
to Section 30(2)
of the CTTT Act. Consequently, Clause 20(3)(b) of the CTTT Regulations are
the view of the Tribunal, although it is extremely difficult to envisage how the
applicant could have proved that the respondent
breached the statutory guarantee
that services will be provided with due care and skill under Section 60 of the
Australian Consumer Law 2010 (“the ACL”)
in respect of the
decision of the insurer to repair, rather than write off the vehicle (which
appears to be the only remotely relevant
cause of action, and the Tribunal
noting that the applicant did not cite any relevant law in his application).
Further, even if
the applicant was ever able to establish the respondent
breached Section 60 of the ACL, it is extremely difficult to envisage how
would establish that it was “fair and equitable” under
Consumer Claims Act 1998
to receive compensation of
$30,000.00, even if he established breach. It appears the Tribunal has
is a “consumer” and the claim a
“consumer claim” under
Consumer Claims Act
, and the respondent did not submit that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction in
respect of the application filed by the applicant.
although the applicant may never have been able to establish breach, nor
establish loss, the Tribunal is not satisfied that
the respondent has proved on
the balance of probabilities that there are “exceptional
circumstances” within the meaning
of Clause 20(3)(a) of the CTTT
Regulations, even taking into account the difficulties faced by the applicant in
establishing breach
or the remedy claimed in the application. On many
occasions, the Tribunal deals with unrepresented litigants who bring proceedings
with little understanding of relevant legal principles. The circumstances of
this matter are substantially different to the circumstances
Allianz Insurance Limited
, where the applicant had legal representation
through the proceedings, and maintained proceedings despite there being clear
difficulties with the orders sought.
respect of Section 30(2) of the CTTT Act and Clause 20(3)(b) of the CTTT
Regulations
the Tribunal is not satisfied the respondent has proved on
the balance of probabilities that a costs order, in whole or part, should
made in favour of the respondent. The orders of both 16 July 2013 and 4
September 2013 provided that the respondent have the
car assessed and provide a
report to the applicant before the applicant was to file and serve evidence.
Although there was a delay
in the applicant providing his car for assessment,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that this delay justifies a costs order being made
in favour of the respondent. The respondent is the insurer of the applicant,
and after receipt of the report of the assessor, it
appears that the applicant
decided not to pursue the proceedings against the insurer. On any view of it,
whether or not the applicant
decided to continue with the application, the
respondent would have had to provide some evidence to its insured explaining why
decision not to write off the vehicle was appropriate. The Tribunal is not
satisfied the respondent has proved to the requisite
standard of proof the
Tribunal should order costs against the applicant in the proceedings (including
the cost of obtaining the report
of Mr Tanti of Mastertech Industries Pty
the above reasons, the application for costs is
G J Sarginson
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal
30 December
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (125 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter