URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/238.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Attorney General for NSW v MM (a pseudonym) by his tutor Barbara Ramjan [2025] NSWCA 238 (28 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Attorney General for NSW v MM (a pseudonym) by his tutor Barbara
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 238
Hearing Date(s):
20 October 2025
Date of Orders:
28 October 2025
Decision Date:
28 October 2025
Ward P; Stern JA; Griffiths AJA
1. Grant leave to appeal.
that the draft notice of appeal be filed by 10am, 29 October
3. Direct that the draft notice of contention be filed
by 10am, 29 October 2025.
4. Allow the
5. Set aside the declaration made by the primary
judge on 19 September 2025.
Catchwords:
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW – Commonwealth and State relations –
inconsistency of laws – where respondent is a National Disability
Insurance Scheme participant – where respondent became a forensic patient
pursuant to
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
Forensic Provisions Act 2020
(NSW) (MHCIFP Act) – where the applicant
seeks the respondent’s status as a forensic patient to be extended by 18
– whether material obtained by the applicant from a registered NDIS
service provider pursuant to
of the MHCIFP for the purpose of that
application is admissible – whether there is an operational inconsistency
of MHCIFP Act and s 67G of the National Disability Insurance
Scheme Act (2013) (Cth) such that to that extent the former is invalid
to s 109 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
Legislation Cited:
Child Care Act 1972
Crimes Act 1900
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act 2003
s 16(1)(db)
Judicial Review Act 1991
Judicial Review Act 2000
Judiciary Act 1903
Mental Health and Cognitive
Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
ss 71(1)(b)
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Code of Conduct) Rules 2018
(Cth), rr 3, 6
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Complaints Management
and Resolution) Rules 2018 (Cth)
National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Incident Management and Reportable Incidents) Rules 2018 (Cth), rr (12)(2),
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Practice Standards — Worker
Screening) Rules 2018 (Cth)
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Provider
Registration and Practice Standards) Rules 2018 (Cth), sch 1, cll 10, 12(2),
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Quality and
Safeguards Commission and Other Measures) Act 2017
Payroll Tax Act 2007
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Student Assistance Act
Whistleblowers Protection Act 2001
Cases Cited:
Attorney General for New South Wales v MM (a pseudonym) (bht Johnson)
[2024] NSWSC 1030
Attorney General for New South Wales v MM (a
pseudonym) (bht Ramjam) (Preliminary)
[2025] NSWSC 941
Attorney General for
New South Wales v MM (Preliminary)
[2024] NSWSC 599
Attorney General for NSW
v MM (a pseudonym) by his tutor Barbara Ramjan
[2025] NSWSC 1074
Pacific Tobacco Company Ltd v Stapleton
(1952) 86 CLR 1
[1952] HCA 32
Commissioner of State Revenue v Uber Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 172
Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
Collector of Customs v Agfa-Gevaert Ltd
(1996) 186 CLR 389
Cooper v Owners – Strata Plan No 58068
(2020) 103 NSWLR 160
Coverdale v West Coast Council
(2016) 259 CLR 164
Ex parte Zietsch; Re Craig
[1944] NSWStRp 29
(1944) 44 SR (NSW) 360
Fuller v Lawrence
(2024) 99 ALJR 103
[2024] HCA 45
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR
[2005] HCA 7
Jordan v Second Commissioner of Taxation
King v Director of Housing
(2013) 23 Tas R 353
[2013] TASFC
National Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
(2020) 276 FCR 415
NEAT Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB Ltd
(2003) 216 CLR 277
Piras v Thaisawat
(1993) 115 FLR 79
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
v New South Wales
(2001) 53 NSWLR 299
[2001] NSWCA 360
Sea Shepherd
Australia Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
(2013) 212 FCR 252
[2013] FCAFC
Smith v Victoria Police
(2012) 36 VR 97
[2012] VSC 374
Stone v Guli
[2020] QCA 288
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
262 CLR 362
[2017] HCA 34
Tasmania v TJG
[2021] TASSC 47
Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
(2003) 77 ALJR 1797
[2003] HCA 54
v Commonwealth
(2006) 227 CLR 532
[2006] HCA 25
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Memorandum,
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment
(Quality and Safeguards Commission and Other Measures) Bill 2017
Explanatory
Memorandum,
National Disability Insurance Scheme Bill 2013
Principal judgment
Attorney General of New South Wales (Applicant)
MM (a pseudonym) by his
tutor Barbara Ramjan (Respondent)
Representation:
JS Emmett SC with RA McEwen (Applicant)
B Lim SC with A
Mohseni (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor’s Office
(Applicant)
Legal Aid NSW (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00369134
Publication Restriction:
Restriction on publication of the respondent’s name
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of New South Wales
Common Law Division
[2025] NSWSC 1074
Date of Decision:
19 September 2025
Weinstein J
File Number(s):
2025/188399
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
In September 2022, the respondent, an Aboriginal man in his late 50s, whose
name is suppressed, became a forensic patient pursuant
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment Forensic Provisions Act 2020
(MHCIFP Act), following a special hearing conducted in the District Court in
which a qualified finding of guilt was made in
respect of the commission by the
respondent of an offence of aggravated sexual assault of a person under the
respondent’s authority
contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
The respondent has a lengthy criminal history, including several offences
involving violence, and a history of non-compliance with
court orders and bail
undertakings. The respondent has a mild neurocognitive disorder and is a
National Disability Insurance Scheme
(NDIS) participant. Little Blue Wren
Services Pty Ltd (LBW) is a registered NDIS service provider and acted as the
respondent’s
support coordinator until June 2025.
The respondent’s status as a forensic patient was set to expire on 27
May 2024. On 3 November 2023, a conditional release order
was made by the Mental
Health Review Tribunal in respect of the respondent (who had been in custody
since his arrest in respect of
the offence he was found to have committed).
The applicant, the Attorney General of New South Wales, then commenced
proceedings seeking an order that the respondent’s status
as a forensic
patient be extended by 18 months. The constitutional issue the subject of the
present proceedings was raised in the
context of the hearing before Ierace J on
31 July 2025 of those proceedings. In written submissions for that hearing the
had referred to material obtained from LBW pursuant to
MHCIFP relating to the respondent. The respondent objected to the tender of that
LBW material, contending that there is an
operational inconsistency between
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth) and s 138 of the
MHCIFP Act such that s 67G is rendered inoperative pursuant to
Constitution
. An interim order was made by Ierace J, extending the
respondent’s status as a forensic patient until 15 November 2025.
Weinstein J heard the constitutional issue and concluded that registered NDIS
providers are performing duties, functions or powers
under the NDIS Act in the
course of providing the supports and services for which they are registered to
an NDIS participant. His
Honour held that LBW could not be compelled to produce
documents in its possession concerning the respondent’s behaviour and
mental condition because s 138 of the MHCIFP Act was inconsistent with the
operation of s 67G(a) of the NDIS Act and was to that
constitutionally invalid.
The applicant seeks leave to appeal against that decision. The final hearing
of the application pursuant to s 123 of the MHCIFP Act
to extend the
respondent’s status as a forensic patient is listed for hearing on 7
November 2025. If this appeal is successful,
the applicant wishes to make the
LBW documents available to the expert(s) for review prior to that hearing. Hence
the appeal has
been heard and dealt with as a matter of urgency.
On appeal, the applicant contends that, on its proper construction, s 67G of
the NDIS Act captures only documents held by the NDIS
provider because of the
exercise or performance of a power, function or duty, the carrying out of which
is enabled or mandated (as
opposed to merely regulated) by the NDIS Act. The
respondent resists that construction and has filed a notice of contention
to uphold the primary judgment on the basis that the LBW documents
produced under compulsion were held because of specific duties
imposed on the
registered NDIS provider under the NDIS Act.
The respondent advances his argument in two alternative ways. First, the
narrower contention reflected in his notice of contention
that the documents
held and produced by LBW in compliance with the s 138 orders are documents held
or in the possession of LBW because
of the performance or exercise of its
“duties” under the NDIS Act. Alternatively, the respondent contends
captures all documents prepared or held by registered service
providers in the performance or exercise of their duties, powers or
under the NDIS Act and that the documents in question fall within that
description.
The Court (Ward P, Stern JA, Griffiths AJA) held, granting leave to appeal
and allowing the appeal:
As to the proper construction of s 67G of the NDIS Act:
(1) Contrary to the respondent’s primary argument, the
documents produced by LBW in compliance with the s 138 orders were
not documents
held or in the possession of LBW in the performance or exercise of its
“duties” under the Act. Upon review
of those documents, it is clear
that the documents could not be said to have been held or possessed by LBW in
the exercise or performance
of duties said to have been imposed by ss 45A,
73F, 73W or 73Z of the NDIS Act: [128]-[153].
(2) Duties, functions or powers “under” the NDIS
Act do not extend beyond functions that are conferred or imposed directly
immediately by the statute. The proper construction of the word
“under” must give weight to the NDIS Act’s legislative
and context, and the question whether a power, duty or function, is properly
characterised as falling “under”
the NDIS Act requires consideration
of whether the legislation itself provides the authority, force or justification
for its exercise
or occurrence. Accordingly, the proper enquiry is whether the
duty, power or function is being performed or exercised pursuant to
statutory obligation or enabling provision derived from the NDIS Act itself:
[165]-[172].
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[2005] HCA 7
[2024] HCA 35
(2024) 99 ALJR 103
Neat Domestic trading Pty Ltd
(2003) 216 CLR 277
[2003] HCA 35
Scharrer v New South Wales
(2001) 53 NSWLR 299
[2001] NSWCA 360
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue v Uber Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 172
Stone v Guli
[2020] QCA 288
King v Director of Housing
(2013) 23 Tas R 353
[2013] TASFC 9
(3) On its proper construction, s 67G of the NDIS Act
captures only documents held by the NDIS provider because of the exercise
performance of a power, function or duty, the carrying out of which is enabled
or mandated (as opposed to merely regulated) by
the NDIS Act. This is consistent
with the purpose of the NDIS Act. The respondent’s construction, which
would result in a blanket
embargo on an NDIS provider being compulsorily
required to produce documents to a court or authority, may undermine some of the
of the NDIS Act: [173]-[174].
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR
[1998] HCA 2
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 91 ALJR 936
Coverdale v West Coast Council
(2016) 259 CLR 164
[2016] HCA 15
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football
(1997) 187 CLR 384
[1997] HCA 2
, considered.
Tasmania v TJG
[2021] TASSC 47
, not followed.
(4) The phrase “duties, powers or functions” as
used in s 67G of the NDIS Act is a composite phrase rather than reference
three distinct subject matters. However, the constructional issue does not
depend on the phrase “duties, powers or functions”
being read as a
composite phrase: [157]-[164].
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
[2003] CA 54;
77 ALJR 1797
XYZ v Commonwealth
(2006) 227 CLR 532
[2006] HCA 25
Sea Shepherd
Australia Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
(2013) 212 FCR 252
[2013] FCAFC
Collector of Customs v Agfa-Gevaert Ltd
(1996) 186 CLR 389
National Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
(2020) 276 FCR 415
[2020] FCAFC 79
Cooper v Owners – Strata Plan No 58068
[2020] NSWCA 250
, considered.
(5) There is nothing extraordinary about the relationship of
confidence between NDIS provider and participant to warrant a different
conclusion as to the proper construction of s 67G of the NDIS Act. Nor is there
textual support for treating the relationship between
participant and service
provider as rendering the latter immune to compulsory production of the records
in question in these proceedings:
: The applicant, the Attorney General for New South Wales, seeks leave
to appeal from a decision of Weinstein J (
Attorney General for NSW v MM (a
pseudonym) by his tutor Barbara Ramjan
[2025] NSWSC 1074
(the primary
judgment)) in which his Honour held that there is an operational inconsistency
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment Forensic
Provisions Act 2020
(NSW) (MHCIFP Act) and
Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth) (NDIS Act) such that, to the
extent of that inconsistency, the NDIS Act must prevail ([81] of the primary
issue had arisen in the course of proceedings under s 123 of the MHCIFP Act in
circumstances where orders had been made under
s 138 of that Act requiring the
production of documents relating to the behaviour or physical or mental
condition of the respondent
by his (now former) registered National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) service provider, Little Blue Wren Services Pty Ltd
LBW produced a limited number of documents in compliance with those
orders (which were marked as a Confidential Exhibit by the primary
were before this Court, separated into eight groups or documents).
respondent contended that those documents had been obtained in contravention of
s 67G of the NDIS Act, which, as set out in due
course, precludes a person
(except for the purposes of the NDIS Act or the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
Royal Commissions Act
)) from being compelled to produce
certain documents or disclose certain information. The documents and information
the subject of
s 67G of the NDIS Act are documents in the possession of a
person “because of the performance or exercise of his or her duties,
functions or powers under [the NDIS Act]” and any matter or thing of which
a person has notice “because of the performance
or exercise of such
duties, functions or powers”.
Honour concluded, at [70], that:
In my opinion, the text and statutory context of s 67G and the broader purposes
of the NDIS Act make it clear that registered NDIS
providers are performing
duties, functions or powers under the NDIS Act in the course of providing the
supports and services for
which they are registered to an NDIS participant. Any
documents possessed because of the performance of those duties, functions and
powers are captured by s 67G of the NDIS Act and are protected from compulsory
production.
Honour proceeded, among other orders, to make the following
declaration:
(1) A declaration that, for the purposes of
Constitution
section 138
Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment
Forensic Provisions Act 2020
(NSW) (MHCIFP Act) is inconsistent with
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth) (NDIS
Act), insofar as
purports to empower a Minister administering the MHCIFP
Act to order a person (compelled person) to produce any document, report
information to the Minister concerning a forensic patient (within the meaning of
the MHCIFP Act) in circumstances where:
(a) the compelled person is a “registered NDIS
provider” under the NDIS Act;
(b) the forensic patient is a participant in the National
Disability Insurance Scheme (within the meaning of the NDIS Act); and
(c) the compelled person has the material sought by the order
because of the person’s exercise of duties or functions as
the registered
NDIS provider of supports for the forensic patient.
in those terms, the declaration in effect assumes that the provision of supports
by a registered NDIS provider involves the
exercise of duties or functions
“under” the NDIS Act (the conclusion his Honour reached at
applicant contends that, on its proper construction, s 67G of the NDIS Act
captures only documents which are held by the NDIS
provider because of the
exercise or performance of a power, function or duty the carrying out of which
is enabled (or enabled and
mandated), as opposed to merely regulated, by the
NDIS Act; and that the documents produced by LBW do not fall within that
applicant seeks leave to appeal on the sole ground of appeal set out in his
draft notice of appeal:
1 The primary judge erred in finding that
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act
(Cth) (NDIS Act) applies to any
document created or possessed by a registered NDIS provider (within the meaning
of the NDIS Act)
in the course of providing services and supports to a
participant in the NDIS.
respondent does not oppose the grant of leave and has filed a draft notice of
contention seeking that the primary judge’s
decision be affirmed on the
following ground:
1 The documents produced under compulsion were held because of
the performance of specific duties imposed on the registered NDIS
provider under
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth), namely:
was and is no dispute between the parties that there is a potential operational
inconsistency between s 67G of the NDIS Act
and s 138 of the MHCIFP Act. Rather,
the dispute is as to the proper scope of the former and the extent to which it
is operationally
inconsistent with the latter
Prior to the hearing at
first instance, the respondent issued a Notice of a Constitutional Matter under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) to the Commonwealth, State and
Territory Attorneys-General, none of whom intervened in the proceedings (the
Attorney General
for New South Wales, as already noted, was joined as a party to
the proceedings and hence not an intervener).
application for leave to appeal was heard on 20 October 2025 concurrently with
the hearing of the appeal in the event that leave
were to be granted. This Court
was asked to deliver reasons with expedition in light of the timeframe for the
ongoing MHCIFP proceedings,
as explained below.
the reasons that follow, leave to appeal will be granted and the appeal
background to the present application can be summarised briefly, as gleaned from
the Joint Statement of Agreed Facts in the primary
proceedings (and set out in
more detail by the primary judge at [5]-[18]).
respondent is an Aboriginal man in his late 50s, residing in West Tamworth in a
property leased from a community housing provider
(see [6] of the primary
judgment). The respondent has a lengthy criminal history, including a number of
offences involving violence,
and a history of non-compliance with court orders
and bail undertakings ([7] of the primary judgment).
respondent has a mild neurocognitive disorder and is an NDIS participant; his
current NDIS plan being due to expire in May 2026.
as already noted, is a registered NDIS service provider. LBW acted as the
respondent’s support coordinator until June 2025.
LBW prepared the
respondent’s current NDIS plan. The respondent now has two NDIS service
providers (only one of which, as we
understand it, is a registered NDIS service
September 2022, the respondent became a forensic patient pursuant to
s 72(1)(b) of the MHCIFP Act following a special hearing conducted
District Court in which a qualified finding of guilt was made as to the
commission by the respondent of an offence of aggravated
sexual assault of a
person under the respondent’s authority contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW). The respondent’s status as a forensic
patient was set to expire on 27 May 2024.
3 November 2023, prior to the expiry of the respondent’s status as a
forensic patient, a conditional release order was made
by the Mental Health
Review Tribunal in respect of the respondent (who had been in custody following
his arrest in respect of the
offence he was found to have committed).
applicant commenced proceedings seeking an order that the respondent’s
status as a forensic patient be extended by 18 months
and, following a
preliminary hearing before Sweeney J, an interim order was made extending that
status for three months to 27 August
Attorney General for New South
Wales v MM (Preliminary)
[2024] NSWSC 599).
On 7 August 2024,
after a final hearing before Dhanji J, the respondent’s status as a
forensic patient was extended for 12
months, expiring on 16 August 2025
Attorney General for New South Wales v MM (a pseudonym) (bht Johnson)
[2024] NSWSC 1030).
16 May 2025, the applicant again filed a summons seeking interim and final
orders extending the respondent’s status as a
forensic patient. An interim
order was made by Ierace J on 31 July 2025, extending the respondent’s
status as a forensic patient
to 15 November 2025 (see
Attorney General for
New South Wales v MM (a pseudonym) (bht Ramjam) (Preliminary)
[2025] NSWSC
It was in the context of the preliminary hearing before Ierace J on 31
July 2025 that the constitutional issue the subject of the
present application
applicant, in his written submissions filed for the preliminary hearing, had
relied on material obtained from LBW pursuant to
orders pursuant to s 138 of the
MHCIFP Act. The respondent, in his submissions, objected to the tender of the
LBW material produced
pursuant to the s 138 orders. Weinstein J (the primary
judge) heard the constitutional issue raised by the respondent’s objection
to the tender of that material on 1 and 4 September 2025.
primary judge held that LBW could not be compelled to produce documents in its
possession concerning the respondent’s behaviour
and mental condition
because s 138 of the MHCIFP Act was inconsistent with the operation of
s 67G(a) of the NDIS Act ([62]-[63] of
the primary judgment).
final hearing of the application pursuant to s 123 of the MHCIFP Act to extend
the respondent’s status as a forensic patient
is listed before a judge in
the Common Law Division for hearing on 7 November 2025. The applicant maintains
that the LBW documents
(the subject of the confidential exhibit before the
primary judge) are relevant to the s 123 application in circumstances where
is disagreement between the court-appointed experts as to whether the
respondent poses a risk of causing serious harm to others if
he ceases to be a
forensic patient (one of those experts, Dr Gordon Elliott, opining, without
having reviewed the LBW records, that
the respondent does pose a risk of causing
serious harm to others if he ceases to be a forensic patient but not being
convinced that
it rises to the level of “unacceptable risk”; that
the combination of forensic patient status and continued NDIS support
most likely means of managing the respondent’s risk; and, while expressing
the difficulty of offering a conclusive opinion
that the least restrictive means
of managing that risk is continued NDIS support alone). If the appeal is
successful, the applicant
wishes to make the LBW documents available to the
expert(s) for review in that context.
the urgency that attends the determination of the present
application.
Leave to appeal
noted above, the respondent does not oppose the grant of appeal. In our view,
leave should be granted. The proposed appeal raises
an issue of the proper
construction of s 67G of the NDIS Act which is of public importance and which
has not been the subject of
appellate consideration.
submitted by the applicant, the effect of the findings of the primary judge is
that a (potentially large) number of documents in
the possession of NDIS
providers will be shielded from the ordinary compulsory production processes of
State criminal investigation,
law enforcement and civil procedure. This was in
effect conceded by Senior Counsel for the respondent in argument before this
though it was submitted that this was explicable by reference to the
“extraordinary relationship” created by the NDIS
Act between
participants and registered NDIS service providers (the respondent more than
once drawing a distinction between exogenous
commercial activity merely
regulated by statute and what the respondent identifies as the legislative
policy encapsulated in the
NDIS Act to “enlist” or
“harness” the private sector to deliver supports for scheme
participants within a
system of registration). The respondent submits that, in
taking steps to “harness” the private sector, the NDIS Act has
created the conditions for a relationship of vulnerability between participants
and providers under the scheme; and says that s 67G
is a designedly broad
provision intended to protect not simply private information but an important
confidential relationship between
registered providers and scheme
participants.
circumstances where there is a clear issue of public importance and we consider
that the decision reached at first instance is
attended by sufficient doubt to
warrant reconsideration, leave will be granted for the
is necessary to set out several of the provisions of the NDIS Act, to which we
were taken during oral submissions by Senior Counsel
for both parties, in some
the outset, we note that the NDIS Act creates a body known as the National
Disability Insurance Agency (Chapter 6), the functions
of which include
“delivering” the Scheme (see the simplified outline in s 8), headed
by a Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
and governed by the Board of the Agency; and,
since amendments were made in 2017, establishes a Commission (the NDIS Quality
Safeguards Commission) and the office of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards
Commissioner (Chapter 6A), the functions of which include
registering and
overseeing the operation of NDIS providers and managing and resolving complaints
objects of the NDIS Act are specified in s 3(1), including:
(a) in conjunction with other laws, give effect to
Australia’s obligations under the Convention on the Rights of Persons
Disabilities done at New York on 13 December 2006 ([2008] ATS 12); and
(c) support the independence and social and economic
participation of people with disability; and
(d) provide reasonable and necessary supports, including early
intervention supports, for participants in the National Disability
Scheme; and
(e) enable people with disability to exercise choice and
control in the pursuit of their goals and the planning and delivery of
supports; and
(g) promote the provision of high quality and innovative
supports that enable people with disability to maximise independent lifestyles
and full inclusion in the community; and
(ga) protect and prevent people with disability from
experiencing harm arising from poor quality or unsafe supports or services
provided under the National Disability Insurance Scheme; and
respondent here emphasises that the provision of supports is itself a statutory
object (not merely the regulation of the provision
of such supports), referring
to sub-s (1)(d).
3(2) provides that the statutory objects are to be achieved by:
(a) providing the foundation for governments to work together
to develop and implement the National Disability Insurance Scheme;
(b) adopting an insurance‑based approach, informed by
actuarial analysis, to the provision and funding of supports for people
with disability; and
(c) establishing a national regulatory framework for persons
and entities who provide supports and services to people with disability,
including certain supports and services provided outside the National Disability
Insurance Scheme.
respondent relies on sub-s (2)(c) as indicating that Parliament’s design
choice was to enlist (or harness) the private sector
to achieve the statutory
objects of the NDIS Act. The applicant also, though in the context of different
submissions, points to the
legislative expectation that supports and services
will be provided both pursuant to and outside the NDIS.
3(3) provides that, in giving effect to the objects of the NDIS Act, regard is
to be had to the matters set out in sub-ss
(b)-(d), including the provision of
services by other agencies, Departments or organisations and the need for
interaction between
the provision of mainstream services and the provision of
supports under the NDIS.
4 (headed “General principles guiding actions under this Act”) sets
out various principles in relation to people
with disability and their families
(see, for example sub-ss (6) and (7)) and includes:
(14) People with disability should be supported to receive
supports outside the National Disability Insurance Scheme, and be assisted
coordinate these supports with the supports provided under the National
Disability Insurance Scheme.
(15) In exercising their right to choice and control, people
with disability require access to a diverse and sustainable market
disability supports in which innovation, quality, continuous improvement,
contemporary best practice and effectiveness in the
provision of those supports
is promoted.
(17) It is the intention of the Parliament that the Ministerial
Council, the Minister, the Board, the CEO, the Commissioner and
any other person
or body is to perform functions and exercise powers under this Act in accordance
with these principles, having regard
to the need to ensure the financial
sustainability of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
respondent here emphasises the recognition of the right to choice and control of
participants to go into the marketplace to obtain
supports and services; and
submits that this is indicative of an intention by the legislature to create the
market for, and the supply
of, services by statutory intervention. The
applicant, on the other hand, points to the reference in sub-s (14) to
co-ordination
of supports both provided under the NDIS and provided outside the
NDIS as going to the regulation of those supports.
sub-s (17) refers only to functions and powers (not duties), the respondent
emphasises that there is recognition in the statute
that other persons and
bodies will perform functions and exercise powers under the NDIS Act (i.e., not
simply service providers).
Insofar as the heading refers to
“actions” under the NDIS Act, the respondent submits that nothing
turns on this for
the construction of s 67G.
8, as adverted to above, sets out a simplified outline of the NDIS Act,
including an articulation of: what the NDIS comprises;
the administrative
provisions supporting the operation of the NDIS; and provision for the
regulation of persons and entities who
provide supports and services to people
with disability “under” the NDIS. (Pausing here, this is in terms a
to “under” the scheme as opposed to under the NDIS Act. We
see this as a significant textual indicator that the “duties,
functions or
powers” referred to in s 67G are those directly imposed or conferred
by the NDIS Act, particularly where the scheme
is defined by reference to the
“arrangements” set out in identified chapters of the NDIS Act (see
below).) Section 8
recognises that a person with a disability may receive
supports or services from registered NDIS providers but also may receive
and services from provider who are not registered.
9 (Definitions) contains definitions of terms used in the NDIS Act, including
definitions of “Agency officer”,
“Commission officer”
and “participant”. The term “National Disability Insurance
Scheme”, as noted
above, is defined as meaning “the arrangements set
out in Chapters 2 and 3”. Chapter 2 of the NDIS Act deals with assistance
(including provision of general supports and funding) to people with disability
who are not participants; chapter 3 deals with the
provision of general
supports, including funding, to or in relation to participants.
amount” is defined as meaning an amount paid “under” the NDIS
in respect of supports (other than general
supports) funded under a
participant’s plan.
term NDIS provider is defined as meaning:
(a) a person (other than the Agency) who receives:
(i) funding under the arrangements set out in Chapter 2; or
(ii) NDIS amounts (other than as a participant); or
(b) a person or entity:
(i) who provides supports or services to people with disability
other than under the National Disability Insurance Scheme; and
(ii) who is prescribed by the National Disability Insurance
Scheme rules for the purposes of this subparagraph.
applicant notes that this defines an NDIS provider by reference (in (a)) to the
receipt of funding, not to the duties, powers
or functions performed or
exercised by that person. We note here that the definition of NDIS provider
again is tied to the scheme,
i.e., the “arrangements” set out in
chapters 2 and 3 of the NDIS Act.
9 also includes definitions of “protected Agency information” and
“protected Commission information”.
“registered NDIS provider” is defined as a person or entity who is
registered under s 73E; and, correspondingly, “registered”
registered under s 73E. One significance of registration is that certain
supports (namely, those for which funding is managed
by the Agency) can only be
provided by registered NDIS providers. There is no prohibition on supports or
services being provided
by unregistered NDIS providers (other than the supports
for which funding is managed by the Agency). This is relevant to note because,
although the present application involves a registered provider (and the
declaration made by the primary judge was in terms confined
to the position of
registered providers), as emphasised by Senior Counsel for the respondent at
AT 31.15, when construing s 67G one
must do so in the context of its
potential operation to NDIS providers other than registered NDIS providers as
well as to registered
NDIS providers (as Senior Counsel for the respondent
3 of the NDIS Act headed “participants and their plans” sets out in
Part 1 the steps to be taken to become a participant
(s 18ff). Part 2 deals with
participants’ plans (s 31 setting out the principles relating to plans, s
32 providing that the
CEO must facilitate the preparation of the
participant’s plan; ss 32D and 33 setting out the matters that must be
in a participant’s plan (the difference being between old
framework plans and new framework plans – the respondent stating
latter is the relevant provision for the purpose of the respondent’s plan;
see AT 34.43; cf AT 35.10)). Subsection
33(6) provides that, to the extent that
the funding for supports under a participant’s plan is managed by the
Agency, the plan
must provide that the supports are to be provided only be a
registered NDIS provider.
3 of Part 2 of Chapter 3 deals with managing the funding for supports
“under” the participant’s plans (reference
here being made by
the respondent to s 42 which sets out the meaning of “managing the funding
for supports”). Section
45 deals with payment of amounts payable under the
NDIS in general and s 45A with payment of amounts where there is
a claim”. Section 45A provides that an amount is not
payable under the NDIS in respect of the acquisition or provision of a
service unless the CEO is satisfied that a claim for payment has been made in
accordance with sub-ss (2), (3) and (5).
subsections specify, relevantly, that: a claim may be made only by the persons
there specified; a claim must be in the approved
form (if any) and include any
information and be accompanied by documents required by the CEO; and the period
within which a claim
must be made. (Section 45A is relied upon by the respondent
in the present case as a specific duty imposed on the registered NDIS
under the NDIA Act because of which the respondent says LBW held each of the
documents produced under compulsion –
see below.)
4, headed “Administration” includes provisions enabling information
to be provided or documents to be produced
at the request of the CEO or the
Commissioner: s 53, a requirement by the CEO in the circumstances specified
requiring information
or documents from a participant or prospective participant
to be provided to the Agency; s 55, a requirement by the CEO to obtain
provision to the Agency of information or documents from other persons; s 55A, a
requirement by the Commissioner that a person
other than a prospective
participant or person receiving support or services from an NDIS provider for
information or documents to
be provided to the Commissioner. In each case, the
heading to the section indicates that this is to ensure the integrity of the
the case of a requirement under ss 55 or 55A, this must be by written notice and
the notice must specify at least 14 days as the
period within which the
information or document is to be given or produced (s 56). It is an offence to
refuse or fail to comply with
a requirement under ss 55 or 55A, without
reasonable excuse (s 57).
2 of Chapter 4, headed “Privacy”, contains provisions dealing with
the protection of information held by the Agency
(Division 1, ss 60-67) and by
the Commission (Division 2, ss 67A-67F). Relevantly, there is provision, despite
s 67G, for the CEO
and the Commissioner to disclose information acquired by
a person in the performance of his or her functions or duties or in the
of his or her power under the NDIS Act in certain circumstances (see ss 66 and
67E). (Although in these sections “functions”
“duties” are coupled together separately from “power”,
this is most likely due to the different nouns
applicable to each (performance
as opposed to exercise).)
3, headed “Information generally” contains the critical provision
for the purposes of the present application
67G provides:
67G Protection of certain documents etc. from production to court etc.
A person must not, except for the purposes of this Act or the
Commissions Act 1902
, be required:
(a) to produce any document in his or her possession because of
the performance or exercise of his or her duties, functions or
powers under this
(b) to disclose any matter or thing of which he or she had
notice because of the performance or exercise of such duties, functions
to a court, tribunal, authority or person that has power to require the
production of documents or the answering of questions.
respondent describes this as a “gap-filling” provision. We refer in
due course to the circumstances in which s 67G
was inserted into the NDIS Act in
2017, which in our view tend against such a description.
3A of Chapter 4 deals with NDIS providers. Division 2 applies only in relation
to registered NDIS providers.
to the requirements for and process of registration, s 73B
73B Requirement to be a registered NDIS provider
(1) The National Disability Insurance Scheme rules may require
that specified classes of supports provided under participants’
to be provided only by persons who are registered under section 73E to
provide those classes of supports.
Note: See also subsections 32D(7) and 33(6), which provide
that, if the funding for supports under a plan is managed by the Agency,
supports are to be provided only by a registered NDIS provider.
(2) A person must not provide a support under a
participant’s plan if:
(a) the National Disability Insurance Scheme rules require the
person to be registered to provide the support under the plan; and
(b) the person is not so registered.
Civil penalty: 250 penalty units.
and s 73C provides:
73C Application to be a registered NDIS provider
(1) A person may apply to the Commissioner to be a registered
NDIS provider in relation to one or more of the following:
(a) the provision of supports or services under the
arrangements set out in Chapter 2;
(b) managing the funding for supports under participants’
(c) the provision of supports under participants’
Note: An unincorporated association or a partnership may also
apply for registration under this section (see section 203).
(2) A person may also apply to the Commissioner to be a
registered NDIS provider in relation to the provision of services or supports
people with disability other than under the National Disability Insurance Scheme
if the person is included in a class of persons
prescribed for the purposes of
subparagraph (b)(ii) of the definition of
(3) The application must:
(a) be in writing; and
(b) be in a form (if any) approved in writing by the
Commissioner; and
(c) include any information, and be accompanied by any
documents, required by the Commissioner.
Note: The Commissioner is not required to make a decision on
the application if this subsection is not complied with (see section
(4) The Commissioner may, by written notice, require an
applicant for registration to give the Commissioner such further information
documents in relation to the application as the Commissioner reasonably
Note: The Commissioner is not required to make a decision on
the application if this subsection is not complied with (see section
(5) A notice under subsection (4) may specify a period,
which must not be less than 14 days, within which the information or documents
must be given.
Withdrawal of application
(6) An applicant for registration may at any time, by writing
to the Commissioner, withdraw the application.
(7) A person’s application is taken to have been
withdrawn if the person’s registration is revoked under section 73P
while that application is pending.
73E (headed Registration as a registered NDIS provider) includes subs
(2) A person may be registered in respect of one or more of the
(a) managing the funding of supports under participants’
(b) providing specified classes of supports under
participants’ plans;
(c) providing specified classes of supports or services under
the arrangements set out in Chapter 2;
(d) providing specified classes of supports or services to
people with disability other than under the National Disability Insurance
73F (the second of the sections relied on in the respondent’s notice of
contention as imposing specific duties on registered
NDIS providers because of
which the documents in this case were in the possession of LBW) sets out a
number of standard conditions
to which registration is subject. Additional
conditions may be imposed under s 73G. Sections 73F-G provide:
73F Registration is subject to conditions
(1) The registration of a person as a registered NDIS provider
is subject to the following conditions:
(a) the conditions set out in subsection (2);
(b) the conditions (if any) imposed by the Commissioner under
section 73G;
(c) the conditions (if any) determined by the National
Disability Insurance Scheme rules under section 73H.
(2) The registration of a person as a registered NDIS provider
is subject to the following conditions:
(a) a condition that the person comply with all applicable
requirements imposed by a law of the Commonwealth or a law of the State
Territory in which the person or entity operates as a registered NDIS
(b) a condition that the person comply with all applicable
requirements of the NDIS Code of Conduct;
(c) a condition that the person comply with all applicable
standards and other requirements of the NDIS Practice Standards;
(d) a condition that the person comply with all applicable
requirements relating to record keeping prescribed by the National Disability
Insurance Scheme rules for the purposes of section 73Q;
(e) a condition that the person implement and maintain the
applicable complaints management and resolution system in accordance
section 73W;
(f) a condition that the person comply with all applicable
requirements relating to complaints prescribed by the National Disability
Insurance Scheme rules for the purposes of section 73X;
(g) a condition that the person implement and maintain the
applicable incident management system in accordance with section 73Y;
(h) a condition that the person comply with all applicable
requirements relating to reportable incidents prescribed by the National
Disability Insurance Scheme rules for the purposes of section 73Z;
(i) a condition that the person give to the Commissioner, on
request, information specified in the request within the period specified
request (which must not be less than 14 days).
73G Conditions specified in certificate of registration
(1) The Commissioner may impose conditions to which the
registration of a person as a registered NDIS provider is subject.
(2) A condition may be imposed at the time of registration, or
at a later time.
Note: Conditions imposed under this section may also be varied
or revoked (see section 73L).
(3) The conditions may include, but are not limited to,
conditions relating to the following matters:
(a) the types of quality audits the provider must undergo;
(b) the timing of such quality audits;
(c) requirements relating to supports or services for which the
provider is registered to provide, including circumstances in which
supports or
services for which the provider is registered can or cannot be provided.
73H allows further conditions to be imposed through the NDIS Rules (of which a
number are here relied upon by the respondent,
as explained in due course).
73J (the third of the statutory provisions specified in the respondent’s
notice of contention) provides that it is an
offence if a person is a registered
NDIS provider and breaches a condition to which the registration is subject.
Section 73J provides:
73J Registered NDIS providers must comply with conditions of
registration
A person contravenes this section if the person:
(a) is a registered NDIS provider; and
(b) breaches a condition to which the registration of the
person is subject.
Civil penalty: 250 penalty units.
73N and 73P provide for the suspension and revocation of the registration of a
registered NDIS provider if, relevantly, the
Commissioner of the NDIS Quality
and Safeguards Commission (the Commissioner) reasonably believes that a person
has contravened,
is contravening, or is proposing to contravene, the NDIS Act.
NDIS providers are subject to s 73Q, which provides:
73Q Record keeping by registered NDIS providers
A registered NDIS provider must keep records of the kind, for the period and in
the form prescribed by the National Disability Insurance
Scheme rules.
Note: Compliance with this section is a condition of
registration (see paragraph 73F(2)(d)), breach of which is a civil penalty
provision (see section 73J).
the applicant accepts that this section imposes an obligation to keep certain
records, the applicant argues that this is imposing
an obligation that a
provider of supports and services is able to do otherwise than
“under” the NDIS Act (the applicant’s
argument being that, for
the purposes of s 67G, a duty, power or function must be something
“enabled” by the NDIS Act
not merely regulated, or dictated to, by
the NDIS Act) (see AT 26.4). The applicant accepts that if “duty”
obligation that arises from or is imposed by the NDIS Act then s 73Q
would be engaged (see AT 25.30) but argues that while the source
obligation to keep records is the NDIS Act, the lack of coherence and other
indicators that Parliament did not expect registered
providers or others to be
covered by s 67G calls for an alternative construction (see AT 27.5). Pausing
here, we note that the respondent
in oral submissions accepted that he could not
point to specific obligations in the NDIS Act requiring the particular records
question to be kept.
applicant points out that non-registered NDIS providers may also be subject to
record-keeping obligations, of different scope,
under s 46(3), which
The National Disability Insurance Scheme rules may make provision for and in
relation to the retention of records by NDIS providers
that receive NDIS amounts
on behalf of participants, including requiring that prescribed records be
retained for a prescribed period.
3 of Part 3A of Chapter 4 then deals with “Quality assurance” and is
not restricted to registered NDIS providers.
73T provides:
73T NDIS Practice Standards
(1) The National Disability Insurance Scheme rules may make
provision for or in relation to standards concerning the quality of
supports or
services to be provided by registered NDIS providers.
Note: Non‑compliance with the NDIS Practice Standards by
registered NDIS providers constitutes a breach of condition of registration
paragraph 73F(2)(c) and section 73J).
(2) Rules made for the purposes of subsection (1) are to
be known as the
NDIS Practice Standards
(3) Without limiting subsection (1), the NDIS Practice
Standards may deal with the following:
(a) standards to be complied with to become a registered NDIS
(b) standards to be complied with to remain a registered NDIS
(c) matters relating to assessing compliance with the
(d) matters relating to the screening of workers employed or
otherwise engaged by registered NDIS providers or of members of the
personnel of registered NDIS providers.
73V then provides for approved quality auditors.
4 of Part 3A, Chapter 4, is headed “NDIS Code of Conduct”. Section
73V provides that NDIS rules may make provision
for a code of conduct that
applies to either or both of NDIS providers (whether registered or not) and
persons employed or otherwise
engaged by NDIS providers or members of the key
personnel of NDIS providers. It is an offence to contravene the NDIS Code of
where applicable:
73V NDIS Code of Conduct
(1) The National Disability Insurance Scheme rules may make
provision for or in relation to a code of conduct that applies to either
of the following:
(a) NDIS providers;
(b) persons employed or otherwise engaged by NDIS providers or
members of the key personnel of NDIS providers.
(2) Rules made for the purposes of subsection (1) are to
be known as the
NDIS Code of Conduct
(3) A person contravenes this section if the person:
(a) is subject to a requirement under the NDIS Code of Conduct;
(b) fails to comply with the requirement.
Civil penalty: 250 penalty units.
applicant points to s 73V as highlighting the difficulty with s 67G in its
application to corporate NDIS providers on the respondent’s
interpretation. The applicant points out that s 67G does not operate where a
person has in his or her possession a document only
by exercise of a duty, power
or function by someone
than that person; and submits that the
respondent’s construction involves an incoherence between the position of
providers (or those who provide services through, say, a partnership
structure) and others.
5, headed “Complaints management and resolution” contains s 73W on
which the respondent’s notice of contention
next relies. Section 73W
73W Complaints management and resolution system—registered NDIS
A registered NDIS provider must implement and maintain a complaints management
and resolution system that:
(a) is appropriate for the size of the provider and for the
classes of supports or services provided by the provider; and
(aa) acknowledges the role of advocates (including independent
advocates) and other representatives of persons with disability;
(ab) provides for cooperation with, and facilitates
arrangements for, advocates (including independent advocates) and other
representatives
of persons with disability who are affected by the complaints
process and who wish to be independently supported in that process
advocate or other representative; and
(b) complies with the requirements (if any) prescribed by the
National Disability Insurance Scheme rules for the purposes of this
Note: Non‑compliance with this section constitutes a
breach of condition of registration (see paragraph 73F(2)(e) and
applicant notes that this is not limited to complaints in relation to funded
services or scheme participants.
6, headed “Incident management – registered NDIS providers”,
includes ss 73Y and 73Z:
73Y Incident management system
A registered NDIS provider must implement and maintain an incident management
system that:
(a) is appropriate for the size of the provider and for the
classes of supports or services provided by the provider; and
(b) complies with the requirements (if any) prescribed by the
National Disability Insurance Scheme rules for the purposes of this
Note: Non‑compliance with this section constitutes a
breach of condition of registration (see paragraph 73F(2)(g) and
73Z Reportable incidents
(1) The National Disability Insurance Scheme rules must
prescribe arrangements relating to registered NDIS providers notifying
managing reportable incidents that occur, or are alleged to have occurred, in
connection with the provision of supports or services
by registered NDIS
providers or in other circumstances prescribed by the National Disability
Insurance Scheme rules.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the National
Disability Insurance Scheme rules may deal with the following matters:
(a) the manner and period within which reportable incidents
must be reported to the Commission;
(b) action that must be taken in relation to reportable
(c) authorising the provision of information relating to
reportable incidents to the Minister, the Agency or other specified bodies;
(d) the matters in which the Commissioner may authorise an
inquiry in relation to a reportable incident, on his or her own initiative.
(3) Without limiting paragraph (2)(b), action may include:
(aa) requiring a registered NDIS provider to provide people
with disability with information regarding the use of an advocate (including
independent advocate) in relation to an investigation into the reportable
incident; and
(a) requiring a registered NDIS provider to arrange for, and
cover the cost of, an independent investigation into the reportable
within a specified period; and
(b) providing a copy of any report of the independent
investigation to the Commissioner.
Reportable incident
(a) the death of a person with disability; or
(b) serious injury to a person with disability; or
(c) abuse or neglect of a person with disability; or
(d) unlawful sexual or physical contact with, or assault of, a
person with disability; or
(e) sexual misconduct committed against, or in the presence of,
a person with disability, including grooming of the person for
sexual activity;
(f) the use of a restrictive practice in relation to a person
with disability, other than where the use is in accordance with an
authorisation
(however described) of a State or Territory in relation to the person.
(5) Despite subsection (4), the National Disability
Insurance Scheme rules may provide as follows:
(a) that a specified act, omission or event is
reportable incident
(b) that a specified act, omission or event is not
reportable incident
respondent’s notice of contention also specifies s 73Y of the NDIS Act as
a duty which engages s 67G in this case.
8, headed “Compliance and enforcement” deals with monitoring powers,
providing that this Part (Part 3A) is subject
to monitoring under Part 2 of the
Regulatory Powers Act. Section 73ZE provides:
73ZE Monitoring powers
Provisions subject to monitoring
(1) This Part is subject to monitoring under Part 2
of the Regulatory Powers Act.
Note: Part 2 of the Regulatory Powers Act creates a
framework for monitoring whether the provisions of this Part have been complied
with. It includes powers of entry and inspection.
Information subject to monitoring
(2) Information given in compliance or purported compliance
with a provision of this Part is subject to monitoring under Part 2
the Regulatory Powers Act.
Note: Part 2 of the Regulatory Powers Act creates a
framework for monitoring whether the information is correct. It includes powers
of entry and inspection.
Authorised applicant, authorised person, issuing officer, relevant chief
executive and relevant court
(3) For the purposes of Part 2 of the Regulatory Powers
Act as it applies in relation to this Part:
(a) an inspector is an authorised applicant; and
(b) an inspector is an authorised person; and
(c) a magistrate is an issuing officer; and
(d) the Commissioner is the relevant chief executive; and
(e) each of the following is a relevant court:
(i) the Federal Court;
(ii) the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2);
(iii) a court of a State or Territory that has jurisdiction in
relation to matters arising under this Act.
Person assisting
(4) An authorised person may be assisted by other persons in
exercising powers or performing functions or duties under Part 2 of
Regulatory Powers Act in relation to this Part.
73ZR provides:
73ZR Appointment of inspectors and investigators
(1) The Commissioner may, in writing, appoint a person who is
one of the following as an inspector, an investigator, or both, for
the purposes
of this Part:
(a) a member of the staff of the Commission under
section 181U;
(b) a person assisting the Commissioner under
section 181W;
(c) a person performing services for the Commonwealth under a
contract with the Commonwealth.
(2) The Commissioner must not appoint a person mentioned in
subsection (1) unless the Commissioner is satisfied that:
(a) the person has suitable training or experience to properly
exercise the powers for which the person will be authorised to use;
(b) the person is otherwise an appropriate person to be
appointed as an inspector, investigator or both (as the case requires).
(3) A person appointed under this section must, in exercising
powers as such, comply with any directions of the Commissioner.
(4) If a direction is given under subsection (3) in
writing, the direction is not a legislative instrument.
to other relevant provisions, we note that the NDIS Act expressly provides for
the “functions” of the CEO of the Agency
(s 159), the Commission
(s 181B); and the Commissioner (s 181E); and that the NDIS Act provides for
other persons to be engaged to
assist the Agency or the Commission, such as:
staff of the Agency (s 169); persons engaged to assist the Agency (s 170);
the Commission (s 181U); consultants to the Agency (s 171) or to the
Commission (s 181V); members of the Board of the Agency (Ch
6, Pt 2) or of
the Independent Advisory Council (Ch 6, Pt 3); inspectors or investigators (s
73ZR); the scheme actuary (s 180A) or
the reviewing actuary (s 180D). The
specification of “functions” in relation to the CEO, Commission and
Commissioner
provides some support for the notion that “functions”
is used in s 67G of the NDIS Act in the context of official or
public functions
rather than in a more generic sense of things that a person may do otherwise
than as required or enabled by the
Amendments in
noted earlier, s 67G of the NDIS Act was not inserted into the NDIS Act until
2017. The predecessor section to s 67G was s 65,
which was contained in Part 2
of Ch 4 of the NDIS Act as initially enacted. Section 65 was in almost
identical terms but did not
include a carve-out referring to the
Commissions Act
Explanatory Memorandum concerning the NDIS Act as initially enacted, stated that
s 60 (“Protection of information held by
the Agency etc.”) was being
enacted because “[a] large amount of personal information will likely be
acquired by the
Agency through the operation of the scheme, and the protection
of that information and a person’s right to privacy is considered
paramount” (Explanatory Memorandum,
National Disability Insurance Scheme
, p 26). Further, it was noted that s 65:
...provides that an officer [though as enacted s 65 used the word
“person”] must not, except for the purposes of this
Act, be required
to produce any document in their possession or disclose any matter or thing they
had or knew because of their performance,
exercise of their duties, functions or
powers under the Act to a court, tribunal, authority or person who has the power
the production of documents or the answering of questions.
67G of the NDIS Act was inserted into the NDIS Act in 2017, at the same time
that the Commission was established (see the
National Disability Insurance
Scheme Amendment (Quality and Safeguards Commission and Other Measures) Act
(Cth) (Amending Act)). These amendments followed an independent review
conducted pursuant to s 208 of the NDIS Act (Explanatory Memorandum,
Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Quality and Safeguards Commission and
Other Measures) Bill 2017
(Amending Act Explanatory Memorandum)). The Outline
at the commencement of the Explanatory Memorandum for the amending bill included
the statement that:
Disability services delivered through other systems, such as health, education
and justice, will continue to be covered by the quality
and safeguarding
arrangements for those systems. Universal complaints and redress mechanisms,
including police, fair trading bodies,
professional and industry bodies,
consumer protection laws and other regulatory and complaints systems will
continue to be available
to both NDIS participants and people with disability
outside the NDIS.
is placed by the applicant on the statement in the above passage as to the
continued availability of universal complaints
and redress mechanisms.
Amending Act established the Commission and the Commissioner. The Amending Act
also effected a restructure of Part 2 of Chapter
4. The provisions contained in
Part 2 of the NDIS Act as initially enacted (ss 60-67) were put into Division 1,
headed “Information
held by the Agency”, and were the subject of
amendments to clarify that they applied only to the Agency. A new Division 2 was
introduced, headed “Information held by the Commission”, and
contained provisions for the protection of information provided
newly-established Commission. Section 65 was repealed and re-enacted as s 67G as
part of the newly-established Division 3,
headed “Information
generally”.
page 13, the Amending Act Explanatory Memorandum said of the then proposed (now)
This is an important protection and discretion which enables people to provide
information to the Commission without fear of it being
used against them in
proceedings which do not relate to the purposes of the Act. The new section does
not prevent a subpoena being
issued to any person who provided the information
to the Commission.
applicant places emphasis on the reference here to “protection and
discretion”. The applicant submits that, unlike
ss 66 and 67E, s 67G does
not in terms confer a discretion. The applicant says that this is because s 67G
is not framed as a secrecy
provision that prevents disclosure (cf the offence
provisions in ss 62 and 67B); rather, it preserves a discretion in the sense
s 67G provides an immunity from being “required” to produce or
disclose. The applicant submits that such an immunity
(untethered to a secrecy
provision and therefore preserving a “discretion” to disclose) is
readily understandable in
relation to Commonwealth officers and other persons
performing public functions under the NDIS Act (such as those referred to at
[75] above) but argues that it is difficult to understand in relation to private
service providers who are regulated under the NDIS
Act. (The respondent cavils
with this.)
Amending Act also substantially amended the system of registration for
providers. Prior to 2017, the registration of providers
was dealt with in Part 3
of Ch 4 (ss 69-73). At that time, the only section concerning the obligations of
registered providers was
s 73, which allowed the NDIS Scheme rules to make
provision in relation to a range of matters, including compliance with
safeguards, and the consequences of a failure to comply with the NDIS
Act. Part 3A moved the registration function from the Agency
newly-established Commission, and introduced new processes for registration and
quality assurance.
Interpretation of s 67G
then to the critical issue for present purposes, the interpretation of
s 67G, the parties’ submissions may be summarised
Applicant’s submissions
already noted above, the applicant’s contention is that, on its proper
construction, s 67G of the NDIS Act captures only
documents which are held
because of the exercise or performance of a power, function or duty the carrying
out of which is enabled
(or enabled and mandated) by the NDIS Act.
this regard, the applicant contends that the obligations imposed on NDIS
providers (whether registered or unregistered) are in
the nature of the
regulation of private entities; regulating or placing conditions on the
provision of particular services but not
conferring statutory powers on
registered providers. The applicant argues that the expectation is that NDIS
providers will be private
entities (referring by way of example to the object in
s 4(15) of the NDIS Act – see above); and that there is a qualitative
difference between the regulation under the NDIS Act of the activities of NDIS
providers and the imposition or conferral of public
duties, functions or powers
conferred on officers and other persons performing a public function under the
NDIS Act (such as the
persons referred to at [75] above).
applicant’s contention is that the qualitative difference between the
exercise of public or administrative functions on
the one hand and the public
funding of persons engaged in private activities on the other is best recognised
by holding that the
former category involves duties, powers or functions which
are enabled, or enabled and mandated, under the NDIS Act. The applicant
that, where that is the case, possession of the documents may be seen to
“derive from the enactment” (referring
by way of analogy to the
approach taken in
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Fuller v Lawrence
(2024) 99 ALJR 103
) at [13], [16], to which we refer in due course).
applicant thus contends that s 67G is engaged by a duty, power or function which
enables a person to do something which the person
could not otherwise do and
which causes the person to possess the protected document or acquire the
protected information.
way of consideration of the text of s 67G, the applicant points to the
potentially broad import of the words “power”,
“function” and “duty”, noting that those are words
capable of different interpretations in different statutory
contexts (referring
Canadian Pacific Tobacco Company Ltd v Stapleton
[1952] HCA 32
(1952) 86 CLR 1
[1952] HCA 32
(per Dixon CJ);
Jordan v Second Commissioner of Taxation
[2019] FCA 1602
ff per White J).
applicant submits that the language of “power” and
“function” under the NDIS Act is not apt to refer to
an activity
that a person can do independently of the NDIS Act. In this sense, the applicant
says that it reflects the distinction
that an entity created by statute, or the
functions of an office created by statute, can only be exercised in the manner
contemplated
by that statute or by some other statute; whereas private
individuals do not derive their powers to act from the NDIS Act and nor
corporations.
the applicant submits that the terms “power”, “function”
and “duty” should not be considered
in isolation; rather, the
applicant contends that the provision uses a composite expression and that
“duty” should be
understood in the same way as “power”
and “function” (i.e., as referring to something that depends on the
legislation to enable it to be done or to have effect); and hence the applicant
argues that something would not be a “duty,
power or function” under
the NDIS Act if the NDIS Act merely regulates or imposes conditions on an
activity in which a private
person or entity could otherwise engage.
is submitted that there are textual factors that support this interpretation,
the applicant pointing to the language of “supports
and services provided
under the arrangements set out in Chapter 2” (including in the definition
of “NDIS provider”
in s 9), which the applicant argues is apt to
capture the overlay of the obligations under the NDIS Act to the pre-existing
of activity of a registered provider (i.e., the provider’s
business), in contrast to that provider exercising or performing
powers, duties
or functions under the NDIS Act. The applicant contrasts reference to the
provision of supports and services “under
the arrangements” set out
in Chapters 2 and 3 of the NDIS Act with the reference to the performance or
exercise of duties,
powers or functions “under the NDIS Act”. The
applicant also places weight on the distinction drawn in the statute between
NDIS (i.e., the Scheme),
which is defined as the arrangements set
out in Chapters 2 and 3, and the NDIS Act itself. The applicant notes that
supports or services
are provided, and amounts are paid, under the
“Scheme” (the applicant referring by way of example to ss 3(1)(ga),
24, 35, 45, 45A).
applicant submits that the words “performance or exercise” in s 67G
suggest that the “powers”, “functions”
“duties” in that section refer to positive actions enabled (or
enabled and compelled) by the NDIS Act, rather than
obligations that require
compliance when exercising a power or capacity which is non-statutory or which
is conferred otherwise than
by the NDIS Act. The applicant contrasts this with s
203, which refers to an “obligation ... imposed” or “a thing
the entity would be permitted to do”, and s 6, which refers to
“meeting obligations under, or for the purposes of”
the NDIS Act.
The applicant argues that this difference in language supports a conclusion that
the word “duties” (as
part of the composite expression
“duties, functions or powers”) in s 67G does not encompass
obligations or activities
that are merely regulated by the NDIS Act.
that regard, the applicant submits that the obligations imposed on registered
NDIS providers go well beyond the circumstances covered
by sub-paragraph 1(c) of
the declaration made by the primary judge (set out at [5] above); that they
would extend to the obligations
to implement complaints management/resolution
systems (s 73W) and incident management and reporting systems (ss 73Y-73Z) and,
consideration is given to obligations that arise under the rules established
for the purposes of the NDIS Act, they would include
obligations under the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Practice Standards — Worker
Screening) Rules 2018 (Cth)
(As will be seen in due course, the
respondent here invokes both ss 73W and 73Y, as well as s 73T and certain of the
obligations under
a number of the NDIS Rules in arguing that s 67G is engaged in
relation to various of the documents here in dispute.)
applicant argues that, if these obligations are covered by s 67G, then its scope
is surprisingly broad (and materially impairs
a great range of State regulatory
and law enforcement activities); and, conversely, if these matters are not
covered, then it follows
that “duties” should not simply be equated
with “obligations”, but should rather be read in a narrower sense
produce a more coherent result. The applicant argues that, once it is accepted
that “duties” should be read in a narrower
sense, there is every
reason to prefer a narrower construction of s 67G of the kind he proposes.
to contextual considerations and the purpose of s 67G, the applicant points to
the objects of the NDIS Act (set out in s 3) and
submits that the NDIS Act seeks
to balance a number of different objectives, including that specified at
s 3(1)(ga), with a range
of different guiding principles. The applicant
refers in particular to the guiding principles set out at s 4(6), s 4(7), s
and to the recognition that the NDIS Act does not exclusively cover any
field of regulation but is intended to supplement existing
legislative regimes
and supports, and to operate concurrently with other Commonwealth and State
regimes (referring by way of example
to ss 3(3) (c)-(d), 4(14)-(15)). As
adverted to above, the applicant emphasises that the Amending Act Explanatory
Memorandum to
the legislation states that “universal complaints and
redress mechanisms” will continue to be available.
applicant says that s 67G provides an immunity from requirements to produce
(documents or information) but no obligation of secrecy,
and has no explicit
carve-out referable to the consent of the disabled person. It is submitted that,
consistent with the stated purpose
in the explanatory memorandum, s 67G is not
primarily concerned with protecting individuals’ privacy (something which
is preserved
in other legislation and by Part 2 as a whole), but is rather
concerned with ensuring that, if information or documents are provided
persons exercising public or administrative functions under the NDIS Act, then
courts, tribunals or other authorities cannot force
their disclosure for
unrelated purposes.
indicated above, the applicant argues that the consequence of the primary
judge’s reasoning (that registered NDIS providers
would be immune from
many of the ordinary investigative processes of State-based litigation and law
enforcement) would materially
impair the protections offered by a range of
State-based regulatory bodies, including in relation to criminal activity,
occupational
health and safety, professional regulation and fair trading.
Insofar as the primary judge considered that this concern would be met
the mechanisms under the NDIS Act for a request to be made to the Commissioner
who might then obtain documents from the provider
(see at [73]-[74]), the
applicant points out that there is no ability to compel production by the
Commissioner, and that this process
can be expected to take time (including
that, pursuant to s 73J(2)(i), a request for information from the registered
NDIS provider
must specify a period for compliance of no less than 14 days). The
applicant submits that this runs counter to the statement in the
Amending Act
Explanatory Memorandum that universal complaints and redress mechanisms would
remain available. The applicant says that
the scope of protective laws enacted
by the States (enforceable through the police, professional regulators,
SafeworkNSW and other
equivalents), are thus materially impaired in respect of
NDIS participants on the primary judge’s construction of the
it is submitted that the primary judge’s reasoning would have the
surprising consequence that NDIS participants would
themselves be precluded from
requiring that they be given access to documents concerning them (for instance,
under privacy law) unless
they persuade the Commissioner to obtain the documents
and disclose them under s 67E. The applicant submits that this would not advance
the objects described above. Noting that, in argument before the primary judge,
the respondent submitted that s 67G does not prevent
consent by the participant
or the participant’s guardian from consenting to disclosure of information
the participant itself disclosing the information (which
the applicant suggests amounts to the proposition that s 67G should be read
so as not to apply to requirements imposed by the NDIS Act on participants) (see
transcript 4/9/25; p 46.7), the applicant submits
that the more coherent and
textual pathway to that outcome is to construe the words “duties,
functions or powers” so
as not to encompass every activity carried out by
a registered NDIS provider.
applicant accepts that the interpretation adopted by the primary judge would
protect the privacy of people with disability but
says that the dignity
of people with disability would be better served through State law
enforcement bodies having the same access to documents and information
registered provider (by, for example, police, or other similar entities) as
those bodies have in respect of any other provider
of social or medical
services. It is submitted that the dignity of people with disability would also
be better served if they could,
when otherwise empowered to do so, compel the
production to them of their own documents. In oral submissions, the respondent
that a partial answer to the applicant’s submission that, on the
respondent’s construction, participants could not compulsorily
their own information may be found in the NDIS Rules, the respondent referring
by way of example to cl 12(2) of the National
Disability Insurance Scheme
(Provider Registration and Practice Standards) Rules 2018 (Cth) (NDIS Provider
Registration and Practice
Standards Rules), which requires registered providers
to ensure that a participant’s information is easily accessible to the
principal (see AT 41.45). Of course, that suffers from the difficulty
(recognised by both parties) of approaching construction of
the legislation by
reference to the NDIS Rules put in place pursuant to the legislation.
applicant argues that the legislature’s desire to balance the competing
interests between participant privacy and other
factors is recognised in
ss 67E(1)(a), (1) (b) (i), (iii) and (iv) and in s 67F.
the applicant points out that the breadth of the interpretation preferred by the
primary judge has the effect that documents
that do not contain any private
information of participants will fall within s 67G. It is noted that s 67G is
not confined to documents
containing the private information of a participant;
it is defined by reference to the performance of duties, functions or powers
under the NDIS Act. So, for example, the applicant argues that an occupational
health and safety investigation seeking documents
concerning the processes and
protocols utilised by a registered provider may be impaired on the basis that
those documents were created
because of the performance or exercise of duties,
functions or powers under the NDIS Act.
Smith v Victoria Police
(2012) 36 VR 97
[2012] VSC 374
Victoria Police
), a broader interpretation of the phrase “the exercise
of functions under this Act” was preferred as better promoting
the objects
and purpose underlying the
Whistleblowers Protection Act
Ferguson J, as her Honour then was, at [55]), the applicant emphasises that
service providers may, but need not be, registered
NDIS providers and the
applicant contends that the narrower construction of s 67G is the more
coherent construction.
to the respondent’s draft notice of contention, the applicant accepts that
there is an available argument that the breadth
of s 67G could be curtailed by
the operation of the words “because of”. However, the applicant
submits that it is not
clear that all, or even the majority, of documents held
by a registered provider would be held because of a duty, power or function
under the NDIS Act. In those circumstances, the applicant says that much would
turn on the particular facts and the circumstances
in which the document was
created and that this makes the respondent’s interpretation unattractive
as it would leave registered
providers or State-based regulators to make a
difficult judgment about precisely which documents would fall within the
prohibition
on compulsory production. (Indeed, the exercise carried out on a
review of the confidential documents the subject of the present
proceedings
would illustrate this.)
the applicant argues that if primacy is given to the factual question of
causation, then whether something fell within s
67G might turn on the evidence
as to why the record was made or kept by the particular provider, which might
lead to inconsistent
outcomes (such as if one provider might be protected by s
67G because s 73Q is the only reason the records are retained, whereas
naturally prudent provider who might keep records regardless of what s 73Q
required might be outside the protection of s
67G). The applicant argues that
the difficulties with this outcome give some weight to the suggestion that s 67G
was not intended
to capture provisions such as s 73Q, and supports the
narrower interpretation of s 67G.
Respondent’s
submissions
oral submissions, the respondent put his case in two ways: first, as reflected
in the draft notice of contention, the more narrow
contention that each of the
confidential documents produced by LBW in answer to the s 138 order was created
by LBW and therefore
in its possession because of the performance by LBW of
record-keeping duties under the NDIS Act; and, second, the broader alternative
contention that, if any of the LBW documents is found not to have been created
in the performance of a statutory duty, they were
created in the performance of
LBW’s ordinary functions and those functions were functions
“under” the NDIS Act.
the principal way in which the argument is put (the issue raised by the notice
of contention), the respondent says it is not necessary
to enter into debate as
to the meaning of “under”. On the alternative way in which the
argument is put, the respondent
accepts that, in a sense LBW, was not exercising
powers conferred directly or immediately on it by the NDIS Act but submits that
the purpose and intent of s 67G requires a broader construction of the word
“under”, extending beyond functions that
are conferred directly or
immediately by the statute.
respondent places much emphasis on the legislative policy of the NDIS scheme
being to “harness” or “enlist”
the private sector to
provide supports and services (an insurance-based approach) and the confidential
nature of the relationship
between providers and participants. As to the latter,
the respondent argues that the content of s 67G includes a concern with privacy,
pointing to the structure of the NDIS Act, in which s 67G (dealing with
information generally) appears after divisions dealing specifically
information held by the Agency and formation held by the Commission. (The
applicant cautions against the making of
assumptions about the
scheme setting up particularly “close” or
“extraordinary” relationships, and then interpreting
the legislation
by reference to those assumptions.)
respondent submits that s 67G is intended to extend beyond the Agency and the
Commission and that this is reinforced by the broad
language of s 67G which
applies to “a person”. The respondent submits that, in a scheme
where providers will hold information
Agency or Commission might hold, the privacy provisions are being dealt with by
s 67G in relation
to those providers; and argues that duties “under”
the NDIS Act must encompass duties imposed not just on officials but
are subject to the NDIS Act.
respondent cavils with the proposition that the NDIS Act simply regulates
private sector entities exercising general law liberties;
rather, the respondent
contends that the scheme is substantially to create that private sector and that
any general law capacity
to provide disability services is, in substantial
respects, extinguished by the NDIS Act and replaced with a conditional
to do so subject to the scheme for registration. (The applicant
rejects the suggestion that the general law capacity to provide disability
services has been extinguished by the NDIS Act and replaced with a conditional
permission to do so.)
respondent argues that the applicant’s construction would undermine a
designedly broad provision intended to protect not
simply private information
but an important confidential relationship between registered providers and NDIS
participants. It is submitted
that this fundamentally differs from “mere
regulation” of exogenous or private commercial activity. In this context,
the respondent refers to various of the provisions relating to registration and
funding of registered providers, as well as the statutory
objects of the NDIS
Act (which have been set out earlier in these reasons).
to the construction of s 67G, the respondent argues that the references to
“duties”, “functions” and “powers”
distinct and that the natural reading of the phrase is a disjunctive one
intended to capture the variety of activities under
the NDIS Act. The respondent
submits that the words should not be read together as a composite expression
because “duty”
and “power” point to distinct concepts.
The respondent argues that the components of the expression “duties,
or functions” cannot be read
ejusdem generis
if they do not
express a common genus.
respondent says that “duties”, especially when read with the
reference to “any person” in s 67G, is broad
enough to encompass
obligations owed by any person by reason of the NDIS Act; and that it extends,
in its ordinary and natural meaning,
to the many obligations to which registered
providers are subject including record-keeping and incident reporting
obligations.
to the concept of “functions”, the respondent submits that this is a
broad concept and that, in characterising a provider’s
“functions” under the NDIS Act, one may look to the ordinary
conceptions of the “role” that a provider performs
(referring by way
of example to the approach adopted in
Smith v Victoria Police
“functions” of the Commissioner in that case – see at [47];
[50]). In that regard, the respondent says
that the role of a registered
provider under the NDIS Act is to deliver supports in a manner governed by the
NDIS scheme. The respondent
argues that, when a private provider is providing
the supports for which it has been registered in a manner governed by the NDIS
scheme, that provider is performing functions within the meaning of s 67G.
to the meaning of “under” in the phrase “under the NDIS
Act”, the respondent says that this is both protean
and largely
functional. The respondent argues that the effect of the applicant’s
construction is to read the word “under”
as “conferred or
imposed by” in a narrow sense and says that there is nothing in the text,
policy or function of s 67G
to warrant such a narrow construction (cf,
parte Zietsch; Re Craig
[1944] NSWStRp 29
(1944) 44 SR (NSW) 360).
The respondent submits
that, given the remedial policy of protecting the privacy of participants (which
underpins Pt 2, Ch 4 of the
NDIS Act), the word “under” should be
given the breadth it naturally admits.
respondent submits that private registered providers are not performing
functions outside the NDIS Act; rather, that the NDIS
Act has created a new
statutory species of professional activity. The respondent argues that
providers who are registered under
an Act and who, by rendering scheme services
are exercising a permission given to them by the NDIS Act, are readily seen to
be performing
functions “under” that Act.
respondent says that the NDIS Act itself describes the functions of registered
providers as functions “under” the
NDIS Act, referring to s 4, which
refers to general principles guiding “actions under this Act”; and
to references in
the NDIS Act to supports provided “under” the NDIS
(s 4(14)) and to services “provided under” the scheme
(ss 3(1)(ga)
and 181E(a)). The respondent also refers to s 4(17), which he says makes
clear that the principles are to be observed
not only by identified public
institutions, but also by “any other person or body” performing
functions under the NDIS
respondent argues that, to exclude registered providers from the scope of s 67G
and to limit the provision to public bodies on
whom the NDIS Act directly
confers public power, would be inconsistent with Parliament’s choice to
extend s 67G to “any
person” (and submits in effect that had
Parliament chosen to restrict immunity in that way it could have done so
referring to the
Student Assistance Act 1973
Child Care Act 1972
(In reply submissions, the applicant
contends that the exclusion of registered providers from the operation of
s 67G is not inconsistent
with the language of “any person” in
s 67G having regard to the context of s 67G and its legislative history.
The applicant
points out that the protections in Divisions 1 and 2 of
concern disclosure; and that they are silent concerning compulsory processes; in
contrast to which s 67G limits the circumstances
in which compulsory
production of information may be required. The applicant maintains that s 67G
applies to Agency and Commission
officers, as defined under the NDIS Act, and
also, for example, to consultants (ss 171, 181V) and inspectors or investigators
under the NDIS Act (who may include third party contractors –
see s 73ZR).)
respondent also submits that the applicant’s construction does not cohere
with the structure of Pt 2 of Ch 4 of the NDIS
Act, of which the respondent says
s 67G forms an important “gap-filling” part. The respondent
says that, on the applicant’s
view, only the Agency, the Commission and
its staff would be made non-compellable because only they would be exercising
powers directly
“under” the NDIS Act. The respondent argues that s
67G must be given some other work to do.
respondent submits that the broader construction for which he contends is
supported by the conclusion reached by Pearce J in
Tasmania v TJG
Tasmania v TJG
), in an ex tempore judgment, that a registered
NDIS provider was performing its functions “under” the NDIS Act when
had in its possession documents relating to the services it was giving
participants as a registered provider. The applicant notes
Honour’s reasons included that s 67G must be referring to persons
other than the Agency and Commission and its ancillary
offices, and that a
registered provider’s function of providing supports is a function under
the NDIS Act (see at [15]).
to the purpose of s 67G, the respondent argues that this favours his
construction. Insofar as the applicant suggests that s 67G
protects only
documents in the custody of government agents empowered directly by the statute,
such as the Commission, the Agency
and its officers, the respondent argues that
the kind of enquiry made in the judicial review context (see
whether an administrative action is undertaken pursuant to a direct source of
statutory power is not a relevant enquiry in
the context of a scheme, such as
Part 2 of Chapter 4 of the NDIS Act, designed to protect the
“privacy” of scheme participants
(that being one of the purposes of
the NDIS Act outlined in s 4). In this context, the respondent refers to
the requirement as a
condition of registration that “respect the privacy
of people with a disability” (referring to r 6 of the National
Insurance Scheme (Code of Conduct) Rules 2018 (Cth) (Code of Conduct
Rules)). (In reply submissions, the applicant says that even
permissible here to use the rules to construe the NDIS Act, r 6 of the Code
of Conduct Rules
does not address the concerns raised by the applicant.
The applicant notes that r 6 also requires that a person to whom the Code
Conduct Rules applies “promptly take steps to raise and act on concerns
of supports and services
provided to people with disability” and says that there may be
circumstances in which these obligations
come into conflict (for example, where
disclosure of private information may be required to raise a concern about a
service provided
to a person with disability). The applicant submits that
facilitating law enforcement and professional regulation is entirely consistent
with respecting an individual’s privacy.)
respondent accepts that providers would not be prohibited by s 67G from
making a voluntary disclosure of participants’ information
but says that
any voluntary disclosure would be constrained significantly by the obligation to
“respect the privacy of people
with a disability” as a condition of
registration; and that this does not point against a characterisation of s
purpose as the protection of participants’ privacy. Nor, the
respondent argues, is this characterisation of purpose undermined
by the effect
of the primary judge’s construction being to preclude participants from
compelling the production of their own
information. (The applicant, to the
contrary, argues that the fact that a participant cannot compel production of
records concerning
services provided to them is an indicator of the incoherence
created by the broad interpretation, the applicant noting that the secrecy
protections in Div 1 and Div 2 of Part 2 expressly contain exceptions referable
to the consent of the participant.)
respondent accepts that s 67G does not fix upon information having any necessary
quality of confidentiality but the respondent
argues that the point of s
67G’s protection of privacy is to ensure the privacy of the relationship
set up by the NDIS Act
between providers and participants (by preventing any
coercive interference with that relationship irrespective of the contents of
document in question). The respondent says that anything less would
“predictably diminish public confidence” in
the sanctity of that
relationship (referring to
Piras v Thaisawat
(1993) 115 FLR 79
The respondent says that it is that confidence or expectation that underpins
disabled persons’ choice to participate
in the scheme and entrust
information to providers. (In reply submissions, the applicant notes that the
respondent has not pointed
to any part of the NDIS Act or extrinsic materials to
support the proposition that s 67G is intended to ensure the privacy or
of the relationship
between registered providers and
participants. The applicant also notes that there are many relationships
recognised in general and
statute law as requiring significant protection: for
example, the relationship between medical practitioners or lawyers and their
clients; and says that it would be startling if the legislature had intended
that that the logistical step of having funds managed
through the Agency should
have as its consequence that certain documents would be immune from law
enforcement and professional regulators.
The applicant also says that that
would create a discrepancy between people with disability whose funds are
managed in this way,
and those whose funds are not.)
respondent dismisses the concerns raised by the applicant as to the consequences
of the primary judge’s construction (such
as the ability of State
regulatory bodies being impaired in the exercise of their statutory
investigative powers) as being exaggerated.
The respondent says that the NDIS
Act already prescribes a mechanism for State regulatory authorities to receive
information about
NDIS participants (referring, among other things, to the
requirement for notification to the Agency of “reportable incidents”
– see s 73Z; and to the provisions under which the Commission may
require the provision of documents – see ss 55A, 73F(2)(b),
181F(c) of the
NDIS Act; NDIS Code of Conduct, r 3). The respondent also refers to the receipt
by the Commission of participant
information by the regular audits that must be
conducted under r 13B(6) of the NDIS Provider Registration and Practice
Rules; and to the provisions which empower the CEO of the Agency and
the Commission, respectively to disclose requested documents
to any person if
“satisfied on reasonable grounds that it is in the public interest to do
so” and to heads of a State
or Territory department (ss 66(1)(a),
66(1)(b)(v) and 67E).
respondent argues that the Parliament has decided that the best way of balancing
participants’ rights to privacy with competing
regulatory goals is for the
Agency and the Commission, rather than NDIS providers, to act as the
“gatekeepers” to NDIS
information; and says that, even if the proper
construction of s 67G has the consequence the applicant foreshadows, this is
a consequence of Commonwealth provisions giving immunities to persons
entrusted with the execution of important public functions.
to the applicant’s reference to the statement in the Amending Act
Explanatory Memorandum as to the continued availability
of universal complaints
and redress mechanisms, the respondent says that those will continue to be
available; and that, to the extent
the respondent’s construction impinges
on the unfettered conduct of those complaints systems, that is consistent with
the NDIS Act already achieves elsewhere (referring to s 58 and Pt 2
generally). (In reply submissions, the applicant accepts that
interpretation favoured by the respondent does not render unavailable the
universal complaint and redress mechanisms referred
to in the extrinsic
materials, but he contends that this interpretation materially impairs the
effectiveness of those mechanisms
as regards a particular class of scheme
participants (who, since their funding is managed by the Agency, might be
expected to be
among the more vulnerable participants).)
the extent that s 67G may “materially impair” regulatory aims under
State provisions, the respondent argues that this
is simply the consequence of a
Parliament according more weight to privacy in certain sensitive relationships
than some forensic
benefits that might have been expedient in litigation; and
that, if this be “extraordinary”, it is because the NDIS Act
and organises an “extraordinary” relationship between registered
providers and participants in the scheme.
Determination
noted above, in oral submissions, Senior Counsel for the respondent made clear
that the primary way in which he puts the respondent’s
case on the
construction argument is that contended for in the draft notice of contention,
namely that the documents held and produced
by LBW in compliance with the
s 138 orders are documents held or in the possession of the registered
service provider (LBW) in the
performance or exercise of its duties under the
NDIS Act. Those statutory duties, as identified in the notice of contention, are
(as indicated earlier) those said to be imposed by: s 45A (as to the making of
payment claims); s 73F (which provides that registration
is subject to
conditions); s 73W (which requires registered NDIS providers to implement and
maintain a complaints management and
resolution system); s 73Y (which requires
registered NDIS providers to implement and maintain an incident management
system); and
s 73Z (which provides for NDIS rules to prescribe arrangements
relating to registered NDIS providers in relation to reportable incidents).
is convenient therefore to deal first with that, more narrow contention, and to
do so by reference to the documents contained in
the confidential exhibit. For
obvious reasons, they will be referred to without revealing the contents
thereof. Having reviewed those
documents, we do not accept that those documents
can be said to be held or in the possession of LBW in the performance or
of “duties” under the NDIS Act.
– Support Coordination Implementation report
1 appears to be a completed Agency template form headed “Support
coordination – implementation report”
in relation to the respondent.
It is dated 13 June 2024. The respondent says that LBW would not have completed
the form if it were
not a registered provider. That much may readily be accepted
but it says nothing as to whether the document is held or in LBW’s
possession because of the performance or exercise by it of a duty under the NDIS
respondent, in its Aide-Memoire on the Notice of Contention, identifies the
following statutory “duties” as those
relied upon by him to engage s
67G of the NDIS Act in respect of this document: first, s 45A of the NDIS Act
(payment claims) and,
second, s 73T of the NDIS Act (by reference to Schedule 1,
cl 19(2) of the Registration/Practice Standards Rules).
2 – Support plan
2 is a Support Plan dated 29 July 2024 on LBW letterhead.
respondent again identifies s 45A of the NDIS Act (payment claims) and
s 73T of the NDIS Act (by reference to the NDIS Provider
Registration and
Practice Standards Rules, Sch 1, cl 19(2)) as the statutory duties that engage s
67G of the NDIS Act in respect
of this document.
applicant says that the preparation of a support plan is not referable to any
power, function or duty under the NDIS Act, the
NDIS Rules, or LBW’s
conditions of registration. Further, the applicant says that the existence of
this type of document (which
he says may well be prepared irrespective of
whether a person is a NDIS participant whose funding is managed through the
NDIA) illustrates
the difficulty with the respondent’s focus on the
question of factual causation.
Documents 3 and 4 – LBW
3 is a document on LBW letterhead with the heading “ABC Data Sheet”
and dated 17 October 2024. Document 4 is
a similar document but dated 21 October
2024. The documents appear to be based on a template which contains headings
including “Behaviours
Concern” (under which there are a succession
of boxes to be selected by the person completing the form), Reasons and
relation to both of those forms, the respondent identifies s 45A of the NDIS Act
(payment claims) and s 73Y of the NDIS Act (by
reference to the National
Disability Insurance Scheme (Incident Management and Reportable Incidents) Rules
2018 (Cth) (NDIS Incident
Management Rules)), s 12(2), (4) as the statutory
“duties engaging s 67G of the NDIS Act.
applicant says that these two reports are not records required to be kept by
operation of the conditions of LBW’s registration
(s 73F(2)(g)), the
incident management system set up under s 73Y, or the NDIS Incident Management
Rules, noting (correctly, having
regard to our review of the content of these
reports) that these reports do not describe a reportable incident
within the meaning of s 73Z(4) or the NDIS Rules. The applicant also
says that a prudent service provider could be expected to prepare
and maintain
documents of this kind regardless of the obligations under the NDIS
Documents 5-8 – Case and Progress Notes
documents contain a variety of case and progress notes.
5 comprises Support Worker Progress Notes dated 25 September and 17 October
respondent identifies s 45A of the NDIS Act (payment claims) (noting that these
include time records) and s 73Y of the NDIS Act
(by reference to the NDIS
Incident Management Rules), s 12(2), (4) as engaging s 67G of the NDIS Act in
respect of this document.
6 is a case note dated 29 October 2024.
respondent identifies s 45A of the NDIS Act (payment claims), again noting the
inclusion of time records, s 73T of the NDIS Act
(by reference to the NDIS
Provider Registration and Practice Standards Rules, Sched 1, cl 10) and s 73W of
the NDIS Act (by reference
to the National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Complaints Management and Resolution) Rules 2018 (Cth) (NDIS Complaints
Management and
Resolution Rules) s 10(2)-(3)) as here engaging s 67G of the
7 comprises case notes from dates ranging from 30 April 2025 to 22 May
respondent again identifies s 45A of the NDIS Act (payment claims), again noting
the inclusion of time records, s 73T of the NDIS
Act (by reference to the NDIS
Provider Registration and Practice Standards Rules, Sched 1, cl 10) and s
73W of the NDIS Act (by reference
to the NDIS Complaints Management and
Resolution Rules s 10(2)-(3)) as engaging s 67G of the NDIS Act.
8 contains notes headed “Incident notes” with dates ranging from 24
January 2025 to 19 February 2025.
respondent identifies s 45A of the NDIS Act (payment claims), again noting the
inclusion of time records, s 73Y of the NDIS Act
(by reference to the NDIS
Incident Management Rules), s 12(2) and (4) as engaging s 67G of the NDIS
applicant says that each of the above documents comprises case or progress notes
completed by employees of LBW. The applicant
says that these are not records
required to be kept by operation of the conditions of LBW’s registration
(s 73F(2)(g)), the
incident management system set up under s 73Y, or the
Incident Management Rules, noting correctly that the notes do not describe
reportable incident
within the meaning of s 73Z(4) or the
particular, the applicant says that the use of the word “incident”
does not necessarily indicate that a note or record
refers to a reportable
incident, nor can it be inferred that the note or record was created or retained
due to the requirements of
s 73Y; and the applicant says that a prudent service
provider could be expected to prepare and maintain documents of this kind
of the obligations under the NDIS Act.
these documents as a whole, insofar as the respondent relies upon s 45A as
imposing a duty because of which the above documents
were in the possession of
LBW, we consider that the suggestion that there is a “duty” under
the NDIS Act to make a claim
for payment is artificial. There is no
“duty” to make a claim for payment. Service providers might well
choose to provide
support services to persons with disabilities on a voluntary
basis (and one would expect many charities to do so, for example). Section
simply means that if a “payment claim” is to be made it must be
accompanied by certain documents.
to the reliance by the respondent on s 73T of the NDIS Act (for Documents 1 and
2), we do not consider that those documents were
prepared or kept under a
statutory duty to do so. Indeed, we note that the respondent accepts that he
does not rely in his aide-memoire
addressing the eight confidential documents or
groups of documents on s 73Q (the record-keeping provision) for the reason that
has not found a rule specifically referring to s 73Q as being record-keeping
rules (in other words, as we understand it, no specific
rule relating to the
record-keeping obligation in s 73Q of the NDIS Act) (see AT 45.48). The only
rules apparently made under s 73Q
relate to worker selection, and those are not
relevant to this appeal.
to the reliance by the respondent, in relation to the various case and progress
notes, on provisions of the NDIS Act requiring
registered providers to implement
and maintain various systems in relation to complaints and incident management,
none of Documents
5-8 record a reportable incident (within the meaning of s
73Z(4)) and some (the documents in Document 5, 7 and 8 for example) expressly
record that there are no behaviours of concern or that this item is not
applicable. The NDIS Act provides that NDIS rules may make
provision for
standards (s 73T, under Division 3 Quality assurance) and a Code of Conduct (s
73V, Division 4) and that failure to
comply with a requirement under an
applicable Code of Conduct is an offence. The NDIS Act does not directly impose
an obligation
(or duty) to comply with those rules.
to s 73W and s 73Y, it is certainly the case that registered providers are
obliged to implement and maintain a complaints management
and resolution system
and an incidental management system, respectively. However, the source of any
duty on the part of a registered
provider to keep records as part of the
maintenance of such systems derived from the NDIS Rules, not from the NDIS Act
do not accept that any of the documents in question are precluded from
compulsory production pursuant to s 67G of the NDIS Act
on the proper
construction of that section (on the assumption that one is focusing simply on
the “duties” aspect of that
provision).
to the alternative (broader) way in which the respondent’s argument is
put, namely the argument that s 67G covers all
documents prepared or held
by registered service providers (whether or not they contain personal
information relating to the participant)
in the performance or exercise of their
duties, powers or functions (each considered separately) under the NDIS Act; and
is no distinction between what might be described as
“public” duties, powers or functions and those that might be
or exercised by a private service provider (registered or otherwise),
we make the following observations.
principles applicable when construing statutory provision were not in dispute
and are well known (see, for example,
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 262 CLR 362
per Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ at [14]).
begins with a consideration of the text but the statutory text must be
considered in its context, that context including legislative
history and
extrinsic materials (see, for example, the approach adopted in
Coverdale v
West Coast Council
(2016) 259 CLR 164
[2016] HCA 15)
, and having regard to
the purpose of the legislation or the mischief it was intended to address (see,
for example,
CIC Insurance Ltd
v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
[1997] HCA 2
, per Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and
Gummow JJ at 408).
consideration of the text requires attention not only to the phrase
“duties, powers and functions” but also to the
“under” the NDIS Act. There is no dispute that “because
of” introduces a causal connection between
the holding of the documents of
information and the performance or exercise of duties, powers and functions
under the NDIS Act (although
the applicant has pointed to the difficulties of
factual causation that are occasioned by a broad construction of s 67G).
have concluded that, as the applicant submits, the phrase “duties, powers
and functions” is used in s 67G of the NDIS
Act in a composite sense
rather than as referring to three distinct subject matters.
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
(2003) 77 ALJR 1797
, the meaning of “composite expression” was explained by the
High Court at [34] as being “one which is a compound
created out of at
least two elements or integers which is different from each of them”. In
XYZ v Commonwealth
(2006) 227 CLR 532
[2006] HCA 25
, Gleeson CJ
cautioned that there “are many instances where it is misleading to
construe a composite phrase simply by combining
the dictionary meanings of its
component parts” and, similarly, in
Sea Shepherd Australia Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2013) 212 FCR 252
[2013] FCAFC 68
J said that “[t]he task is not to pull apart a provision, or composite
phrase within a provision, into its constituent
words, select one meaning,
divorced from the context in which it appears, and then reassemble the
provision”.
Collector of Customs v Agfa-Gevaert Ltd
(1996) 186 CLR 389
, the High Court accepted that, in determining the meaning of a composite
phrase, one may have regard to both the ordinary and technical
meanings of the
individual words comprising a compound phrase for the purpose of determining the
phrase’s unique meaning.
National Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
(2020) 276 FCR 415
, the Full Court of the Federal Court (Flick, Mortimer and Banks-Smith
JJ), when construing the meaning of “reasonable and necessary
supports” in the NDIS Act, said that “each limb of the phrase should
be given work to do” (at [149]) but went on
to observe (at [150]) that
“[b]oth adjectives qualify the noun “support”, but they do so
as a composite phrase.
It is not fruitful to split them off and consider
them separately, just as it is neither fruitful nor appropriate to attempt any
exhaustive or authoritative judicial definition of them”.
fact that the word “or” as opposed to “and” appears in
the expression “duties, powers or functions”
does not preclude this
being construed as a composite phrase. In
Cooper v Owners – Strata
Plan No 58068
(2020) 103 NSWLR 160
[2020] NSWCA 250
, Basten JA
described a strata by-law prohibiting “harsh, unconscionable or
oppressive” by-laws as “a ‘triune’,
three words
conveying a single criterion”.
the NDIS Act, various provisions refer specifically to “duties” of
particular persons (see, for example, ss 80, 180B
and 180E) and others to
“functions” of particular persons (see ss 118, 123, 159 and 181B).
Further, in other sections
of the NDIS Act, “functions or duties”
are referred to separately to “exercise of powers” (see ss 66(1)(a),
67E(1)(a), 73ZE and 73ZF). This suggests that, when adopting the expression
“duties, powers and functions”, the legislature
was indeed adopting
a composite expression in s 67G.
said, the applicant submits that his argument as to the construction of
s 67G does not depend on the phrase “duties, powers
functions” being read as a composite phrase. Rather, the applicant
emphasises the incoherence of a construction which encompasses
activities of
private NDIS providers not exercising or performing public duties, powers or
to the meaning of “under”, we consider that this is informed in the
NDIS Act by the fact that it is used in different
expressions:
“under” participant’s plans; under the Scheme (which itself is
defined as the “arrangements”
in Chapters 2 and 3); and under the
NDIS Act. That textual indication suggests that focus here should be on whether
the duty, power
or function (whether considered in a composite or individual
sense) is being performed or exercised pursuant to some statutory obligation
requirement or enabling provision derived from the NDIS Act itself, as opposed,
say, to fulfilling a condition of registration
or requirement contained in a
participant’s plan or simply performing functions as a registered
provider. Certainly, it is
a requirement that access providers be registered in
order to supply certain support servers (i.e., those for which funding managed
by the Agency is received). But that does not make the process of registration,
or the forms required to be prepared in an applying
for registration, or the
provision of supports by registered providers, the performance and exercise of a
duty, power or function
under the NDIS Act.
noted earlier, the applicant refers in this context to the decision of the High
(and see also
NEAT Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB
(2003) 216 CLR 277
[2003] HCA 35
, Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ held at [89] that two criteria must
be satisfied for a decision to be made “under” an
enactment within
the meaning of the ADJR Act: first, the decision must be expressly or impliedly
required or authorised by the enactment;
second, the decision must itself
confer, alter or otherwise affect legal rights or obligations, and in that sense
derive from the
enactment. A similar approach was taken by Gleeson CJ, who
identified the question as whether the decision “took its legal
effect from statute”. At [18], the Chief Justice approved the following
quote from Davies AJA in
Scharrer v New South Wales
(2001) 53 NSWLR 299
[2001] NSWCA 360:
77 The crux of the issue in each case is whether the enactment
has played a relevant part in affecting or effecting rights or obligations.
grant of authority to do that which under the general law a person has authority
to do is not regarded as sufficient.
decision in
was recently considered by five members of the High
. At [11]-[16] of the joint judgment, the approach of
Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ was discussed and elaborated upon as follows
(citations omitted):
11 The joint reasons of Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ reviewed
the existing case law on the meaning of the expression “a
decision of an
administrative character made ... under an enactment” in the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) (“the
AD(JR) Act”), upon which the Review Act is substantially based. The
plurality described the expression “made
... under an enactment” as
involving a question of “characterisation of the particular outcome”
which founds an
application for review under the statute (in the context of the
Review Act, an application for a statutory order of review).
12 The plurality rejected a construction of s 4(a) turning
upon the identification of the “immediate” or
“proximate”
source of power to make the relevant decision as
deflecting attention from the interpretation of the Review Act (and the AD(JR)
in the light of legislative subject, scope and purpose. They also rejected
a construction turning upon the “true lawful source”
of the power to
make the decision. Their Honours identified cases in which a decision, required
or authorised by an enactment, is
nevertheless not “made under” that
enactment. These included where the decision derived its capacity to bind from
or some other private law source; where a decision to vote at a
creditors meeting was not given statutory effect by the sections
relied upon and
only affected legal rights because of the cumulative effect of votes later cast;
and where the power to make the
decision was not sourced in a relevant statute,
even though the decision, once made, had a critical effect for the operation of
13 The plurality concluded that the determination of whether a
decision is “made ... under an enactment” involves the
following two
criteria: first, the decision must be expressly or impliedly required or
authorised by the enactment; and, secondly,
the decision must itself confer,
alter or otherwise affect legal rights or obligations, and in that sense the
decision must derive
from the enactment.
14 As to the first criterion, the plurality found that the
decisions were authorised by the
University Act
, as the decision-making
committees depended for their existence and powers upon the delegation by the
council of the university under
provisions of the University Act. However, as to
the second criterion: the decisions did not affect legal rights and obligations;
the decisions had no impact upon matters to which the University Act gave legal
force and effect; and Ms Tang enjoyed no relevant
legal rights and the
university had no obligations under the University Act with respect to the
course of action the latter adopted
towards the former. There were no legal
rights and obligations under private law which were capable of being affected by
the relevant
decisions. A consensual relationship had been brought to an end,
but no decision was made by the university “under” the
15 The criteria stated by the plurality in
determining whether a decision of an administrative character is “made ...
under an enactment” have been applied
by numerous Australian courts in
construing statutory judicial review regimes. Neither party to this appeal
sought to challenge the
criteria” as necessary for
a finding that the Direction Decision was made under an enactment —
namely, the DPSO Act —
within the meaning of the Review Act.
16 The second
criterion, that the decision must
itself confer, alter or otherwise affect legal rights or obligations, and in
that sense the decision
must derive from the enactment, coheres with the
observation of Mason CJ (with whom Brennan J agreed and Deane J agreed on this
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
”) that a decision “on a matter of substance for
which the statute provided as an essential preliminary to the making
ultimate decision” was reviewable under the AD(JR) Act. It also coheres
with the observation of Toohey and Gaudron JJ
that, if an
enactment requires that a particular finding be made as a condition precedent to
the exercise of or refusal to exercise
a substantive power (in that case a
decision to suspend or cancel a commercial broadcasting licence), a finding that
satisfies the
condition precedent is “readily characterized as a decision
‘under an enactment’”.
was whether a direction given by a corrective services
officer to a prisoner under
s 16(1)(db)
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual
Offenders) Act 2003
(Qld) (DPSO Act) was a decision “made ... under an
enactment” within the meaning of the
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld), such that the recipient was entitled to a statement of reasons under
of the latter Act. The parties accepted that s 16(1)(db) of the DPSO Act
expressly or impliedly authorised the direction to be given.
The question was
whether the second
criterion was satisfied. The High Court held
that it was, emphasising that the source of the obligation to comply with the
was the DPSO Act. The fact the direction depended for its efficacy on
the making of a supervision order by a court did not alter
this conclusion (see
at [20]-[24]).
Court has recently emphasised the caution to be used in relying on the reasoning
and other cases decided in different statutory contexts (see
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Uber Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA
), which considered the use of “under” in
Payroll Tax Act 2007
(NSW), which refers to “a contract
under which a person ... has supplied to [the person] ... services”, at
[83]-[88]).
To similar effect is the statement by the Queensland Court of Appeal
Stone v Guli
[2020] QCA 288
per Davis J (McMurdo and Mullins
JJA agreeing).
King v Director of Housing
(2013) 23 Tas R 353
[2013] TASFC 9
cited with apparent approval by the High Court in
at [15] fn 24),
the question was whether decisions taken by the State Director of Housing,
pursuant to the
(Tas) to give a tenant notice that her
lease would not be extended or renewed and that she was required to vacate the
rented premises
were made under an enactment for the purposes of the
Review Act 2000
(Tas). Porter J (Tennent and Wood JJ agreeing) held that
they were not, reasoning as follows (emphasis as per original):
63 I have set all of this out to show that it is abundantly
clear that for a decision to be one under an enactment, it must be
more than the
exercise of a public power which affects legal rights in some way. The decision
must be more than one expressly or
impliedly authorised by the statute. The
meaning of the second criterion of the plurality in
is plain. To use
the description given in
Judicial Review of
Administrative Action
(5th ed, 2013), at 93 [2.550], “ ... the
decision must make a present or contingent difference in the realm of legal
or obligations,
it must do this
because of the force it
derives from the relevant enactment
64 In my view, that is where the appellant fails. Whilst the
authority for the Director to act in the way he did comes from the
], the force or effect of the decisions does not. The decisions derived
their force from the contractual relationship between the
parties, as that
relationship is governed by the [
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
]. The lease
agreement provided for an expiry date. A decision not to extend or renew the
lease beyond that expiry date has force
because of the ordinary relationship
between parties in that position. The service of the notice to vacate is to be
treated in the
same way. The decision derives its force from the relationship as
governed by the [
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
]. As the primary judge
said, the decision to serve the notice to vacate was a decision that any
landlord could make, rather than
a decision deriving from the [
]. That the [
Residential Tenancy Act 1997
] governed the
circumstances in which the Director had to deal with the expiry of the lease,
and the issue of a notice to vacate,
is irrelevant. The decisions operate
because of the general law.
of the need for caution when seeking to derive guidance from cases considering
different legislative schemes, the consistent
thread of these decisions is that
the proper interpretation of the word “under” must give weight to
legislative purpose
and context, and that the question whether a power, duty or
function is properly characterised as falling “under” the
may require that attention is given to whether the relevant legislation itself
provides the authority, force or justification
for its exercise or occurrence.
In this way, our construction of s 67G is consistent with the approach taken in
the cases discussed
to the purpose of the NDIS Act, and s 67G within that Act, the objects of the
NDIS Act have been set out above. They can comfortably
be achieved on the
applicant’s construction of s 67G. We do not accept that the
“relationship” created between
the NDIS provider and participant is
extraordinary; nor is it one that mandates the respondent’s construction
of s 67G. Rather,
some of the purposes of the NDIS Act may well be undermined if
there is a blanket embargo on an NDIS provider being compulsorily
required to
produce documents to a court or authority, including under s 138 of the MCHIFP
would be a very surprising outcome, as the applicant submits, if law enforcement
agencies or the like were unable to compel production
of NDIS records (or could
only obtain them through a cumbersome process of requesting them from the
Commissioner – and hence
be left to the Commissioner’s discretion in
that regard); and would potentially operate to the contrary of the legislative
objects of the NDIS Act. Nor does it make sense for there to be no restriction
on the voluntary production by an NDIS provider of
documents or information but
a restriction on the NDIS provider being compelled to produce the relevant
documents or information.
as the respondent places considerable weight on the “extraordinary”
relationship of confidence between NDIS provider
and participant (and the
vulnerability of the participant), there is nothing extraordinary about
relationships of confidence and
trust in which intimate information may be
expected to be disclosed (see the doctor/patient relationship for one) yet
such communications (in this example, doctor/patient records) are
regularly the subject of compulsory production. Nor is there textual
support for
treating the relationship between participant and service provider as rendering
the latter immune to now compulsory production
of the records in question
insofar as the decision in
Tasmania v TJG
reflects a broad construction
of s 67G, we respectfully disagree for the reasons given above.
therefore conclude that, on the proper construction of s 67G, there is no
operational inconsistency with s 138 of the MCHIFP Act
in its operation on the
documents which were required to be produced in this
was accepted by the applicant that if the appeal were successful no costs would
be sought against the respondent. For the above
reasons, we make the following
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Direct that the draft notice of appeal be filed by 10am, 29 October 2025.
(3) Direct that the draft notice of contention be filed by 10am, 29 October
(4) Allow the appeal.
(5) Set aside the declaration made by the primary judge on 19 September 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (504 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter