URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shlimon v Steric Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 70; (10 October 2025)
CommissionSeal
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Shlimon v Steric Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPICPD 70
Shlimon Youkhana Shlimon
RESPONDENT:
Steric Pty Ltd
icare Workers Insurance
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W27511/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
10 October 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 4 June 2025, subject to the following
amendment, is confirmed.
amend Order 2 of the Certificate of Determination to insert the word
“respiratory” immediately before the word “urinary”
that Order.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – consideration of deemed date of injury for a
disease pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
and (3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation
Ozcan v Macarthur Disability Services Ltd
considered and applied
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr S Hickey, counsel
M D Di Re Solicitor & Attorney
Respondent:
Ms L Goodman, counsel
Rankin Ellison Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Shlimon v Steric Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 252
Mr M Strachan
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
4 June 2025
INTRODUCTION
dispute in this matter takes place within a narrow confine. Namely, what is to
be the correct date of injury to be applied in
assessing Mr Shlimon Youkhana
Shlimon’s (the appellant) entitlement to lump sum compensation under
s 66 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(1987 Act).
appellant commencing employment with Steric Pty Ltd (the respondent) as a
process worker, packer, forklift driver and general
labourer in
The respondent manufactured
foods for various shops such as Coles and Woolworths. The appellant’s job
involved lifting and
bending or driving a forklift. While driving the forklift
the appellant was required to twist and turn while reversing, placing stress
his lower back and neck. In about 2004 the pain in the appellant’s left
elbow and back meant that he made a claim for workers
compensation and he
stopped working for a period of 2-4 weeks. When he returned to work it was on
light duties until May 2005 when
his hours returned to normal, although he was
not able to return to working overtime
appellant brought a claim in 2006 for lump sum compensation in the former
Workers Compensation Commission (WCC), the statutory
predecessor of the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission). The claimed injuries were to the
appellant’s lumbar spine and left
shoulder as a result of the nature and
conditions of his employment. The matter was resolved with the same parties as
in these proceedings
filing an agreement under s 66A of the 1987 Act, the
effect of which was to pay the amount of $12,500 to the appellant in respect
10% whole person impairment (WPI).
This agreement specified the date of injury as 3 November 2004.
appellant continued to work with the respondent after he made his 2006 claim,
working normal hours and duties at his own pace
but he was never able to return
to overtime duties.
appellant’s statement
describes his work and reported symptoms over the period 1 January 2002 to
23 July 2020. The appellant has not worked since Friday
12 February
appellant commenced these proceedings in October 2024, claiming lump sum
compensation of 45% WPI comprising assessments of the
following body systems:
left upper extremity, right lower extremity, lumbar spine, respiratory, urinary
and reproductive systems.
The appellant pleads that these injuries came about as
a result of the nature and conditions of his employment, which he has described
in the statement I have referenced above, with respect to the period claimed (1
January 2002–23 July 2020).
is no dispute in this matter about liability.
appellant’s application was referred to Commission medical assessors, who
reached a combined WPI assessment of 46% WPI specifying
the date of injury as
being 1 January 2002, being the date pleaded in the ARD.
parties then raised a dispute about the correct date of injury which was to be
utilised in the assessment of the monetary value
of the lump sum compensation.
Pausing here, this was an issue that should have been resolved or decided well
prior to the referral
to the medical assessors. The Referral
Certificate
1 January 2002 as the date of injury and this was what was recorded in the
Medical Assessment Certificate dated 5 March
2025 issued by the Commission.
Neither party took issue with the date on the Referral. Neither party now
submits that 1 January 2002
is the correct deemed date of injury.
question was heard by the Member on 14 May 2025. The essential finding deciding
this point can be found at Order 3 of the Certificate
of Determination dated 4
June 2025 which reads as follows;
“The 3 November 2004 injury
materially contributed to the further injury of 22 July 2020 such that
impairment resulting from
the latter injury is to be assessed as resulting from
the 3 November 2004 injury.”
appellant appeals this decision.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by the parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined
on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
Workplace Injury Management
and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) have been met.
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member uncontroversially identified the dispute he had to resolve, namely the
correct date of injury to be applied in assessing
the appellant’s correct
entitlement under s 66 of the 1987 Act and whether there was a further
“deemed” injury
sustained on 22 July
Member approached the answer to this question in the following
“43. The [appellant] has clearly advanced the matter on
the basis that the impairments from the 2004 injury and the 2020 injury
related and can be aggregated. [This] is evident from:
(a) the submission that he was only entitled to bring a further claim for lump
sum compensation because the earlier claim was brought
prior to 18 July 2012
(such that s 66(1A) of the 1987 Act does not apply to the further claim), and
(b) the concession that the earlier compensation paid in 2006 would need to be
deducted from any further entitlement he may now
considered the issue in similar circumstances in the matter
respondent referred to in these proceedings at length. I adopt what I said in
at [102]–[105] with respect to the operation of s 322(2)
and s 322(3) of [the 1998 Act].
322(2) of the 1998 Act provides that ‘Impairments that result from the
same injury are to be assessed together to assess
the degree of permanent
impairment of the injured worker’.
322(3) of the 1998 Act provides that ‘Impairments that result from more
than one injury arising out of the same incident
are to be assessed together to
assess the degree of permanent impairment of the injured worker’.
applying s 322(2) and (3) I consider I am required to follow what was said by
Macfarlan JA (with Simpson AJA and McCallum JA agreeing)
noted that the relevant question ‘was whether the later [injury] resulted
from those on the first date. If they did,
s 322(3) of the 1998 Act required
them to be assessed with the impairment arising out of the [first injury]
because all the injuries
arose out of the same incident.’ MacFarlan JA
further concluded in
‘the impairments are however connected
because the first incident injuries materially contributed to them’. They
‘arose out of’ and ‘resulted from’ that
injuries to the [appellant’s] left shoulder and back continued to
deteriorate following the 2004 deemed injury including
with the development of
the conditions to the respiratory and urinary and reproductive system. The
[appellant] also developed complaints
in his right shoulder as a result of the
nature and conditions of his employment.
am satisfied, applying the principles in
that the earlier injury
in 2004 materially contributed to the later conditions in the lumbar spine (and
consequential urinary and
reproductive condition) and left shoulder and that the
later conditions therefore arose out of and resulted from the 2004
do not accept the submission by the [appellant] that the manner in which s 15(1)
of the 1987 Act deems an injury to have occurred
culmination’ of events overcomes the clear principle in
where a later impairment augments the earlier impairment they are to be assessed
together as resulting from the first impairment.
further do not accept the [appellant’s] submission that the later onset of
the right shoulder somehow changes the analysis.
The claim for lump sum
compensation was advanced by the [appellant] on the basis that the right
shoulder should be aggregated with
the other impairments and on its own the
right shoulder does not reach the 11% whole person impairment
threshold.”
Certificate of Determination issued on 4 June 2025
“The Commission determines:
[appellant] sustained injury to his left shoulder and lumbar spine as a result
of the nature and conditions of his employment
with respondent up to
3 November 2004 with a deemed date of 3 November 2004;
[appellant] sustained a further injury to his left shoulder, right shoulder,
lumbar spine and a consequential condition to his
urinary and reproductive
system due to the nature and conditions of his employment up to 22 July 2020
with a deemed date of injury
of 22 July 2020.
3 November 2004 injury materially contributed to the further injury of 22 July
2020 such that impairment resulting from the latter
injury is to be assessed as
resulting from the 3 November 2004 injury.
monetary compensation payable to the [appellant] pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
is to be calculated with reference to the
3 November 2004 injury.
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
the claim for permanent impairment compensation is remitted to the
President for referral back to Medical Assessors Carter and Obele
reconsideration with respect to:
(a) correction of the date of injury such that it is injury on 3 November 2004
(incorporating injury on 22 July 2020 (deemed), and
(b) correction of any error with respect to the left and right upper extremity
in the lead Medical Assessment Certificate of Dr
Carter which inverts the
findings of Medical Assessor Obele with respect to the left
upper extremity.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant relies on the following three grounds of appeal:
(a) Ground One
– The Member erred at law at reasons [47] and [49]
when misdirecting himself in applying
which dealt with the question
of causation and aggregation of injuries sustained in three discreet events of
injuries) when the principles in
applicable to the found ‘nature and conditions’ injuries by way of
disease with separate deemed dates of injury
determined as 3 November 2004 and
22 July 2020 and in so erring determined incorrectly 3 November 2004 as the date
for assessment
of the impairments.
(b) Ground Two
– The Member erred at reasons [51] when misdirecting
himself in applying
disease injuries found to have
occurred on deemed dates of injury 3 November 2004 and finally on 22 July 2020
as a result of the
nature and conditions of employment to the effect that where
the later impairment augments the earlier impairment both such impairments
to be assessed together as resulting from the first injury/impairment.
(c) Ground Three
– The Member erred in failing to include a
determination at [1] and [2] of the Certificate of Determination and at reasons
[54] the consequential injury to the ‘respiratory system’ despite
having found such respiratory system injury at reasons
LEGISLATION
15(1) of the 1987 Act provides:
“(1) If an injury is a
disease which is of such a nature as to be contracted by a gradual
(a) the injury shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have
(i) at the time of the worker’s death or incapacity, or
(ii) if death or incapacity has not resulted from the injury—at
the time the worker makes a claim for compensation with respect
to the injury,
(b) compensation is payable by the employer who last employed the
worker in employment to the nature of which the disease was due.”
322(2) and (3) of the 1998 Act provide:
“(2) Impairments
that result from the same injury are to be assessed together to assess the
degree of permanent impairment
of the injured worker.
(3) Impairments that result from more than one injury arising out of
the same incident are to be assessed together to assess the
degree of permanent
impairment of the injured worker.”
As to Ground One
appellant submits that having ‘found’ two deemed dates of injury,
3 November 2004 and 22 July 2020, due to the nature
and conditions of the
appellant’s employment up to 22 July 2020 (and two consequential
conditions in addition), there was no
need for the Member to apply the
principles arising from
relating to either causation or
aggregation. There is no need to consider
, the appellant submits,
as the deeming provisions in the 1987 Act provide the mechanism for determining
such dates, relying upon
ss 15 and 16 of the 1987
The appellant also points
to ss 68B(2) and (3) of the 1987 Act (incorrectly referenced as
s 68) to support a submission that the
assessment for a disease injury is
at its point of culmination. The appellant concludes by
“I submit that the very logic of applying s 4(b)(i)
or s 4(b)(ii) disease provisions which necessarily invoke application of
provisions in s 15 and 16 of the 1987 Act demands that the impairments/injuries
suffered as at any found deemed dates of injury
be assessed for any impairments
found or determined upon such deemed date(s). In the Appellant's case there was
a worsening over
time of the original injuries for which the Appellant was
compensated in 2006 for the lumbar spine and left upper extremity. In addition,
the right upper extremity suffered injury and impairment along with the lumbar
spine and left upper extremity up to the second found
deemed date of injury
22 July 2020. The consequential injuries result from the Appellant's
injuries which are seen as having culminated
on the final deemed date of injury
(22 July 2020). Applying s 68(2)(a) and s 68(3)(a) there is requirement to
deduct from the otherwise
whole of the assessment of impairment assessed at 22
July 2020 the previously paid lump sum compensation for the deemed date if
injury/impairment
on 3 November
response, the respondent says that it is the appellant’s uncontested
evidence that he suffered incapacity from 3 November
2004 onwards. He was
injured as at that date and from then on, the appellant says that he could not
work overtime, with the appellant’s
evidence being that prior to injury,
he regularly worked on average 15 overtime hours per
respondent submits:
“6. As Griffiths AJA (Kirk JA and Stern
JA agreeing) stated in
Haddad v The GEO Group Australia Pty
‘As explained in
Thoroughgood
, the correct position is that
where a disease injury causes an incapacity (in the sense of a reduction in
earning capacity) and at
the same time gives rise to an entitlement to
compensation under the 1987 Act (whether for permanent impairment or treatment
or otherwise), s 15(1)(a)(ii) operates to deem the date of injury
relevant to any such claim to be the time when the worker suffered
incapacity.
This does not turn on the framing of the claim by the claimant but rather on the
entitlement to claim, as illustrated
most clearly in
Thoroughgood
to submissions made by the Respondent, Member Strachan found that the Appellant
had suffered a further injury with a deemed
date of 22 July
Strachan then went on to consider whether the impairments from the 2004 injury
and the 2020 injury could be
aggregated.
Strachan properly considered the application of section 322(2) of the 1998 Act
which provides that in assessing the degree
of permanent impairment, impairments
that result from the same injury are to be assessed together and section 322(3)
which provides
that impairments that result from more than one injury arising
out of the same incident are to be assessed together. Member Strachan
that he was
required to follow what was said by Macfarlan JA (with Simpson AJA and McCallum
JA agreeing) in
where his Honour noted that the relevant
question ‘was whether the later [injury] resulted from those suffered on
date. If they did, s 322(3) of the 1998 Act required them to be
assessed with the impairment arising out of the [first injury] because
injuries arose out of the same incident.’
Strachan further noted that Macfarlan JA further concluded in
‘the impairments are however connected because the first incident injuries
materially contributed to them. They therefore
‘arose out of’ and
‘resulted from’ that incident.’
Strachan found, applying the principles in
that the earlier injury
in 2004 materially contributed to the further injury of 22 July 2022 and that
the later conditions therefore
arose out of and resulted from the 2004
respondent also says that the appellant made no submission to the Member that
did not apply to causation or aggregation, due to the operation of
ss 15 and 16 of the 1987 Act.
respondent concludes with the following:
“Member Strachan
found that the injury in 2004 materially contributed to the later injury on 22
July 2020 in accordance with
the principles enunciated in
therefore it was the 2004 date of injury that applied to the assessment of
permanent impairment.”
Consideration
have read the transcript of the appellant’s submissions before the
Nowhere was it put to
the Member that the principles arising from
had no application to
the facts of this case. To the contrary, counsel for the appellant referred the
, amongst a number of authorities dealing with causation
and aggregation, at T7, T11 and
for the respondent also submitted to the Member on the effect of
this matter. In summary, in reliance upon
, counsel for the
respondent submitted that the relevant date was the first date of
incapacity,
which on the
respondent’s case is 3 November 2004. Whilst I accept that the
appellant’s case to the Member did not embrace
the respondent’s
position on
, the appellant did not say that
application.
definition, the Member cannot be in error for not dealing with an argument that
was not put.
I do accept that the argument about s 4(b)(i) and the deemed date determined by
reference to s 15(1) of the 1987 Act was an
argument that was put to the
The Member dealt with
this submission and his preferred view of the application of
circumstances of this matter in the passages I have extracted above. So, whilst
the precise argument now put on appeal was
not advanced to the Member, I will
nevertheless decide this ground on its merits.
the outset, I remark that the appellant takes no issue with what I consider to
be unchallenged factual findings that the Member
made that the later injuries
resulted from the 2004 injury.
also note that the evidence of the appellant was that after the 2004 injury, he
paced his work but was never again able to work
overtime. As set out above, the
appellant’s evidence was to the effect that before the 2004 injury, he
worked on average 15
overtime hours each week. The appellant also gave extensive
evidence about the progression of his injuries from 2004 to
none of which was in
my respectful opinion, the appellant’s argument that
application does not deal with, in terms, exactly what Macfarlan JA said in that
decision. In
, the worker had suffered injuries to her lumbar spine,
thoracic spine and right shoulder on 14 November 2011. The worker suffered
further injuries to her lumbar and thoracic spine on 3 May and 26 September
2012 in the same employment. On appeal in the former
Workers Compensation
Commission, the Deputy President held that the right shoulder injury could not
be aggregated with the losses
which arose due to the second and third injuries,
as the right shoulder injury did not contribute materially to them. Macfarlan JA
said that this approach was incorrect, saying the following at [16]:
“The Deputy President reached a different conclusion because
she found that the right shoulder injury ‘did not materially
contribute to
the impairments of the lumbar or thoracic spine and was not the same injury
(pathology), ... This was not however,
with respect, the issue that needed to be
addressed. The relevant question was whether the later spinal injuries resulted
suffered on the first date. If they did, s 322(3) of the 1998
Act required them to be assessed with the impairment arising out of
shoulder injury because the injuries all arose out of the same incident, that
is, that of 14 November 2011.”
factual circumstances in this case are, in my view, stronger than those in
. In this case there is accepted injury in 2004, which is followed
by unbroken incapacity
thereafter.
The injury asserted,
and this was not in dispute, was injury by disease, which
addressed at [80]. The correct deemed date for the injury is when the worker
suffered incapacity, in this case 2004. There is no
challenge on the evidence
that the appellant suffered incapacity from 2004 and that the progression of the
disease resulted from
the 2004 injury.
in terms of the facts in this case, was relevant and applicable Court of Appeal
authority which bound the Member. The Member was
obliged to apply it.
Member was correct to find 3 November 2004 as the relevant deemed date of
has not been established, Ground One is dismissed.
As to Ground Two
ground is essentially a repetition of that which was argued by the appellant in
Ground One. Whilst attention in Ground One is
directed to the asserted
errors at reasons [47] and [49], Ground Two impugns reasons [51]. The appellant
“There was error in applying the causation and
aggregation principles set in
when the Appellant's case invoked the
application of the disease principles set in s 4(b) and sections 15 and 16 and s
In applying
principles the Member misdirected himself into
finding that as the original injury found (3 November 2004) materially
contributed
to the injuries/impairments which culminated at 22 July 2020 the
original injury was causative of the later injuries in part and
injuries later in time are assessed as caused by the earlier injury. That then
erroneously led to the determination at reasons
[56] that the monetary
compensation is to be calculated by reference to the earlier injury on
3 November 2004.”
reply, the respondent relies upon its submissions in response to Ground One,
specifically paragraphs [14] to [17] which I have
read but do not repeat.
Consideration
Two is not expressed in terms different to Ground One and for the same reasons
that I have dismissed Ground One, Ground Two
must also fail.
Two is dismissed.
As to Ground Three
appellant says that the Member, having found an injury of a consequential nature
to the appellant’s respiratory system at
reasons [40], failed to specify
this system in his orders. The respondent agrees that this appears to be an
oversight in Order 2
of the Certificate of Determination.
Consideration
is apparent that the Member did not include the undisputed as found
to the appellant’s
respiratory system in his orders. This was in error.
Three is established. I will make orders amending Order 2 of the Certificate of
Determination dated 4 June 2025 to include
the respiratory system.
essential aspects of this appeal which are constituted by Grounds One and Two
have failed. I will correct the error in Order 2
of the Certificate of
Determination dated 4 June 2025 to insert the body system of
“respiratory” before the word “urinary”
in that Order.
Otherwise, the Certificate of Determination is confirmed.
Certificate of Determination dated 4 June 2025, subject to the following
amendment, is confirmed.
amend Order 2 of the Certificate of Determination to insert the word
“respiratory” immediately before the word “urinary”
that Order.
Judge Phillips
10 October 2025
Appellant’s statement
dated 14 April 2023, Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), p 1.
See ARD, pp
Dated 21 October
Shlimon v Steric Pty
[2025] NSWPIC 252
Gutierrez v
State of New South Wales South Western Sydney Local Health District
Ozcan v Macarthur
Disability Services Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 56
Appellant’s submissions 1 July 2025, [11]–[13].
Appellant’s
submissions 1 July 2025, [16].
[2024] NSWCA 135
), referring to
Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd v Thoroughgood
[2014] NSWCA 166.
reasons, [42].
reasons, [43].
reasons, [47].
reasons, [49] and [55].
Respondent’s submissions 5 August 2025,
Respondent’s submissions 5 August 2025,
Transcript of
proceedings 14 May 2025 (T).
In the transcript,
is incorrectly spelt as
Industries Limited v Bell
[2010] NSWCA 162
Appellant’s submissions 1 July 2025, [17].
At reasons, [40].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.52 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter