URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/838.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pilon v State of New South Wales (NSW Police Force) [2025] NSWPICMP 838; (29 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Pilon v State of New South Wales (NSW Police Force) [2025] NSWPICMP
Timothy Pilon
RESPONDENT:
State of New South Wales (NSW Police Force)
APPEAL PANEL
John Wynyard
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Michael Hong
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
DATE OF DECISION:
29 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
appeal by traumatised police officer from 6% whole person impairment (WPI)
for psychological injury; whether Medical Assessor (MA) had made
findings contrary to evidence before her without adequate reasons;
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
authority for requirement
for MA to refer to contradictory evidence if factual findings inconsistent; to
adequately explain their
reasoning; MA failed to do so generally but
specifically in two of the five impugned categories; re-examination conducted;
MAC revoked.
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
22 April 2025 Timothy Pilon, the appellant, lodged an Application to Appeal
Against the Decision of a Medical Assessor. The medical
dispute was assessed by
Dr Surabhi Verma, a Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical Assessment
Certificate (MAC) on 26 March 2025.
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of Permanent
1 March 2021 (the Guidelines) and the
Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
(AMA 5). “WPI” is reference to whole person impairment.
“Baseline WPI" is a reference to the total WPI
assessed before deduction
or modification pursuant to the relevant legislative
RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND
28 February 2025 this matter was referred to the Medical Assessor for a WPI
assessment of psychological/psychiatric disorder caused
by an injury on a deemed
date of 13 January 2023.
Pilon was employed by the respondent as a Detective Senior Constable who began
work with the respondent in 2011. He ceased on 1
January 2023.
was subject to the usual traumatic experiences that first responders encounter
during the course of their employment.
served some time in Bourke from 2016 and was transferred to Ballina in 2019 and
later to Tweed Heads. In 2020 he was transferred
to Byron Bay.
Medical Assessor assessed 6% WPI.
PRELIMINARY REVIEW
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that the worker
should undergo a further medical examination for
the reasons given below.
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
Further medical examination
Assessor Michael Hong of the Appeal Panel conducted an examination of the worker
on 14 August 2025 and reported to the Appeal
Medical Assessment Certificate
parts of the medical certificate given by the Medical Assessor that are relevant
to the appeal are set out, where relevant, in
the body of this decision.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions which have been considered by the Appeal Panel.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes
of fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
reporting Mr Pilon’s daily activities, the Medical Assessor conveniently
considered them in the context of each psychiatric
impairment rating scale
(PIRS) category. She said,
relevantly:
activities/ADL:
-Self-Care And Personal Hygiene: Mr Pilon showers once a day as compared to
showering twice a day before the incident. He brushes
his teeth and changes into
clean clothes on a regular basis. He is able to do household chores like
vacuuming, washing, barbeque
veggies and cooks at least three times a week and
makes chicken nuggets and fish for his children. He denied losing or gaining
since the incidents.
-Social and recreational activities: Mr Pilon previously
enjoyed surfing, going to the gym. He said that he has not surfed in a long
time. He has however got his own gym equipment and exercise about three times a
week. He catches up with his friend who is also an
ex- police officer every
second week for a coffee in the mornings. He also met up with his family in
Newcastle around Christmas.
-Social Functioning: His parents live in Dubbo, and his parents and one of
his sisters live in Dubbo, while his other sister lives
on the Sunshine Coast.
He continues to have a positive relationship with his mother and talks to her
regularly. His father has been
diagnosed with dementia. He has a positive
relationship with his wife, but since he gets short-tempered, it occasionally
his relationship. He has lost a few friendships.
[10c] of the MAC the Medical Assessor said that he disagreed with Dr
Chivaurah’s assessment, and explained her opinion in
similar terms to her
Table 11.8 PIRS Rating Form, which we now
PIRS Category
Reason for Decision
Self-Care and personal hygiene
Mr Pilon showers once a day as compared to showering twice a day before the
incident. He brushes his teeth and changes into clean
clothes on a regular
basis. He is able to do household chores like vacuuming, washing, barbeque
veggies and cooks at least three
times a week and makes chicken nuggets and fish
for his children. He denied losing or gaining weight since the incidents.
Social and recreational activities
Mr Pilon previously enjoyed surfing, going to the gym. He said that he has
not surfed in a long time. He has however got his own gym
equipment and exercise
officer every second week
for a coffee in the mornings. He also met up with his
family in Newcastle around Christmas.
He picks and drops his children to school and drives there. He leaves his
him if there was
any reason why he does not drive long distances to which he said he does not
have anywhere to go and hence does
not drive long distances generally. He said
that he has however driven to long distances. He was able to drive to Dubbo
Coast and drove there to meet his sister about six months back.
Social functioning
His parents live in Dubbo and his parents and one of his sisters live in
Dubbo and his other sister lives in Sunshine Coast. He continues
positive relationship with his mother and talks to her on a regular basis. His
father has been diagnosed with dementia. He
has positive relationship with his
wife but since he gets short-tempered, but it occasionally impacts his
relationship. He has lost
friendships few friendships.
Concentration, persistence and pace
Mr Pilon reported that his memory is pretty good and has been alright
He is able to complete household chores on time and denied making mistakes
when doing them or cooking food. He reported that he watches
Netflix at night
and listens to podcasts when he is doing other household chores. He denied
playing video games or reading books.
He reported that his attention and
concentration fluctuate, but was not able to give any relevant examples for the
same. Objectively,
he scored 3/3 on 3-word repeat and 3/3 on 3-word recall. He
was able to state the days in a week in both forward and backward manner.
Employability
Mr Pilon was not sure of what he wants to do work wise. I believe that he
can work for less than 20 hours per fortnight and cannot
work more than one or
two days at a time. He continues to be impacted by symptoms of depression and
PTSD which have impacted his
capacity to continue working and remain employed
with pre-injury employers and in pre-injury duties and hours.
Median Class
Aggregate Score Impairment Total %
SUBMISSIONS
referring to the accepted authorities regarding incorrect criteria and
demonstrable error, Mr Pilon submitted that the Medical
Assessor had fallen into
error with regard to her assessment of each category of the PIRS, save that of
Self-care and personal hygiene
were referred to the comments made by the Medical Assessor in this category when
she assessed a class 1.
Pilon kindly copied into his submissions the relevant class descriptors for
classes 1 and 2 in this category. He submitted that
the class 1 allocation was
inconsistent with the evidence and underestimated the severity of Mr Pilon's
impairment.
Medical Assessor, he said, did not give adequate consideration to his statement
6 February 2025 and was not addressed in any detail in her MAC.
were referred to various factual matters which will be considered below as to
the Medical Assessor's error.
were also referred to comments by both medical experts. Dr Chivaurah was the
medical expert retained by Mr Pilon and Dr Young was
retained for the Police
Medical Assessor explained why she differed from Dr Chivaurah and we were
referred to her comments in that regard. It was submitted
that she had not
however explained how her opinion differed from Dr Young's comments
notwithstanding that he found that maximum medical
improvement had not been
was submitted:
“The inconsistency between [the Medical
Assessor's] report and what was documented by other independent Medical
Assessors...
casts doubt over the accuracy of her assessment and suggests she
has applied the incorrect criteria and made a demonstrable error...”
Social and recreational activities
Pilon again kindly uploaded the relevant descriptors for a class 2 and class 3
were referred to the Medical Assessor's reasons for giving a class 2 rating.
were again referred to the observations of the medico-legal experts before the
Medical Assessor. It was submitted that the Medical
Assessor's rating did not
take into consideration her notes that the appellant was no longer taking part
in social activities he
previously did such as surfing and going to the gym and
that he would have lost friendships as a result.
inconsistency between the report of the Medical Assessor and what was documented
by other independent Medical Assessors cast doubt
over the accuracy of the
assessment,
Mr Pilon said.
was submitted that the Medical Assessor did not adequately consider Mr Pilon's
statement of 6 February 2025 as it was not addressed
in any detail in her MAC.
Mr Pilon said that the statement gave context to this category and the Medical
Assessor fell into error
in not attaching any weight to it.
referred to the reports of Dr Chivaurah and Dr Young, both of which concurred
Mr Pilon told them that he cooked about three times nights of the week
and that he did the washing. It was submitted that Dr Young,
by acknowledging Mr
Pilon's ability to manage his personal hygiene and household tasks, nonetheless
highlighted a lack of motivation
for broader activities. This, it was submitted,
suggested a mild impairment.
were referred to the Medical Assessor's explanation as to why she differed from
Dr Chivaurah - particularly that he now showered once a day whereas he used
to shower twice a day. This, it was also submitted, indicated
a mild impairment
and not the minor deficit found by the Medical Assessor.
was made of the Medical Assessor that she had not explained how her opinion
differed from Dr Young's comments regarding
the appellant's functioning.
Social and recreational activities
class 2 rating given by the Medical Assessor it was submitted was erroneous. We
were kindly supplied with the relevant class descriptors
in the PIRS and
reference was made to Medical Assessor's reasons for the class 2 functioning.
Pilon submitted that there was an inconsistency between the history taken by the
Medical Assessor and Dr Chivaurah.
Medical Assessor recorded that Mr Pilon had his own gym equipment which he used
with his ex-police officer friend
every second week for coffee.
Dr Chivaurah the history was given that Mr Pilon “catches up for
coffee” with “another copper who is off work
Chivaurah recorded that Mr Pilon used the gym at home alone twice a week whereas
“before medication I was probably doing
it four to five times a
It was alleged that the Medical Assessor, in explaining her differences of
opinion with those of Dr Chivaurah and Dr Young, failed
to take into
consideration “her notes that the appellant is no longer taking part in
the social activities he previously did
such as surfing and going to the gym and
would have lost friendships from this.”
was submitted that this alleged inconsistency “suggests that [the Medical
Assessor] has applied the incorrect criteria and
made a demonstrable error in
her assessment of this category.”
functioning
demonstrable error alleged was that the class 2 rating was based on the
terminology of the descriptors rather than an objective
assessment of the facts
that the evidence demonstrated.
was submitted that the Medical Assessor did not taken into account the fact that
there had been four separations within the marriage,
which was contrary to her
finding that there had been no such periods. We were referred also to Dr
Chivaurah’s findings and
rating of a
class 3 impairment on the history
he took that there had been four marital
separations.
Concentration persistence and pace
relevant descriptors for class 2 and class 3 were kindly made available and Mr
Pilon referred to the Medical Assessor's reasons
within the PIRS Table 11.8.
Again, Mr Pilon contrasted what was recorded by the Medical Assessor with the
histories taken by Dr Young
and Dr Chivaurah.
was submitted that the reason put forward by the Medical Assessor for
disagreeing with
Dr Chivaurah’s assessment had not been clearly
articulated.
was submitted that the assumption made by the Medical Assessor that listening to
podcasts was intellectually demanding was not
explained. There was a significant
difference with the history recorded by Dr Chivaurah that Mr Pilon said “I
tried to listen
to podcasts” and the history recorded by the Medical
Assessor that he did listen to podcasts for 30 minutes.
Employability
relevant class descriptors were again reproduced, and Mr Pilon submitted that
class 4 rating was inconsistent with the evidence. There was, it was
argued, no medical evidence that certified Mr Pilon as being
fit for 20 hours
per week. Further, it was submitted that the Medical Assessor gave inadequate
reasons for her finding.
were again referred to the reports of the opposing medical experts, about which
Mr Pilon said that Dr Chivaurah noted that no employment
either paid or
voluntary had been performed by him since he ceased work. Dr Young noted that he
could not return to police work for
12 months and that he was temporarily
incapacitated. The contrast between the opinions of the medical experts and that
of the Medical
Assessor was such that a
re-examination was required, Mr
Pilon said.
respondent firstly made some general submissions regarding the role of a Medical
Assessor. It argued that there was no requirement
to reproduce the relevant
descriptors, and that there was no requirement for an explanation as to any
disagreement with the medical
experts. It submitted that adequate reasons for
each category rating had been given.
Self-care and hygiene
respondent submitted that the class 1 rating was proper, bearing in mind the
relevant evidence, which it referred to.
Social and recreational
was submitted that the Medical Assessor was not bound to follow the opinion of
Dr Chivaurah, and that her assessment was consistent with the history she
obtained from
Mr Pilon. He was able to occasionally go out to events without
needing a support person and did not become actively involved, which
consonant with the class 2 rating given by the Medical
Social functioning
respondent referred to the findings of the Medical Assessor that there was a
positive relationship with Mr Pilon’s wife
that was occasionally impacted
by his short temper, but that the relationship had been improving. The four
periods of separation
had been noted, but the evidence did not establish that
the relationship was severely strained, as was required for a class 3 rating.
Pilon’s care for his children was also more consistent with a class 2
rating, it was submitted.
Concentration persistence and
respondent noted that on the evidence of Mr Pilon’s daily routine, a class
1 rating might have been appropriate, but accepted
that the class 2 assessment
was justified by the history taken by the Medical Assessor. This included the
“objective”
tests administered by her.
Pilon’s statement, it was argued, established that he was able to type
long documents and provide a consistent history, which
indicated an ability to
carry out the activities indicated in the descriptors for a class 2 rating. Dr
Chivaurah did not suggest
that Mr Pilon had any more serious limitations, and
his opinion was also consonant with a class 2 assessment, notwithstanding his
class 3 finding.
Employability
class 4 rating was made based on the Medical Assessor’s own opinion
following the clinical examination and history given
to her at the examination,
the respondent said. It referred to Dr Young’s opinion that Mr
Pilon’s earning capacity would
only be impacted for
12 months or so,
and four months later Mr Pilon’s daily activities indicated some capacity
The psychiatric impairment rating scale
PIRS is established as the rating system for assessing psychiatric/psychological
impairment, by virtue of Chapter 11 of the Guides.
Chapter 11 sets out six
categories of behaviour to be considered, each being divided into five classes,
ranging in seriousness from
one to five. Class 1 relates to a situation where
there is no psychological deficit, or a minor deficit attributable to the normal
variation in the general population. Class 5 pertains to a person who is totally
“Impairment in each area is rated using class
descriptors. Classes range from 1 to 5, in accordance with severity. The
form must be used when scoring the PIRS. The examples of activities are
examples only. The assessing psychiatrist should take account
person’s cultural background. Consider activities that are usual for the
person’s age, sex and cultural norms.”
Medical Assessor is required to classify each category, and to apply the
resulting scores as set out in Chapter
assessment of psychiatric disorder has been considered in a number of cases. In
Ferguson v State of New South
Campbell J was concerned
the case where the Medical Appeal Panel had revoked the MAC on the basis that
the finding by the AMS had
been glaringly improbable. His Honour found that the
Panel had fallen into jurisdictional error. He said at
“By reference to
NSW Police Force v Daniel Wark
[2012] NSWWCCMA 36, the Appeal Panel directed itself that in questions of
classification under the PIRS:
‘... the pre-eminence of the clinical observations cannot be
underrated. The judgment as to the significance or otherwise of
the matters
raised in the consultation is very much a matter for assessment by the clinician
with the responsibility of conducting
his/her enquiries with the applicant face
Appeal Panel accepted that intervention was only justified: if the
categorisation was glaringly improbable; if it could be demonstrated
AMS was unaware of significant factual matters; if a clear misunderstanding
could be demonstrated; or if an unsupportable
reasoning process could be made
out. I understood that all of these matters were regarded by the Appeal
Panel as interpretations
of the statutory grounds of applying incorrect criteria
or demonstrable error. One takes from this that the Appeal Panel understood
more than a mere difference of opinion on a subject about which reasonable minds
may differ is required to establish error in
the statutory sense.
Appeal Panel also, with respect, correctly recorded that in accordance with
Chapter 11.12 of the Guides ‘the assessment
is to be made upon the
behavioural consequences of psychiatric disorder, and that each category within
the PIRS evaluates a particular
area of functional impairment’: Appeal
Panel reasons at [37]. The descriptors, or examples, describing each class of
in the various categories are ‘examples only’: see
Jenkins v Ambulance Service of New South
. The Appeal Panel said
‘they provide a guide which can be consulted as a general indicator of the
level of behaviour that might
generally be expected’: Appeal Panel reasons
Glenn William Parker v Select Civil Pty
another case regarding
assessment of psychiatric disorder, Harrison AsJ cited [23] of
with approval at [65]. Her Honour said at [66]:
relation to Classes of PIRS there has to be more than a difference of opinion on
a subject about which reasonable minds
may differ to establish error in the
statutory sense. (
[24]).....”
Garling J said at [73]:
“It was a matter for the
clinical judgment of the AMS to determine whether the impairment with respect to
employability was
at the moderate level, as he did, or at some other level. But,
in seeking judicial review, a mere disagreement about the level of
impairment is
not sufficient to demonstrate error of a kind susceptible to judicial
is accordingly necessary for the Panel to be satisfied that the assessment by
the AMS in this category was erroneous in one of
the following ways (to use the
reference by Campbell J in
(a) if the categorisation was glaringly improbable;
(b) if it could be demonstrated that the AMS was unaware of significant factual
(c) if a clear misunderstanding could be demonstrated, or
(d) if an unsupportable reasoning process could be made out.
Lancaster v Foxtel
Basten AJ noted at
[88-89] that these four considerations, although not inaccurate, were not a
statement of legal principles, and
that care should be taken in applying the
explanation in place of ss 327(3) and 328(2).
is axiomatic however, that the reasons given by a Medical Assessor be adequate
to explain the assessment made. In
Basten JA (Handley & McColl
JJA agreeing) said:
“121 where it is necessary for the Panel
to make findings of primary fact, in order to reach a particular conclusion as
existence, nature and extent of any physical impairment, it may be
expected that the findings of material facts will be set out in
its reasons.
Where facts are in dispute, it may be necessary to refer to evidence or other
material on which findings are based,
but the extent to which this is necessary
will vary from case to case. More importantly, where more than one conclusion is
it will be necessary for the Panel to give some explanation of its
preference for one conclusion over another. That aspect may have
significance in circumstances where the medical members of a Panel have made
their own assessment of the applicant’s
condition and have come to a
different conclusion from that reached by other medical practitioners, as set
out in reports provided
to the Panel, and
the other hand, to fulfil a minimum legal standard, the reasons need not be
extensive or provide detailed explanation of the criteria
applied by medical
specialists in reaching a professional judgment (Authority omitted). At least,
that will be so where the medical
science is not controversial: if it is, a more
expansive explanation may be required.”
reasons are equally applicable to the function of a Medical Assessor.
arguments advanced by Mr Pilon were directed at the failure by the Medical
Assessor to explain her reasons by reference to seemingly
contradictory evidence
which was before her. We agree with that criticism, but rather than discuss
every category, his submissions
regarding the following categories are
illustrative of the problem, which can only be resolved by a re-examination.
Social and recreational activities
11.2 provides relevantly:
“Class 1 No deficit, or minor
deficit attributable to the normal variation in the general population:
regularly participates
in social activities that are age, sex and culturally
appropriate. May belong to clubs or associations and is actively involved with
Class 2 Mild impairment: occasionally goes out to such events eg without
needing a support person, but does not become actively involved
(eg dancing,
cheering favourite team).
Class 3 Moderate impairment: rarely goes out to such events, and mostly when
prompted by family or close friend. Will not go out without
a support person.
Not actively involved, remains quiet and withdrawn.”
reasons given for the class 2 rating by the Medical Assessor were, to
“Mr Pilon previously enjoyed surfing, going to the
gym. He said that he has not surfed in a long time. He has however got his
gym equipment and exercise about three times a week. He catches up with his
friend who is also an ex-police officer every second
week for a coffee in the
mornings. He also met up with his family in Newcastle around
Christmas.”
Pilon’s submissions were directed to the accuracy of that history. Whilst,
as noted above, the pre-eminence of the clinical
examination cannot be
underrated, if a Medical Assessor takes a clinical history that is factually
different from the evidence that
was before him/her, the Medical Assessor is
required to refer to “the evidence or other material” on which her
were based, as was determined in
his statement of 6 February 2025, Mr Pilon said that he had lost interest in
activities he used to enjoy. He no longer went to
the gym four to five times per
week, and he needed a support person if he was driving in certain
situations.
He said that he did
exercise alone at home three to four times per week, but all the relevant
evidence needed to be referred to in
explaining why the Medical Assessor formed
her opinion.
experts on each side of the record had recorded a different history as to Mr
Pilon’s activities. Dr Chivaurah noted a similar
activities:
withdrawn, prefers staying at home;
occasionally
meets a friend for coffee but stated, "I don't really go anywhere... I just stay
no participation
in previous hobbies or sports.
Young said of Dr Chivaurah’s
report provides a reasonable and consistent account of Mr. Pilon’s
psychiatric condition and impairments but in my
opinion prematurely concludes
that MMI has been reached.”
observe that Dr Young’s findings were consistent with a class 3 rating,
and that he agreed with Dr Chivaurah’s opinion
as being reasonable and
consistent.
reasons given by the Medical Assessor portrayed a person who appeared to be
quite active. They gave insufficient recognition to
the more moderate impairment
suggested by the class 3 descriptors. Mr Pilon did not appear to have gone out
to relevant events, and
he appeared to be more quiet and withdrawn than her
reasons suggested.
determined that there is an error, being an insufficient explanation of the
rating based on the available information, and a re-examination
was necessary to
explore these additional facts.
Social functioning
11.4 provides relevantly:
“Class 2 Mild impairment: existing
relationships strained. Tension and arguments with partner or close family
member, loss of
some friendships.
Class 3 Moderate impairment: previously established relationships severely
strained, evidenced by periods of separation or domestic
violence. Spouse,
relatives or community services looking after children.”
Medical Assessor said, to repeat:
“His parents live in Dubbo
and his parents and one of his sisters live in Dubbo and his other sister lives
in Sunshine Coast.
He continues to have positive relationship with his mother
and talks to her on a regular basis. His father has been diagnosed with
dementia. He has positive relationship with his wife but since he gets
short-tempered, but it occasionally impacts his relationship.
He has lost
friendships few friendships.”
relevant facts have not been referred to. When discussing Dr Chivaurah’s
report at [10c], the Medical Assessor said:
functioning: I have noted there are tension and arguments with his partner but
no periods of domestic violence or separation
or spouses or community services
looking after children. This warrants mild rather than moderate
impairment.”
assume that the Medical Assessor intended to convey that she was noting the
marital discord as she wrote, and was not referring
to any earlier note to that
effect, as none was made. She earlier noted that Mr Pilon was married in 2013,
and that they had two
children and that his wife went running with him three
weeks earlier.
Medical Assessor did not refer to Mr Pilon’s
has been about four times where I have stayed at my parent’s place about
10 hours away due to the difficulties in my marriage. When this occurred I
stayed about a week each time.”
did she refer to the history taken by Dr
relationship with his wife is improving ‘it’s not the best’
because ‘I was just drinking, was agitated
and even now feel
withdrawn.’ They have considered separation but ‘we are still
together’ and ‘I have gone
to stay with my parents for a couple of
weeks’ on four separate occasions.”
that of Dr Young:
“Mr Pilon's relationship with his wife has
become strained. ‘Not the best... I'm trying to... I've got to get some
counselling
and stuff... things are not going well,’ he admitted. They
plan to seek couples counselling to address their issues.
Mr Pilon has been married since 2013; together since approximately 2008. He
has two children: a daughter nearly 10 and a son aged
7. Currently experiencing
marital difficulties; plans to initiate couples
counselling.”
Medical Assessor appears to have erred in fact by finding there were no periods
of separation, and she did not explain that finding
in the light of the evidence
before her that there had in fact been four such periods, nor did she refer to
that evidence. This was
a further matter that gave us pause, and to determine
that a re-examination was required.
is little utility in discussing the findings relating to the remaining impugned
categories, as the re-examination must consider
all the challenges. Medical
Assessor Hong’s report follows:
“1. HISTORY RELATING
TO THE INJURY
Brief history
Mr Pilon joined the police in 2011 and reached the rank
of a senior constable. He ceased working in January 2023 and has not worked
He reported his mental health declined from around 5 years before he ceased
working and related to exposure to deaths and people with
horrific injuries,
violence and major accidents, and also lack of support at work (he said, it was
not bullying and harassment as
Dr Peter Young wrote, and that he had a
disagreement with another officer).
He developed anxiety and depression, and described alcohol overuse from early
2020. He would cry for no reason at work, but persist
with working.
Mr Pilon is taking Sertraline 50 mg and previously took
He continues to consult Toby Wilson, a psychologist, recently having reviews
every 2-3 weeks. They have done trauma-based Cognitive
behaviour therapy.
He also sees Dr Mark Scurrah, a Psychiatrist, recently every 2-3 months. He
has not had group-based treatment or psychiatric admission.
Mr Pilon's anxiety and depression are similar as when
assessed by Dr Surabhi Verma. He does not drink alcohol anymore, and explained
he cannot stop once he starts drinking. He has frequent nightmares and his sleep
is slightly better off alcohol. He takes Melatonin
as needed for sleep. He has
distressing memories related to work.
Mr Pilon's anxiety symptoms are triggered by certain places, unfamiliar
places, crowded places and he does not like to talk about
himself, or answer
questions about what he does. He worries something bad would happen when out.
He eats regularly and exercises a couple of times a week, and has a stable
weight. Recently, he exercised less, due to a shoulder
He has occasional suicidal ideations, and never acts on them. He described
being irritable without acting out. He said he goes 0 to
100 over little
He said his concentration varies depending on the activities. He struggles
with reading and prefers to listen to podcasts, and can
listen for 30 minutes
when doing housework. He has never been one to read books or novels, but at
work, he read a lot without concentration
difficulties, but now, he cannot read
similar material. With forms, he rereads the same material and asks his wife to
• Social activities/ADL:
Normally, he has many interests and recreational
activities, including surfing and regular workouts at the gym. He enjoyed group
activities with friends, generally different sports every week in
teams, with a club at the sports centre. But he does not do these
anymore. He said he gets paranoid near water, as he fears people would drown in
water and he would need to intervene.
He uses the home gym regularly, but no longer uses professional gyms with
On a typical day, Mr Pilon said he does not do a lot, he does some housework
as he listens to podcasts, he watches TV and watches
Netflix for hours,
generally TV series, comedies and dramas. He avoids podcasts and shows about
traumatic content, e.g. a person
with a rough childhood. He does not watch
documentaries or crime shows.
He drives and does the school drop-off, and some gardening and weeding. He
buys the groceries sometimes and his wife does more. He
goes to the shops when
it is quiet and not many people there. He cooks a couple of times a week, but
finds it harder to organize
it, and generally his wife tells him what to buy and
He said sometimes he only showers once daily and previously, he showered
daily twice, as he has always done.
His parents are 10 hours away in Dubbo and he talks to his mother regularly,
but his father has dementia, and cannot hold conversations.
He only visits his
parents once a year, and his parents cannot really travel to visit him due to
his father's condition. He has 2
sisters, but one is 10 hours away and another
is on Sunshine Coast, 3.5 hours away. The relationship is ok, but they only meet
once a year.
He has withdrawn from his friends since the work injury. He said he stopped
talking to some people. He has a friend, an ex-police
officer and they have
coffee every 2 weeks. The friend is supportive.
He has been married since 2013, but the marital relationship is not good, as
he gets angry at home. They separated 4 times and he
left to live in his
parents' home, 10 hours away. He said the last time was a while back, and he
could not recall when. He said they
seemed to be ok, but the marriage is always
up and down, even now.
I asked about trips away, Mr Pilon reported going to Nelson Bay in December
2024, and met up with his parents and sisters, and was
in a caravan park with
his wife and children. He did not like being there. In 2023, they went to Dubbo
as a family for Christmas.
As a family, they went to the Sunshine Coast once in
2024 for his sister's birthday, and they have not gone away in 2025.
He uses iPad for Netflix and does not use social media.
ON EXAMINATION
Mr Pilon was assessed by video. He was at home
during the assessment. He engaged well with the assessment process. There was no
psychomotor
slowing or abnormal movements. He was moderately restricted in his
affect range and reactivity. He spoke spontaneously in a soft
tone. He struggles
to remember details. Before I completed the assessment, I asked him for
additional information that he wanted
to add and he had nothing to add.
• summary of injuries and diagnoses:
Mr Pilon reports that due to his work experience, he
started overusing alcohol and has developed depression, anxiety, and trauma
consistent with Post-traumatic stress disorder. His condition has not
significantly improved over time and certainly not since being
assessed by Dr
Mr Pilon's described difficulties are generally similar to his statement,
noting that he avoids certain places, has difficulty concentrating
and focusing,
cannot read more than a few sentences and has to re-read, and has been
forgetful. There is quite significant social
isolation and apart from one
friend, he does not catch up with anybody outside his family. He has rare trips
and only goes to social
gatherings with support from his family, but even when
going away with his family of origin, he remains withdrawn.
Mr Pilon's described functioning is also generally similar as that noted by
Dr Peter Young in 2024, who noted his plan to go to Nelson
Bay for a trip with
his family of origin for Christmas.
Looking at Dr Bernard Chivaurah’s PIRS, he rated self-care and personal
hygiene as 2, but in fact, he did not identify any specific
deficit. Mr Pilon
reported a level of functioning consistent with 1.
Even though Dr Chivaurah rated concentration, persistence and pace as 4, the
described explanation could be consistent with a 2 or
a 3. The Panel rated 3 on
the basis that Mr Pilon used to be able to focus on reading material for hours
at work, but now he struggles
even with basic forms. He watches Netflix, but
these are all shows that do not require much concentration. Similarly, he
to podcasts while doing housework and is not always focused on them.
In terms of employability, even though Mr Pilon is not at work, he does
regular activities at home, attending to tasks at home and
he is not completely
devoid of productivity, and this is consistent with a 4.
• consistency of presentation
I have found no inconsistency in Mr Pilon's
presentation.”
adopt Medical Assessor Hong’s report. It is apparent that the Medical
Assessor did not adequately consider the evidence before
her in determining Mr
Pilon’s assessment, which in turn caused her to fall into error.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 26 March
2025 should be revoked, and a new MAC should be
issued. The new certificate and
PIRS rating form is attached to this statement of reasons.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Timothy Pilon
Respondent:
State of New South Wales (NSW Police Force)
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Surabhi Verma and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as to
the matters set out in the Table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in NSW workers compensation
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
Psychological/Psychiatric
13 January 2023 (deemed)
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
Table 11.8: PIRS Rating Form
Timothy Pilon
Claim reference number (if known)
Age at time of injury
35 years old
Date of Injury
13 January 2023
Occupation at time of injury
Detective Senior Constable.
Date of Assessment
17 March 2025
Marital Status before injury
Psychiatric diagnoses
Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder.
Depressive Disorder.
Use Disorder in remission.
Psychiatric treatment
Is impairment permanent?
PIRS Category
Reason for Decision
Self-care and personal hygiene
Apart from showering once instead of twice a day, there are no significant
changes compared to before the subject injury. There is
only a minor deficit,
attributable to the normal variation in the general population.
Social and recreational activities
He has rare social and recreational activities and remains quiet and
withdrawn, and needs a support person. He has coffee with a friend
for support.
Social functioning
Mr Pilon's relationship with his wife is severely strained and they have
separated several times. The relationship is not significantly
better since the
last separation.
He is anxious and socially avoidant, and ceased contact
with most of his friends.
The relationship with his general family is more
distant and remains intact.
Concentration, persistence and pace
Mr Pilon described having poor concentration.
He has not undertaken
study since the subject injury.
He does not read as he can only focus for a
couple of minutes. He listens to podcasts when doing household chores, for 30
but does not focus on it . He cannot engage in intellectually
demanding tasks anywhere near 30 minutes.
Employability
Mr Pilon has not worked since the subject injury and his anxieties and
concentration difficulties impact on his capacity to work.
He regularly
performs tasks at home, which are remunerable under different circumstance,
consistent with productivity less than 20
hours per fortnight.
Median Class
Aggregate Score Impairment
Appeal papers page
Guides page
See 11.15-11.21 at Guides
page 65 and Table 11.7 at Guides page
[2017] NSWSC
[2015] NSWSC
[2018] NSWSC
[2022] NSWSC
Appeal papers page 54 at
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers page
Appeal papers pages 76
and 78 respectively.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.37 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter