URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/841.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Campbell v Cottee Parker Architects [2025] NSWPICMP 841; (30 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Campbell v Cottee Parker Architects [2025] NSWPICMP 841
Christine Lori Campbell
RESPONDENT:
Cottee Parker Architects
APPEAL PANEL
Deborah Moore
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Michael Hong
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
DATE OF DECISION:
30 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor (MA) erred by failing to provide
reasons; failed to take into account relevant considerations; failed to
correctly apply the psychiatric impairment rating scale (PIRS),
and did not
afford the appellant procedural fairness;
– MA erred in his
assessment of three of the PIRS categories and his
section 323
deduction; Appeal
Panel found reasons adequate and no error in the PIRS assessments; error in
section 323
deduction; MAC revoked.
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
30 July 2025, Christine Lori Campbell (the appellant) lodged an Application to
Appeal Against the Decision of a Medical Assessor.
The medical dispute was
assessed by Dr Clayton Smith, a Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical
Assessment Certificate (MAC) on 10
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
ed 1 March 2021 (the Guidelines)
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent
Impairment,
PRELIMINARY
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that it was not
necessary for the worker to undergo a further
medical examination because
although one was requested, we consider that we have sufficient evidence before
us to enable us to determine
this appeal, for reasons which will become apparent
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions. They are not repeated in full, but have been
considered by the Appeal Panel.
summary, the appellant submits that the Medical Assessor erred as
(a) the Medical Assessor failed to provide adequate reasons;
(b) the Medical Assessor failed to take into account relevant
considerations;
(c) the Medical Assessor failed to correctly apply the PIRS, and
(d) the Medical Assessor did not afford the appellant procedural fairness.
reply, the respondent submits that no errors were made.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes
of fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
appellant was referred to the Medical Assessor for assessment of whole person
impairment (WPI) in respect of a primary psychological
injury on a date of
injury of 17 April 2003.
Medical Assessor obtained the following history:
“Ms Campbell
is a 45-year-old divorced mother of three teenagers (aged 13, 15 and 18)
residing in Earlwood, where she has rented
a house since May 2023. She has 50/50
shared custody of her children through court-ordered arrangements. She has no
current partner,
with her last relationship ending in mid 2023.
She currently works as a casual interior design lecturer at the Whitehouse
Institute of Design in Redfern, teaching 12 hours per week
(two days) across
three 12-week trimesters annually. She receives workers compensation payments to
supplement her income.
Ms Campbell was employed as an interior designer at Cottee Parker Architects
at the time of injury. She commenced employment on 28
November 2022 in their
Darlinghurst office. She described experiencing workplace bullying from a senior
architect who would abuse,
yell, scream and bang his hand on tables during
meetings and use profanity with colleagues. A specific incident occurred on 8
2023 when the senior architect verbally abused another colleague over a
Pilates class scheduling conflict. By March 2023, she began
experiencing
anxiety, sleep problems and fear of abuse from the senior architect. Additional
stressors included software license
delays, strict deadlines, and high and
unrealistic expectations from management. In March 2023, she attempted to resign
position but was convinced to stay and work from home pending an
investigation into the senior architect’s behaviour. She reported
experiencing subtle workplace bullying and targeting including exclusion from
meetings, withholding of information and passive aggressive
behaviour. Her last
day of work was 12 April 2023.
Her initial treatment involved GP management who initiated a workers
compensation claim. She was prescribed sertraline but discontinued
it after two
days due to increased anxiety, irritability and anger. She was then prescribed
escitalopram. She was referred to a psychologist.
There were difficulties
initiating antidepressant treatment due to symptoms of suspected bipolar
disorder, later confirmed when she
was referred to her treating psychiatrist.
She was diagnosed with bipolar affective disorder type 2, thought to have been
since early adulthood.”
setting out details of Ms Campbell’s treatment regime, the Medical
Assessor then noted present symptoms as follows:
“Ms Campbell
described persistently low mood, anxiety and flattening of her emotions, with
periodic exacerbations of depressed
mood. She expressed existential distress,
questioning, ‘Who am I anymore?’ and loss of confidence. She
described difficulty
with motivation. She has insomnia, which is managed with
medication.
She experiences anxiety in social situations. She has anticipatory anxiety
her employment
status. She has developed avoidant behaviours, only shopping at familiar
locations. She reported feeling judged when
around people other than her family.
She is hypervigilant about others’ perceptions. She avoids small talk and
casual social
interactions. She develops physical anxiety symptoms, including
chest tightness and a rapid heart rate.
She described a loss of confidence in her professional abilities and negative
self-evaluation, describing herself as “a lonely
loser”. She
described rumination about job rejections and her financial situation. She has
intrusive thoughts about her former
workplace. She reported catastrophic
thinking about her future prospects.
She described experiencing difficulties with her memory, particularly with
dates and timelines.
She denied suicidal thoughts, psychotic symptoms, current panic attacks,
aggressive outbursts or self-harm behaviours.“
Details of any previous or subsequent accidents,
injuries or condition
Her first contact with mental health services occurred in 2013 during marital
difficulties. She attended marriage counselling with
her then-husband. During
her separation, she had one to two follow-up sessions with the first
marriage counsellor. The counsellor
identified anxiety stemming from what was
characterised as an abusive relationship, particularly involving financial
control and
coercive behaviour. She told me that physical violence was absent
but the relationship featured power inequality and controlling
behaviours, such
as her husband demanding accountability for time spent outside of the home.
GP records indicated a history of stable
anxiety with depressive features
related to domestic abuse managed by psychology. They noted that the anxiety
symptoms were well-controlled
before recent events.
Ms Campbell was diagnosed with bipolar affective disorder type 2 by her
treating psychiatrist in 2023, a condition she was thought
to have developed in
her late teens/early twenties. She expressed ambivalence about this diagnosis,
acknowledging that in some ways
it made sense given her historically high energy
personality, but questioned why it was not identified earlier, given her ability
to complete multiple qualifications and maintain employment.
According to Dr Vulovic’s assessment in August 2023, her bipolar type 2
appeared to have been present since early adulthood,
although hypomanic episodes
were not particularly severe or functionally impairing. He noted that the recent
workplace events had
exacerbated bipolar symptoms. He also diagnosed
post-traumatic stress disorder related to workplace trauma, noting that the
outbursts occurred outside discreet hypomanic episodes and were more
likely attributable to post-traumatic stress disorder. I note
that the events in
the workplace did not meet Criterion A for post-traumatic stress disorder. He
may have been referring to domestic
violence-related post-traumatic stress
disorder. It was noted that her stepfather was violent in childhood.
Before her workplace injury, she managed without psychiatric medications. Her
first trial of psychiatric medication occurred after
the workplace incident. She
denied any psychiatric hospitalisations or suicide attempts before the workplace
injury. Pre-injury functioning
appeared to have been good, maintaining
employment, caring for her children and engaging in multiple social and sporting
despite any underlying anxiety symptoms. She described herself
pre-injury as ‘vibrant, outgoing, social and the life of the
I note a possible history of depression and alcohol use disorder in her
Medical Assessor then set out details of the impact of her injury on her social
activities and activities of daily living (ADLs)
“She has withdrawn from all previous friendships. She
has difficulties maintaining a full study schedule, completing only two
out of an expected 10 to 12 hours weekly. She procrastinates on her course
requirements. She has withdrawn from previous recreational
activities including
cricket coaching, netball and social sports. She has reduced her self-care
activities cutting her own hair to
avoid interactions in a salon. Her appetite
is reduced with irregular eating patterns.
Ms Campbell maintains basic self-care routines, including showering daily
before work and applying makeup whenever leaving the house.
She independently
manages her grooming including cutting and dyeing her hair rather than visiting
a hairdresser citing both financial
constraints and social anxiety about small
talk. She walks to the local shops daily for groceries. She cooks meals for
herself and
her children, maintains the household, and manages the laundry. She
reported significant weight gain attributed to medication side
effects. She
maintains an appropriate professional appearance for work wearing suitable
attire for teaching. She reported complete
social isolation apart from her
children. She has no local friendships and maintains contact with only two
friends in England via
WhatsApp and occasional Facetime. She has withdrawn from
previously enjoyed activities including netball, cricket coaching and football.
She occasionally attends Rugby League games with her children but otherwise
rarely leaves home except for essential activities. She
deliberately shops at
the same Woolworths because it is familiar and reduces her social anxiety. She
has minimal interaction with
work colleagues beyond brief exchanges with the
receptionist and occasional work-related discussions. She does not participate
staff social activities or socialise during breaks.
She has a driver’s licence but her car has been inoperable since
December, requiring costly repairs leading her to rely on public
transport or
walking. She occasionally borrows her daughter’s car. She uses bus and
train connections for her work commute.
She walks to local shops and services.
She expressed anxiety about unfamiliar travel situations and has restricted her
to familiar locations.
She has no active friendships. She has lost contact with family members,
including her sister and mother, and expressed difficulty
forming new
relationships due to difficulties trusting others and fear of judgment. She
maintains appropriate parenting relationships
with her three children describing
open communication and emotional closeness. Workplace social functioning is
limited to what is
required for her teaching duties. She manages classroom
interactions effectively, describing her enjoyment of the mentoring role
progress of her students. She avoids broader workplace social engagement. Her
capacity to spend time with people other than
her children is limited by social
anxiety, in part caused by embarrassment and fear that she has nothing to
contribute.
She successfully manages structured teaching responsibilities, delivering
three two-hour classes per day, two days weekly. She has
difficulty with
self-directed tasks, evident in her Certificate IV studies, where she completes
only two hours of the expected 10
to 12 hours weekly. She reported difficulty
maintaining focus during job searching, becoming easily distracted and
overwhelmed. She
often procrastinates. She described challenges completing
routine tasks, often leaving them unfinished. Her motivation varies. There
been no concerns about her performance at work. I note she is certified for 32
hours per week. She teaches an ethics class on
Mondays at a local primary school
between 2:20 pm and 3:00 pm.
On a typical workday, she is up at 7:00 a.m. and ensures her children are
awake. She showers, applies makeup, gets dressed and walks
to the bus stop. She
commutes to Redfern via bus and train. She prepares her classroom and checks her
equipment, then teaches her
first class from 9:00 am to 11:00 am. She has a
coffee break from 11:00 am to 11:30 am and then teaches her second class. She
a brief break between 1:30 pm and 2:00 pm before teaching her final class
between 2:00 pm and 4:00 pm. She commutes home and shops
at Woolworths on her
way. She attends to household chores and laundry, cooks and eats dinner, and
spends some time preparing for
the next day’s classes when she has classes
the following day. At 8:30 pm, she takes her medications, says goodnight to her
children and retires to bed around 9:30 pm.
On a non-teaching day, she has no fixed routine. She attempts to study but
has difficulties with motivation. She performs household
chores and walks to the
shops for daily groceries. She searches for jobs. She has limited social or
recreational activities.”
on examination were reported as follows:
“Ms Campbell
presented on time. She was pleasant and cooperative with recently self-dyed and
cut hair and fashionable glasses.
Her mood was depressed and anxious with a
restricted, matter-of-fact affect. Her speech was of normal rate, tone and
volume. She
was articulate with organised thoughts. She expressed anxious and
depressive thoughts, particularly regarding career and financial
concerns and
loss of identity. She described catastrophic thinking and fears of being judged
by others. There were themes of shame
and guilt. She denied suicidal thoughts.
No evidence of psychotic symptoms or hypomania was observed. She was alert and
There were no overt cognitive deficits observed during the assessment.
Cognition was not formally assessed. Her insight and judgment
were intact and
she claimed to take medication as prescribed.”
Medical Assessor then summarised the injuries and diagnoses as
“Ms Campbell is a 45-year-old interior designer who
developed an aggravation of bipolar disorder type 2 in the context of perceived
workplace bullying and a toxic workplace culture. Her symptoms remain consistent
with mild bipolar type 2 depressive phase.
She reported a depressed mood and loss of pleasure in previously enjoyed
activities for most of the day for more days than not with
insomnia (managed by
medication), impaired motivation, lowered self-esteem, impaired concentration
and intrusive depressive thoughts.
She described changes in appetite and weight
gain. There is associated functional impairment.”
Medical Assessor added:
“Ms Campbell presented as a consistent
historian. There was no evidence of exaggeration, hyperbole or malingering. Her
presentation
was consistent with the medical evidence provided by her treating
clinicians. Several inconsistencies were noted in the most recent
assessment, which Ms Campbell noted was incorrect. She stated that she had no
supportive family or friends, and her social
interactions were limited to her
children only. Her presentation was consistent with the mechanism of the injury
and the mental state
examination.”
Medical Assessor assessed 7% WPI from which he deducted 1/10
respect of the pre-existing condition.
then set out a summary of the material he had before him.
is both detailed and extensive and we propose to consider relevant material in
our discussion below.
The appellant’s submissions
have been summarised above.
specifically, the appellant submits that the Medical Assessor erred in respect
of his assessment in three of the PIRS categories,
namely social functioning,
concentration, persistence and pace and employability.
addition, it is submitted that the Medical Assessor denied the appellant
procedural fairness in making a deduction pursuant to
s 323 of the 1998 Act.
submissions are as follows:
(a) There is no analysis or reasoning provided in respect of the Medical
Assessor’s reference to the reports of Dr Nagesh and
Dr Sherman such that
it is difficult to appreciate how the Medical Assessor formed their own
(b) The Medical Assessor appears to simply recite the history and does not
provide any further insight or commentary in support of
their argument,
particularly so in relation to the report of Dr Nagesh which the Medical
Assessor reported was at odds with the available
evidence. It is not clear how
the Medical Assessor formed this opinion in the absence of any reasons.
(c) What is to be set out in the statement of reasons is the actual path of
reasoning by which the Medical Assessor arrived at the
opinion the Medical
Assessor actually formed.
(d) Dr Abhishek Nagesh (Psychiatrist) reported on 6 August 2024 at page 6 of his
report that the appellant had no pre-existing condition.
(e) Dr Ian Sherman (Psychiatrist) in his report dated 6 December 2024 at page 12
of his report indicated there was weak evidence
that the appellant suffered from
bipolar disorder. Dr Sherman also stated that a deduction of 10% was not
appropriate and that there
was insufficient evidence to suggest the
appellant’s recent presentation, at the time of the report, was closely
the previous bipolar disorder. It was Dr Sherman’s impression
that the appellant had adjustment disorder arising from work
circumstances.
(f) The Medical Assessor does not adequately respond to and simply repeats the
findings of Dr Nagesh and Dr Sherman, which the appellant
submits are relevant
considerations.
Functioning
(a) The Medical Assessor assessed the appellant as a Class 2 in respect of the
PIRS category ‘social functioning’.
(b) The Medical Assessor took a history that the appellant experienced anxiety
in social situations. The Medical Assessor also took
a history the appellant had
anticipatory anxiety about social interactions. The appellant had developed
avoidant behaviours, only
shopping at familiar locations. The appellant avoided
small talk and social interactions with physical anxiety symptoms, 12 including
chest tightness and a rapid heart rate. The Medical Assessor also took a history
that the appellant had a negative self-evaluation,
describing herself as a
“a lonely loser”.
The MAC took a history that the appellant had withdrawn from all
previous friendships. The appellant reported complete social isolation
from her children. The appellant had no local friendships and did not
participate in staff social activities or socialise during
breaks. The Medical
Assessor also took a history that the appellant had no active friendships, had
lost contact with family members,
including her sister and mother, and expressed
difficulty forming new relationships due to difficulties trusting others and
of judgment.
At page 9 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor took a history that the appellant
reported she had no family or friends who live nearby,
no network of supportive
family or friends, that she was no longer volunteering as a cricket coach and
was not actively involved
in the community.
Despite the history being replete with the appellant’s difficulties
with social functioning, the Medical Assessor assessed the
appellant as a Class
2. Particularly so in circumstances where the Medical Assessor recorded at page
6 of the MAC that the appellant
presented as a consistent historian with no
evidence of exaggeration, hyperbole or malingering.
Based on the Medical Assessor’s own history, the appellant’s PIRS
rating in respect of 13 ‘social functioning’
more closely aligns
with a Class 3 rating as a minimum or a Class 4.
Concentration,
persistence and pace
(a) The Medical Assessor determined that the appellant had difficulty with
self-directed tasks evident in her Certificate IV studies
where she completed
only two hours of the expected 10 to 12 hours weekly.
(b) However, the Medical Assessor is silent on providing a breakdown of how the
appellant completed the two hours of coursework.
On the available history in the
MAC, it is not clear whether the appellant would complete this in short blocks
or a longer period
of time. The reader is simply forced to draw their own
(c) At page 13 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor does take a history that the
appellant reported difficulty maintaining focus during
job searching becoming
easily distracted and overwhelmed. The appellant often procrastinated and
described challenges completing
routine tasks often leaving them unfinished.
(d) On 19 November 2024, Dr Vedran Vulovic, treating psychiatrist, noted that
completing her coursework has been difficult. She gets
distracted, that she was
behind in her studies and she had problems keeping up with deadlines, recalling
and retaining information.
(e) On 20 November 2024, Dr Carpio noted that she had failed her course, missed
two assessments that she was unaware of, having submitted
all her other
assessments.
(f) Despite referring to this evidence, the Medical Assessor appears to make no
light [sic] of the appellant’s apparent difficulties
or how it impacts on
her concentration, persistence and pace.
(g) On the available evidence, the appellant warranted a Class 3 rating in
respect of the PIRS category ‘concentration, persistence
Employability
(a) The Medical Assessor does not grapple with or address how his opinion
differed to the opinion of Dr Abhishek Nagesh (Psychiatrist)
in his report dated
6 August 2024. The Medical Assessor simply acknowledges that Dr Nagesh’s
opinion was at odds with the available
evidence and does not explore this issue
more fully.
(b) The Medical Assessor also took a history that the appellant worked as a
casual lecturer at the Whitehouse Institute of Design,
teaching 12 hours weekly.
However, the Medical Assessor is silent on how the appellant’s work hours
are impacted by the subject
injury and whether her employment on a causal basis
is due to her psychological symptoms resulting from the subject injury.
(c) In the context of these matters, the Medical Assessor did not correctly
apply the PIRS and thus erred.
s 323 issue
(a) The Medical Assessor at page 10 of the MAC relevantly stated the following:
“The extent of the deduction is difficult or
costly to determine so in
applying the provisions of s.323(2) I assess the deductible proportion as one
tenth. I note that she was
functioning well prior to the injury.”
(b) In circumstances where the Medical Assessor expressly stated the appellant
was functioning well prior to injury, the appellant
is at a loss as to how the
Medical Assessor determined that the appellant’s reported pre-existing
bipolar disorder type 2 contributed
to the appellant’s impairment.
(c) Further, there was clearly medical evidence supporting the position that the
appellant was not suffering from a pre-existing
condition as contained in the
report of Dr Nagesh dated 6 August 2024.
(d) Also, Dr Sherman in his report dated 6 December 2024 reported there was weak
evidence that the appellant may suffer from bipolar
disorder. Dr Sherman also
reported that a deduction of 10% was not appropriate as there was insufficient
evidence to suggest the
appellant’s recent presentation, at the time of
his report, was closely related to her previous bipolar disorder.
(e) The Medical Assessor appears to simply ignore the evidence available before
indicated earlier, the respondent submits that no errors were
The ‘Reasons’ Issue
reasons for an administrative decision are not to be minutely and finely
construed with an eye keenly attuned to the perception
of error. The reasons are
meant to inform and not to be overtly scrutinised by seeking to discern whether
some inadequacy may be
gleaned from the way in which the reasons are expressed.
See Vitaz v Westform (NSW) Pty Ltd & Ors
[2020] NSWSC667.)
our view, the Medical Assessor’s reasons were adequate in the context of
an overall reading of the MAC.
example, when the Medical Assessor noted that the opinion of Dr Nagesh was
“at odds with the available evidence” he
explained why this was so
in the MAC and the annexed table.
1.6 of the Guidelines requires a Medical Assessor to make an assessment on the
day of examination, “taking into account
the claimant’s relevant
medical history and all available relevant medical information...”
expressing an opinion as to some of this “medical information” the
Medical Assessor was simply fulfilling his task
as required by the
Guidelines.
these reasons, we do not accept the appellant’s submissions on this
Social Functioning
Medical Assessor assessed a Class 2 rating and said:
no active friendships. She has lost contact with family members, including her
sister and mother, and expressed difficulty
forming new relationships due to
difficulties trusting others and fear of judgment. She maintains appropriate
parenting relationships
with her three children describing open communication
and emotional closeness. Workplace social functioning is limited to what is
required for her teaching duties. She manages classroom interactions
effectively, describing her enjoyment of the mentoring role
and the progress of
her students. She avoids broader workplace social engagement. Her capacity to
spend time with people other than
her children is limited by social anxiety, in
part caused by embarrassment and fear that she has nothing to
contribute.”
descriptor for a Class 2 rating reads: “Mild impairment: Existing
relationships strained. Tension and arguments with partner
or close family
member, loss of some friendships.”
descriptor for a Class 3 reads: “Moderate impairment: Previously
established relationships severely strained, evidenced
by periods of separation
or domestic violence. Spouse, relatives or community services looking after
a Class 4 it reads: “Severe impairment: unable to form or sustain long
term relationships. Pre-existing relationships ended
(eg, lost partner, close
friends.) Unable to care for dependents (eg own children elderly
is simply no evidence to support a Class 4 rating in this category since the
appellant told the Medical Assessor she was both
close to her children and spent
considerable time with them “describing open communication and emotional
closeness.”
in our view is a Class 3 rating appropriate since there is no evidence of
domestic violence or that her former spouse or other
relatives, let alone
community services are looking after the children.
as the Medical Assessor noted, “She maintains appropriate parenting
relationships with her three children describing
open communication and
emotional closeness
not bound by the opinions of other doctors, they do form part of the evidence
which we must consider.
this regard, we note that Dr Nagesh assessed a Class 2 as did Dr Sherman.
is able to interact with her students “describing her enjoyment of the
mentoring role and the progress of her students.”
addition, as far as family and friends are concerned, we note that many of them
are not local in any event.
certainly accept, as did the Medical Assessor, that Ms Campbell has some
restrictions in this category, but those restrictions
are entirely consistent
with a Class 2 rating.
the appellant’s submissions fail.
Concentration,
persistence and pace
Medical Assessor assessed a Class 2 rating and said:
successfully manages structured teaching responsibilities delivering three
two-hour classes per day, two days weekly. She
has difficulty with self-directed
tasks evident in her Certificate IV studies where she completes only two hours
of the expected
10 to 12 hours weekly. She reported difficulty maintaining focus
during job searching becoming easily distracted and overwhelmed.
procrastinates. She described challenges completing routine tasks often leaving
them unfinished. Her motivation varies.
There have been no concerns about her
performance at work.”
descriptor for a Class 2 reads:
“Mild impairment: can
undertake a basic retraining course, or a standard course at a slower pace. Can
focus on intellectually
demanding tasks for periods of up to 30 minutes, then
feels fatigued or develops headache.”
a Class 3 it reads:
“Moderate impairment: unable to read more
than newspaper articles. Finds it difficult to follow complex instructions (eg
manuals, building plans), make significant repairs to motor vehicle,
accept that the examples in Table 11.1 are examples only and are not exclusive,
but in this instance the Medical Assessor’s
description of the duration
for which Ms Campbell can concentrate and persist accords with the Class 2
descriptor almost exactly.
Campbell is clearly able to focus for longer than 30 minutes given her teaching
workload and the necessary preparation this would
entail. She is also able to
read “more than newspaper articles.”
expressed by Member Carolyn Rimmer in
Wright v Ngroo Education
Incorporated
[2022] NSWPICMP 106:
“Concentration, persistence and pace
is a category where the assessor can apply clinical judgment and considerable
weight must
be given to the assessor’s observations in the clinical
examination. The assessor, during the clinical examination, is able
the worker’s ability to concentrate, assess persistence with the cognitive
demands of the assessment, and observe
the pace at which the worker can
observations of Member Rimmer, whilst not binding, highlight the significance
and probative value of the evidence obtained by
a medical assessor on the day of
examination when it comes to the concentration, persistence and pace category.
short, nowhere has the Medical Assessor described a Class 3 rating.
must be remembered that cl 1.6 of the Guidelines provides: “Assessing
permanent impairment involves clinical assessment of
the claimant as they
present on the day of assessment...”
these reasons, we do not agree with the appellant’s submissions in this
category and they fail.
Employability
Medical Assessor assessed a Class 3 rating and said: “She is working 12
hours per week in a less stressful role.”
agree that these reasons set out in his table are not very detailed, however, in
the body of the MAC, the Medical Assessor set
out considerable detail about the
nature and extent of her current employment.
descriptor for a Class 3 rating reads:
“Moderate impairment:
cannot work at all in same position. Can perform less than 20 hours per week in
a different position,
which requires less skill or is qualitatively different
(eg less stressful).”
a Class 4 it reads: “Severe impairment: cannot work more than one or two
days at a time, less than 20 hours per fortnight.
Pace is reduced, attendance is
again, the appellant’s particular employment fits precisely with the
descriptor for a Class 3 rating.
are frankly at a loss to understand the appellant’s submissions on this
Medical Assessor took a history that the appellant worked as a casual lecturer
at the Whitehouse Institute of Design, teaching
12 hours weekly.
is meant by the submission that “the MA is silent on how the
appellant’s work hours are impacted by the subject injury
and whether her
employment on a causal basis is due to her psychological symptoms resulting from
the subject injury” is unclear.
the Medical Assessor noted her current employment and the obvious inference was
that that was as a result of her injury
(his job was to assess that) and
accordingly rated a Class 3.
addition, we note the Medical Assessor’s comments regarding the opinion of
Dr Carpio. The Medical Assessor said:
“On 25 September 2024,
Dr Emmanuel Carpio noted that she had commenced a new job teaching and was
loving it, was doing well
and was not stressed about the job.
On 1 October 2024, Dr Carpio noted that he discussed her progress at work and
that she was doing well and completing her course work
while working well. On 23
October 2024, he noted that she was work well in her teaching role with no
increase in work-related anxiety.
She was noted to enjoy her work as a teacher
and was getting good feedback from students. She was noted be keeping up with
her schedule
to complete her final assessment due on 17 November and was aiming
to increase her hours after submission of her final assessment.
On 20 November 2024, Dr Carpio noted that she had failed her course, missed
to [sic] assessments that she was unaware of having submitted
all her other
assessments. She withdrew from her course and her work hours were increased to
eight hours, three days per week.”
she may have had some difficulties at that time with the course work, she
nonetheless continued working and was in fact certified
as fit to work
“eight hours, three days per week.
The s 323 Deduction
this issue, we agree with the appellant’s submissions for reasons that
Medical Assessor made the following comments:
“Ms Campbell was
diagnosed with bipolar affective disorder type 2 by her treating psychiatrist in
2023, a condition she was
thought to have developed in her late teens/early
twenties. She expressed ambivalence about this diagnosis, acknowledging that in
some ways it made sense given her historically high energy personality, but
questioned why it was not identified earlier, given her
ability to complete
multiple qualifications and maintain employment. According to Dr Vulovic’s
assessment in August 2023,
her bipolar type 2 appeared to have been present
since early adulthood, although hypomanic episodes were not particularly severe
functionally impairing
. (our emphasis) ...
Before her workplace injury, she managed without psychiatric medications. Her
first trial of psychiatric medication occurred after
the workplace incident. She
denied any psychiatric hospitalisations or suicide attempts before the workplace
. Pre-injury functioning appeared to have been good, maintaining
employment, caring for her children and engaging in multiple social
and sporting
activities despite any
underlying anxiety symptoms
. (Our emphasis)
section 11(b), the Medical Assessor explained the contribution from the
pre-existing condition as: “A history of recurrent
mood disorder
(hypomanic and depressive episodes) and anxiety, interpersonal difficulties (for
example, difficulties trusting others),
also associated with and aggravated by
exposure to domestic violence in her marriage.”
the Panel’s view, this does not explain how her previous psychological
condition contributed to her current psychiatric impairment.
People can have
previous recurrent psychiatric episodes that do not contribute to the current
impairment.
his report dated 6 December 2024, Dr Ian Sherman noted “weak evidence that
she may suffer from bipolar disorder.”
2013 there were domestic violence issues that led to psychiatric intervention
and it may be that Dr Vulovic was referring to that
way, the appellant was clearly functioning at a high level in a demanding job
prior to her work-place injury.
Section 323 of the 1998 Act states:
“(1) In assessing the
degree of permanent impairment resulting from an injury, there is to be a
deduction for any proportion
of the impairment that is due to any previous
injury (whether or not it is an injury for which compensation has been paid or
under Division 4 of Part 3 of the 1987 Act) or that is due to any
pre-existing condition or abnormality.
(2) If the extent of a deduction under this section (or a part of it) will be
difficult or costly to determine (because, for example,
of the absence of
medical evidence), it is to be assumed (for the purpose of avoiding disputation)
that the deduction (or the relevant
part of it) is 10% of the impairment, unless
this assumption is at odds with the available evidence.”
v Wenaline Pty Ltd
(2010) NSWSC 78
(‘Cole’) is relevant
authority for s.323 of the 1998 Act. It is noted that in order for a deduction
to be made under
s.323 there must be evidence that a pre-existing abnormality;
condition; or previous injury contributes to the impairment.
Fire & Rescue NSW v Clinen
[2013] NSWSC 629
, Campbell J referred to
D'Aelo v Ambulance Service of New South Wales
(1996) NSWCCR 139
Elcheikh v Diamond Formwork (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWSC 365
. Campbell J said at [32]:
“As Schmidt J pointed
, it is necessary to find a pre-existing
abnormality or condition, here the latter, actually contributing to the
impairment before
s.323 WIM is engaged. This conclusion has to be supported by
evidence to that effect. Assumption will not suffice.”
regard to these authorities, there is no compelling evidence to support a
conclusion that any pre-existing condition the appellant
contributed
to the impairment.
short, we do not consider that any deduction is warranted.
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 6 January
2025 should be revoked, and a new MAC should be
issued. The new certificate is
attached to this statement of reasons.
WORKERS COMPENSATION DIVISION
APPEAL PANEL
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Injuries received after 1 January 2002
Matter number:
Christine Lori Campbell
Respondent:
Cottee Parker Architects
This Certificate is issued pursuant to
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act
The Appeal Panel revokes the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical
Assessor Dr Clayton Smith and issues this new Medical Assessment
Certificate as
to the matters set out in the table below:
Table - whole person impairment (WPI)
Body Part or system
Date of Injury
Chapter, page and paragraph number in WorkCover Guides
Chapter, page, paragraph, figure and table numbers in AMA 5
Proportion of permanent impairment due to pre-existing injury,
abnormality or condition
Sub-total/s % WPI (after any deductions in column 6)
Psychological
17 April 2023
Total % WPI (the Combined Table values of all sub-totals)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.17 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter