URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bulghadaryan v State of New South Wales (South Eastern Sydney Local Health District) [2025] NSWPICPD 59; (11 August 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Bulghadaryan v State of New South Wales (South Eastern Sydney Local
Health District)
[2025] NSWPICPD 59
Anna Bulghadaryan
RESPONDENT:
State of New South Wales (South Eastern Sydney Local Health District)
Employers Mutual Limited – TMF
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W26938/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Geoffrey Parker SC
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
11 August 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Application to receive additional evidence is refused.
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 10 December 2024 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – assessment of the evidence – claimed
injury to the shoulders not found by the Member at first instance
finding by Member of injury to lumbar and cervical spines –
section 352(6)
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
– fresh or additional evidence – claimant undergoes MRI after Member
decides case at first instance – additional
evidence in the form of a
statement, MRI and report sought to be relied on in the appeal in relation to
the shoulders –
CHEP Australia Limited v Strickland
[2013] NSWCA
12 DDCR 501
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr M Greene, solicitor
Carroll & O’Dea Lawyers
Respondent:
Ms K Balendra, counsel
Hicksons Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Bulghadaryan v State of New South Wales (South Eastern Sydney Local
Health District)
[2024] NSWPIC 685
Mr P McAdam
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
10 December 2024
INTRODUCTION
appeal is from a decision of a Member of the Personal Injury Commission dated
10 December 2024.
appellant, Ms Anna Bulghadaryan, was employed at the Sydney Eye Hospital as a
medical records officer. The Sydney Eye Hospital
had physical files and records
that the appellant was required to move. She claimed lump sum compensation for a
22% whole person
impairment.
issue in dispute between the parties was whether the appellant had suffered an
injury to her lumbar spine and both shoulders arising
out of or in the course of
her employment with the respondent.
10 December 2024, the Commission determined that issue as
“1. I am satisfied that Ms Bulghadaryan suffered an
injury to the lumbar spine arising out of or in the course of her employment
with the respondent, to which employment was the main contributing factor.
for the respondent for injury to both shoulders.
matter is remitted to the President for referral to a Medical Assessor pursuant
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act
for assessment as follows:
(a) Date of injury: 7 February 2024 (deemed).
(b) Body systems/parts:
(i) cervical spine, and
(ii) lumbar spine.
(c) Method of assessment: whole person impairment.
documents to be referred to the Medical Assessor are:
(a) the Application and attached documents;
(b) the Reply and attached documents, and
(c) an Application to Admit Late Documents dated 22 November 2024 and attached
documents.”
appellant seeks to adduce additional evidence pursuant to s 352(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Act) and otherwise seeks to agitate two grounds of appeal,
– Error of fact in relation to the
diagnosis provided by Dr Bodel in his reports and what is required of an
orthopaedic surgeon
to arrive at the diagnosis.
– Error of discretion in failing to properly engage
with the evidence.
the reasons that follow I decline to receive the additional evidence, dismiss
the appeal and confirm the Member’s Certificate
Determination.
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member accepted the appellant’s statement dated 6 June 2024 which set out
the background to her injury, including an increase
in duties occasioned by
staff reductions. There was brief mention made of shoulder pain developing in
2020 due to the requirement
to stack large numbers of files.
summarised the evidence of Dr Bodel, orthopaedic surgeon, who provided the
assessment upon which the appellant’s claim was
based. In the report of 2
February 2024, Dr Bodel described the injuries as gradual onset of neck and
shoulder girdle pain; the right
shoulder was worse than the left. The appellant
also suffered from lower back pain. The doctor explained that the injury
due to the nature of the work; the intensity of heavy lifting and
repetitive use of the arms, at times overhead.
2 September 2024 Dr Bodel reported in respect of the shoulders as
“Your client has rotator cuff pathology in both
shoulders and the nature and condition of the work has caused aggravation,
acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration to rotator cuff disease probably in
the form of tendonitis bursitis in the circumstance. Underlying pathology
aggravated by work is causing pain, stiffness and loss of function as I have
indicated.”
Member said Dr Bodel rejected the connection between the cervical spine and the
shoulder pathology.
Member referred to the reports of Dr Hale, orthopaedic surgeon qualified by the
respondent. In the report of 8 December 2022,
Dr Hale commented upon the
diagnosis provided in the Certificate of Capacity issued by general practitioner
Dr Ekmejian of “neck
strain and back injury”, saying that those
diagnoses were reasonable and consistent with Dr Hale’s conclusions.
noted from Dr Hale’s report of 8 December
“The symptoms certainly appears [sic] to be due to the
repetitive nature [of the work] that Anna has been required to do, particularly
in an environment of an increased workload causation.”
the report of 30 April 2024 Dr Hale diagnosed soft tissue injury to the cervical
spine and low back pain with no clear correlation
to employment. Dr Hale
rejected any connection between employment, the lumbar pain and the condition of
the shoulders. He said:
“It is reasonable to attribute the
neck pain to the work-related injury in 2022 but there is no evidence of a
specific shoulder
pathology or lumbar condition.”
Hale provided a supplementary report of 14 November 2024 in which he largely
reiterated his previous opinion and expressed disagreement
with the assessment
by Dr Bodel.
Member summarised the evidence of Dr Walker, a neurologist qualified by the
respondent, in his two reports of 24
July 2023 and 18 October
2023. The passages quoted by the Member from Dr Walker’s reports include
the assertion by Dr Walker
that “[t]here was no actual
‘injury’ on 8 August 2022 but rather that is the date Ms
Bulghadaryan decided to choose.”
And the subsequent opinion as at 18
October 2023, “[t]here was no event that caused her presentation. She says
that she developed
pain whilst at work but we have no way to verify that. There
was no pathology found.” The Member noted that Dr Walker agreed
diagnosis but suggested that it had nothing to do with her work.
treating doctor, Dr Alan Nazha, pain physician, provided a report dated 2
February 2023. He supported a connection between the
pain the appellant was
experiencing in the lower back and the neck with work related injury.
appellant saw Professor Aggarwal, a neurologist and rehabilitation pain medicine
specialist. Professor Aggarwal diagnosed “chronic
generalised neuropathic
pain syndrome with central sensitisation”. The Member observed that the
remainder of the Professor’s
reports focused on the cervical and lower
Member quoted from the clinical notes maintained by the general practitioner and
“Also before me are the clinical notes provided by Ms
Bulghadaryan’s treating general practitioner. On 3 September 2022,
first attendance is recorded, relating to ‘neck pains, extending all the
way down the spine’. A note on 7 September
2022 records ‘after
working only two hours, gets neck pains, going down to shoulders, not to
arms’. On 4 October 2022,
the lumbar spine is included, where Dr Ekmejian
records ‘done some job on lower back’ and refers Ms Bulghadaryan for
a CT of the lumbar
summarising the parties’ submissions, the Member expressed his findings
and reasons. Under the heading “Lumbar Spine”
the Member observed
that the lumbar spine was only faintly disputed by the respondent.
Member rejected Dr Walker’s opinions on the basis that his focus on a lack
of specific injury misled the doctor in the conclusion
he reached. The Member
observed that Ms Bulghadaryan did not allege that there was a specific
injurious event. She alleged a gradual
onset condition, being a disease or
aggravation of a disease type case. There is no specific incident to report as
the duties of
her employment, over a period of time, caused her injury (as she
the Member observed in relation to Dr Walker:
“I would also
note that Dr Walker has dismissed the [appellant] on the basis of what he
describes as a ‘clerical job’.
It is accepted that in general terms
that the role Ms Bulghadaryan occupied was clerical in nature. However,
describing it in the
almost dismissive terms, as Dr Walker has done, belies the
actual nature of the work, which is undisputed. Ms Bulghadaryan’s
statement explains this best, and it involved moving large amounts of physical
files in boxes. This is not typical ‘clerical’
work or the type of
work all the doctors would be familiar with in record keeping for a modern
hospital. This is physical work, in
an antiquated system, that over time got
heavier and heavier due to departures and resourcing
Walker’s opinion was rejected because he had not properly considered the
actual duties performed by the appellant and his
conclusion was based on an
incorrect history. Furthermore, he had misunderstood the nature of injury as
defined in the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
, as opposed to the generally
understood definition of injury being a specific incident or
contest as the Member saw it was between Drs Bodel and Hale, observing that
Dr Hale’s rejection of the injury was not particularly
forceful. The
Member observed, referring to Dr Hale, “[h]e supports her claim at least
symptomatically, if not on the basis
of a strong causal chain. He suggests there
is no clear lumbar condition or pathology, but that is not explained and is
inconsistent
with the history he takes from Ms Bulghadaryan of low back
Member quotes from Dr Bodel observing that he takes a full history of the nature
of the appellant’s duties and the work
she performed. Dr Bodel records the
increase in filings in conjunction with the loss of staff. The Member quotes Dr
opinion in disagreement with Dr Hale as follows:
“This history of this lady’s injury is quite specific. She has had a
very heavy work load which increased dramatically
over a period of years. I
believe that is causative to the pathology of the neck, back and shoulders by
way of aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation, and deterioration to underlying
disease processes. I acknowledge that the investigations show minimal changes
much more than one would expect for a person of this age but I am still
satisfied that the nature of the work based on the history
that I have been
given as to the work and the difficulty associated with it particularly after an
almost doubling of the workload
and one third of the workforce was not
Member said:
“I am satisfied that Dr Bodel has taken a full history of duties performed
and reached an appropriate conclusion considering
the history and material
before him. I give more weight to his opinion [than to] those proffered by the
respondent for that reason.
I accept the respondent’s submission that I should treat Ms
Bulghadaryan’s statement with caution. I have done so and
agree that there
is a degree of inconsistent [sic] in how she initially reports the onset of pain
in her back with that recorded
in the clinical notes. I do not think that
undermines Ms Bulghadaryan’s case so significantly as to make it
unacceptable. It
may be that she experienced some minor pains in 2017 or so that
were manageable.”
Member said there was support for the appellant’s lumbar spine claim in
the reports of the treating specialist Dr Nazha.
Professor Aggarwal does not
disagree with the appellant’s subjective conclusion that the work involved
in the records department
resulted in the symptoms. Further, the Member referred
to the general practitioner’s notes as supporting the claim.
the issue of injury to the lumbar spine the Member concluded:
“For the above reasons, I am satisfied that Ms Bulghadaryan suffered an
injury to her lumbar spine in the course of her employment
with the respondent,
to which employment was the main contributing factor. The lumbar spine will be
referred for an assessment of
whole person
impairment.”
finding in favour of the appellant concerning the lumbar spine is not
challenged.
with the left and right shoulders, the Member said:
“The [appellant’s] case for injury in the shoulders is significantly
less convincing than in the lumbar spine. She has
the onus to prove her case,
and although the standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities, it is
still her onus to prove.”
Member quotes from part of the appellant’s statement at paragraph [14]
which he said contained a sparse reference to her
general practitioner’s note of 3 September 2022 does not refer to problems
in the shoulder. The entry of 7 September 2022
includes a clinical
“... very heavy duties
after working only two hours, gets neck pains, going down to shoulders, not
better on weekends when she is not working.”
the clinical notes it was unclear whether the reference to pain in the shoulders
was coming from the neck or arose from pathology
in that part of the
Bodel was the only specialist who supported the claim with respect to the
Member quoted the passage from Dr Bodel’s report of 2 September 2024 set
out above. Dr Bodel did not regard the bilateral
shoulder pain as having its
origin in the cervical spine pathology.
treating specialists did not refer “particularly” to any problems in
the shoulders. The Member said that Dr Nazha
“‘Intermittently, she states there is pain
that radiates interscapularly’ (the scapula being the shoulder blade).
That would support a conclusion that the pain is radiating from the neck, rather
than being distinct pathology in the
Member says:
“Dr Hale’s opinion in respect of the
shoulders is similar to his opinion in the lumbar spine; that is a lack of
pathology. In respect of the shoulders, this is much more persuasive.
There are no specific investigations undertaken in respect
of the shoulders.
There is no particular pathology identified in any of the treating material,
other than some referred pain. Dr
Bodel describes rotator cuff pathology but
does not say what that pathology is.
He opines that there has been a deterioration of ‘rotator cuff disease
probably in the form of tendonitis bursitis’ but
that is an inconclusive
‘probably’ diagnosis and is made without reference to any treatment,
investigations or firm diagnosis
in the shoulders.
In the absence of any treating material supporting a finding, and where Dr
Bodel has reached his conclusion in a bare way without
real explanation as to
his diagnosis, I am not satisfied that Ms Bulghadaryan has suffered an injury to
either shoulder, on the balance
of probabilities.”
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
respondent does not dispute that the appeal was filed within time.
Threshold issue
respondent does not dispute that the appeal satisfies s 352(3) of the 1998
Act as to the amount of compensation at issue, being
at least $5,000 and at
least 20% of the amount awarded.
Interlocutory decision
decision is not an interlocutory decision.
On the papers
parties have submitted that the appeal can be determined on the papers.
Personal Injury Commission Act
(the 2020 Act),
together with Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3 provide that I may be satisfied
that the documents and the submissions
of the parties provide me with sufficient
information so that the appeal can be determined on the papers without holding
hearing. I am satisfied in this matter and propose to determine the
matter on the papers without holding any conference or formal
Nature of the appeal
appellate jurisdiction conferred by s 352 of the 1998 Act relevantly
“(5) An appeal under this section is limited to a
determination of whether the decision appealed against was or was not affected
by an error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of any such error.
The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
State of New South Wales v
the Court of Appeal
constituted by five members delivered important guidance as to the appellate
leading judgment was delivered by Leeming JA
(with whom Kirk and McHugh JJA agreed, with short agreeing judgments from Bell
Honour said at [91]:
“Future appeals under s 352 should apply
the approach in
Warren v Coombes
Fox v Percy
. Appropriate
deference is to be given to members where their findings are based on evidence
in respect of which they have an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it
is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference
was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member were a jury and there was
some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential Member, after making
appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a
different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink from
giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
kind of matters identified in
“factual findings which are likely to have been
affected by impressions about the credibility and reliability of witnesses
by the trial judge as a result of seeing and hearing them give their
evidence. It includes findings of secondary facts which are
combination of these impressions and other inferences from primary
the present matter the Member determined the appellant’s claim on the
basis of the written evidence. His findings of fact
did not depend on
impressions about credibility or reliability of the witnesses in so far as he
neither saw nor heard them.
Further evidence
352(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“Evidence that is fresh
evidence or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence received
in relation to the
decision appealed against may not be given on an appeal to
the Commission except with the leave of the Commission. The Commission
grant leave unless satisfied that the evidence concerned was not available to
the party, and could not reasonably have
been obtained by the party, before the
proceedings concerned or that failure to grant leave would cause substantial
injustice in
additional evidence the appellant wishes to rely upon is:
(a) a statement of the appellant dated 7 January 2025, and
(b) an MRI of both shoulders and report dated 20 December 2024.
is convenient to deal with the application to rely on additional evidence
immediately.
additional evidence is received on the application for leave to rely on the
material but for the reasons that follow not otherwise.
appellant’s statement provides relevantly:
December 2024, my solicitors at Carroll & O’Dea Lawyers sent me a copy
of the Certificate of Determination
of Member McAdam dated 10 December
2024. Following review of the decision where the Member was of the opinion that
suffer injuries to both or either shoulder, I wanted to get
clarification as to why I was experiencing pain in my shoulders.
12 December 2024, I attended a consultation with my GP Dr Raffi Sahajian. As I
had done since seeing Dr Sahajian since August 2024,
previously seeing
Dr Ekmejian, I had confirmed that I had been experiencing pain in both my
shoulders due to increase in my work
tasks with the Sydney Eye Hospital.
Dr Sahajian asked why I had not undergone an MRI, which I told him because
none of my treating
doctors including Dr Ekmejian recommended I undergo an MRI
of the shoulders.”
On 19 December 2024 the appellant underwent an MRI of both shoulders.
MRI report is the second piece of additional evidence that the appellant wishes
to rely upon. The conclusion from the report is
“Bilateral mild tendinosis diffusely of the
supraspinatus extending into the anterior aspects of the infraspinatus without
cuff tendon tears.
There is mild to moderate right and minimal left sided subacromial-subdeltoid
Early right AC joint degenerative change.”
Appellant’s submissions on the additional
appellant submits that the MRI scan of both shoulders was not available prior to
the hearing on 28 November 2024 and could not
reasonably have been obtained by
her “without referral from a treating doctor, which did not occur until
our client received
that referral from Dr Sahajian.”
is further submitted that a failure to grant leave would cause substantial
injustice in the case as the reasoning for Member McAdam’s
finding was a
lack of treating material supporting Dr Bodel’s findings in relation to
the shoulders. This, it is submitted,
is apparent from the Member’s
observation that “[i]t is unclear whether it is pain coming down from the
neck or pain
in the shoulders arising from pathology in that body part.”
appellant cites
Northern New South Wales Local Health Network v
Respondent’s submission in opposition to receipt of
the additional evidence
respondent submits:
“Clearly the Appellant chose to obtain the
MRI in an attempt to obtain further evidence
after reading the decision
which should have been obtained prior to commencing proceedings. This is
evidence that could have, and should have, been reasonably
obtained prior to the
commencement of the claim in relation to both shoulders. On that basis leave
should not be granted.”
(emphasis in the original)
respondent cites the decision of Candy ADP in
Paramount Global Protection Pty
Limited v Gorge
the effect that the original arbitration should not be treated as a preliminary
hearing and all relevant evidence should be called
at that time.
respondent submits furthermore that no substantial injustice would be caused to
the appellant if leave were not granted.
“The Appellant’s provision of an MRI at this
stage, some two years after leaving her employment, does not deal with the
findings at [67] of the [reasons] that ‘none of the treating specialists
refer particularly to any problems in the shoulders’.
That the Appellant
believes herself to have shoulder pain now, does not resile from the fact that
her treating doctors did not take
note of issues in relation to her shoulders
whilst treating her for work related injuries, contemporaneous to when she
injury arose.
As such there would be no substantial injustice in the case if leave were not
granted. Indeed, if leave were granted, there would
be a substantial injustice
to the Respondent. The Respondent has had no opportunity to investigate or
obtain an opinion on evidence
from a suitably qualified specialist in response
to evidence which should have been provided at the time the Appellant made the
The appellant’s further submissions in
appellant, referring to her statement, says:
examines paragraph [4] of the statement, it is clear that the sole reason
prompting further enquiry by the appellant
was the learned Member’s
decision ... Reasonableness has to take into account the circumstances of the
person who is required
to act reasonably. That is the appellant worker in this
appellant submits that it was not open to her to “ponder the
adequacy” of the investigations made by her medical practitioners
generated the clinical notes. She submits:
“Clearly the
substantive new material sought to be relied upon is important. That which is
revealed in the MRI renders the decision
under appeal unsafe, and certainly
discloses factual error (which is appealable pursuant to s 352(5)) as it is
axiomatic that the
Member had determined the factual matrix of the case
she submits, does not stand in the way of the Commission receiving material for
the first time after the Member’s decision.
The appellant submits that she
did not merely await the determination and then search for more evidence. Rather
she was taken by
surprise at what the Member held and responded swiftly
accordingly. “There was no element of strategy, as is perhaps implied
[the respondent], in waiting for the determination, and then seeking a
hearing with the benefit of the Member’s
appellant alludes to the website “healthdirect”. This material is
addressed within the context of Ground 1 of the
appeal, and for the reasons
provided in that section, it cannot be relied upon.
complaint that the respondent will not have an opportunity to investigate is
challenged by the appellant on the basis that if
there is a remitter, both
parties can require their respective independent experts interrogate the
significance of the MRI in its
temporal context.
Consideration
56(1) of the 2020 Act provides as follows:
otherwise provided by this Act or enabling legislation, a decision of the
Commission under the Workers Compensation
Acts or in relation to the police
officer support scheme is final and binding on the parties and is not subject to
appeal or review.”
2020 Act provides for reconsideration in s 57 and the 1998 Act provides in
s 352(6) for additional evidence being received on
appeal, but otherwise
matters before the Commission are determined on the basis of the evidence
adduced by the parties in the hearing
before the Member.
CHEP Australia Limited v
(agreed to by Macfarlan JA and Basten JA who wrote separately)
“In the s 352(6) context, there are two threshold
questions. They arise as alternatives and are set out in the second sentence
the provision. The first goes to the issue of availability in advance of the
proceedings. The second entails an assessment of
whether continued
unavailability of the evidence ‘would cause substantial injustice in the
case’. The discretion to admit
becomes available to be exercised only if
the Commission is satisfied as to one of the threshold
352(6) provides so far as the first limb is concerned that the material
“could not reasonably have been obtained by”
the appellant.
appellant, as is demonstrated by her statement, obtained the MRI in response to
the determination of the Member that there was
no investigative material to
corroborate Dr Bodel’s conclusion that there was pathology in the
shoulders. Whilst it may be
moot as to the appropriateness of an MRI scan for
medicolegal purposes, the reality is that the MRI was generated because of the
Member’s decision of 10 December 2024.
the evidence could have been obtained before the hearing. There is no reason why
the referral for an MRI could not reasonably
have been obtained before the
hearing. Before the hearing it must have been apparent to the appellant the
opinion of Dr Bodel was
vulnerable to being rejected because it was poorly
supported by the other evidence in the form of the records of the treating
and was contradicted by Drs Hale and Walker’s evidence. The
requirement that Dr Bodel’s opinion needed to be bolstered
evidence was obvious. An MRI could reasonably have been obtained before the
appellant submits that the failure to grant leave would cause substantial
injustice in the case. For the reasons that follow I
reject this submission.
it is not disputed by either Dr Bodel or Dr Hale that there is likely to be
pathology in the appellant’s shoulders.
The radiology merely delineates
the pathology described by Dr Bodel, it does not add to the question of
absent expert medical evidence I am not able to interpret the radiology. In
other words, the clinical significance of the
radiologist’s report
requires interpretation by a medical expert. It is not open to me without such
assistance to draw conclusions
from the radiological report.
plainly the respondent is correct in its submission that it would be severely
prejudiced by the inability to investigate
and obtain evidence in response to
the additional evidence. The submission by the appellant that a remittal to a
fresh hearing will
enable additional evidence to be obtained is not
satisfactory.
the radiology is two years after the event. It does not speak at the time of the
appellant’s treatment or of the state
of the appellant’s shoulders
at the time of the hearing before the Member. In other words, the radiology
speaks of the condition
of the appellant’s shoulders at the date the
images were taken. The Member’s concern was the condition of the
appellant’s
shoulders at the time of the hearing.
Barrett JA said this:
“That construction
cannot be accepted. The part of s 352(6) concerning
‘substantial injustice’ does not direct attention
to possibilities
or potential outcomes. The task is to decide whether absence of the evidence
‘would cause’ substantial
injustice in the case. There must
therefore be a decision as to the result that ‘would’ emerge if the
evidence were taken
into account and the result that ‘would’ emerge
if it were not. If the result would be the same on each hypothesis, the
justice cannot be said to have been defeated by
exclusion.”
I observe, the radiology merely corroborates Dr Bodel’s opinion as to the
pathology which he diagnosed. It does not overcome
the other matters referred to
by the Member, in particular the absence of a clinical note in the treating
material supporting a finding.
Furthermore, the opinion of Dr Hale was to the
contrary of that of Dr Bodel. His opinion was that there was a lack of shoulder
those reasons I decline to grant leave to receive the additional evidence.
Ground 1 – Error of fact in relation to the diagnosis
provided by Dr Bodel in his reports and what is required of an orthopaedic
surgeon to arrive at the diagnosis
Appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Member’s reasons, paragraphs [60], [70] and [71].
She says of paragraph [70] that the Member misconstrued
the diagnosis of Dr
Bodel in his report. The appellant submits that Dr Bodel in his supplementary
report provided a diagnosis of
rotator cuff disease and that this diagnosis was
arrived at from a review of the appellant’s symptoms, history provided to
the doctor, details of work duties and physical examination. Dr Bodel,
based on his examination and experience, concluded the disease
“probably in the form of tendonitis bursitis in the circumstance”.
The appellant submits that the Member was in error
and misconstrued the firm
diagnosis presented by Dr Bodel of rotator cuff disease.
appellant submits that the conclusion at paragraph [71] was in error because Dr
Bodel in his reports of 2 February 2024 and 2
September 2024 went into
considerable depth in relation to the appellant’s work history, the
increased nature of her duties
and the gradual onset of neck and bilateral
shoulder pain.
appellant submits that in relation to paragraphs [69] and [70] of the reasons,
the Member placed considerable emphasis on the
need for investigations in order
to determine rotator cuff pathology.
the appellant submits the Australian website “healthdirect.gov.au”
makes clear that rotator cuff injury may be diagnosed
without further
The majority of rotator
cuff injuries or diseases are diagnosed based solely on examination where the
doctor enquires about the injured
person’s symptoms, history (including
work history in these circumstances) and physical examination of the shoulder.
appellant submits Dr Bodel’s reports appropriately reviewed the
appellant’s treatment history, including her records,
her work history,
the nature of her work duties as provided on examination and in her statement
dated 6 June 2024 and together with
the physical examination of the appellant,
before arriving at a diagnosis of rotator cuff pathology in both shoulders. He
nature and conditions of employment had caused aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration to rotator cuff disease probably
the form of tendonitis bursitis in the circumstances. The underlying pathology
aggravated by work is causing pain, stiffness and
loss of function.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that whilst Dr Bodel did express in his later report the
opinion “rotator cuff pathology ... probably
in the form of tendonitis
bursitis”, this does not support the appellant’s submission that Dr
Bodel’s diagnosis
is firm, and his diagnosis of rotator cuff pathology is
based on a supposition of probable tendonitis bursitis.
respondent submits that the expression of opinion from Dr Bodel of what the
appellant ‘probably had’ rather than what
she did have is not
sufficient to satisfy the appellant’s onus of proof and does no more than
suggest a possible causal relationship.
The Member was correct to reject it. The
respondent cites
Seltsam Pty
Limited v McGuiness.
(The respondent does not provide a pinpoint reference to either citation.)
the appellant’s submission that Dr Bodel goes into particular depth in
relation to the appellant’s work history, the
gradual onset of pain and
his physical examination, the respondent says these matters do not address the
issues raised by the Member,
namely, that there is no reference to treatment,
investigations or firm diagnosis. As to the actual conclusion he gave, the
path of reasoning is not disclosed and a clear injury not
explained. The Member carried out the task as he was required to do, by
with the report of Dr Bodel and providing more than sufficient reasons for why
he rejected it. There was no error in that
appellant is required to show error on the Member’s part, not that
“other reasonable minds may differ on whether they
might have made a
finding about causation being made
The appellant has
failed to do that.
respondent submits that the appellant’s reliance on the healthdirect
documentation is misplaced. The appellant’s reliance
on healthdirect
extracts is opposed and is not a proper basis upon which to form any conclusion
regarding diagnosis. The author of
the extract is not identified nor are the
author’s qualifications to make the statements in the extract. The
respondent submits
it cannot be given any weight, especially where expert
medical opinion has been served in the matter by specialists such as Dr Bodel
and Dr Hale. The respondent submits the extract contravenes r 73 of the
Injury Commission Rules 2021
and should not be admitted or, if admitted should
be given minimal or no weight.
Appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant submits that Dr Bodel’s use of the word “probably”
is the equivalent of the civil standard of proof,
namely, on the balance of
probabilities.
Consideration
Member was required to determine whether the appellant had sustained an injury
to the shoulders as she claimed. That task did
not depend on his understanding
of the process of diagnosis. He was required to determine the issue on the basis
of the evidence
before him.
follows that the appellant’s reliance on the healthdirect.gov.au website
is, with respect, misplaced largely for the reasons
given by the respondent. The
item is presumably adduced as expert evidence as to what is necessary or not
necessary to make a diagnosis
of rotator cuff injury. However, expert evidence
as to how Drs Hale and Bodel arrived at their diagnostic opinions is, with
irrelevant even if the material were admissible, which it is not.
appellant does not engage with the Member’s basis for rejecting Dr
Bodel’s opinion with respect to the shoulders.
The Member says that Dr
Bodel’s expression of opinion in relation to the rotator cuff disease as
“probably in the form
of tendonitis bursitis” is an
inconclusive
‘probably’ diagnosis” (my
The Member’s
conclusion is supported by the additional matters he refers to, namely that the
diagnosis is made without reference
to any treatment, investigations and
“[i]n the absence of any treating material supporting a
The diagnostic
opinion is tentatively expressed.
appellant does not challenge the Member’s conclusion that there was an
absence of any treating material supporting a finding
in accordance with Dr
Bodel’s tentative “inconclusive” diagnosis.
Furthermore,
the appellant’s submission that the Member failed to properly engage with
Dr Hale’s opinion is, with respect,
not established. Dr Hale, in his
report of 30 April 2024, records that the appellant reported ongoing neck pain
which radiates to
both shoulders particularly the right side. He then offers the
“Anna continues to describe persistent symptoms
affecting her cervical spine and subsequently the lumbar spine which initially
developed as an overuse injury related to her employment.
The level of the symptoms is unexpected due to the fact that she has been
away from the workplace for a considerable period.
Some of the symptoms raise the possibility of migraines and it is difficult
to explain all of the clinical findings including the
widespread tremor as well
as her low back pain.”
diagnoses soft tissue injury cervical spine, low back pain with no clear
correlation to her employment.
asked a specific question:
“(f) Do you consider the
claimant’s current diagnosis at the neck, lumbar spine and shoulders has
been caused by the initial
complaint of injury in 2022? (please confirm reasons
why/why not).”
He answers:
“It is reasonable to attribute the neck pain to the work-related injury
in 2022 but there is no evidence of a specific shoulder
pathology or lumbar
condition.”
the doctor answers:
“There is no clear explanation as to why
her shoulders, lumbar spine are affected as a result of the amount of the
initial work-related
still later:
“As well as this, in view of the atypical
examination and tremor with all shoulder movements, in my opinion there is no
evidence of shoulder
pathology.”
Member said:
“None of the treating specialists refer
particularly to any problems in the shoulders. Dr Nazha, at the highest,
provides that
‘Intermittently, she states there is pain that radiates down
interscapularly’ (the scapula being the shoulder blade).
support a conclusion that the pain is radiating from the neck, rather than being
distinct pathology in the
Member preferred the opinion of Dr Hale, supported as it was by the records of
the treating specialists, to the opinion of Dr
Hale’s conclusion that there was a reduced range of motion of the
shoulders does not conflict with his conclusion that the
disability in the
shoulder is unrelated to any injury in the course of employment.
is not a case of the Member failing to engage with the opinion of Dr Hale,
rather the Member accepted Dr Hale’s opinion as
to causation in preference
to that of Dr Bodel.
appellant has failed to establish that the Member was in error in his conclusion
that the appellant had not suffered injury to
the shoulders. Ground 1 of the
appeal is dismissed.
Ground 2 – Error of discretion in failing to properly
engage with the evidence
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Member did not properly engage with or scrutinise the
reports of Dr Hale as evidenced by the only reference
to Dr Hale’s opinion
in relation to the shoulders being at paragraph [69] of the reasons.
appellant accepts that Dr Hale provides an opinion in his report dated 30 April
2024 but that that opinion conflicted with different
sections of his own
appellant makes the following submission:
“Understanding full
well that Dr Hale does not believe there is a bilateral shoulder pathology, the
assessment would appear
to indicate that there is a ‘pre-existing
condition’ in both shoulders, hence the deduction. In the
Appellant’s
view, this appears to be more in line with the opinion of Dr
Bodel being ‘underlying pathology aggravated by work is causing
stiffness and loss of function as I have
indicated.’”
appellant submits that the Member fell into error “by not scrutinising the
opinion of Dr Hale, particularly in circumstances
where it would appear
that there is an acceptance of a ‘pre-existing condition’, which the
Appellant argues by way of
Dr Bodel’s report was aggravated by the nature
and conditions of her employment, with the nature of said physical duties not
being in dispute.”
appellant then seeks to rely upon the additional evidence which I have
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the appellant relies upon what she says is a difference
in the degree of scrutiny that the Member gives
to the report of Dr Bodel as
opposed to Dr Hale for this ground of appeal.
respondent submits:
“... the Appellant at [27] of her
submissions creates an opinion in Dr Hale’s report that is not actually
expressed. In
particular the Appellant suggests that Dr Hale’s assessments
of the shoulder, despite a determination that issues with the
shoulder are not
work related, would ‘appear to indicate that there is a
‘pre-existing condition’ in both shoulders’.
However, Dr Hale
does not state that there is a pre-existing condition in the shoulder. Dr Hale
simply assesses a non-work related
impairment in both shoulders. Given the
length of time that elapsed between the date of injury and the date of
Dr Hale’s report,
and the lack of history of complaint in relation to
both shoulders, it is unsurprising that Dr Hale did not determine that there
a ‘pre-existing condition’ in both
shoulders.”
Appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant reasserts in reply the submission that the Member did not engage
sufficiently with the evidence of Dr Hale. The appellant
“Dr Hale identified pathology in the shoulders, and
rated same, then excluded them from his overall rating. The problem with
approach (which is self-evident) was noted by Dr Bodel at ARD 33. The strong
implication is that Dr Hale either did support
causation or, if he did not, his
reasoning was so deficient that it was factually erroneous for the Member not to
Consideration
have to a large extent dealt with this in the context of the consideration of
Ground 1 of the appeal.
Hale provided a report dated 14 November 2024 in which he addressed the
disagreement with Dr Bodel. He said:
“It should be noted that
on page 2 of Dr Bodel’s supplementary report, dated 02/09/2024, he
indicated the following: ‘He
assessed a 7% whole person impairment for the
lumbar spine only, 0% whole person impairment for the neck.’
My assessment was the reverse, i.e. 7% whole person impairment for the
cervical spine and 0% for the lumbar spine. At the time of
my examination, I did
identify reduced bilateral shoulder movements but attributed this to neck pain
rather than shoulder pathology.
Irrespective of this fact, I did calculate the
potential impairment of both shoulders but noted that I did not think that this
associated with any significant shoulder
pathology.”
Hale then confirmed his previous opinion “that Anna has sustained a soft
tissue injury to her cervical spine as a consequence
of the described
work-related injury. There is no evidence of specific shoulder injury. She does
experience low back pain, but there
is no clear correlation with her
employment.”
the doctor says:
“For the reasons described above, it is
considered that her employment is a substantial contributing factor to her neck
but not to the lumbar spine or bilateral shoulders.”
is significant that the Member found support for Dr Bodel’s opinion in
relation to the lumbar spine in the treating
He found no support in
the treating material for Dr Bodel’s opinion with respect to the bilateral
shoulder complaint.
reason he was persuaded that the opinion of Dr Hale should be preferred because
Dr Hale, as with the treating doctors, could
find no pathological explanation
for the appellant’s shoulder symptoms.
is difficult not to see Ground 2 of the appeal as being no more than
dissatisfaction with the Member’s conclusion that he
should prefer the
evidence of Dr Hale on the question of the bilateral shoulder complaint to that
of Dr Bodel. His expressed reason
for doing so was the absence of reference in
the treating material to problems with the shoulders. It was the presence of
such material
that persuaded the Member to adopt Dr Bodel’s view with
respect to the lumbar spine in preference to that of Dr Hale. There
is no error
on his part in applying the same logic to his acceptance of Dr Hale’s
opinion with respect to the shoulder complaint.
to the appellant’s submission that the Member failed to adequately engage
with Dr Hale’s evidence, the Member
applied a consistent logic to the
evidence of both Dr Bodel and Dr Hale, a logic which led him to find for the
appellant with respect
to the injury to the lumbar spine and against her with
respect to the alleged bilateral shoulder injuries.
was no error in the Member’s approach. Ground 2 of the appeal is
Application pursuant to s 352(6) for leave to receive additional evidence is
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 10 December 2024 is
Geoffrey Parker SC
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
11 August 2025
Bulghadaryan v State of New
South Wales (South Eastern Sydney Local Health District)
[2024] NSWPIC 685
(reasons), [23].
[2025] NSWCA 157
266 CLR 129
, [62], quoting
[2013] NSWCA 255
Respondent’s
submissions, [6].
NSWWCCPD 127
Respondent’s submissions,
Appellant’s submissions in reply,
Appellant’s
submissions in reply, [6].
[2013] NSWCA 351
12 DDCR 501
Appellant’s submissions,
[2000] NSWCA
Respondent’s
submissions, [7].
Reply to Application
to Resolve a Dispute (reply), p
Appellant’s
submissions, [27].
Appellant’s submissions,
Respondent’s
submissions, [10].
Appellant’s submissions in reply,
Respondent’s
Application to Admit Late Documents dated 22 November 2024, p
Reasons, [71].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.56 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter