URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/269.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Curtis v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force [2025] NSWCATAD 269; (4 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Curtis v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 269
Hearing Date(s):
15 October 2025
Date of Orders:
04 November 2025
Decision Date:
4 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
EA MacIntyre, Senior Member
(1) The administratively reviewable decision of the Respondent under review
is affirmed.
(2) Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(c)
(1)(d) of the
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
, the contents of all paragraphs in these
reasons marked NOT TO BE PUBLISHED are not to be published or disclosed to the
or the public.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - reviewable decision - correct and preferable decision
- Civil and Administrative Tribunal - merits review
LICENCING - firearms -
licence - fit and proper person - public interest
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Firearms Act 1996
Firearms Regulations 2017
Cases Cited:
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond (“Bond Media case”)
[1990] HCA 33
; (1990) 170 CLR 321
Barlow v Commissioner of Police, New South
Wales Police Service
[2003] NSWADT 254
Commissioner of Police v
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
Hill v Commissioner of Police, New South
Wales Police Service
[2002] NSWADT 218
Joseph v NSW Commissioner of Police
[2017] NSWCA 31
Meacham v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 107
v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
Petricevic v
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2022] NSWCATAD 24
Commissioner of Police
[2021] NSWCATAD 275
Ward v Commissioner of Police
[2000] NSWADT 28
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Scott Wayne Curtis (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
(Respondent)
Representation:
Hartmann & Associates Solicitors (Applicant)
McCullough Roberston
Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00172824
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(c)
(1)(d) of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
, the contents of all paragraphs in these reasons marked NOT TO
BE PUBLISHED are not to be published or disclosed to the Applicant
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an application for review of a decision of the Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force, the respondent in these proceedings
(“Respondent”) to
revoke a firearms licence held by the applicant (“Applicant”). He
held that licence under
Firearms Act 1996
”). The Applicant contests the revocation of his licence.
matters at issue are whether;
(1) the Applicant is a “fit and proper” person to hold a firearms
(2) it is in the “public interest” for the Applicant to continue to
hold a firearms licence.
Applicant has held firearms licences since 2006.
the evening of 25 April 2003, the police attended a public place where the
Applicant was involved in a brawl. The police said that
the group was
intoxicated and drinking alcohol in an alcohol free zone. The police issued a
move on direction but the group returned.
The police also said that the
Applicant swore at them.
police subsequently arrested and charged the Applicant involving the use of
offensive language in or near a public place or school.
That charge was
subsequently withdrawn.
further incident occurred on 11 December 2004 in a public place. The police
issued the Applicant with a “move on” direction
29 July 2008, the police were conducting a patrol and observed the Applicant and
one other person spray painting on a wall. On
further inquiries, the police
ascertained that they had permission to do so. The police say the Applicant and
the other person became
aggressive and questioned police powers.
TO BE PUBLISHED]
25 February 2024, at about 1:40 AM, the Applicant was travelling and was stopped
by the police for random breath testing. The breath
test produced a negative
result. An oral fluid test, however, produced a positive detection to
methamphetamine. I will refer to this
test as the “roadside test”.
The Applicant was then arrested for the purposes of a secondary test and walked
to a random
breath test bus.
the second test in the random breath test bus, the police utilised A Drager Drug
test 5000 STK (“STK”) and a drug
collection head
(“DCH”). I will refer to this test as the “Drager test”.
Sergeant Mitchell Gage was present
at the testing. His written statement was in
evidence. He also gave oral evidence at the hearing of the matter attending by
audio-visual
the Drager test, the STK section disconnected from the DCH and fell into the
Applicant’s lap. The evidence was that when
the STK fell, the sampler pad
was face up.
Applicant, having been directed by Sergeant Gage to do so, picked up the STK
section by holding its grey handle and slid the sampler
back into the DCH. The
DCH did not leave the Applicant’s mouth during this time. The test
returned a positive result for methamphetamine.
asked whether he took drugs, the Applicant said: “no comment”.
oral fluid collected by the DCH was placed in a sealed vial in the presence of
the Applicant and a security seal number was used
to label the sample. The
sample was sent for analysis to the NSW Forensic and Analytical Science Service.
following testing, they
said that a result positive to methamphetamine was
TO BE PUBLISHED]
16 June 2024, the Applicant was charged with driving a vehicle while having an
illicit drug present in the blood. The charge was
later withdrawn. The police
said that this was because the oral testing did not comply with the standard
operating procedures, which
required the test to be repeated if the test
detaches. This had happened.
21 June 2024, the firearms registry suspended the Applicant’s firearms
licence. The stated reason of the Respondent for doing
so was that the Applicant
was subject to a prescribed offence relating to drugs and that it was not in the
public interest for the
Applicant to possess a firearms licence.
11 July 2024, the police attended the Applicant’s residence and served a
suspension notice on him. There were statements
in evidence from police officers
who attended on the day. They were Sergeant Erin Kennedy and Sergeant Benjamin
Guy. Both attended
the hearing and gave oral evidence.
Guy described the Applicant’s conduct as “sarcastic, combative and
condescending”. The police also reported
that he said: “Everyone
should have guns, the world would be a better place”. Police also saw a
vehicle with a rear sticker
on the windscreen that said: “Fuck Gun
Applicant also made several references to “pigs”. The police said
they thought that this was a reference to them.
police seized four large boxes containing ammunition and 12 firearms.
14 November 2024 and 18 February 2025, the Applicant wrote to the firearms
registry on numerous occasions seeking the return
of his firearms and raising
concerns regarding the treatment of his firearms.
18 February 2025, the Applicant’s category AB firearms licence was
revoked. Following internal review, the decision to revoke
the Applicant’s
firearms licence was affirmed.
6 May 2025, the Applicant lodged an appeal with the Tribunal seeking
administrative review of the decision to revoke his firearms
licence. These are
the proceedings before the Tribunal for determination in this matter.
Applicant’s rights of review
Firearms Act
, a person may relevantly apply to the Tribunal
for administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act
(NSW) (“ADR Act”) of a revocation of a licence or permit
issued to the person.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (“NCAT
Act”) allows jurisdiction to the Tribunal to exercise functions as are
conferred or imposed on the Tribunal
under the ADR Act.
was not in dispute that the Tribunal has jurisdiction for administrative review
of the decision of the Respondent in this matter,
in circumstances where the
Respondent had revoked the Applicant’s licence under the
Firearms Act
Tribunal’s powers on review are set out in s 63 of the ADR Act as
“(1) In determining an application for an administrative review under
this Act of an administratively reviewable decision,
the Tribunal is to decide
what the correct and preferable decision is having regard to the material then
before it, including the
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that
are conferred or imposed by any relevant legislation on
the administrator who
made the decision.
In determining an application for the administrative review of an
administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the administratively reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the administratively reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and make a
decision in substitution for the administratively reviewable
decision it set
(d) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and remit
the matter for reconsideration by the administrator in accordance
directions or recommendations of the Tribunal”.
8 July 2024, the Tribunal heard an application for orders under s 64 of the NCAT
Act. The Tribunal, among other orders, made an
order prohibiting publication of
certain confidential materials and of matters contained in that material.
hearing of the Applicant’s application for review of the
Respondent’s decision to revoke his firearms licence took
place on 15
October 2025. The Tribunal made further orders on that day for part of the
hearing to occur in confidence. The Applicant,
his legal representative and
members of the public were not present for that part of the hearing. That part
of the hearing dealt
with the confidential
Consideration
statutory scheme governing the issue or refusal of a firearms licence is
relevant to determining when a licence may be revoked.
This is because the
Firearms Act
says that a licence may be revoked for any reason for which the
licensee would be required to be refused a licence of the same kind.
statutory scheme for the licencing of firearms is set out in the
Firearms Act
Under that scheme, the Respondent “may” issue a licence in respect
of an application, or refuse any such application
As such, the
Respondent’s power to issue a licence is discretionary.
sets out the underlying principles of the
Firearms Act
in the following
Principles and objects of Act
(1) The underlying principles of this Act are—
(a) to confirm firearm possession and use as being a privilege that
is conditional on the overriding need to ensure public safety,
(b) to improve public safety—
(i) by imposing strict controls on the possession and use of
firearms, and
(ii) by promoting the safe and responsible storage and use of
firearms, and
(c) to facilitate a national approach to the control of firearms.
(2) The objects of this Act are as follows—
(a) to prohibit the possession and use of all automatic and
self-loading rifles and shotguns except in special circumstances,
(b) to establish an integrated licensing and registration scheme for
all firearms,
(c) to require each person who possesses or uses a firearm under the
authority of a licence to prove a genuine reason for possessing
or using the
(d) to provide strict requirements that must be satisfied in relation
to licensing of firearms and the acquisition and supply of
(e) to ensure that firearms are stored and conveyed in a safe and
secure manner,
(f) to provide for compensation in respect of, and an amnesty period
to enable the surrender of, certain prohibited firearms”.
paramount principle derived from
is ensuring public safety (
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Service
[2002] NSWADT 218
[24]). This is the “overriding need” that must be given effect under
the legislation.
of fact relevant to determination of the question must be proved under the
required standard of proof, namely the balance
of probabilities. However, there
is no onus of proof. The Applicant, in particular, does not bear the onus of
Meacham v Commissioner of Police
[2020] NSWCATAP 107
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
NSWCATAP 10
, at [34]).
manner in which evidence is to be received has been described in the following
terms: “the parties put on such evidence
as they wish and, in a matter of
this kind involving the exercise of a discretion, it is a matter for the
Tribunal to properly consider
all relevant materials and ignore all irrelevant
matters in exercising the power of the relevant administrator in review
proceedings.
This is especially the case where a decision has been taken on a
discretionary basis in light of the public interest”. The
Tribunal is
required to base its findings of fact on “logically probative
material” (
, at [82] – [83]).
exercising the discretionary power under
, what is required is an assessment
of risk in allowing an applicant to have a firearms licence. The test is
stringent. The Tribunal
must be satisfied that there is “virtually no
Ward v Commissioner of Police
says when a licence must
Section 11(3)
“A licence must not be issued unless—
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is a fit and
proper person and can be trusted to have possession of firearms
without danger
to public safety or to the peace,
(7) Despite any other provision of this section, the Commissioner may
refuse to issue a licence if the Commissioner considers that
issue of the
licence would be contrary to the public interest.”
says when a licence may be revoked. It provides:
24 Revocation of licence
(2) A licence may be revoked—
(a) for any reason for which the licensee would be required to be
refused a licence of the same kind, or
(c) if the Commissioner is of the opinion that the licensee is no
longer a fit and proper person to hold a licence, or
(d) for any other reason prescribed by the regulations”.
Firearms Regulations 2017
(NSW) (“Regulations”)
also makes provision for when a licence may be revoked. It says:
20 Revocation of licence—licence not in the
public interest
The Commissioner may revoke a licence if the Commissioner is satisfied that it
is not in the public interest for the licensee to
continue to hold the
24(2)(a) says that a licence may be revoked for any reason for which the
licensee would be required to be refused a licence
of the same kind. Provisions
setting out when a licensee would be required to be refused a licence of the
relevant kind are found
in s 11 described above. Accordingly, how s 11 may or
may not apply to the Applicant, were he to apply for a licence, is relevant
determining whether the revocation of his licence should stand or not.
questions for determination by the Tribunal in the present case are as
(1) whether the Respondent can be satisfied that the Applicant is a “fit
and proper person” to hold a licence within
the statutory meaning and can
be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger to public safety or to
(2) is it in the public interest for the Applicant to continue to hold a
firearms licence.
Evidence of tests
matter of fact relevant to determination of this matter is whether or not the
results of the tests carried out on the Applicant
on 25 February 2024 carry
weight and ought to be accepted. The Applicant’s submission was that the
roadside test may have resulted
in a “false positive”. He also said
that the results of the Drager test were impugned by likely contamination. The
on the other hand said that the results of both tests carried weight
and should be accepted.
disagreement between the parties turned, among other things, on the likely
consequences of the detachment of the STK section during
the Drager test and its
subsequent reattachment. The particular question was whether this had the effect
of contaminating the device
and as a result, compromising the results of
was no dispute that the device used for the Drager test did come apart during
testing. The Respondent’s evidence however
given by Sergeant Gage was that
the white pad forming part of the STK fell face up onto the Applicant’s
hand and did not come
into contact with his skin so that there was unlikely to
be any risk of contamination.
Respondent also says that the fluid test from the laboratory contained an
approximate methamphetamine concentration averaging
13,128 in ng/ml. The
Respondent says that this is over 1,300 times the laboratory’s lower
reporting limit of 10ng/ml. He also
says that it is not possible to have an oral
fluid concentration of this kind as a result of contamination.
Additionally,
the Respondent says that the initial roadside test was also positive. He
disagreed that this was a “false positive”.
Respondent relied on a “comprehensive expert report” dated 5
September 2025 from Mr Alen Lin, a forensic pharmacologist.
Mr Lin said that the
purpose of oral fluid random drug testing of drivers was only to establish a
presence of a drug and did not
indicate impairment at the time of driving. He
says that if a driver returns a positive detection for drugs on the initial
test, then an oral fluid sample is obtained from the secondary drug
screening test and sent to the laboratory for a confirmatory
analysis to
identify the specific drugs used. The Respondent says that this is what happened
in the present case, the initial roadside
test being carried out followed by the
later Drager test.
Applicant, for his part, relied on expert evidence of Dr Michael Robertson. He
is a consulting pharmacologist, forensic toxicologist
and chemist. Dr
Robertson’s evidence was that a roadside test is a “semi
quantitative” test and would produce a
more significant result if there
were higher drug levels present. He says that the roadside test showed that if
the methamphetamine
was present, the concentration was “relatively
low”. He went on to say that if the concentration of the drug was more
than 200 times the “cut-off” concentration of the device, he would
have expected a much stronger response in the roadside
test. I understood the
Applicant to be saying that there was an inconsistency between the low
concentration of methamphetamine shown
in the roadside test and the much higher
levels shown in the Drager test.
Applicant says that there is a question of the reliability of the test reports
because of this inconsistency. His submission is
that the roadside test produced
a “false positive” and the result of the later Drager test was
compromised by contamination.
Robertson, however, also says that if it is assumed that the sample or
collection pad remained in the mouth of the Applicant and
did not come into
that “contamination at this
point is not likely”. However, he also
says that if the sample or collection pad fell into the lap of the Applicant and
touched or handled the pad, contamination was possible. He says that while
contamination “cannot be proved”, he did not
believe that
contamination “can be excluded”.
Robertson also refers to the possibility that the Applicant “did or did
not have an amount of drug on his clothes or hands”.
I understood this to
be a possible explanation for the positive testing, rather than the positive
testing being the result of the
presence of methamphetamine in the
Applicant’s body.
evidence of Dr Robertson and Mr Lin are consistent on one matter, namely that if
the sample or collection pad remained in the
mouth of the Applicant and did not
come into contact with any potentially contaminated surfaces, contamination was
not likely.
summary, the evidence shows that there was a presence of methamphetamine both in
what the roadside test and the later Drager test
showed. Whether or not the
roadside test was “semi-quantitative” or not, the evidence is that
the test was positive.
The Drager test was also positive.
is a question as to whether contamination affected the result of the Drager
test. Both experts agree that the risk of contamination
was low if the STK did
not come into contact with a contaminated surface. I accept the evidence of
Sergeant Gage that when the STK
fell, it did not touch the skin of the
Applicant. The Applicant says that when reconnecting the STK to the DCH, the
Applicant could
have touched the testing swab. Dr Robertson, however, says that
contamination “cannot be proved” and was only a possibility.
the opinion that I can, in these circumstances, accept on the balance of
probabilities the positive result of the Drager
test for methamphetamine,
despite the separation of the STK during testing.
if the positive result of the Drager test was a consequence of the presence of
methamphetamine on the Applicant’s clothing,
a possibility that Dr
Robertson raised, absent explanation as to why this may have happened, this is
not something that assists the
Applicant’s case.
when asked whether he used drugs, the Applicant did not deny that he did, and
said: “no comment”. This too does
not assist the Applicant.
these reasons, I accept, on the balance of probabilities, that the results of
the two tests in evidence show that the Applicant
had tested positive for
methamphetamine use.
“Fit and proper person”
first question is whether the Applicant is a “fit and proper person and
can be trusted to have possession of firearms without
danger to public safety or
to the peace” within the meaning of
Firearms Act
licence must not be issued to the Applicant unless the Respondent is so
satisfied. If not so satisfied, these are grounds for
revocation of a licence by
s 24(2)(c).
, a licence may be revoked if “the Commissioner is of the
opinion that the licensee is no longer a fit and proper person to
licence”. The additional words found in
asking whether the
person “can be trusted to have possession of firearms without danger to
public safety or to the peace”
do not appear in
s 24(2)(c).
applies where the person in question is “no longer” a fit
and proper person. This indicates, in my opinion, that
refers to an
earlier time when the person satisfied the description of a “fit and
proper person”. Given that an applicant
had to be a “fit and proper
person” under
to obtain a licence in the first place, this must
mean that the reference to a “fit and proper person” in
carries the same meaning as in
and not some different meaning.
is a “fit and proper person” generally requires making a value
judgment. In
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond (“Bond Media
[1990] HCA 33
; (1990) 170 CLR 321, the High Court (Toohey and
Gaudron JJ) said, at [63]:
“The question whether a person is fit and proper is one of value judgment.
In that process the seriousness or otherwise of
particular conduct is a matter
for evaluation by the decision maker. So too is the weight, if any, to be given
to matters favouring
the person whose fitness and propriety are under
consideration”.
Member Higgins, as she then was, considered the meaning of the phrase “fit
and proper person” in the context
of firearms in
Barlow v Commissioner
of Police, New South Wales Police Service
[2003] NSWADT 254.
She said, at
[22], again emphasising the relevance of conduct:
s. 11(3)(a)
of the Act requires the Commissioner to determine the
fitness and propriety of an applicant for a licence by having regard to the
applicant’s conduct and whether that conduct is such that he can be
satisfied that the applicant can be trusted to have possession
of firearms
without danger to public safety or to the peace”.
Respondent relied on the conduct of the Applicant in 2003 and 2004 described at
[4] – [6] above and other behaviours the
police said were disrespectful
described at [19]-[20] above, to support the submission that the Applicant was
not a “fit and
proper person” for the purposes of the
Applicant, on the other hand, says that being “difficult or
belligerent” does not make a person more likely to be
an irresponsible
firearms owner. He also says his bumper sticker and views on gun control do not
mean he cannot be trusted with firearms.
do not think that the events of 2003 and 2004 carry much weight of themselves
given the significant amount of time that has elapsed
since then. The
Applicant’s later behaviours in 2024 described at [19] – [20] carry
more weight and clearly do not assist
the Applicant. However, taken by
themselves, behaviours occurring at particular times in particular
circumstances, are not sufficient
to allow me to make a determination of whether
or not the Applicant is a fit and proper person for the purposes of holding a
licence, without also considering the remainder of the evidence.
Applicant’s attitude towards law enforcement revealed by the evidence as a
whole is a matter that requires consideration,
separately from particular
behaviours occurring at particular times. The Respondent submits that the
Applicant’s attitude towards
police including making comments about
“pigs” shows a concerning attitude towards the law and police in
carrying out
their duties. The Respondent says that these are matters going
towards the Applicant’s honesty and integrity. The Applicant
on the other
hand said that these were simply attempts at “dark humour” and that
even if the Applicant could have been
more self aware, this does not warrant a
revocation of his firearms licence.
do not think that the Applicant’s attitudes as shown in the evidence from
2024 assist him. I think they are relevant to the
determination of whether or
not he is a fit and proper person for the purposes of the
Firearms Act
cannot simply be dismissed as “humour”. This is not a case where the
conduct of the Applicant occurred only in the
past and a period of years has
elapsed since the conduct in issue (
Petricevic v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2022] NSWCATAD 24
, at [67]). The conduct dates to last year.
evidence establishing the Applicant’s use of methamphetamine is also of
relevance in making a determination of whether he
is a fit and proper person for
the purposes of holding a firearms licence. The Applicant relies on the absence
of a conviction arising
out of the positive tests for methamphetamine. He also
says that he has no history of drug taking. He claims an “aversion”
to drugs and says that he has lectured his children against the dangers of
Respondent, on the other hand, explained the reasons why charges were not
pressed as set out at [16] above and said that these
circumstances did not
prevent reliance on the test results for the purposes of making a determination
Firearms Act
. I understood the Respondent’s submission to be
that despite the higher criminal standard or proof required to obtain a
conviction,
the Tribunal was not prevented from accepting the test results in
these proceedings on the civil standard of proof.
agree that the absence of a conviction does not prevent the Tribunal from
accepting evidence surrounding the alleged conduct of
the Applicant, including
the test results. In
Joseph v NSW Commissioner of Police
[2017] NSWCA 31
the Court of Appeal said, at [62[-[63]:
“Before this Court, Mr Joseph relied upon the Appeal Panel decision
in Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police v
[2005] NSWADTAP 55
, which is in the following terms:
“20 We make the following short observations. It is quite
possible that material considered in a criminal proceeding will
be relevant to
the exercise of a licensing discretion even though the particular offences
charged have not been proven. The Tribunal
is entitled, and duty bound, to take
into account any relevant material going to the question of what is the correct
and preferable
decision in connection with the particular administrative
discretion. The mere fact that a court has dismissed charges is of no great
moment. It is the reasons why the charges were dismissed that matter. If an
offence has failed on a technical point, as has been
strongly asserted by Mr
McLaughlin in this case in relation to at least one of the charges, the
statements of prosecution witnesses
may retain high probative value for the
purposes of the exercise of the licensing discretion. Obviously, if they were
not subject
to cross-examination at the local court proceeding, then care would
need to be exercised at the point of any inquiry by the Tribunal
that a process
of that kind be allowed.”
When read as a whole, this paragraph does not assist Mr Joseph. Its tenor is
consistent with what I have said above, in particular
in its affirmation that
there is no reason in principle why an administrative decision maker should not
take into account evidence
of matters that were the subject of criminal charges
that did not lead to convictions. The point correctly made by the Appeal Panel
in Mercer is that any available material disclosing the reasons why
there were no convictions may shed light on the weight to be
given to the
accept the explanation of the Respondent as to why charges were not prosecuted.
I do not think that these are circumstances that
prevent the Tribunal from
accepting the evidence produced by the tests on the Applicant for the reasons
set out at [54] – [58]
above. The evidence of the Applicant’s use of
methamphetamine weighs against him in making a determination as to whether he
a fit and proper person within the meaning of the
Firearms Act
Applicant relied on eight character references which were in evidence. They
speak highly of him. However, the Respondent said
that most did not refer to
the context of the Applicant’s firearms licence. The Respondent also says
that the character references
do not demonstrate an understanding of the issues
that led to the decision to revoke the Applicant’s firearms licence and
of limited use. I take note of the character references but the weight they
carry does not displace the weight carried by the other
matters set out above.
TO BE PUBLISHED]
consider that the Applicant’s positive test for methamphetamine and the
further matters set out at [73] above are of sufficient
gravity to allow for a
finding that he does not satisfy the test under
s 11(3)(a).
This is not a case
where there is “virtually no risk” in allowing the Applicant to have
a firearms licence. It follows
that the Respondent’s decision to revoke
his firearms licence should stand.
Public interest
Respondent’s submission is that it is not in the public interest for the
Applicant to hold a firearms licence. What is the
“public interest”
is not defined in the
Firearms Act
Saxby v Commissioner of Police
[2021] NSWCATAD 275
, the Tribunal said, at [14]:
“The expression ”public interest” is not defined in
, nor elsewhere in the Act, and a decision in relation to the public
interest in this context is particularly informed by the underlying
and objects of the Act and the strict controls under the Act in relation to
licensing. In Commissioner of Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP
, at [25], the Appeal Panel said that the ’public interest’ is
an inherently broad concept giving the Commissioner (and
hence the Tribunal on
review) the ability to have regard to a wide range of factors in deciding
whether to exercise a discretion
adversely to an individual. Public safety
is to be given paramount consideration: Hill v Commissioner of Police, New
South Wales
Police Service
[2002] NSWADT 218
In Commissioner
of Police v Toleafoa
[1999] NSWADTAP 9
, at [24], the Appeal Panel
“... public interest is a term embracing matters against others, of
standards of human conduct and of the functioning of government
and government
instrumentalities et cetera established and accepted to be for the good order of
society and for the well being of
its members. The interest is therefore the
interest of the public as distinct to the interest of the individual or
individuals.
The “public interest” is an inherently broad concept giving the
appellant the ability to have regard to a wide range
of factors in choosing
whether to exercise a discretion adversely to an individual. As the possibility
of refusing an application
on the ground of character is dealt with elsewhere in
the same section, it is reasonable to infer that the Parliament intended that
the public interest discretion operate in areas to which the character ground
was not relevant or, possibly, in circumstances where
an objection on character
grounds would not be sufficient in its own right to warrant refusal... “.
accept the Respondent’s submission that the public interest weighs against
the Applicant being granted a firearms licence.
It cannot be said that there is
“virtually no risk” in the Applicant holding a firearms licence
having regard to the
matters set out at [73] – [74] above. In these
circumstances, I am satisfied that grounds for revocation of the
Applicant’s
firearms licence would have been established on the basis of
public interest.
the reasons set out at [73], [74] and [77] above, the Respondent has made out
his case for the revocation of the Applicant’s
firearms licence.
(1) The administratively reviewable decision of the Respondent under review
is affirmed.
(2) Pursuant to
ss 64(1)(c)
(1)(d) of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
, the contents of all paragraphs in these reasons marked
NOT TO BE PUBLISHED are not to be published or disclosed to the Applicant
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter