URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/297.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Tokyurek v Roads and Maritime Services [2013] NSWADT 297 (24 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Tokyurek v Roads and Maritime Services
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 297
Hearing Date(s):
13 November 2013
Decision Date:
24 December 2013
S Leal, Judicial Member
The decision to cancel the Applicant's authority to drive a taxi-cab is
Catchwords:
Passenger Transport Act - cancellation of taxi-cab driver authority -
misuse of Cabcharge vouchers - whether fit and proper.
Legislation Cited:
Passenger Transport Act 1990
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
Cases Cited:
McDonald v Director General of Social Security (1984) 1 FCR 354
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond (1990) 170 CLR 321
Director General, Department of Transport
[1999] NSWADT 68
Director-General, Department of Transport
[2001] NSWADT 74
Principal judgment
Yucel Tokyurek (Applicant)
Roads and Maritime Services
(Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
Y Tokyurek (Applicant in person)
Smythe Wozniak (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Tokyurek, who is the applicant in this case, was first granted an authority to
drive taxi-cabs in 2005.
2 September 2013, Mr Tokyurek was advised that Roads and Maritime Services (RMS)
was considering cancelling his driver authority
and wished to invite him to make
submissions as to why his authority should not be cancelled. RMS relied on
allegations that Mr Tokyurek
had fraudulently obtained and used Cabcharge
dockets to obtain benefits by deception.
his reply to RMS, Mr Tokyurek admitted to having fraudulently obtained twelve
Cabcharge vouchers, which he had then presented and
from which he had gained a
benefit. He stated that he has since paid back $3800 of the total amount of
$5200 and apologised for his
9 October 2013, RMS cancelled Mr Tokyurek's driver authority and on 17 October
2013, Mr Tokyurek applied to this Tribunal for a
review of this decision. An
application to stay the decision in this matter was refused on 22 October
Review decision
this case, the Tribunal is undertaking a review of the merits of the original
decision. The role of the Tribunal is to make the
correct and preferable
decision having regard to the material before it, including any relevant factual
material and any applicable
written or unwritten law. It then affirms the
original decision, varies it, or sets it aside and substitutes another decision.
Tribunal makes its own decision in place of that of RMS and there is no
presumption that the decision of RMS is correct.
McDonald v Director General
of Social Security
(1984) 1 FCR 354 at 357.
has the power to authorise persons to drive taxi-cabs. Such an authority
attests, inter alia, that the authorised person is considered
to be of good
repute and in all other respects a fit and proper person to be the driver of a
Passenger Transport Act 1990
states that 'having regard to the
purpose of an authorisation under this Division, Roads and Maritime Services may
at any time vary,
suspend or cancel any person's authority under this Division.'
issue in this case, then, is whether the decision to cancel Mr Tokyurek's
authority to drive taxi-cabs was the correct and preferable
one, having regard
to whether Mr Tokyurek is a fit and proper person, whether he is of good repute
and whether he has sufficient
responsibility and aptitude to drive a taxi-cab.
The Tribunal has the power to review this decision pursuant to s38 of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Passenger Transport
Consideration of evidence
Tribunal held a hearing in this matter on 13 November 2013. Mr Wozniak appeared
for RMS while Mr Tokyurek was unrepresented.
to documents on file, Mr Tokyurek was first granted a taxi-cab driver authority
on 2 July 2005.
traffic record discloses five offences between 2003 and 2011, including three
speeding offences, an unlawful U turn and disobeying
a no parking sign.
Tokyurek's fraudulent use of Cabcharge vouchers involved vouchers issued to a
motor repairer by the insurance company Suncorp.
In May 2013, Cabcharge
repairer, who advised that thirty
vouchers issued in its name were missing and
unaccountable.
of these vouchers listing his name and driver authority were submitted for
payment by Mr Tokyurek.
2 September 2013, RMS wrote to Mr Tokyurek inviting him to make submissions as
to why his authority should not be cancelled in
light of his apparent misuse of
these Cabcharge vouchers.
his subsequent submission dated 19 September 2013, Mr Tokyurek described himself
as a married man with four children. He admitted
that he had 'obtained twelve
dockets fraudulently, presented them fraudulently and also gained benefits by
apologised for his actions and explained the situation as
This gentleman...contacted me for a taxi a few months ago
in the vicinity of Auburn to go to the city. Whilst driving, I was made
to make 'easy money.' I just had to present dockets fraudulently obtained to
gain benefits by deceit and whatever amount
that was to be written on the
dockets would be split half way. It was easy money that I should never have
accepted, but greed took
the better of me because of business being so
tough....I basically decided to pay back the whole amount that I gained by
I had now regretted my decision to gain benefits and wanted to right a
wrong for what it was worth...I have so far paid $3800 of
the total amount of
$5200. I have also paid the operator $940.
support of his submission that his driver authority not be cancelled, Mr
Tokyurek described himself as 'trustworthy, a good provider
to my family and a
man with integrity.' He wrote that:
I believe that I am of good
repute in all other aspects and a fit and proper person to be the driver of a
taxi cab. I have never taken
the passenger the long way or the wrong way. Never
at any time have I overcharged a passenger the wrong tariff. I have always taken
passengers to their destinations safely and never brought harm to a single
passenger in the 11 years that I have been driving and
operating taxis. I am
always helpful and friendly.
I strongly believe that any good judgement was temporarily clouded by my
personal and financial situations. The biggest disappointment
is that my dear
mother who is only 68 years old has been diagnosed with terminal
cancer...Financially I was forced to sell my taxis
because of business not being
good. The industry is struggling and it is tough making money.
There is no excuse for what I have done. It was wrong. I just wanted to
explain my reasons in my own words to why I failed myself,
my wife and my
children in this matter. I have jeopardised our future. I have succumbed to
greed and temptation for which I am embarrassed
and ashamed of.
cancelling his driver authority, the RMS found that Mr Tokyurek's actions in
fraudulently obtaining and using Cabcharge dockets
to obtain benefits by
deception meant that he was not a fit and proper person with sufficient
responsibility and aptitude to drive
a taxi in accordance with law and
Tokyurek did not seek an internal review of the decision to cancel his driver
authority and instead lodged an application for review
to this Tribunal.
evidence before the Tribunal, Mr Tokyurek admitted that he had fraudulently
obtained and used the twelve Cabcharge vouchers in
question. He told the
Tribunal that of the $5200 owing, he had paid back $3800. He had begun to pay
back the money prior to the RMS
investigation into the matter as he felt guilty
authority, he has been unable to pay back the outstanding amount.
apologised for his actions, telling the Tribunal that he let himself and his
family down and feels ashamed and embarrassed that
he has not been able to
provide for his family following the cancellation of his licence.
Wozniak described Mr Tokyurek's actions as being particularly serious and
submitted that in an application such as this, fraud
within the industry itself
is seen as more serious than fraud outside the industry. He submitted that Mr
Tokyurek had given no justification
for his fraudulent behaviour and that his
actions meant that he was neither of good repute nor a fit and proper person to
driver's authority. He submitted that the Cabcharge system relies on the
honesty of its drivers in order to work and that any abuse
of this system should
be taken seriously.
discussed earlier, the issue in this case is whether the decision to cancel Mr
Tokyurek's authority to drive taxi-cabs was the
correct and preferable one,
having regard to whether Mr Tokyurek is a fit and proper person, whether he is
of good repute and whether
he has sufficient responsibility and aptitude to
drive a taxi-cab.
term "fit and proper person" was discussed by Chief Justice Mason in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321 at [63]. The
Chief Justice said that:
The question whether a person is fit and
proper is one of value judgment. In that process the seriousness or otherwise of
conduct is a matter for evaluation by the decision maker. So too is
the weight, if any, to be given to matters favouring the person
whose fitness
and propriety are under consideration.
this case, an authority to drive a taxi-cab can be granted under the
Transport Act 1990
, one of the objectives of which is to encourage public
passenger services (which include taxi-cab services) that meet the reasonable
expectations of the community for safe, reliable and efficient passenger
transport services.
following factors need to be taken into account in determining a person's
suitability and fitness to hold a taxi-cab authority:
the nature,
seriousness and frequency of any criminal offences for which the applicant has
been arrested or convicted;
the nature,
seriousness and frequency of any complaints made against the applicant;
the applicant's
driving record;
the applicant's
reputation in the community; and
the likelihood
that the applicant will re-offend, be the subject of further complaints or
commit further traffic offences.
assessing the last factor, the following considerations are relevant:
the length of
time since the offences were committed and the circumstances in which they were
whether the
applicant admits responsibility for the offences or complaints and shows genuine
the efforts the
applicant has made to rehabilitate himself or herself during that time;
any change in
the applicant's circumstances such as increased support from friends, family or
professional service providers.
Saadieh v Director
General, Department of Transport
[1999] NSWADT 68
Tokyurek has admitted to fraudulently obtaining and then using twelve Cabcharge
vouchers for which he received a benefit of $5200.
On his own evidence, this
involved completing vouchers for trips that never took place, then claiming
money for them. The Tribunal
accepts that he has since paid back $3800 of the
$5200 fraudulently obtained by him. The Tribunal accepts that he has been unable
to pay back any further amount since the cancellation of his driver authority,
which has meant that he has been unable to continue
working as a taxi driver.
The Tribunal accepts that Mr Tokyurek made early admissions in relation to his
misuse of the relevant Cabcharge
vouchers and has since attempted to make amends
for his actions by paying back the money he had fraudulently received.
Tribunal accepts that Mr Tokyurek has a long record of working as a taxicab
driver and that his authority has never previously
been refused or cancelled.
The Tribunal accepts Mr Tokyurek's evidence that he engaged in the fraudulent
behaviour due to financial
pressures and clouded judgement as a result of his
mother's recent diagnosis with cancer.
the past ten years, Mr Tokyurek's driving record has included five offences,
three of which involved speeding. For the past two
years, there have been no
further traffic offences recorded against Mr Tokyurek.
no evidence has been adduced by Mr Tokyurek to show that he enjoys a favourable
reputation in the community, Mr Tokyurek
attended the Tribunal hearing with his
wife and the Tribunal accepts that she continues to support him and his
endeavours to pay
back the money he wrongly obtained.
Tribunal accepts Mr Tokyurek's evidence that he regrets his actions, is
remorseful for his misuse of the Cabcharge vouchers in
question and is ashamed
of his behaviour and the hardship it has caused to his family. In light of this,
the Tribunal is satisfied
that Mr Tokyurek has admitted responsibility for his
actions and shows genuine remorse. The fact that he has paid back a substantial
amount of the monies misused is an indication of the attempts that Mr Tokyurek
has made to make amends and rehabilitate himself.
Tribunal accepts Mr Tokyurek's evidence that his family are experiencing
financial hardship as a result of the cancellation of
his driver authority.
Questions of possible hardship to the applicant or his family cannot be taken
into account, however, in determining
whether RMS has made the correct and
preferable decision:
Lal v Director-General, Department of Transport
[2001] NSWADT 74.
Tokyurek's actions in fraudulently receiving, completing and presenting twelve
Cabcharges are very serious and, having occurred
in April and May this year,
very recent. The Cabcharge system, which is widely used within the taxicab
industry, relies on the honesty
of the people who use them. Passengers who use
the services of taxi-cabs need to be able to rely on the honesty of the driver.
Tokyurek's misuse of the twelve Cabcharge dockets brings into question his
honesty in the discharge of his duties as a taxi-cab driver.
fact that Mr Tokyurek was prepared to present Cabcharge vouchers knowing that
they were false is, the Tribunal finds, sufficient
proof that he is not, at this
stage, a fit and proper person to hold a taxi-cab driver authority. The Tribunal
is accordingly satisfied
that Mr Tokyurek's actions in fraudulently receiving
and presenting Cabcharge vouchers for journeys that never occurred are
sufficiently
serious to warrant the cancellation of his authority.
the Tribunal has determined that, at this stage, Mr Tokyurek is not a fit and
proper person to hold an authority, it is not necessary
to consider whether Mr
Tokyurek is of good repute or whether he has sufficient responsibility and
aptitude to drive a taxicab, in
accordance with the conditions under which a
public passenger service is operated, and in accordance with law and
light of the above findings, the Tribunal is satisfied that the decision of RMS
to cancel Mr Tokyurek's authority to drive taxi-cabs
decision to cancel the Applicant's authority to drive a taxi-cab is
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter