URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BASAVARAJ, Rajesh [2020] NSWMPSC 1 (21 January 2020)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
CONSTITUTED PURSUANT TO PART 8 of
THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
To HOLD AN INQUIRY INTO
A COMPLAINT IN
RELATION TO
Dr Rajesh Basavaraj
Date/s of Inquiry:
16 & 17 December 2019
Committee members:
Dr Arthur Glass, PhD, Chairperson
Dr Candace Newberry
Dr Catherine Berglund PhD
Legal Officer assisting Committee:
Ms Aisling Treacy & Ms Leslie Scholl
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Emma Bayley
Appearance for Dr Rajesh Basavaraj:
Stephen Barnes, Barrister, Andrew Davey Unsworth Legal
Date of decision:
21 January 2020
Publication of decision:
Refer to page 18 of this decision for details of non-publication
A hearing was held on 16 and 17 December 2019. The particulars of the
Complaint were found proven and the Committee considered that
this amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Respondent was reprimanded and several
conditions were placed on his registration.
1. After a consultation with the Respondent on 11
October 2016 a patient complained to the HCCC. It was said that Dr Basavaraj
an inappropriate breast examination and made unpleasant
2. A Conduct Interview was held with the Respondent at the
Medical Council on 28 March 2017. The interviewers recommended to the Council
that the matter be referred to the Conduct Committee for consideration as to
whether it should be referred to the HCCC for investigation.
happened and the HCCC obtained an expert report from Dr S Howle and the
Complaint before us is to a large extent based upon
this report.
4. The Complaint is set out in full as an attachment to this decision. It
alleges that Dr Basavaraj is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under
section 139B(1)(a) of the
National Law
in that he has engaged in conduct
that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by him in the
practice of medicine is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
experience.
5. It is also alleged under section 139B(1)(l) that Dr Basavaraj is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct because he engaged
in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of medicine.
6. The particulars of the Complaint are set out in detail below as we use
these to organise the material before the Committee. In
short, it is alleged
that the Respondent conducted an inappropriate medical examination, made
inappropriate comments to the patient
and unnecessarily locked the consultation
THE RESPONDENT’S BACKGROUND
7. Dr Basavaraj
completed a Bachelor of Medicine/Bachelor of Surgery in India in 1995 and was
first registered in New South Wales
on 3 May 2004. At all relevant times with
respect to this Complaint, Dr Basavaraj practiced as a General Practitioner.
National Scheme he is presently registered nationally in the general
category and is employed on this basis. Dr Basavaraj has no
conditions on his
practice of medicine. Dr Basavaraj obtained Fellowship of the Royal Australian
College of General Practitioners
8. Section 139B of the National Law
Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct"
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
(1) Unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a registered medical practitioner includes each of the
Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or
experience.”
Other improper or unethical
“any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice or purported practice of the practitioner’s
profession.”
9. The standard of proof which the Committee must
apply is one of reasonable satisfaction. And as the much used statement of
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
"Reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or
established independently of the nature and consequence of the
fact or facts to
be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of
an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
whether the Issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters 'reasonable satisfaction' should
not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences".
10. These remarks, of course, focus the decision-makers’ attention
upon the nature of the evidence required to establish the
case. They do not
change the standard of proof, which remains that of reasonable satisfaction.
11. This is the legal framework in which we are to consider the material
placed before us. For the Complaint to be proven, the Committee
reasonably satisfied on balance that Dr Basavaraj committed the conduct
complained of and that this conduct satisfies the
statutory definition of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. In this sense the onus is on the Commission
to establish that Dr Basavaraj
has departed to the requisite degree from the
appropriate standards. The standard of proof relevant to our fact-finding
is conventionally referred to as the
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
standard (discussed above). Basically, the standard of proof is proportionate to
the gravity of the issue to be proved. These disciplinary
proceedings will have
professional and personal consequences for Dr Basavaraj and we have taken
account of this in our deliberations.
12. In evaluating Dr
Basavaraj’s conduct he is to be judged by the standards of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of training
and experience. He was first registered in
New South Wales in 2004. He obtained Fellowship of the Royal Australian College
Practitioners in 2013. He is an experienced general practitioner and
is to be judged accordingly.
13. The issues to be
determined by this Committee are as follows.
First, whether the Committee is reasonably satisfied on balance that the
factual particulars of the Complaints are proven.
Second, whether the conduct overall amounts to unsatisfactory professional
And third, whether orders or directions made by way of Part 8, Division 3,
Subdivision 3 of the National Law are appropriate.
14. An issue for the Chairperson is whether non-publication directions
should be made.
THE HEARING
15. This was held on 16 and 17
December 2019. At the hearing, evidence was given by the complainant, Patient A,
the peer reviewer
Dr Howle (by telephone) and the Respondent.
was some discussion at the commencement of the hearing as to how to deal with
the two stages of the Inquiry (i.e. whether
the Complaint was proven, stage 1
and if so, what should follow from this, stage 2). It was agreed that the stages
would be kept
distinct but that that both stages would be dealt with during this
17. At conclusion of the evidence on stage 1, submissions were
made by the parties and the Committee considered these and then notified
parties that it was likely that all or most of the particulars would be found
proven and that this would amount to a finding
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Submissions were then made as to what orders the Committee should make.
THE MATERIAL BEFORE US IN GENERAL TERMS
18. This case
turns on what happened during the consultation of 11 October 2016. The account
of this consultation given by Patient
A varies significantly from the account
given by the Respondent. As for the written material before us on this matter
Patient A’s
version of events can be found in the complaint form filled in
on the day of the consultation, an email dated 25 October 2016 addressed
HCCC employee, four HCCC file notes of 24 October 2016, 2 August to 2017, 21
February 2018, 29 June 2018 and a sworn statement
of November 2017. For his
part, the Respondent’s account is set out in his medical records for the
consultation, written responses
to the complaint to the HCCC (December 2016) and
the Medical Council (February 2017), a record of what he said at the Council
of 28 March 2017 and a statement dated 18 November 2019. And of
course, we have before us the oral evidence given at the hearing
by Patient A
and by the Respondent, evidence which focused primarily upon what happened
during this consultation.
19. We discuss the detail of this evidence
below but we note at the outset that on a number of crucial matters we have
accepted Patient
A’s evidence rather than the evidence of the Respondent.
Patient A complained of the matters particularised in the Complaint
the day of the consultation or in follow-up emails over the next few weeks. The
Respondent states that he had only a vague
recollection of the consultation when
he responded to the HCCC (in December 2016) and he has no independent
recollection of the consultation
now. His account of what happened is based upon
his medical notes and upon his usual practice in these circumstances.
20. It is true that there are some puzzling aspects to Patient A’s
account. In her initial complaint and follow-up emails she
does not mention that
the breast examination followed the request for a prescription for Levlen (oral
contraception). In the material
before us this aspect of the consultation was
not mentioned by Patient A until she telephoned the HCCC on 2 August 2017. In
the Respondent’s
submission this shows that Patient A is an unreliable
witness because in order to cause maximum damage to the Respondent’s
reputation she deliberately gave the false impression that the breast
examination followed upon her attendance with a sore throat.
In the context of
all the material before us we do not accept this submission.
addition, the Respondent points to certain inconsistencies between Patient
A’s account and the account of the consultation
recorded in the
Respondent’s medical records. For example, Patient A denies that the
Respondent carried out an abdominal examination
and is “99% sure”
that the Respondent did not ask her if her family had a history of breast
cancer. Yet the medical record
for the consultation records the results of an
abdominal examination and notes certain details, for instance, that there is no
history of breast cancer and that she has had an allergic reaction to
penicillin. Patient A’s evidence is that she volunteered
the information
that there was no family history of breast cancer and she cannot now recall
whether she volunteered the information
Respondent asked her about this. The medical records state that Patient A has
never had a PAP
smear yet. A HCCC file note of a conversation with Patient A
some two weeks after the consultation records that she has had one PAP
is possible but unlikely that the patient had a PAP smear in the two weeks
between the consultation and the file note (as
the patient suggested) but
perhaps the file note is inaccurate. It is likely that there was an abdominal
examination, unless the
medical records on this point have been fabricated. But
on the material before us there is no good reason to think that the medical
records have been altered after the event.
22. Our view of these
inconsistencies in the patient’s account (if that is what they are) is
that they do not detract from her
truthfulness about the claims particularised.
Perhaps she had forgotten about the abdominal examination when she made her full
patient had a PAP smear, we do not consider significant the potential
23. We note in passing that while we accept that the
Respondent’s medical records have not been altered after the date of
consultation,
it is not always clear which parts of these notes were
automatically generated. It is the Respondent’s evidence that typing
“cough” and “OCP” generated several lines of text which
he later edited. This of course raises the question
as to whether everything
recorded was actually done. We take up this point in subsequent paragraphs.
24. The Complaint alleges that what happened at the consultation of 11
October 2016 can be characterised on the part of the Respondent
“improper or unethical conduct”. In the way the case was presented
before us this allegation connects primarily with
particular 4, namely, making
inappropriate comments about the patient’s tattoo and nipple piercing
which was a breach of the
Medical Board of Australia “Sexual Boundaries
guidelines for doctors”. It was not argued before us and nor do we think
that the Respondent conducted a breast examination for his own private reasons.
What happened on 11 October 2016 was at worst a poorly
conducted breast
examination, without proper consent, without good reasons exacerbated by
inappropriate comments and the unacceptable
locking of the consultation door.
The Respondent gives his reasons for conducting the examination and for locking
the door; and he
denies handling the patient’s breasts in a certain way
and making inappropriate remarks. While on most of these matters we
find against
the Respondent we do not find that his motives were improper. In other words,
during the course of the Inquiry the Committee
had in mind its obligations under
section 171D of the National Law, namely, to refer the matter to the Tribunal if
the opinion that the complaint if substantiated may provide
grounds for suspension or cancellation” of the Respondent’s
registration (i.e. amounted to professional misconduct, rather than just
unsatisfactory professional conduct). We did not form such
OUR REASONING RELEVANT TO EACH PARTICULAR
Particulars raise some 14 allegations against Dr Basavaraj. We set out the
material before us on each particular based on
the documents before us.
26. As mentioned we have had the benefit of submissions from both the
HCCC and the Respondent’s legal advisers. We have listened
carefully and refer to them below where appropriate.
On 11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate
judgment and care in that he did not explain his reasons for recommending
breast examination to Patient A in circumstances where:
a. Patient A gave a history of a sore throat with lack of energy and
requested a medical certificate;
b. the practitioner examined Patient A's throat, took her temperature, used a
stethoscope and gave her a medical certificate;
c. Patient A then requested a repeat prescription for the contraceptive
d. Patient A did not complain of any breast symptoms.
circumstances a. to d. are common ground between the parties. What is disputed
is whether the Respondent properly explained
his reasons for recommending a
breast examination.
29. As mentioned in her initial complaint to the HCCC
in October 2016 Patient A did not mention that she requested a script for the
contraceptive pill. However, she did refer to this in her longer statement of
November 2017 (headed October but signed 2 November
2017. Here she states that
the Respondent said that she needed to have a breast examination today and she
acquiesced.
30. In his statements (December 2016, February 2017) the
Respondent claims that he explained to the patient that the hormones in the
may adversely affect breast lumps and he asked if she had ever had a
professional breast examination. As she had not, he asked
whether she would like
to have one that day to which she consented. In his comments to the Council
interviewers (March 2017) the
Respondent concedes that due to time pressures
perhaps he did not “take adequate steps to explain himself”.
31. At the hearing it was the patient’s evidence that the
Respondent did not explain his reasons for the examination and had
not given her
the option as to whether to have the breast examination. If he had she would not
have wanted this. He just said let’s
do it and then asked her to go to the
examination table and remove all her tops. He closed the curtain around the
table. She acquiesced
as she trusted the doctor.
32. At the hearing the
Respondent could not recall if he did take adequate steps to explain the reasons
for conducting a breast examination.
But in his view, it was “nearly
impossible” that he would give no explanation at all.
33. The notes
say that he “advised breast self-check and at the time of PAP smear - to
alert if she has any breast lump; discussed
pros cons SE etc at length; breast
check NAD”. As the Council interviewers put it - it is unclear how the
consultation moved
from the suggestion that there be a breast examination in the
future by someone else at the time of a PAP smear to the Respondent
conducting a
breast examination during this consultation. The notes do not record that the
patient requested a breast examination
or that she consented.
the Respondent’s evidence that it was the patient who prompted the breast
check and he did not dissuade her because
of certain risk factors (we discuss
these below in reference to particular 2). To be fair the Respondent at other
times could not
recall whether he suggested the breast check at that point of
time, or the patient requested it. But he noted that the consultation
conducted in a way in which the patient could read the medical notes and
suggested that she saw that he had written “advised
breast self-check and
at the time of PAP smear” and this possibly triggered her
35. Our view of this material is that it is more likely that the
Respondent suggested the breast examination and the patient acquiesced
trusted the doctor’s judgement on this matter. Whatever the Respondent
thought he said about the reasons for the examination
this information was not
understood by Patient A. As noted above the initial complaint on the day of the
consultation and the longer
email to the HCCC two weeks later do not connect the
breast examination to her request for a prescription for an oral contraceptive.
In our view this supports the patient’s claim at the hearing that the
Respondent failed to explain to her the reasons for a
breast examination and
consequently failed to obtain her reasoned consent to this.
the peer reviewer’s assessment that if the patient’s version of
events on this issue is accepted (i.e. failure
to explain his reasons for
recommending a breast examination) this amounted to a significant departure from
the expected standards.
We agree with this assessment. Particular 1 is made out
and in the circumstances of this case we are of view that this is unsatisfactory
professional conduct via S139B(1)(a) of the National Law.
Particular 2
: On 11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise
appropriate care and judgment in that he proceeded to conduct a breast
examination
on Patient A in circumstances where:
a. the practitioner had never previously consulted with Patient A;
b. Patient A told the practitioner during the consultation that she had no
family history of breast cancer;
c. Patient A did not complain during the consultation of any breast
d. there was insufficient clinical indication for conducting a breast
examination on Patient A at that time.
38. A breast examination was
conducted in the circumstances as set out in parts (a), (b) and (c). The issue
is (d) – whether
there was insufficient clinical indication for conducting
a breast examination on Patient A at that time? And if there was not, whether
this amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
39. It is Patient
A’s evidence that the Respondent suggested the breast check at that time,
and she acquiesced. It was the Respondent’s
evidence at the hearing that
the patient prompted the breast check and he agreed to do it because of the risk
factors as he saw it.
These factors were that she had been taking oral
contraception for 10 years and although the patient said she had no breast lumps
this had never been checked by a medical practitioner. The Respondent agreed
that the breast check did not have to be done at that
consultation and could
give no reason why it happened, other than that the patient requested this. On
the material before us we find
it unlikely that the patient suggested a breast
check and more likely that the doctor initiated this.
40. As for the risk
factors referred to by the Respondent, it was pointed out at the Council
Interview that the Respondent did not
address more obvious risk factors by
measuring the patient’s blood pressure or weight or by counselling her
against smoking
while taking the contraceptive pill.
41. We share the
opinion of the Council interviewers and the peer reviewer that there was
insufficient clinical indication for conducting
a breast examination on Patient
A at that time.
42. In the circumstances set out in this particular (a.
to d.) it was the peer reviewer’s opinion that a breast examination
be most unusual. His report is not fully clear as to whether he regarded this as
a departure or a significant departure from
the expected standards. At point 5
of his report he gives the view it was a significant departure on the assumption
that the doctor
had not asked about family history of breast cancer or breast
lumps. The medical notes however make clear that these two matters
discussed. On the Respondent’s version of events at point 28 he finds a
breast examination inappropriate but merely below
the expected standards.
However, when asked his view on the Respondent’s version of events in
circumstances where it was the
patient’s first presentation and she had
not complained about a breast lump, soreness or other breast related symptoms,
states that the breast examination was significantly below the expected
standards. He repeated this view in his oral evidence before
43. In the circumstances set out above it was the
Respondent’s submission that the peer reviewer, Dr Howle, did not regard
matters alleged in particular 2 a significant breach of the standards. We do
not agree with this submission. Further, it is the
Committee’s view,
guided by its two specialist members, that conducting a breast examination in
the circumstances set out in
this particular was a significant departure from
the expected standards. The Committee considered that the breast examination was
not required in this consultation and relies in part for its view on the RACGP
Guidelines for preventive activities in general practice,
9th edition (in the
materials before the Committee) which states (9.3) “There is insufficient
evidence to recommend that clinical
breast examination offers any benefits to
women , of any age.” We do not accept that the patient requested a breast
examination.
Further, we do not accept that an adequate explanation of breast
examination was provided to the patient, nor that appropriate informed
for this examination was given by the patient for this examination. Particular 2
is made out and in the circumstances of
this case we are of view that this is
unsatisfactory professional conduct via S139B(1)(a) of the National Law.
Particular 3:
On 11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to
exercise appropriate skill, judgment and care in that during the breast
examination,
the practitioner:
a. put his hands palms down underneath both Patient A's breasts and moved her
breasts up and down quickly for a few seconds then repeated
this action by
'jiggling' her breasts in circumstances where:
i. Patient A had not complained of any breast lumps;
ii. jiggling the breasts was not a necessary part of the
examination;
b. squeezed her nipple in circumstances where:
i. Patient A had not complained of any nipple discharge;
ii. squeezing the nipple was not a necessary part of the examination.
45. This particular is based on the patient’s statement of November
46. The Respondent denies that he conducted the examination as
particularised. But admits that he gently squeezed the patient’s
because this is the appropriate part of the examination which allows the
practitioner to identify any lumps immediately below
the nipple while looking
for any possible discharge.
47. With regard to part (a), Patient A notes
in her statement that during the breast examination the Respondent placed his
palms up, underneath both breasts and moved her breasts up and down
quickly for a few seconds with the effect that he jiggled them.
At the hearing
Patient A said that during the examination the Respondent jiggled each breast
side to side for a couple of seconds
a couple of times. It was pointed out in
cross examination that Patient A could not evaluate what should happen in a
breast examination
by a medical practitioner as she had not had one before. Her
response was that she had been taught how to self-examine her breasts
obviously jiggling the breast side to side was not part of any proper
investigation.
48. In his statements and again in his evidence at the
hearing the Respondent denies jiggling Patient A’s breasts, as she
it. In his first statement of December 2016 he describes in detail how
he conducted the breast examination which includes the wearing
of latex gloves.
This account of course may be based upon his usual practice.
complaint made on the day of the consultation Patient A refers to the Respondent
“jiggling her breasts” and
she repeats this in her email to the HCCC
some two weeks later. At the least, the Respondent failed to give an
understandable explanation
to Patient A as to what he was doing during the
examination. And we accept Patient A’s account of this aspect of the
examination,
namely, that unexplained “jiggling of the breasts occurred
and, like Dr Howle, we consider this an unnecessary part of an orthodox
examination.
50. However, while we are satisfied that part (a) of
particular 3 is made out in the absence of any material before us disclosing
motivation other than the carrying out a breast examination we are not satisfied
(in the circumstances of this case) that this
amounts to a significant departure
from the expected standards. In other words, we do not consider that the matters
alleged in part
(a) while found proven amount to unsatisfactory professional
51. As for part (b), the Respondent records in his December
2016 statement that he “gently squeezed the nipples to rule out
discharge”. In her statement of November 2017 Patient A said that without
any explanation the Respondent pinched her nipple
when she had given him no
reason to touch her there.
52. It is the peer reviewer’s evidence
that the only explanation for squeezing the nipple is to check for discharge as
an indication
of a breast disorder. But this is only done with the
patient’s express permission and it would be more appropriate to ask the
patient to do it herself.
53. We accept Patient A’s evidence that
the Respondent did not explain why the breast examination needed to extend to
his squeezing
her nipple and she did not consent to this. In these circumstances
we agree that this conduct was significantly below the expected
54. In sum, we find part (a) of this proven but not amounting
to unsatisfactory professional conduct. We find part (b) proven and
circumstances of this case we are of view that this is unsatisfactory
professional conduct via S139B(1)(a) of the National
Particular 4
: On 11 October 2016, the
practitioner failed to exercise appropriate judgment in that during the breast
examination on Patient A
whilst she was partially undressed on the examination
couch, the practitioner:
a. in respect of the tattoo on her ribs, asked her what it meant;
b. after Patient A replied that it meant 'Life is beautiful' in Thai, said
words to Patient A to the effect of "Life is indeed beautiful";
c. in respect of her nipple piercing said words to Patient A to the effect of
"That must have hurt."
56. This particular is based on the allegations in
the patient’s statement of November 2017. The Respondent denies asking the
patient about her tattoo or nipple piercing and denies making any comments about
these matters.
57. In evaluating the likelihood of these remarks being
made we note that they were referred to in the complaint which the patient
on the day of the consultation and repeated in her email to the HCCC of two
weeks later. We have no reason to believe that the
patient misunderstood or
fabricated this aspect of the consultation. The Respondent already by December
2016 had little recall of
the consultation. At the hearing he said that he could
not recall if the patient had a tattoo or a piercing and would not make such
comments as they are clinically irrelevant. He said that the words alleged were
not his kind of language and not in his vocabulary.
58. On this issue we
accept the evidence of Patient A. On this basis we find particular 4 proven.
Particular 4 is made out and in
the circumstances of this case we are of view
that this is unsatisfactory professional conduct via S139B(1)(a) of the National
59. The matters raised by particular 4
can also be described as “improper and unethical conduct”. The
relevant guidelines
– Sexual Boundaries: Guidelines for doctors (Medical
Board of Australia, October 2011) - define sexual misconduct as including
“making sexual remarks... in front of the patient”. In managing
sexual boundaries doctors are cautioned to be aware that
sexual harassment
includes “making suggestive comments about the patient’s appearance
or body”. In other words,
it is our view that the matters raised by
particular 4 and now found proven is unsatisfactory professional conduct via S
of the National Law.
Particular 5
: On 11 October
2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate judgment in that
practitioner unnecessarily locked the door
to the consultation room during the
consultation in circumstances where:
a. the practitioner did not offer any reason to justify locking the door;
b. Patient A did not make any request to lock the door;
c. the privacy curtain around the examination table would afford Patient A
sufficient privacy in the event that another person may
enter the consultation
room during an examination.
61. These allegations are based on the
patient’s statement of October 2017.
62. About these matters the
Respondent states that he locked the consultation door in order to ensure that
the patient’s privacy
was protected. For he has in the past experienced
occasions when children or elderly patients with dementia simply walked into the
consultation room. He now accepts that he ought to have advised the patient he
proposed to do this and should have explained why.
63. At the Council
Interview it is noted that “the Respondent seemed unaware that locking the
door without adequate explanation
could be frightening to a patient especially a
young woman”.
64. At the hearing it was the patient’s
evidence that the privacy curtain was closed during the breast examination
she could see an open space behind the doctor. After the breast
examination she had dressed and the doctor said she could leave.
But she noticed
that the door was locked. She said that the doctor did not tell her that he was
locking the door and she did not
notice him locking it. Her evidence initially
was that the doctor unlocked the door but in response to questions she said that
opened the door.
65. It was the Respondent’s evidence that he
cannot close the privacy curtain because the space is too small to allow him to
carry out an examination in these circumstances. Since working at the medical
centre in Riverwood (since 2013) he has adopted the
practice of stopping people
entering the consultation room from the outside when he is conducting a private
examination. He does
this by means of a “privacy latch” which he
states can be opened from the inside and thus does not restrict the
66. As to why the door needed to be locked from
the inside, the Respondent said it was not uncommon for children or patients
dementia or others to mistakenly enter his consultation room. He explained
the layout at the practice where there is no way of distinguishing
outside which consultation room was his and which were the other rooms at the
practice. Accordingly, it has been his practice
whenever he does a private
examination, perhaps once a week or once a month, to engage the “privacy
latch”. The Respondent
could not recall if he told Patient A that he was
engaging the privacy latch but to tell the patient of this he said was his
practice. When asked, he could not clearly identify where in his training
in Australia he had seen anyone else lock the door of a
67. We accept Patient A’s evidence that she was shocked to
find the room locked. This allegation was made soon after the events
October to 2016 (in her email of 25 October 2016). Possibly the Respondent said
something about locking the door but, clearly,
he failed to communicate this to
Patient A. As noted above, the Council interviewers commented that the
Respondent “seemed
unaware that locking the door without adequate
explanation could be frightening to a patient especially a young woman”.
lack of insight was repeated at the hearing when the Respondent continued
to argue that the patient was not restricted because the
latch” could be opened from the inside.
68. We accept the
Respondent’s evidence that the privacy curtain could not be fully closed
during the breast examination. However,
on the material before us we find that
he did not offer any understandable reason to the patient to justify locking the
nor did Patient A request that the door be locked.
the peer reviewer’s opinion that in the circumstances of this consultation
locking the door without proper explanation
was inappropriate and conduct
significantly below the expected standards. We agree with this view. Particular
5, parts (a) and (b),
are proven and in the circumstances of this case we are of
view that this is unsatisfactory professional conduct via S 139B(1)(a)
National Law.
Summary of our findings
70. Particular 1, 2,
3(b), 4 and 5 is made out. Separately and together this amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct by way
of S 139B(1)(a) of the National
That particular 4 is made out is also unsatisfactory professional conduct by way
of S 139B(1)(l) of the National Law
72. The facts of particular 3(a) are made out but this does not amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct by way of S 139B(1)(a)
of the National
THE APPROPRIATE ORDERS
73. With regard to the appropriate orders in this matter, the Committee
notes its jurisdiction in these disciplinary proceedings is
both to protect the
public, and to assist in maintaining the appropriate ethical and clinical
standards of the profession. With the
object of protecting the public in mind we
must take account both of the likelihood of the Respondent repeating the
professional
conduct we have found to be unsatisfactory in these proceedings,
and also the need to maintain the appropriate standards and deter
others from
falling short of them. Public confidence in the profession is maintained if it
can be seen that there are consequences
for unsatisfactory professional conduct.
It is not our role to punish the Respondent.
74. We must now consider
the relevant protective orders to be made. The Committee notes that the powers
available to it in this regard
are set out in s146(B) of the National Law. A
Committee may do one or more of the following:
or reprimand the practitioner;
that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising of the
practitioner’s profession, it considers appropriate
be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration;
that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
counselling;
that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the
that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at the times,
in the way and to the persons specified by the
that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the management of the
practitioner’s practice, from the persons
specified by the
75. After hearing the evidence on whether the
Complaint was made out the Committee was of the view that it was likely to make
against the Respondent. Accordingly, the parties presented evidence and
submissions relevant to stage two. There was some discussion
as to just which
parts of the Complaint were likely to be found proven and the Committee
indicated it was of the view at this stage
of the proceedings that, at the
least, most of the Complaint would be found proven.
76. At this stage of
the proceedings the HCCC indicated that the protective orders they proposed were
- a reprimand, Category B supervision
arrangements, a mentoring condition, the
completion of a clinical communication program organised by the Cognitive
Institute and
other machinery conditions. For reasons of due process the
Committee informed the parties that in addition to these conditions it
like the stage 2 submissions to address such additional conditions as the
requirement of a performance assessment, a possible
limit on the examination of
women and a limit on patient numbers seen per day.
77. After an
adjournment, the Respondent submitted that the Complaint concerned one
consultation and although this was some years
ago there have been no further
complaints. If there was to be supervision the public was sufficiently protected
by Category C supervision
(i.e. off-site supervision). And if an educational
course was ordered the Respondent should be given 12 months rather than 9 months
to complete the course. As for the suggestion that there should be a condition
requiring a performance assessment or that there be
a condition that the
Respondent not treat women for a period of time, such measures were
disproportionate as the Complaint was based
on one consultation and there have
been no further complaints. For the same reason a limit on patient numbers could
not be justified.
Patient A was a “fit in” so there was some
reference to time pressures in this case but seeing too many patients was
the cause of the alleged failings. The doctor’s evidence is that he sees
25 to 30 patients a day which is not a large number
of patients.
HCCC’s submission argued for the matters it proposed. It was said that if
the Committee had concerns about the Respondents
clinical skills a performance
assessment would be appropriate. As for the limit on patient numbers, perhaps
this was a sensible condition
especially if the doctor was to be a sole
practitioner for a period of time (between the retirement of his partner say and
him finding
a replacement).
79. Further evidence was taken from the
Respondent relevant to the orders the Committee might make. He said that any
condition limiting
his ability to examine female patients would be very
difficult. At present he does refer many of these examinations to his female
partner or to Family Planning or other Centres.
80. As to his present
workload, he said that apart from his work at the practice he works for an
After-hours Cooperative, various
nursing homes and does some home visits. He
would like to cut down on his work for the Cooperative and at the nursing homes.
found it very difficult to hire doctors for his practice and he is
concerned as to how he will replace Dr Reddy. She is at present
working three
afternoons but does plan to retire at some stage.
81. The Respondent
said that he had spoken about the Complaint to some other doctors and that if he
was faced with clinical problems,
he can raise them at the monthly GP meeting
which he attends.
82. The Respondent added that he does his nursing home
work primarily on Wednesday afternoon where on average he would bill about
15 patients. Sometimes he goes to the nursing homes more than once a week. He
estimated that at the practice on a full day
he would see between 25 to 30
patients. At the After-hours Cooperative he is on duty at least once per month.
He works between 7
PM to 10/10:30 PM and sees about four patients per
83. In justifying a supervision condition the HCCC pointed to the
lack of insight shown by the Respondent. It was argued that he had
not accepted
his responsibility for his conduct during the consultation and not shown an
understanding as to how the consultation
would have appeared to Patient A. In
response to this the Respondent argued that this was an unfair inference based
on the way that
the Respondent had argued his case. If this had been a true two
stage case, he would have been in the position to read the statement
decision, see the findings made against him, and he would have responded
differently.
Our view of this
is as follows. In view of the
findings made against the Respondent a reprimand is appropriate. A supervision
condition should be
imposed and this should be Category C supervision. This will
allow the Respondent to be connected to an independent supervisor. And
set up arrangements which apart from the usual supervision meetings will allow
each to observe the other’s consultations.
We have not however ordered a
mentoring condition as we consider that a supervision order is sufficient in the
circumstances of this
case. A number of the failings alleged in the Complaint
can be attributed to poor communication. For this reason, we have ordered
completion of the Clinical Communication Program organised by the Cognitive
85. It is true as the Respondent argued that the Complaint is
based upon a single consultation. However, the Committee was concerned
way in which the Respondent conducted the breast examination and dealt with
other clinical matters raised by the consultation.
Particularly, the Committee
notes that in oral evidence and in his recorded notes the Respondent made a
provisional diagnosis of
possible Epstein-Barr virus (Glandular fever) in the
consultation in question. His notes suggest that the patient had tenderness
her liver (“RUQ tenderness+”) and in his statement dated 6 December
2016 he states that he “noted slight enlargement
of her liver”.
Despite this written and oral evidence, the Respondent did not suggest any
serological testing for glandular
fever, or any clinical follow for this
possible diagnosis. This caused the Committee to have some concerns regarding
the Respondent’s
general clinical competence. In addition, it was
concerned about his claimed “super-fast approach” and his apparent
indifference
to the effect of the consultation upon the patient; and as to
whether he had made any changes to his practice since this consultation.
for these reasons it considers that a performance assessment is an appropriate
step to take in the interests of protecting
the public from below standard
professional performance. The Committee recommends that the Medical Council
organise a performance
assessment.
86. The Committee considered other
possible protective orders in particular a limit on patient numbers. It is true
that the Respondent
is not at present seeing large numbers of patients. A limit
of say 30 patients per day would provide a framework to allow him to
improve his
clinical performance. However, it cannot be said that the complaint came about
because the Respondent is seeing excessive
patients. In these circumstances
rather than order a limit on patient numbers the Committee considers that this
should be a matter
for the performance review to consider.
87. Our view of the evidence is not only that that the Respondent failed to get consent for a breast examination that in the circumstances
was not warranted. He also failed to properly carry out the breast examination. This was also the view of the peer reviewer, Dr Howle,
and the Council Interviewers. In response to this failure we have directed that the Respondent should have some sessions with a breast
surgeon to learn how to competently undertake a breast examination.
88. Under section 146B(1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
the Committee reprimands the
practitioner.
Practice restrictions
89. Under section
146B(1) (b) and (d) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the Committee directs that the following conditions be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration
Supervision
90. To practise under category C supervision in accordance with the
Medical Council of NSW’s Compliance Policy – Supervision
from time to time) and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review
body. The terms of the Council’s Compliance
Policy are varied as
(a) The supervision meetings will alternate between:
(i) Review and discussion of his practice with his approved supervisor with
particular focus on maintaining appropriate professional
boundaries with
patients, obtaining informed consent, communication with patients, workload
management, clinical performance, clinical
outcomes and medical record reviews.
(ii) Direct observation of patient consultations. The observation sessions will
alternate between the supervisor observing the practitioner’s
consultations and the practitioner observing the supervisor’s
consultations. At least one third of the consultations observed
must include
female patients. Feedback about the observation sessions are to be included in
the supervision reports.
(b) To authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide proposed and approved
supervisors with a copy of the decision that imposed
conditions.
91. To complete within 12 months of
23 January 2020 the Clinical Communication Programme organised by the Cognitive
(a) within three months of 23 January 2020 he must provide evidence to the
Medical Council of New South Wales of his enrolment in
the above-mentioned
(b) within one month of completing the above-mentioned course is to provide
documentary evidence to the Medical Council of New South
Wales that he has
satisfactorily completed the course
(c) To bear responsibility for any costs incurred in meeting this condition.
In the event that the Clinical Communication Programme is
unavailable, he must propose to the Council for approval a similar course
undertaken in accordance with the requirements of this condition by no later
than 2 months from date of this decision.
Attend sessions with breast surgeon
92. To complete within
6 months of 23 January 2020 2 clinical sessions with a Council approved
specialist breast surgeon with specialised
registration in general
a) By 2 months from the date of this decision to nominate an
appropriately qualified breast surgeon for the Council’s approval
commencement of the clinical sessions.
b) At each clinical session, the
breast surgeon and practitioner are to meet for at least 3 hours where Dr
Basavaraj can observe the
breast surgeon consulting with patients. The
objectives of the session are to learn about communication before and during
examinations; seeking consent for breast examination; indications
for breast examinations; risk factors for breast disease and to
observe breast
examination and then conduct breast examinations under
supervision.
c) The practitioner is to provide
a report to the Medical Council of NSW (in a Council approved format) within 14
days following each
clinical session. The report is to include:
session date
• content of discussions
• length of
discussions
• Learnings and self-reflection, including what the
practitioner observed during the observation sessions and what changes he
make to his practice as a result of these sessions.
d) To authorise the
Council approved breast surgeon to report to the Medical Council of NSW (in
Council approved format) within 21
days following each clinicaln session that
• the session dates
• content of
discussions
• feedback about the practitioner’s participation in
the sessions
• if there is any concern about the practitioner’s
engagement or understanding of the requirements of adequate and appropriate
breast examinations during the session.
e) To authorise the Medical
Council of NSW to provide proposed and approved breast surgeon with a copy of
the decision which imposed
this decision.
f) To meet all costs associated
with the clinical sessions and any subsequent reports.
Information
93. To authorise the Council to notify his employer/s of any issues
arising in relation to compliance with any of these conditions.
authorise and consent to any exchange of information between the Medical Council
of NSW and Medicare Australia for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with
these conditions.
95. To bear all costs arising out
of compliance with these conditions.
Review Body
appropriate review body for the purpose of a review under s. 163 -163C
the National Law is the Medical Council of NSW when the respondent has a
principal place of practice in NSW.
97. Sections 125 to 127 of the
National Law are to apply should the respondent’s principal place of
practice be anywhere in
Australia other than in NSW, so that the appropriate
review body in those circumstances is the relevant National
PUBLICATION OF DECISION
98. Pursuant to section
171E(1) of the National Law the Committee provides copy of this written
statement of decision to the Dr, the
Health Care Complaints Commission and the
Medical Council of NSW.
99. Pursuant to section 171E(3) of the National Law the Committee
provides a copy of this written statement of decision to
NON-PUBLICATION DIRECTION
100. The Chairperson continues this
non-publication direction regarding the name and address of Patient A (by way of
Schedule 5D,
clause 7 of the National Law (NSW)) and any information which might
identify her in these proceedings is not to be published by any
101. This direction does not operate to exclude any provision of the
National Law and does not preclude the Medical Council from undertaking
statutory functions.
‘Publication’ may include communicating either in writing or
verbally to any person.
102. An appeal to the Occupational Division of the
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal on a point of law is to be made within 28
days of handing down of the decision.
_______________________
Dr Arthur Glass
Chairperson
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
Executive Officer Medical Council of NSW Punt Road
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 13, 323 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the Medical Council
of New South Wales in
accordance with
sections 39(2)
and 908(3) of the
Health Care Complaints Act
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
('the National Law');
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Dr Rajesh Basavaraj of 264 Belmore Road, Riverwood NSW
2210, being a medical practitioner registered under the
National Law
("the practitioner"),
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT
The practitioner completed a Bachelor of
Medicine/Bachelor of Surgery in India in 1995, was first registered as medical
practitioner
in NSW on 3 May 2004 and became a Fellow of the Royal Australian
College of General Practitioners in February 2013.
From February 2013, the practitioner was working as a general practitioner at a
medical centre in Riverwood.
On 11 October 2016, Patient A attended a consultation with the practitioner at
the medical centre.
COMPLAINT ONE
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
section 1398(1)(a) and/or (I) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of medicine
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience;
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of medicine.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate judgment and
care in that he did not explain his reasons for recommending
examination to Patient A in circumstances where:
A gave a history of a sore throat with lack of energy and requested a medical
certificate;
practitioner examined Patient A's throat, took her temperature, used a
stethoscope and gave her a medical certificate;
A then requested a repeat prescription for the contraceptive
A did not complain of any breast symptoms.
11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate care and
judgment in that he proceeded to conduct a breast examination
on Patient A in
circumstances where:
practitioner had never previously consulted with Patient A;
A told the practitioner during the consultation that she had no family history
of breast cancer;
A did not complain during the consultation of any breast
was insufficient clinical indication for conducting a breast examination on
Patient A at that time.
11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate skill, judgment
and care in that during the breast examination,
the practitioner:
his hands palms down underneath both Patient A's breasts and moved her breasts
up and down quickly for a few seconds then repeated
this action by 'jiggling'
her breasts in circumstances where:
A had not complained of any breast
jiggling the breasts was not a necessary part of the examination;
b. squeezed her nipple in circumstances where:
A had not complained of any nipple discharge;
the nipple was not a necessary part of the examination.
11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate judgment in
that during the breast examination on Patient A whilst
she was partially
undressed on the examination couch, the practitioner:
respect of the tattoo on her ribs, asked her what it meant;
Patient A replied that it meant 'Life is beautiful' in Thai, said words to
Patient A to the effect of "Life is indeed beautiful";
respect of her nipple piercing said words to Patient A to the effect of "That
must have hurt."
11 October 2016, the practitioner failed to exercise appropriate judgment in
that practitioner unnecessarily locked the door to
the consultation room during
the consultation in circumstances where:
the practitioner did not offer any reason to justify locking the door;
b. Patient A did not make any request to lock the door;
c. the privacy curtain around the examination table would afford Patient A
sufficient privacy in the event that another person may
enter the consultation
room during an examination.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter