URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover New South Wales (Inspector Prasad de Silva) v Kenlook Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 70 (31 May 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
WorkCover New South Wales (Inspector Prasad de Silva)
Kenlook Pty Ltd
Case Number:
20296152/05/2, 20296163/5/2
Hearing Dates:
30 March 2006
31 May 2006
Legislation:
Occupational Health and
Safety Act 2000
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor
Rodney, Carroll & O’Dea Solicitors
Counsel for the
: Ms P McDonald
Solicitor for the Defendant
Polgar, Furnishing Industry Association of Australia
Counsel for the
: Mr G Bennett
Reasons for Decision
1. The defendants herein each pleads guilty to a breach of section 8(1)
of the Occupational Health & Safety Act 2000. The second
defendant, being a
Director of the first defendant is charged with the section 8(1) offence by
virtue of the provisions of section
26 (1) of the legislation.
2. The short
particulars of the offence to which the first defendant pleads guilty are set
out in the amended court attendance notice
as follows: -
defendant failed to provide or maintain a system of work which was safe and
without risk to health for procedures and
activities associated with handling,
storage and retrieval of sofa bed frames at the premises which ensured that
it’s employees
carried out the procedures and activities using techniques
and methods which were safe and without risk to health.
The defendant failed
to provide and maintain a system of work that was safe and without risk to
health which ensured sufficient working
space and unhindered access to work
areas at the premises from refuse, off cuts and stacked materials used in the
construction of
The defendant failed to assess the risks for
handling, storage and retrieval of rolls of upholstery, and other materials and
frames used in the construction of sofa beds at the premises to ensure
such processes and activities were safe and without risk to
3. In each case the court has been provided with an agreed
statement of facts document setting out the relevant background facts and
circumstances including the details of a number of visits made to the first
defendants premises by Inspector de Silva and other inspectors
February 2003 and 15 July 2005. I do not propose to set out the background facts
and circumstances within the reasons
for decision. The facts are well known to
the parties.
4. Notwithstanding the plea of guilty entered by both
defendants there was a dispute of fact which required the hearing of some
at the sentencing hearing. The prosecution relied not only upon the
factual inspection reports and photographic evidence but also
an alligation that
an employee of the first defendant who had been in the employment as at the 15
July 2003 had been involved in
a specific incident at the premises and that
whilst assisting 2 other employees to handle sofa bed frames whilst using an
method this former employee had suffered some relatively minor injuries
when a frame had fallen on the back of his neck.
5. Whilst the
defendants both entered pleas of guilty to the offences the claims made by the
former employee where denied. On behalf
of the defendants it was contended that
no reliable evidence existed to support the contention that any employee had
actually suffered
injury as a consequence of the defendants failures to maintain
the premises in a safe manner.
6. The former employee who claimed to
suffer injury in about mid 2003 was brought to the court to give evidence from a
prison where
he was serving a sentence for a serious criminal offence.
7. On behalf of the defendant it was contended that the court would
treat the evidence of the witness with considerable caution given
that the man
was a convicted criminal who had been dismissed from his employment with the
first defendant and was likely to bear
a grudge against the defendants for that
8. The defendant’s called a Mr Madhavan to give evidence
in relation to this issue. Mr Madhavan was an employee of the first
and he recalled working at the first defendants premises at the same time as the
former employee who was claiming to have
suffered an injury whilst on the
premises. Mr Madhavan gave evidence that he was a senior employee who performed
some supervisory
functions on behalf of the first defendant at the premises. His
evidence was that he had no recollection of ever being approached
by the former
employee and informed by him that he had suffered an injury. The relevance of
this evidence was that the employee who
had allegedly been injured had provided
the prosecutor with a witness statement in November 2004 in which he was asked
had reported the incident to the management and had replied “I
told Jay about what happened.” It is clear that Jay was
Mr Jay Madhaven.
9. Notwithstanding the submissions made on behalf of the defendants I
accept the evidence that an incident occurred in about mid 2003
which caused
minor injury to a person who was then employed by the first defendant. I reject
the submission made on behalf of the
defendants that the court should be
inclined to disbelieve the mans evidence simply because he has been convicted of
a criminal offence.
I am prepared to accept that the man in question evidences a
degree of anger towards the defendants. In the view of the court the
relates to the mans claim that he had specifically asked if he could clean up
the area in which he was required to work before
performing a specific task and
the first defendant had directed him not to do so. Shortly there after he had
suffered an injury in
circumstances where he clearly believed the injury would
not have occurred if his employer had not impeded his request to clean the
up. I am satisfied that the clear recollection of the witness almost 3 years
later is related to his ongoing sense of grievance.
However, the fact that he
has a sense of grievance does not of itself destroy his creditability as a
10. The evidence of Mr Madhavan does not, in my view, undermine
the man’s evidence that he reported the incident to Mr Madhavan.
Madhavan informed the court that he had no responsibilities for the recording of
workplace incidents or accidents. Although he
did not recall the man in question
informing him of his injury he stated that if the man had mentioned it to him he
would have not
have taken any action as it was not his role. Instead, he would
have suggested to the man that he go to the office and report the
someone there. In those circumstances there is no particular reason why Mr
Madhavan would have any recollection of being
informed of the injury. It is
clear, on the account given by the former employee that the injury was a
relatively minor one in any
11. It is clear on the evidence that
when the Inspector first visited the first defendants premises in February 2003
he found that
the premises where in such a state as to constitute an unsafe
place to work. The major problems related to passageways that were
so cluttered
with stock as to constitute a risk to safety. In addition heavy rolls of
upholstery and other materials were stacked
in such a fashion that employees
allocated the task of accessing such materials were required to handle heavy
objects and pull them
down from shelving that was too high in a fashion which
constituted an obviously unsafe system of work.
12. Having inspected the
premises following an anonymous complaint the Inspector issued the first
defendant with a number of improvement
13. These improvement
notices were for the most part ignored by the first defendant. The Inspector
returned on a number of occasions
between February 2003 and July 2003 for the
purpose of following up his initial visit and in particular to investigate the
defendants response to the initial and subsequent improvement notices. The
response of the first defendant was entirely unsatisfactory.
Notwithstanding the
fact that the Inspector issued a number of improvement notices and visited the
site on a number of occasions
to ascertain whether the improvement notices had
been complied with the first defendant failed to take appropriate or adequate
to comply with the improvement notices. Eventually, following an
inspection on 15 July 2003 the inspector proceeded to commence the
proceedings
herein against the defendants.
14. It is necessary for the court to give
consideration to the objective seriousness of the offence. It is clear that the
the first defendant’s premises was such that there was an obvious
and foreseeable risk of injury. The photographic evidence
before the court was
most graphic. Employees were required to lift and carry relatively heavy objects
such as sofa frames in conditions
where the passage ways within the premises
were severely congested with stock and equipment and other material that made
access hazardous
especially when the employees where endeavouring to carry heavy
objects. Further, the system adopted for stacking heavy rolls of
upholstery and
other materials was clearly hazardous.
15. The court was provided with a
second set of photographs which provided graphic evidence of the recent
transformation of the premises
following the commencement of these proceedings.
The photographic evidence showed that the passageways within the premises had
made safe by being cleared of the materials that had previously cluttered
them and that the first defendant had reorganised the system
for the stacking of
heavy rolls of upholstery and other materials. I am satisfied that no complex or
expensive remedial steps were
required to achieve this transformation. All that
was needed was for the first defendant to take appropriate steps to acknowledge
that improvement was required and allocate staff to clean up premises which
were, and had been for some time, in a most unsatisfactory
16. The authorities are clear that an obvious and foreseeable risk to
safety is made more serious by virtue of the existence of readily
means of remedying the risk to safety.
17. The authorities are also clear
that the seriousness of the offence is increased if the nature of the risk to
safety is such that
injuries of a severe or most serious kind are likely to
result from the inadequacies from the system of work or the working environment.
In this case I am satisfied that whilst the risk to safety was obvious there was
no obvious or clear risk that injuries of a serious
kind were likely to result
from the unsafe systems. In the view of the court the type of injuries likely to
arise were injuries at
the less serious end of the scale.
satisfied that both a general and specific deterrence factor should be included
in any penalty imposed by the court. The
need for a specific deterrence factor
is underlined by the defendants extraordinary disregard for the improvement
notices provided
by the Inspector over the period of several months. This case
should not have required the attention of the court. Clearly, the need
prosecution would not have arisen if the defendants had adopted a responsible
and sensible approach to the initial improvements
provided by the Inspector. All
the defendants had to do was acknowledge that the improvements notices were
justified and moved diligently
to improve the state of the premises. If that had
occurred there would have been no need for the prosecution to be brought. Given
the inappropriate response by the defendants I am satisfied that a specific
deterrence factor needs to be included in any penalty.
The defendants appear to
have a short sighted and arrogant disregard to the provisions of the legislation
and the purpose behind
it, which is to safeguard the health safety and welfare
of employees when they are at work.
19. As part of the sentencing process
it is relevant for subjective matters which mitigate in favour of the defendant
to be taken
into account. In this case both defendants come before the court
with no prior convictions under the Occupational Health and Safety
Legislation.
This is an excellent record in circumstances where the first defendant and the
second defendant had been engaged in
a manufacturing industry for a substantial
period of time and have employed large numbers of employees. Mr Bennett of
Counsel for
the defendants provided the court with the history of the first
defendant which included the career of the second defendant who arrived
Australia as a migrant from Fiji, learnt the furnishing trade and was eventually
able to establish his own business which has
provided employment for many people
over a long period. This has been, as Mr Bennett submitted, a migrant success
story. The court
notes that this is essentially a family business which
flourished for a period of time and has recently suffered a serious and
significant
downturn in trade largely as a consequence of difficulties
experienced in competing against cheaper imported goods.
20. The first
defendant is incorporated and has no prior convictions. In those circumstances
the legislation provides a maximum penalty
of $550,000.00. This court has
account the objective
seriousness of the offence as well as the subjective
factors in mitigation, including the recent financial pressures on the first
defendant I find that an appropriate penalty in this case is $17,500.00. The
first defendant is entitled to a discount for the plea
of guilty. On behalf of
the defendant it was submitted that the plea of guilty should be treated as
having been entered at the earliest
opportunity given that it followed the
service of the amended court attendance notice. Whilst it is clear that there
will be some
circumstances in which a plea of guilty at a late stage should be
treated as an early plea where there have been significant changes
to the court
attendance notice I am not satisfied that the present case falls within that
category. Whilst the amended court attendance
notice is in a shorter form than
the original court attendance notice the essence of the offence appears to have
changed very little.
In those circumstances I propose to treat the plea of
guilty as having been entered at a late stage, in fact on the sixth occasion
that the matter was before the court. This was in circumstances where the
strength of the prosecution case was clearly substantial.
Consequently, although
the plea of guilty should be acknowledged and rewarded it would be inappropriate
in my view to treat the plea
of guilty as an early plea. I propose to discount
the penalty by 10 percent in acknowledgment of the plea of guilty. Consequently
the first defendant is fined the sum of $15,750.00. There will be a moiety of
the fine to the prosecutor.
21. The second defendant is the founder of
the first defendant and comes before the court in his capacity as a Director of
the company.
It is clear from the evidence before the court that he was at all
material times an active and involved Director who attended the
premises on a
regular basis and had a significant role in the day to day management of the
enterprise. He was clearly the person
best placed to ensure that the premises
where maintained in a safe condition and he was the person best placed to ensure
first defendant responded in an appropriate manner to the improvement
notice issued in February 2003 and the various improvement
notices which were
issued subsequently prior to the proceedings being commenced following the 15
July 2003 inspection.
22. There is no evidence before the court which
would justify the second defendant being regarded as either more or less
than the first defendant. In those circumstances it is appropriate in
the view of the court that the penalty imposed by the court
on the second
defendant should treat the culpability of both defendants in a manner which is
consistent with the principle of parity.
The legislation provides a maximum
penalty for an individual offender with no prior convictions of $55,000.00. The
this court is to impose a penalty not exceeding that amount. In
those circumstances I propose to fine the second defendant the sum
750.00. Taking into account a discount for the plea of guilty the penalty is
discounted to $1,575.00. There will be a moiety
of the fine to the prosecutor.
23. The costs in this matter are substantial which follows the unusual
number of occasions that this matter was before the court.
Prior to the hearing
on 30 March 2006 these matter were before the court on 6 separate occasions. I
am satisfied that the quantum
of the prosecutor costs is justified given the
failures on the part of the defendants to respond to the matters before the
in an expeditious fashion. The first defendant is ordered to pay the
prosecutors costs in the sum of $7,175.99. The second defendant
is ordered to
pay the prosecutors costs in the sum of $7,175.99.
24. The fines and the
professional costs are to be paid within 28 days at the Level 4 Registry of the
Court, Downing Centre, 143-147
Liverpool Street, Sydney.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
31 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (89.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter