URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/260.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hardiman v Parramatta City Council (No 2) [2025] NSWCATAD 260; (23 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Hardiman v Parramatta City Council (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 260
Hearing Date(s):
15 September 2025
Date of Orders:
23 October 2025
Decision Date:
23 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
H J Dixon SC, Senior Member
K Stubbs, General Member
(1) Within 3 months from the date of this decision the
Respondent is to provide an accessible disability parking space on Isabella
Street between Waugh Avenue and Macarthur Street adjacent to the footpath with
kerb access in the position marked X on the Schedule
attached to the
(2) The accessible disability parking space is to
comply with Australian Standard AS 2890.5, 2020 Edition.
Catchwords:
Human Rights – disability discrimination – indirect
discrimination – council services – Respondent to perform
act to redress loss or damage suffered
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Cases Cited:
Eatock v Bolt (No 2)
[2011] FCA 1180
Jones v Scully
Jones v Toben
[2002] FCA 1150
Lawson v State of New South Wales
(Housing NSW)
[2013] NSWADTAP 5
Secretary, NSW Department of Communities and
Justice v James
[2023] NSWCATAP 64
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Pamela Hardiman (Applicant)
The City of Parramatta Council (ABN 49 907
Representation:
Applicant (Self represented)
McCabes Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00196887
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
31 July 2025, the Tribunal provided the parties with reasons
(“Reasons”) which concluded that the application brought
Applicant for indirect discrimination under the
Anti-Discrimination Act
(NSW) (“the ADA”) was granted in part and that the
Respondent had discriminated against the Applicant in the terms it
services to a reserve, namely, the Dan Mahoney Reserve in contravention of s
149M(1)(b) of that Act. The matter was then
to be relisted to deal with relief,
if any, to be granted as a result of the Reasons.
Applicant was directed to file and serve a document setting out in
(1) the relief (i.e. the orders) which she claims should be made to give effect
to the reasons;
(2) submissions supporting the granting of that relief.
Council was then to file and serve a reply to the Applicant’s claimed
relief and submissions. The matter was relisted for
a short 1 hour hearing by
AVL on 15 September 2025 to hear the parties on the question of the relief to be
reasons must be read in conjunction with the Reasons published to the parties on
31 July 2025 (Caselaw reference
[2025] NSWCATAD 259).
Section 108
relief that the Tribunal can order in this proceeding, where it has found the
complaints substantiated in whole or in part, is
prescribed and circumscribed by
of the ADA which reads as follows:
108 Order or other decision of Tribunal
(1) In proceedings relating to a complaint, the Tribunal may
(a) dismiss the complaint in whole or in part, or
(b) find the complaint substantiated in whole or in part.
(2) If the Tribunal finds the complaint substantiated in whole
or in part, it may do any one or more of the following –
(a) except in respect of a matter referred to the Tribunal
under section 95 (2) order the respondent to pay the complainant damages
exceeding $100,000 by way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered by
reason of the respondent’s conduct,
(b) make an order enjoining the respondent from continuing or
repeating any conduct rendered unlawful by this Act or the regulations,
(c) except in respect of a representative complaint or a matter
referred to the Tribunal under section 95 (2), order the respondent
any reasonable act or course of conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered
by the complainant,
(d) order the respondent to publish an apology or a retraction
(or both) in respect of the matter the subject of the complaint
and, as part of
the order, give directions concerning the time, form, extent and manner of
publication of the apology or retraction
(e) in respect of a vilification complaint, order the
respondent to develop and implement a program or policy aimed at eliminating
unlawful discrimination,
(f) make an order declaring void in whole or in part and either
ab initio or from such time as is specified in the order any contract
agreement made in contravention of this Act or the regulations,
(g) decline to take any further action in the matter.
(3) An order of the Tribunal may extend to conduct of the
respondent that affects persons other than the complainant or complainants
the Tribunal, having regard to the circumstances of the case, considers that
such an extension is appropriate.
(4) The power of the Tribunal to award damages to a complainant
is taken, in the case of a complaint lodged by a representative
body, to be a
power to award damages to the person or persons on behalf of whom the complaint
is made and not to include a power
to award damages to the representative
(5) In making an order for damages concerning a complaint made
on behalf of a person or persons, the Tribunal may make such order
as it thinks
fit as to the application of those damages for the benefit of the person or
(6) If two or more vilification complaints are made in respect
of the same public act of the respondent and those complaints are
found to be
substantiated in whole or in part, the Tribunal must not make an order or orders
for damages that would cause the respondent
to pay more than $100,000 in the
aggregate in respect of that public act.
(7) If the Tribunal makes an order under subsection (2) (b),
(c), (d) or (e), it may also order that, in default of compliance
with the order
within the time specified by the Tribunal, the respondent is to pay the
complainant damages not exceeding $100,000
by way of compensation for failure to
comply with the order.
Applicant’s Submissions
Applicant filed a short statement, only some of which addressed the issues of
relief that should or could be granted to give effect
to the Reasons. The
Applicant requested that the Respondent provide safe access to the reserve
“for everybody” and that
may be achieved providing disability
parking close to an entrance, with direct, adjacent access to the Reserve
following Australian
Standards for Disability Parking.
Applicant stated that this may be installed at the site suggested by the
Council’s Disability Advisor, Mr Murray and pointed
to the evidence where
Mr Murray had marked the space on Isabella Street (Exhibit R5).
Applicant made other submissions which strayed outside the scope of the Reasons,
namely, requests for the opening of toilets,
adequate lighting, safety checks of
the ground, and fencing repairs.
Respondent’s
Submissions
Council addressed the forms of relief which had been identified in the Reasons
at [30] and submitted that the only relief open
to be considered on the findings
in the Reasons was the claim that the Council provide more disabled parking that
is close to the
entrance to the Reserve.
Council then addressed the relevant provisions of s 108 of the ADA and, in
summary, argued that the Council’s principal
position on how the Tribunal
ought to deal with a question of relief was as set out at s 108(2)(g), namely,
to decline to take any
further action in the matter, beyond the findings made in
the published Reasons that evidences that the Applicant’s complaint
made out in part.
Council then noted that the Applicant had made no claim for damages in the
application, or during the proceedings, and submitted
that if the Tribunal were
to be considering the award of damages there are a range of matters (set out at
paragraph 16 of its submissions)
to the effect that the matter did not sound in
an award of damages.
Alternatively,
the Council argued that if damages were to be awarded they should be
Council then addressed s 108(2)(c) of the ADA and submitted that as the
Applicant had failed to meet the onus of proving that
she had suffered any loss
or damage it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal to order any
“reasonable act” to be
performed pursuant to that power.
the alternative, if the Tribunal was against the Council on that submission, the
Council made the following submissions:
19. If the Tribunal is against the Respondent on this
submission, then it submits that any relief the Tribunal orders under s
and/or (c):
(a) must be certain, measurable, ascertainable and achievable
and not so vague or uncertain as to leave the Respondent guessing
as to how to
meet, or comply with, and order. Words like ‘adequate’, ‘close
to’, ‘more rigorous’
and the like, as used by the Applicant in
her submissions, could not properly form part of any order for relief, being too
and uncertain as to be immeasurable, unascertainable and unachievable, and
therefore unenforceable for the Respondent and would leave
it exposed to
contempt (of the order) and,
(b) should not put the Respondent, a publicly funded and
elected statutory authority, in a position where it is ordered to, for
make changes to public roads, pedestrian areas, public reserves and/or public
parking spaces, that would:
i) circumvent public consultation processes, in which the
public is provided an opportunity to give feedback to proposed changes
impact them and others in the community, noting that in 2020 the Respondent
engaged Cred Consulting to conduct an extensive
public consultation about Dan
Mahoney Reserve, as part of its Heart of Play Master Plan, and listened to and
received a wide variety
of divergent wishes, concerns and views of the public
ii) jeopardise and/or compromise its allocated funding and
budgets for public works across its extensive asserts in its LGA, being
comprising of a resident population of 256,729 people (according to the 2021
Census) and spanning an area of 84 square kilometres
across suburbs in Greater
Western Sydney including the Hills District, and a small section of Northern
Sydney to the far north east
of its area; and/or
iii) limit or place restrictions on the time required for
Council to prepare and complete design, refer to required committees
approval, complete consultation the process, and attend to any approved works.
the Council submitted that the kinds of matters where orders under
s 108(2)(b) and/or (c) are appropriate to be entered involve
egregious and
intentional forms of contravention such as victimisation and vilification
matters and then referred to
Jones v Scully
[2011] FCA 1066
[2002] FCA 1150
Eatock v Bolt (No 2)
No Action Argument
do not accept that this is a case where we should decline to take any further
Council on the evidence before us has not taken any step to end the
discriminatory conduct which is the subject of our reasons.
Applicant has been striving for change for a long period of time without any
result. The measures taken by the Council to upgrade
access into the Reserve
have, despite complaints, not addressed the issue of accessible parking on
Isabella Street.
Mr Murray testified, he previously recognised the need for the Council to take
action to remedy the issue of parking and access
to the Reserve but the Council
had failed to take his advice, or remedy the problem.
Loss or Damage Argument
considering this argument we bear in mind the following:
(1) In interpreting s 108 regard must be had to the purpose and context of the
section within the ADA as a whole. The long title
of the ADA is: An Act to
render unlawful racial, sex and other types of discrimination in certain
circumstances and to promote equality
of opportunity between all persons.
(2) The overriding purpose of relief under the ADA is to provide redress for
injury and loss suffered.
(3) Section 108 provides the Tribunal with a broad power in circumstances where
it has found unlawful conduct extending to making
restraining orders or
requiring positive steps to be taken to remedy the unlawful conduct.
(4) The legislation must be interpreted as beneficial in nature and the question
of what amounts to “any loss or damage”
must be interpreted in that
(5) Any orders made under s 108(2)(c) should be framed with a degree or
precision to ensure that the reasonable act or course of
conduct to redress any
loss or damage suffered by the complainant is clearly understood.
evidence of the Applicant, which we accepted, was that the absence of accessible
disability parking in close proximity to access
to the Reserve makes her fearful
of her safety particularly when exiting a vehicle, or when she is required to
cross the road.
fear is directly related to her inability to enter the Reserve on the basis of
what she regards as safe. It creates a level of
stress and anxiety which is not
endured by others without a disability.
absence of accessible disability parking restricted the Applicant’s
ability to access the Reserve in a safe way. Although
she can access the
Reserve, if assisted, or if someone else drives a vehicle, her inability to do
so on her own has resulted in a
loss of the full enjoyment of the amenity
offered by the Reserve and enjoyed by others without a disability.
amenity provides the Applicant with contact and potential friendship of other
dog owners which is curtailed if she cannot access
other than with the
assistance of others.
recognise that the Applicant has continued to access the Reserve but her ability
to do so has been curtailed by reason of the fear
of falling in the path of
traffic or crossing the road. It is not a question of whether she can access the
reserve but whether she
can do so safely.
to the submission by the Council the fear and anxiety, limitation on safe access
to the Reserve and full enjoyment of the
amenity offered by the Reserve is in
our view “loss or damage” within the scope of s 108(2)(c):
Secretary, NSW Department of Communities and Justice v James
NSWCATAP 64
Lawson v State of New South Wales
(Housing NSW)
[2013] NSWADTAP 5
Compensation
the Applicant has not sought an order for compensation we do not intend to make
any award to that effect.
Reasonable Act
our view, this is a case where an order should be made pursuant to
s 108(2)(c) of the ADA to require the Council to redress at
degree, the unlawful conduct established.
we set out in our Reasons, Mr Murray identified a parking space near the corner
of Isabella Street and Waugh Avenue which is suitable
for conversion to an
accessible disability parking space within the requirements of the Australian
precise position of the parking space is clearly marked by Mr Murray on Exhibit
R5 with his initials.
are of the view that the Council should be required to implement what Mr Murray
said by providing that space as an accessible disability
parking space. In our
view, given Mr Murray’s evidence that the space has both the width and
appropriate gradient, and that
it can be converted to an accessible parking
space with very little cost, it is a reasonable act to require the Council to
to redress the loss or damage suffered by the Applicant identified
requirement is, in our view, certain, measurable and achievable. It is specific
and not vague and will not leave the Council
guessing as to what is required.
The Council did not argue otherwise in respect of this specific relief
identified by the Applicant
in her submissions. The specifications in the
Australian Standards further inform the Council as to what must be done.
to the matters set out at paragraph 19(b)(i) of the Respondent’s
submissions set out above, Mr Murray’s evidence did
not identify any need
for public consultation in respect of converting this space into an accessible
disability parking space. This
requirement is not concerned with what is to be
done about the Reserve or within the Reserve itself.
to paragraph 19(b)(ii) set out above it cannot, in our view, be said to
jeopardise and/or compromise allocated funding and budgets
for public works
across the Local Government Area for which it is responsible, as the costs are
likely to be very low.
will be necessary to ensure that kerb side access is provided as required by the
Australian Standard.
will require the Council to give effect to this requirement within 3 months. In
our view, such a time limit is not unreasonable
to allow the Council to prepare
and complete the design, and obtain any required approvals, and complete the
do not accept the Council’s submissions that the discretion available to
the Tribunal under s 108(2)(b) or (c) is circumscribed
or conditioned by
the requirement to establish egregious conduct or intentional forms of
contravention. The decisions referred to
(at [15]) above are not relevant
authority to the exercise of the powers under s 108 in the circumstances of
Access Into the Reserve
Applicant also seeks specific changes to access into the Reserve. Mr
Murray’s evidence was to the effect that providing
access into the Reserve
adjacent to this parking space would require work to be performed by the Council
in the form of new access
gates, a ramp, and potentially work inside the Reserve
to permit persons entering at that corner of the Reserve to access the main
area. This currently cannot be done.
our view, this is work which potentially intrudes into the Council’s areas
of concern set out at paragraph 19(a) and (b)
of its submissions set out
evidence before us is insufficient to allow us to conclude to the requisite
level of satisfaction precisely how any work of this
kind will be achieved, the
costs of which will not be unsubstantial, and it may well impact adversely on
ongoing plans for the redevelopment
of the Reserve.
is too much uncertainty as to precisely how this work should, or can be
achieved, in order to enable an order under s 108(2)(c)
to be made with the
requisite certainty.
do not consider it reasonable in the circumstances to make any order in respect
of additional access into the Reserve in close
proximity to the identified
accessible disability parking space.
recognise that this leaves the Applicant with some distance to go to access the
Reserve from the nominated accessible disability
parking space. However, the
Applicant, if using this parking space, will not be required to cross any road
and will be able to exit
the vehicle on the driver’s side on a more level
gradient and thus with less risk. The Applicant will be able to access the
footpath more safely.
is not the most preferred outcome but, in our view, presently goes some way to
redress the identified loss or harm currently
suffered by the Applicant.
Nonetheless,
it is to be expected that Parramatta City Councillors, and Council Officers,
will take seriously the findings made against
the Council, and the fact that the
Applicant has been discriminated against, and will promptly take reasonable
steps to provide,
in the very near future, access into the Reserve from the
nominated accessible disability parking space as described by Mr Murray
evidence to the Tribunal.
other relief, in our view, should be granted in this
orders which we now make will therefore be as follows:
(1) Within 3 months from the date of this decision the Respondent is to provide
an accessible disability parking space on Isabella
Street between Waugh Avenue
and Macarthur Street adjacent to the footpath with kerb access in the position
marked X on the Schedule
attached to the orders.
(2) The accessible disability parking space is to comply with Australian
Standard AS 2890.5, 2020 Edition.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter