URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/654.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Owners Corp SP 76310 v Crown Constructions Pty Ltd (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 654 (20 December 2013)
Owners Corp SP 76310 v Crown Constructions Pty Ltd (Home Building)
NSWCTTT 654
(20 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY TRIBUNAL
Building Division
APPLICATION NO:
HB 13/42879
Owners Corporation SP 76310
RESPONDENT:
Crown Constructions Pty Ltd
APPLICATION:
Renewal of proceedings HB 11/44983
11 December 2013 at Sydney
APPEARANCES:
Mr D. Hand, of counsel, appeared for the applicant
Mr D. Vaughan,
solicitor, appeared for the respondent
Whether orders 1 and 2, made by consent of the parties on application
HB 11/44983 on 12 February 2013 have been complied with and,
to the extent that
they have not, what other orders should be made.
LEGISLATION:
Consumer Trader and Tenancy
Tribunal Act 2001
Renewal of claim
respondent shall, within 21 days of the date of these orders, carry out the
following specific work for the applicant, namely
Remove the balcony doors to unit 7, install suitable flashings that lap over
the balcony membrane and re-install the balcony doors
and adjust.
application is otherwise dismissed.
the parties are unable to reach agreement on the issue of costs, each party
shall file a short written submission on that issue
within 21 days of the date
of these orders. In those circumstances the Tribunal will deal with the issue in
any party seeks a hearing on the issue of costs a written request must be made
to the Registrar within 21 days of the date of these
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION
application was filed as a renewal of claim pursuant to the provisions of the
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
on 2 August
application erroneously referred to file HB 13/29390 as the proceedings in which
the applicant sought a renewal.
a hearing in the matter of HB 13/29390 (application dismissed) and a directions
hearing in HB 13/42879 on 2 October 2013,
Senior Member Meadows attempted to
correct the nature of this application by making certain directions for
amendment of the application.
However, there appears to have been some
misunderstanding of the nature of the proceedings and the amendment subsequently
filed sought
to go outside the parameters of a renewal of
discussion with the parties’ legal representatives today it was determined
application before the Tribunal for hearing today is application HB
the application
is a renewal of claim brought in relation to alleged failure to comply with
orders made on file HB 11/44893,
the only issue
for determination is set out at annexure “C” to the amended
application. That is, whether the respondent
has or has not carried out the work
referred to at points 1 and 2 of the details of work order made by the Tribunal
on 12 February
2013 on file HB 11/44893,
the applicant
seeks a further work order in relation to the alleged failure and does not seek
a money order for any sum,
the applicant
does not rely on the Scott schedule filed with the amended application but does
rely on a statement made by Vincent
Montano on 23 October 2013 and on a report
prepared by Mr Brendan Dinnar of Emdee Consulting Pty Ltd to the extent that it
to the matters covered by orders 1 and 2,
the respondent
relies on a statement (unsigned) filed by Michael Sorokin dated 15 November 2013
and a report prepared by Garry Bray
of MBMO Architects dated 13 November
ADJOURNMENT APPLICATION
applicant sought leave to adjourn the matter to provide expert evidence in reply
to the evidence of Mr Bray.
application was opposed by the respondent.
adjournment and leave to provide further evidence was refused on the basis that
the applicant was represented at the directions
hearing on 2 October 2013 when
the directions for preparation for today’s hearing were made. The
applicant was legally represented
and no request was made at that time for a
direction granting leave to provide expert evidence in reply.
an adjournment would add to the cost of the proceedings, would delay the hearing
of the matter well into the new year and
is not an efficient use of the Tribunal
the provisions of the
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
APPLICANT’S EVIDENCE
statement of Mr Montano to the extent that it was relied on by the applicant
related to his understanding of the agreement reached
with the respondent on 12
February 2013 for which orders were made. The understanding of the agreement
related to the work that
was necessary to prevent water penetration from unit 7
to unit 1 below and the work necessary to provide waterproofing of the balcony
door to unit 7.
regard to order 1 made on 12 February 2013, the report of Mr Dinnar referred to
three areas of water ingress to unit 1. Observation
by Mr Dinnar indicated that
the work done by the respondent appeared to have been successful except in
regard to some localised water
penetration to the ceiling void of unit 1.
investigation by a Paul Fallen Plumbing (not by Mr Dinnar it is noted) disclosed
that there is continuing leakage of water
into the ceiling cavity of unit 1 and
it was concluded by Mr Dinnar that the water ingress was from around the western
balcony door
frame to unit 7.
conclusion of the report was that the work carried out by the respondent had
been partially successful but that further work is
needed to be done to prevent
ingress of water into unit 1.
work that appeared to be related to the work required by order 1 made on 12
February 2013 was to correct the water ingress
around the balcony doors to unit
7 as identified by Paul Fallan Plumbing and referred to by Mr Montano in his
explanation of the
agreement he had made in February 2013.
regard to the second work order for
“follow up on the waterproofing
repair to unit 14 bathroom”
it was noted by Mr Dinnar that there was
no indication of water penetration from the shower recess. It appeared to Mr
Dinnar that
the Megaseal waterproofing that had been done was successful,
although from his perspective as an engineer it was not the ideal
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
unexecuted affidavit of Mr Michael Sorokin was relied on by the
respondent.
document related to instructions given by Mr Sorokin to others to carry out the
works the subject of the Tribunal’s orders
on 12 February
document further purported to be expert opinion in relation to observations made
by Mr Sorokin during an inspection of the site
on 11 November
respondent also relied on a report prepared by Mr Garry Bray, architect. The
report was signed and proper acknowledgement of the
obligations of expert
witnesses was made.
Bray carried out an inspection on 11 November 2013 in heavy rain. His opinion
was that the window lintel facing the balcony of
unit 1 had not failed, there
being no evidence of damage to the lintel or to the surrounding render and
water damage to the ceiling referred to by Mr Dinnar was some 3 to 6 metres
from the window lintel and had no relationship
with the window lintel. The
ceiling leak, according to Mr Bray is related to the original construction of
the building and not to
the window lintel.
Bray noted that the bathroom waterproofing problem in unit 14 had been
successfully rectified by the Megaseal treatment and there
had been no further
problems with it. Contrary to Mr Dinnar, Mr Bray was of the view that Megaseal
is a proper method of rectification
of the waterproofing issue and is guaranteed
for 25 years.
was the respondent’s submission that there is no evidence to establish
that the water leakage now complained of is related
to the work of the
respondent or its failure to comply with the Tribunal orders on HB
RELEVANT LAW
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
43 Enforcement of certain Tribunal orders
(1) If the Tribunal makes an order in relation to any proceedings, the Tribunal
may, when the order is made or later, give leave
to the person in whose favour
the order is made to renew the proceedings if the order is not complied with
within the period specified
by the Tribunal.
(2) If an order has not been complied with within the period specified by the
Tribunal, the person in whose favour the order was
made may renew the
proceedings to which the order relates by lodging a notice with the Tribunal,
within 12 months after the end of
the period, stating that the order has not
been complied with.
(3) The provisions of this Act apply to a notice lodged in accordance with
subsection (2) as if the notice were an application made
in accordance with
section 24.
(4) When proceedings have been renewed in accordance with this section, the
(a) may make any other appropriate order under this Act as it could have made
when the matter was originally determined, or
(b) may refuse to make such an order.
(5) This section does not apply if the operation of an order has been
(6) A notice under this section must be in the form prescribed by the
regulations.
intention of the provision is clearly to provide a method of enforcement of
orders in which a party has been ordered to do, or
refrain from doing something,
in distinction to a money order which is enforceable under other
provisions.
difficulty in this matter is that the agreement made on 12 February 2013 did not
specify the particular cause of the problem for
which the respondent was
agreeing to take responsibility and it did not set out a scope of work to be
performed to achieve the intended
outcome. The agreement was deficient in that
regard, probably because the parties themselves understood the problem but had
investigated and identified the causes.
Tribunal’s orders were similarly unsatisfactory. The Tribunal was unable
to specify a scope of work because the parties
themselves were unable to do so.
The work orders were made to give effect to the agreement in the expectation
that the parties would
subsequently resolve the matter.
according to the applicant the matter was not resolved and the Tribunal’s
task is to determine whether the scope of
work necessary to achieve the outcome
envisaged by the orders of 12 February 2013 has been successfully
FACTS AND CONCLUSION
statement of Mr Montano is useful in that it gives some understanding of the
agreement giving rise to the consent orders of the
Tribunal on 12 February
on that statement I am satisfied that one should not interpret order 1 in a
narrow sense relating only to the window lintel.
It is clear that the parties
were agreeing, and the Tribunal ordered on 12 February 2013, that a scope of
work be undertaken sufficient
to remedy water leakage at the window lintel to
unit 1, irrespective of the source of that water.
document filed by Mr Sorokin and relied on by the respondent, as already noted,
is unsworn. It cannot be said to be independent
(Mr Sorokin being a project
manager for the respondent) and it makes no attempt to explain Mr
Sorokin’s expertise or to acknowledge
the Chairperson’s Code of
Conduct for expert witnesses. Therefore, to the extent that the document
purports to provide expert
opinion on the state of the work as at 11 November
2013, I give it no weight.
I do accept Mr Sorokin’s statement that remedial work has been carried out
with the intention of complying with the
work orders made on 12 February
evidence of both of the experts is that the work required to achieve the outcome
of work orders 1 and 2 has been largely achieved.
Mr Bray claims the work is
fully complete and that the current leakage to the ceiling in unit 1 is
unrelated to the window lintel.
Mr Dinnar claims that work has been done but
that there remains a water ingress issue.
difficulty here is separating issues related to the work orders of 12 February
from unrelated matters.
am satisfied that the work order, as suggested by Mr Montano, contemplated a
scope sufficient to achieve rectification of water
ingress through the balcony
door of unit 7 and making its way in to unit 1.
am further satisfied that Mr Dinnar sets out in his report at para 5.4.1, at dot
point three, the work necessary to resolve that
am satisfied that otherwise the scope of works contemplated by the work order 1
made by consent on 12 February 2013 has been satisfactorily
regard to the waterproofing of unit 14 bathroom, the experts agree that work has
been done which achieves the intended outcome.
The fact that Mr Dinnar would
have preferred a different scope of work is not to the point. No specific scope
of work was ordered,
only that work was to be done to achieve the intended
applicant does not seek an order for compensation but simply a further work
order. I am satisfied that such an order is one that
could have been made by the
Tribunal when the matter was originally determined.
applicant has been successful on a minor issue.
the application was mismanaged and exaggerated thus causing significant expense
to all parties. I am of the preliminary view
that each party should pay its own
the parties cannot agree on the issue of costs or there are matters of which I
am unaware in that regard, I have made a direction
to deal with the issue on
application.
Jeffery Smith
Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal
20 December
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter