URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Hampshire [2013] NSWMT 17 (20 September 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Hampshire
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 17
Hearing Date(s):
18/09/2013 - 19/09/2013
Decision Date:
20 September 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr E O'Brien
See paragraph 46
Catchwords:
Failure to insure, breach of conditions, whether professional
Legislation Cited:
Health Care Liability Act 2001
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Medical Practice Regulation 2008
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
HCCC v Dr Il-Song Lee [2011]
Health Care Complaints Commission v Perroux
[2011] NSWDC 99
[2012] NSWCA 80
Pillai v Messiter [No 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Robert Bernard
Hampshire (Respondent)
Representation
C O'Donnell (Applicant)
M Lynch (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Suppression order in respect of patients named in the evidence
Tribunal has heard a Notice of Complaint brought by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (the "HCCC") against Dr Robert Bernard
Hampshire (the "respondent").
The original notice was dated 14 November 2012. At the commencement of the
hearing the HCCC was given
leave, by consent, to rely initially on an Amended
Notice of Complaint and then a Further Amended Notice of Complaint (itself
to a later minor amendment). The final notice includes three specific
complaints.
1 alleges that the respondent has been
"guilty of unsatisfactory professional
Section 19(3)
Health Care Liability Act 2001
"HCL"). The complaint alleges that the doctor practised without
professional indemnity insurance from 1 January 2008 until 3 August
respondent admitted the facts alleged against him and also that his conduct
amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
The latter conclusion is an
automatic product of
Section 19(3)
of the HCL.
2, Particular 1, alleges unsatisfactory professional conduct but now under
Section 139B(1)(c) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(the "National Law"). It is alleged that the doctor, while subject to
conditions of practice, did so in contravention of two of the
conditions. The
conditions under which the respondent practised at the relevant time can be seen
in the Evidentiary Certificate in
Exhibit A, Tab 1.
first of the contravened conditions (Condition 4) was that he was not permitted
to consult with any more than 25 patients in a
week. This particular was
admitted and, now due to section 139B(1)(c) of the National Law, that the
conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
2 relates to the second of the contravened conditions of practice (Condition 5).
This condition, at the relevant time,
was in the following
"5. Was to be assessed as fit to practise by a registered medical
practitioner approved by the Board prior to commencing work each
authorise the assessing doctor to inform the board of failure to attend for
assessment, or if he is unfit to practise on
any given day or there is
significant change in health status (including a significant temporary
Sub-particulars
2.1 and 2.2 allege that on certain days in the specified period, the respondent
had practised without having an assessment
at all. Ultimately sub-particular 2.1
was not pressed.
Sub-particulars
2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 allege that on the nominated days a medical practitioner who
was not an approved practitioner carried
out the assessment. To be clear, the
allegation accepts an assessment had been carried out, but alleges the assessor
was not an approved
medical practitioner.
Sub-particulars
2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 were admitted, and once again by operation of law, that the
conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional
3 alleges that Dr Hampshire has been guilty of professional misconduct under
Section 139E of the National Law. The basis
for the complaint are the same facts
as alleged in Complaints 1 and 2 but said to justify, both individually and
cumulatively, the
establishment of the allegation of professional misconduct.
approaching the complaints the Tribunal was mindful that, firstly the onus was
on the HCCC to prove the complaints and, secondly
that although the standard of
proof is on the balance of probabilities, it should nevertheless apply the
standard set out in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
respondent's history is comprehensively set out in the exhibits. His training,
qualifications and progress as a medical practitioner
(including disciplinary
matters) can be found in his statement in Exhibit A, Tab 1. The Tribunal does
not consider it necessary to
repeat this history in this decision.
Complaints 1 and 2; unsatisfactory professional conduct
result of the admissions by the respondent, and the HCCC not pressing
sub-particular 2.1 in Complaint 2, was that the only factual
matter requiring a
finding concerned the establishment of sub-particular 2.2 in Complaint 2.
HCCC's case is best explained by reference to Exhibit C. The first column
indicates dates on which a service was rendered, or
at least billed. Commencing
on 22 October 2010 there are 20 highlighted dates when a service was rendered
but there is no record
of an assessment. The HCCC submitted that this indicated
that on those days the doctor had seen a patient without having, on the
day, had an assessment of his fitness to practise. The respondent's answer to
this allegation was twofold:
(a) His evidence was that there had never been a day that he practised without
first having the necessary assessment.
(b) Exhibit C shows no more than that there is no record of an assessment on the
particular day. It does not, and cannot, indicate
that there was no assessment.
HCCC submitted that it could be inferred that because no record had been
received by the Medical Council that there was necessarily
no assessment. The
Tribunal disagrees. Bearing in mind the
standard, the Tribunal
is of the view that unless it made a finding that the respondent was either
dishonest in his evidence or unreliable
then it could not reach the conclusion
advocated by the HCCC. It is important to note that during the relevant period
the obligation
was on the assessing doctor to fax the form to the Medical
Council. It was common ground that when the obligation switched to the
respondent, the form was properly faxed on every occasion. Other than the
Medicare records, which generated the first column in Exhibit
C, there was no
other evidence to contradict the respondent's position. The Tribunal accordingly
finds that sub-particular 2.2 of
Complaint 2 is not proved.
Professional misconduct
result of the above is that the Tribunal, as far as proof of the complaints was
concerned, was finally left only with the question
of whether the admitted
unsatisfactory professional conduct arising from Complaints 1 and 2 (but without
sub-particulars 2.1 and
2.2) were such as to justify a finding of professional
misconduct as alleged in Complaint 3. In order to establish professional
the HCCC relied on the seriousness of the Complaints both in their
own right and cumulatively. Any reference to Complaint 2 hereafter
the basis that it does not include sub-particulars 2.1 and 2.2.
HCCC submitted that
"the correct approach to determining whether professional
misconduct has been established"
is set out in the following passage from
Health Care Complaints Commission v Perroux
[2011] NSWDC 99
at paragraph
"[18] The issue is whether, when the respondent's contraventions are
considered as a whole, they are of a sufficiently serious nature
suspension or deregistration: s 37
Medical Practice Act 1992
, s 139E Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW). Characterisation is not to be
determined by backward reasoning, first
determining the appropriate outcome and
then characterising the conduct based on the outcome. The definition of
professional misconduct
is focused on the nature of the conduct, which must have
the capacity to justify such an order, whether or not such an order should
made in a particular case: Health Care Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
per Basten JA at [67]. Whereas the characterisation of conduct
depends upon the "seriousness" of the conduct, additional considerations
relevant to determining outcome, principally the need to protect the health and
safety of the public: s 2A (3) of the Act."
Tribunal agrees with the submission concerning the correct approach and has
considered the question accordingly.
HCCC submitted that a failure to be properly insured is a particularly serious
circumstance. Taken with the length of time for
which the respondent was
uninsured (some 20 months) the HCCC said that the definition of professional
misconduct set out in Section
139E was met. If there was any doubt about this,
submitted the HCCC, those doubts would be erased when the unsatisfactory
professional
conduct emanating from Complaint 2 was factored
HCCC referred the Tribunal to a number of authorities but in particular to the
HCCC v Dr Il-Song Lee
[2011] NSWMT 12 and to the decision of the
Court of Appeal in the same matter,
[2012] NSWCA 80.
submitted that as in
the respondent's conduct in not taking out
insurance, had been reckless.
Tribunal in
said the following in relation to the finding of
recklessness:
"37. With some reservation, the Tribunal's conclusion is that Dr Lee
remained uninsured as a result of a combination of his poor administration,
casual attitude to his assumption that he was covered without the need for
regular confirmation as well as a degree of arrogance
and expectation that
responsibility for ensuring his cover continued lay as much with authorities
like the Medical Board and the
insurance company as with himself. The Tribunal,
in essence, finds that Dr Lee was reckless in his attitude to his insurance but
was not overtly dishonest."
are very different to the present matter, starting off
with the length of time for which there was no insurance. The period in Dr
case was some five years. There were distinct issues surrounding Dr Lee of his
attitude both to his own requirements and to
the necessity for others to ensure
that he was properly insured.
respondent here, like Dr Lee, had failings in having proper administration of
his practice. However, the reasons were very different.
The respondent had lost
the services of his secretary due to ill health. He was probably, if only
intermittently, suffering from
his own health problems, which ultimately came to
be diagnosed in 2009. In about June 2009 the respondent attempted to put his
administration
in order although the process took some time.
Tribunal does have some reservations about elements of the respondent's
evidence, in particular arising from paragraph 32 of his
statement (Exhibit 1,
Tab 1) where he says that in August 2008 he sent a fax to a firm of insurance
brokers asking them to arrange
insurance because Avant had declined to insure
him as he was not registered. This would suggest that he continued to practise
he was not insured. The Tribunal did not fully understand the
respondent's evidence as to the events that then occurred; however,
the Tribunal
is not satisfied that he deliberately continued to practise knowing that he was
not insured. There were attempts to
rectify his registration status that was
affecting his capacity to be insured. However the ultimate resolution of the
late 2009 seems to have taken somewhat more than a reasonable period
the Tribunal accepts that practise without insurance is a significant failing
the surrounding circumstances do not permit it
to take the step required to
reach a finding of professional misconduct. The Tribunal does not think the
respondent's conduct falls
within the following description in
Messiter [No 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
"But the statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence or by
deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something
more is required. It
includes a deliberate departure from accepted standards or such serious
negligence as, although not deliberate,
to portray indifference and an abuse of
the privileges which accompany registration as a medical practitioner."
conclusion just reached is not affected by Complaint 2. This is because there
are a number of factors, which will be set out below,
which substantially
mitigate the seriousness of the respondent's conduct in relation to Complaint 2.
1 of Complaint 2 concerns about four weeks, at the beginning of the respondent's
resumption of practise, of seeing more
patients than Condition 4 permitted him
to see. The Tribunal accepts his evidence that this was a product of an early
properly plan the number of patients that he was seeing. Taking into
account that the number of patients in excess of the maximum
is not great, that
the respondent himself brought the matter to the attention of the Medical
Council and that there has been no repeat
of the problem, the Tribunal is of the
view that the unsatisfactory professional conduct should be gauged at a
particularly low level.
It is to be noted that the respondent's permitted number
of weekly patients was increased to 30 on 9 March 2011.
to Particular 2, there is no doubt that at first sight there is a clear breach
of Condition 5. The Condition makes it clear
that the doctor is not to practise
unless he has an assessment by an approved medical practitioner. The difficulty
in attributing
a degree of seriousness to the conduct, which it would otherwise
attract, is the mitigation emanating from the conduct of the Medical
itself. This statement is not made by way of criticism of the Council but rather
as explaining the basis for the respondent's
apparent failure to comply, with
precision, with the terms of Condition 5.
is apparent that the respondent was made aware of the Conditions on 12 May 2010.
The respondent commenced seeing patients on 17
May. By this time no assessing
doctor had been approved but the respondent had made arrangements with the
Radiology practice in the
same building to have assessments on a daily basis
(Exhibit 1, Tab 1, paragraph 57).
22 June 2010 the Medical Board (as the Medical Council was then known) wrote to
the respondent (Exhibit A, Tab 5B). In this letter
the Board reminded the
respondent of the conditions under which he was permitted to practise and
provided certain comments by way
of assistance to him in ensuring compliance
with the conditions.
respect of Condition 5 the Board asked the respondent to nominate a medical
practitioner to carry out the assessment role by 1
July 2010. The Board said
that upon receipt of the name of the nominated practitioner and acceptance of
the role by the practitioner,
an approval process would be put in place which
"usually takes between 5 and 12 days"
. There was no suggestion in the
letter, or enquiry about, any concern that the respondent was practising without
assessments by approved
practitioners.
respondent wrote back to the Medical Board on 24 June 2010 (Exhibit A, Tab 5C).
In this letter the respondent frankly told the
Board that he may have exceeded
the 25 patients per week limit. In addition, he said that he had made
arrangements for Dr Kitchener,
from the radiology practice, to see him to
perform the necessary assessments.
now Medical Council, responded on 1 July 2010 (Exhibit A, Tab 5D). In this
letter the nomination of Dr Kitchener is noted and
the respondent is informed
The Medical Council,
now knowing that the respondent was practising and seeing
Dr Kitchener, made no comment that he should not do so until approval was
the Tribunal accepts that the terms of Condition 5 are clear it can well
understand Dr Hampshire's evidence to the effect that
the Medical Board appeared
to have given him implicit approval to continue to practise while the approval
process took place, provided
the necessary assessment did in fact take place on
each day that he saw patients.
(by telephone) was taken from Drs Kitchener and Gacs both of whom carried out
assessments of the plaintiff. Based on their
evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied
that although they may not have been approved at the relevant time they carried
out the assessments
contemplated by Condition 5. It is also to be noted that on
no single occasion did the respondent fail the assessment.
the circumstances set out above the Tribunal once again attributes a low level
of inappropriate conduct in its assessment of the
unsatisfactory professional
conduct derived from the establishment of Particular 2 of Complaint 2.
Tribunal is therefore not convinced that a finding of professional misconduct
arises from Complaint 2 or from the addition of
Complaint 2 to Complaint 1.
summary the Tribunal is satisfied that the practitioner has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct as alleged in Complaints
1 and 2 (the latter
excluding sub-particulars 2.1 and 2.2) but is not satisfied that the
practitioner was guilty of professional
misconduct as alleged in Complaint 3.
Protective orders
Tribunal's approach to the making of orders consequent upon its findings is that
the orders should have as their primary purpose
the protection of the public and
of the medical profession.
respondent has a long history of appearances before the Tribunal and other
disciplinary bodies. This history does not impact on
the appropriate protective
orders for the current complaints.
is little doubt, and there was no argument to the contrary, but that the
respondent should be reprimanded.
Tribunal is also of the view that in respect of Complaint 1 the respondent
should be fined. This option is available under Section
149B of the National
Law. The Tribunal believes that no other order or combination of orders is
appropriate in the public interest.
It would not be effective to impose yet
further conditions on the respondent and the conduct does not justify suspension
or cancellation
of the respondent's registration.
maximum fine is 250 penalty units. The Tribunal thinks that taking into account
the seriousness of a failure to insure but set
against the background of the
present circumstances that the fine should be 45 units. This equates to the sum
was pointed out to the Tribunal that under Section 150H(2) the current
conditions under which the respondent practises will cease
to have effect
following this decision. The Tribunal does not think it appropriate that it
review the conditions and, subject to
what follows, that there should be any
change in the conditions. The present management of the conditions by the
Council and the
system of review that is in place is entirely appropriate. An
order will therefore be made that the current conditions as set out
Confirmation of Registration Status (Exhibit A, Tab 1) should continue subject
to review by the Medical Council. The caveat
mentioned above is that the
Tribunal recommends to the Medical Council that if it is the view of the Review
Panel that Condition
5 of the published conditions should be deleted then that
would be an appropriate course to follow.
relation to costs, the HCCC submitted that costs should follow the event so that
an order should be made that the respondent pay
the HCCC's costs of the
proceedings. The respondent submitted that he should pay no more than 50% of the
HCCC's costs as a reflection
of the HCCC not succeeding on parts of Complaint 2
and the whole of Complaint 3 and also because, in the absence of Complaint 3,
the other complaints could have been dealt with without the referral to the
Tribunal agrees with the respondent's submissions and, in the exercise of its
discretion, will order accordingly.
Final orders
The respondent is reprimanded.
(2) The respondent is to pay a fine of 45 units equivalent to the sum of
(3) The fine of $4,950 is to be paid to the Medical Council of NSW within 60
days of the date of these orders.
(4) The respondent's registration is to continue to be subject to the
conditions under which he currently practises.
(5) The respondent is to pay 50% of the HCCC's costs of the proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (105 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter