URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zoe (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 7; (4 July 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Zoe (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 7
Hearing Date(s):
27 June 2025
Date of Orders:
4 July 2025
Decision Date:
4 July 2025
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
Dr M Kyriagis, Senior Member
(Professional)
A Healy, General Member (Community)
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT APPLICATION
1. The estate of Zoe is
subject to management under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
2. The management of the estate of Zoe is committed to the
NSW Trustee and Guardian.
3. This order be reviewed by the Tribunal
within 12 months.
GUARDIANSHIP APPLICATION
guardianship order is made for Zoe.
2. The Public Guardian is
appointed as the guardian.
3. This is a continuing guardianship
order for a period of 12 months from 4 July 2025.
4. This is a
limited guardianship order giving the guardian(s) custody of Zoe to the extent
necessary to carry out the functions
5. The guardian has the following
To decide what access Zoe has to
others and the conditions of access.
Accommodation
To decide where Zoe may reside.
Health care
To decide what health care Zoe may
d) Services
To make decisions about services
to be provided to Zoe.
CONDITIONS:
6. The condition of
this order is:
a) Standard Condition
In exercising
this role the guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Zoe to an
understanding of the issues and to obtain
and consider her views before making
significant decisions.
REVIEW OF ENDURING GUARDIANSHIP
APPOINTMENT
In relation to the enduring guardian appointment made
by Zoe on 18 September 2024 appointing Isobel, the Tribunal orders, directs
The appointment of Isobel as an enduring guardian is
REVIEW OF ENDURING POWER OF ATTORNEY
relation to the enduring power of attorney made by Zoe on 18 September 2024
which appointed Isobel as attorney, the Tribunal determines,
Not to carry out a review of the enduring power of
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – review of an enduring guardianship appointment –
guardianship application – whether the subject person
is in need of a
guardian – person of advanced age – no evidence of a cognitive
disorder – concerns regarding functional
capacity – subject person
entirely dependent on their guardian for all lifestyle and financial matters
– concerns of
significant neglect and control –accommodation
decisions needing to be made – hoarding – evidence from the Ageing
and Disability Commission regarding squalor of home – the subject person
is in need of a guardian – who should be the
guardian – current
enduring guardian deemed unsuitable – enduring guardianship revoked
– Public Guardian appointed.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT –
review of enduring power of attorney – no evidence that the subject person
lacked the legal capacity
to make an enduring power of attorney – no
evidence that the enduring attorney acted improperly in her role –
declined to review the making, operation or effect of the EPOA –
financial management application – subject person found
to be incapable of
managing her financial affairs – entirely dependent on the attorney to
manage her financial affairs –
the state of the subject person’s
financial affairs is unclear – concerns regarding an intermingling of
funds between
the subject person and the attorney – NSW Trustee appointed
as financial manager.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Cases Cited:
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public Guardian (Supreme
Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep)
[2015] NSWSC
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
P v D1 & Ors [2011] NSWSC
P v NSW Trustee and
[2015] NSWSC 579
[2003] NSWSC 819
[2013] NSWSC
[2011] NSWSC 1075
[2012] NSWSC 1006
Susan Elizabeth
Parker v Margaret Catherine Higgins & Ors
[2012] NSWSC 1516
YJC v Public
[2024] NSWCATAP 160
Texts Cited:
Physiopedia, “Clinical Frailty
https://www.physio-pedia.com/Clinical_Frailty_Scale
21 July 2025
Principal judgment
001: Review of an Enduring Power of Attorney
Kathryn (applicant)
Isobel (attorney)
NSW Ageing and Disability
Commission (joined party)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
002: Financial
Management Application
Zoe (the person)
Kathryn (applicant, proposed
financial manager)
Isobel (carer, attorney)
NSW Ageing and Disability
Commission (joined party)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
003: Guardianship
Application
Zoe (the person)
Kathryn (applicant, proposed
Isobel (carer, enduring guardian)
NSW Ageing and Disability
Commission (joined party)
Public Guardian
004: Review of an Enduring
Guardianship Appointment
Zoe (the person)
(applicant)
Isobel (carer, enduring guardian)
NSW Ageing and Disability
Commission (joined party)
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Public Guardian
Representation:
M O’Kane, separate representative of Zoe
File Number(s):
NCAT 2025/00002587
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
is an 85-year-old woman who ordinarily resides in her own home with her
daughter, Isobel in regional NSW. Since her discharge
from hospital earlier this
year Zoe and Isobel have been residing with a friend at an undisclosed address
in regional NSW.
has two other children, namely her daughter, Kathryn, and her son, Evan. Sadly,
Evan passed away in 2024.
28 September 2024, Zoe made an Enduring Power of Attorney (“the
EPOA”) and an Enduring Guardianship Appointment (“the
which she appointed Isobel as her attorney and enduring guardian. Copies of
these instruments have been provided to
the Tribunal.
3 January 2025, the Tribunal received applications from Kathryn for review of
the EPOA and review of the EGA. On 6 January 2025,
the Tribunal received further
applications from Kathryn for a guardianship order and a financial management
order. Kathryn subsequently
requested to withdraw these applications; however,
by order dated 15 January 2025, the Tribunal did not consent to the
withdrawal.
Directions Hearings were conducted to progress the matter to Hearing. On 18
March 2025 the Tribunal, inter alia, granted leave
for Isobel to be legally
represented in the proceedings
joined the NSW Ageing and Disability Commission (“ADC”) as a party
to the proceedings.
Hearing was listed on 2 May 2025. On this date the Tribunal, partially
differently constituted, noted the absence of medical and
allied health evidence
in support of the applications, and determined to adjourn the proceedings to
enable further evidence to be
obtained. On this date the Tribunal directed that
Zoe be separately represented in the proceedings and made directions with
to the filing of further evidence. Mary O’Kane
(“Mary”) has accepted the appointment as Zoe’s separate
representative.
Hearing was again listed on 27 June 2025. The Hearing was conducted from the
Tribunal’s Sydney Registry, with some participants
attending in person and
others by telephone. Due to technical issues in the Hearing Room which could not
be resolved in a timely
manner, remote appearances were by way of telephone
rather than video. No one sought to adjourn the Hearing on account of these
difficulties, with remote attendees confirming their willingness to
proceed by telephone.
Hearing was attended by Zoe and Isobel in person, accompanied by a friend and
support person. At the commencement of the Hearing,
Isobel identified that the
support person was her solicitor, however, the support person advised the
Tribunal that she does not act
for Isobel and was attending the Hearing in a
passive support capacity. The Hearing was attended by telephone by Kathryn,
representative of the ADC, and Zoe’s son-in-law.
the commencement of the Hearing, Isobel identified that she and Zoe had only
received a bundle of documents containing medical
records the day prior to the
Hearing. It was unclear to the Tribunal whether that bundle of documents had
included the report from
a Geriatrician, dated 28 May 2025, or the Health
Professional Report Form from a General Practitioner (GP), dated 29 May
. Subject to the opportunity to
review those reports, neither Isobel nor Zoe objected to the Hearing proceeding.
The Tribunal stood
the matter down and provided copies of these reports to
Isobel and Zoe to review.
resuming the Hearing, the Tribunal took the opportunity to obtain evidence from
Zoe in the absence of the other parties (save
for the separate representative)
and thereafter provided a summary of the evidence to the parties when the
Hearing resumed.
circumstances where the parties had been afforded the opportunity to provide
written evidence and submissions to the Tribunal,
and where an hour of the
allocated hearing time had been exhausted attending to the preliminary issues
identified above, upon the
recommencement of the Hearing the Tribunal informed
the parties that:
(1) A time limit would be placed on the presentation of oral evidence and
submissions; and,
(2) The Tribunal would take evidence and submissions jointly on the application
to review the EGA and the application for a guardianship
order, and thereafter
the Tribunal would take evidence and submissions jointly on the application to
review the EPOA and the application
for a financial management order.
Hearing was made difficult by the poor conduct of a number of participants in
the Hearing, with the Tribunal regularly required
to intervene to remind parties
of the Tribunal’s expectations regarding the conduct of the Hearing and
the behaviours of the
parties during the Hearing.
the conclusion of the Hearing the Tribunal determined to reserve its
Subsequently,
on 4 July 2025, the Tribunal made orders to the following effect:
(1) The Public Guardian was appointed as Zoe’s guardian for an initial
period of twelve months with the functions of accommodation,
services, health
care and access.
(2) Isobel’s appointment under the EGA was revoked.
(3) The NSW Trustee and Guardian (“NSW Trustee”) was appointed as
Zoe’s financial manager, with the order to be
reviewed by the Tribunal
within twelve months.
(4) The Tribunal declined to undertake a review of the EPOA.
Reasons for Decision outline the basis for the Tribunal’s decision
regarding each of the substantive applications before
the Tribunal.
Tribunal has read and considered all the written material provided to the
Tribunal, and the oral evidence and submissions presented
at Hearing. Voluminous
written material was provided to the Tribunal (approximately 1,000 pages),
however, much of the material had
little relevance on the issues to be
determined by the Tribunal, save for assisting the Tribunal to understand the
context of Zoe’s
circumstances and the complex family dynamics within
Zoe’s family. Only salient aspects of the evidence are referred to herein;
however, failure to reference particular aspects of the evidence should not be
construed as a failure of the Tribunal to consider
LEGAL PRINCIPLES – GUARDIANSHIP APPLICATION AND
REVIEW OF EGA
Review of EGA
reviewing the appointment of an enduring guardian, the Tribunal may:
confirm the
appointment of an enduring guardian with or without varying the functions of the
appointed enduring guardian;
proceed as if an
application for guardianship or an application for financial management (or
both) had been made; or
appointment, with or without then proceeding as if an application for
guardianship or an application for financial management
(or both) had been
Tribunal must not revoke the appointment of an enduring guardian
(a) the enduring guardian requests the revocation; or
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied it is in the best interests of Zoe that the
appointment be revoked.
Tribunal may only proceed as if an application for guardianship or an
application for financial management (or both) had been
made if it considers it
is in the best interests of Zoe to do so.
Guardianship
Application
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal were:
Is Zoe someone
for whom the Tribunal could make a guardianship order?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian and how long should the order last?
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) (“the Act”) provides
that we may make a guardianship order for a person if we are satisfied that the
“a person in need of a guardian”.
person in need of a guardian is “a person who, because of a disability, is
totally or partially incapable of managing their
person”: the Act,
The disability must restrict them in one or more major life activities to
the extent that they require supervision or social habilitation:
of the Act outlines a number of equally important factors for us to
consider and balance in the exercise of our discretion. These
matters have no
hierarchy or weighting and each is a mandatory consideration. However, the
Tribunal must undertake a balancing exercise
for its consideration of the
of the Act. When undertaking this task the Tribunal may be
guided by the principles that are set out in
of the Act (see
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a
private guardian meets the following requirements in accordance with
of the Act. He or she must:
(a) have a personality generally compatible with the personality of the person
under guardianship;
(b) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of
the person; and
(c) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
of the Act (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and
the Public Guardian
(Supreme Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999,
[2011] NSWSC 1075
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
, the Supreme Court noted the importance
of a proposed guardian being able to demonstrate insight and explain plans for
as guardian objectively and without conflict of interest.
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed:
Supreme Court has held that:
“the proper meaning to be given to the section is to read it as saying
that the Public Guardian should not be appointed in
circumstances in which an
order can properly be made in favour of another person. That requires not only
that the person be willing,
reliable and responsible, but that the appointment
will result in the policy considerations and principles set forth in the Act
given effect (
[2003] NSWSC 1170
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it was made.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES – FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT APPLICATION AND REVIEW OF EPOA
Review of EPOA
Tribunal may, on the application of an interested person, decide to review the
making or the operation and effect of a reviewable
power of attorney, or not to
carry out such a review:
Powers of Attorney Ac 2003
section 36(1).
As a consequence of reviewing the making or operation and effect of a reviewable
power of attorney, the Tribunal may decide whether
or not to make an order under
Powers of Attorney Act
section 36(2).
Susan Elizabeth Parker v Margaret Catherine Higgins & Ors
, Slattery J stated at [80]:
“On an application for
review such as this the Court must first
exercise a discretion under
Powers of Attorney Act
whether or not to conduct a
review. In my view the Court does not have to
conduct a full review of all documents associated with the operation of the
power of attorney to do this. Something short of a full review must be
able to justify the exercise of the
discretion as to whether or not the
Court should conduct a full
review. In the circumstances of this case the
Court can glean sufficient information to exercise the
discretion by
undertaking a general survey of what... (a party )...has produced.”
Tribunal may make a number of orders relating to the making of a power of
attorney including the following:
declaring that Zoe did or did not have mental capacity to make a valid power of
declaring that the power of attorney is invalid (either in whole or in part) if
the Tribunal is satisfied:
(i) Zoe did not have the capacity necessary to make a valid enduring power of
(ii) The enduring power of attorney did not comply with the requirements of the
Powers of Attorney Act
(iii) the enduring power of attorney is invalid for any other reason, for
example, dishonesty or undue influence.
Tribunal may make a number of orders relating to the operation and effect of a
power of attorney if it is satisfied:
that it would be
in the best interests of Zoe to make the order; and
that it would
better reflect the wishes of Zoe to make the order.
orders include, but are not limited to:
An order varying
a term of, or a power conferred by, the power of attorney
removing a person from office as attorney
appointing a substitute attorney to replace an attorney who has been removed
from office or who otherwise vacates the office
revoking all or part of the power of attorney
orders as the Tribunal thinks fit.
on a review of the enduring power of attorney, the Tribunal decides not to make
an order under
Powers of Attorney Act
, it may, if it
considers it appropriate in all of the circumstances to do so, decide to treat
the application for review as an application
for a financial management order
of the Act.
Financial Management Application
25G of the Act provides that the Tribunal may make a financial management order
in respect of a person only if the Tribunal
has considered the person’s
capability to manage his or her own affairs and is satisfied that:
(1) The person is not capable of managing those affairs, and
(2) There is a need for another person to manage those affairs on the
person’s behalf, and
(3) It is in the person’s best interests that the order be made.
[2012] NSWSC 1006
, White J assessed the history of case law in
relation to financial management and noted that initially the issue of
capability was
approached by referring to hypothetical or abstract notions of
the ordinary affairs of man. However, the Court now assesses the person’s
own capacity to do what they are proposing to do [58]. White J used a
“rational appreciation” of assets test to determine
capability to manage his or her affairs. He adopts the reasoning of Barrett J in
[2003] NSWSC 819
who said that the task of the Court in these
circumstances:
“... is to make a judgment as to the capacity and ability of the person
concerned to cope with the ordinary routine affairs
of living, particularly so
far as they concern the person’s property...the requisite judgment is to
be made in the light of
objective physical facts concerning the relevant
person’s property, money and other assets and the way the person is able
look after them. If there is a lack of capacity, the reason for it does not
matter [26].”
[2013] NSWSC 1223
, Justice Lindsay confirmed that the question
focuses attention on the special circumstances of the person. His Honour stated,
“Of central significance is the functionality of management capacity of
the person said to be incapable of managing his or
her affairs, not: (a) his or
her status as a person who may, or may not, lack ‘mental capacity’
or be ‘mentally
ill’; or (b) particular reasons for an incapacity
for self-management.”
test for determining a person’s capability to manage his or her affairs
has been described as follows (
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC
, [307]–[308]):
“Is a person reasonably able to manage his or her own affairs in a
reasonably competent fashion, without the intervention of
a [financial manager]
charged with a duty to protect his or her welfare and interests?
[A] focus for attention is whether the person is able to deal with (making and
implementing decisions about) his or her own affairs
(person and property,
capital and income) in a reasonable, rational and orderly way, with due regard
to his or her present and prospective
wants and needs, and those of family and
friends, without undue risk of neglect, abuse or exploitation.”
considering whether the person is “able” in this sense,
consideration may be given to:
past and present
experience as a predictor of the future course of events;
support systems
available to the person; and
the extent to
which the person, placed as he or she is, can be relied upon to make sound
judgments about his or her welfare and interests:
see Lindsay J in
[2015] NSWSC 498
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the Act, the
Tribunal must act with the interests of the person
concerned as the paramount
consideration and in accordance with the other principles set out in
of the Act.
25M of the Act provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial management
order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage
the person’s estate or
may commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee.
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
then Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of
The NSW Trustee now exercises the role of the Protective Commissioner.
considering who to appoint as a person’s financial manager the Tribunal is
not restricted to considering the appointment
of the NSW Trustee as an
appointment of last resort. Rather, the decision as to whether to appoint a
private person or the NSW Trustee
is to be guided by the principles under
of the Act:
YJC v Public Guardian
[2024] NSWCATAP
SUMMARY OF MEDICAL AND ALLIED HEALTH EVIDENCE
The Hospital Records
ADC provided the Tribunal with a bundle of documents obtained from Hospital A
and Hospital B produced under summons (“the
Hospital Records”).
The bundle comprises almost 400 pages.
Discharge Summary from Hospital A outlines the following:
(1) Zoe presented to hospital via the Emergency Department on 19 December
2024 for a “wheeze”. She also presented with
right sided chest pains
and shortness of breath.
A bedside echo revealed trace pericardial effusion with severe
aortic sclerosis and reduced leaflet mobility, mitral valve anterior
also reduced mobility, moderate to severe systolic dysfunction and IVC dilated
and minimal respiratory variation. CT chest/abdo/pelvis
revealed large bilateral
pleural effusions at least 4cm in depth at the lung bases and adjacent passive
atelectasis with no convincing
malignancy identified. It was concluded that the
large bilateral pleural effusions, subcutaneous flank oedema and periportal
were likely secondary to congestive cardiac failure.
(3) Zoe was admitted to ICU following a diagnosis of aspiration pneumonia. She
was also investigated for dysphagia with an MRI brain which revealed
multiple lacunar infarcts. She received speech pathology input
and was also
placed on NG feeds as per dietician.
(4) After receiving clearance from cardiology, Zoe was also required
to undergo a gynaecological procedure involving “
Hysteroscopy
+D+C+Endometrial Biopsy + Mirena insertion
(5) During her admission, Zoe was also investigated and treated in relation to
(amongst other things) severe hyponatremia, UTI with
transient delirium and
hyperkalaemia.
(6) Zoe was cleared for discharge to Hospital B on 5 March 2025 with
recommendations made for follow-up appointments in the community
Gynaecologist and a Cardiologist, and continued allied health input.
Discharge Summary from Hospital B outlines the following:
(1) Zoe was a patient from 5 March 2025 until 19 March 2025, when she was
cleared for discharge.
(2) During her admission to Hospital B, Zoe was found to be hyperkalaemic, and
her medications were adjusted accordingly.
(3) Recommendations on discharge include the following:
(a) Review by GP within one week, with referrals required for specialist follow
(b) Specialist follow-up required with the gynaecologist in four weeks, and the
cardiologist in two to three months (for consideration
of Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Implantation).
(c) Follow up of outstanding gynaecological lesion biopsy taken in Hospital
(d) Completion of Videofluoroscopic Swallow Study as an outpatient to assess
swallowing.
Occupational
Therapy notes outline the following:
(1) On 8 January 2025, during her admission to Hospital A, cognitive screening
was undertaken by way of a Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(“MOCA”) in
which Zoe scored 21/30. The Tribunal notes, however, that this screening was
undertaken whilst Zoe was quite
unwell and may not be a true reflection of her
cognitive functioning.
(2) On the same date, in relation to completion of a Home Safety Questionnaire,
the following is reported:
“Patients responses to safety and judgment questions indicate pt is
heavily reliant on daughter [Isobel]. Pt has basic understanding
responses however would likely have difficulty problem solving home safety
situations if home alone/left unsupported...
(3) Notes from 17 January 2025 outline the following:
“OT reviewed home environment photos. ++ Hoarding and rubbish noted
throughout house and property. From photos appears to be
limited circulation
space/access to kitchen, bathroom and bedrooms, particularly for equipment and
aids would they need to be prescribed
on d/c. Also concerning is there is no
access to electricity or hot water to the property.”
(4) Notes from 10 March 2025 outline the following:
DISCUSSION RE SERVICES
- Pt reports nil need for services for personal care on D/C as daughter will be
able to assist with dressing and showering and IADLs.
Daughter does not work
full time – quite flexible with hours.
- Pt reports that her other daughter has made up regarding no power or water at
The reasons for D/C to a
friends house is that [Isobel] is clearing out the place since the passing of a
family member and so there
are boxes everywhere.
- Pt reports nil concerns regarding her daughter providing assistance with ADLs
- Pt hesitant regarding OT review in home environment post discharge as it is
her friends house.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Pt not suitable for D/C from OT POV.
Would benefit from ongoing conversations regarding level of care that daughter
can provide on discharge.”
(5) Occupational Therapy progress notes dated 11 March 2025 outline the
“Current Care Needs
- Current care needs fluctuating however at times pt is requiring – 1 x A
bed mobility, 1 x A incontinence pad management,
1 x A with showering and
dressing. And will need 1 x A with most IADLS.
- [Isobel] confirmed that she will be able to provide this level of care on D/C.
[Isobel] reports that at most pt will be home alone
for 2 hours. [Isobel] is not
currently working.
- OT explained hope that pt functioning may continue to improve on D/C in home
environment. Offered OT SpACT follow up – pt
and [Isobel] declined the
need for same.
- OT explained option for services to assist with care needs – pt and
[Isobel] again declined Isobel reporting that they will
manage care needs.
Pt safe for D/C from OT POV
Pt’s daughter able to provide current level of care needs.
Daughter and pt declining further OT follow up or services for D/C.”
Tribunal was provided with a Health Professional Report Form from the GP, who
reports having been Zoe’s General Practitioner
for 28 years.
response to the question “
Does the person have a
disability?
”, the GP has answered “no”. He then identifies
that Zoe lives with a number of health concerns including Type 2
aortic valve stenosis, and congestive heart failure.
the heading of “
Other relevant information
”, the GP reports
the following:
“The house that [Zoe] + [Isobel] live in is squalid. [Isobel] is a
hoarder. While she has assured me that the clean-up is substantially
underway, I
asked that she SMS me a couple of photos to show progress but she refused. The
house that I visited in 2022 would be
a significant fall, fire and disease risk
if nothing has changed since 2022.
Daughter [Isobel] is well known to me and appears to have a Personality
Disorder. Her mother is a little afraid of upsetting Isobel
as she then becomes
very irate, loud and at times offensive. While I consider that [Zoe] has
sufficient cognition to make her own
health + lifestyle decisions, I feel that
[Zoe] would always agree with [Isobel] to make for a peaceful life. I have
significant
concerns about financial management as I suspect that [Isobel] who I
believe has no income of her own, lives off the pension of [Zoe],
large loan taken out by [Zoe] some years ago that is not being repaid –
just interest only.”
The Geriatrician’s Report
Tribunal was provided with a report from a geriatrician dated 28 May 2025.
geriatrician notes that Zoe was referred for a comprehensive geriatric
assessment and was reviewed in the clinic “
in the context of worsening
bilateral leg swelling over the past three weeks, mild chest discomfort, and a
noticeable upper airway
”. It was estimated that Zoe had an
estimated fluid retention of 4-5kg.
geriatrician’s report relevantly identifies the following:
“Cognitive screening with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) yielded
a score of 27 out of 30. Mild cognitive impairment
was noted, which appears to
be secondary to hearing difficulties rather than a true neurocognitive disorder.
There was no clinical
evidence of dementia. Her mood was appropriate, and no
concerns were raised during the consultation.
Using the Clinical Frailty Scale, [Zoe] was assessed as mildly frail CFS-5. This
is likely reflective of her recent hospitalisation
and underlying cardiac
condition, which have diminished her physiological reserve.
The most pressing clinical concern is fluid overload, likely secondary to heart
failure in the setting of valvular heart disease.
Additional issues include her
recent bereavement and subsequent loss of social support, mild frailty, and lack
of engagement with
community services. She is not currently registered with My
Aged Care, despite an increasing need for practical and social support.
currently expresses a desire to remain at home and maintains capacity to make
these decisions, and is open to support and assistance
as able. A detailed
capacity assessment for other functions was not undertaken today.
In terms of broader support, I recommend initiating registration with My Aged
Care so that she may access domestic assistance, transport
support, and
potentially psychological or bereavement counselling...”
Tribunal notes that a Clinical Frailty Score of CFS-5 is indicative of the
“These people often have more evident slowing, and need help in high order
IADLs (finances, transportation, heavy housework,
medications). Typically, mild
frailty progressively impairs shopping and walking outside alone, meal
preparation and housework.”
ACAT Assessment
material available to the Tribunal outlines that various recommendations have
been made for Zoe to participate in an ACAT assessment.
Recommendations have
been made to this effect by the ADC (including prior to Zoe’s hospital
admission), at various times during
Zoe’s recent hospital admission, and
by the geriatrician.
the previous Hearing on 2 May 2025 was adjourned, the Tribunal discussed the
benefit of Zoe undertaking an ACAT assessment during
the adjourned period and
made a notation confirming the recommendation that this occur.
Hearing, the Tribunal was informed that an ACAT assessment has still not been
undertaken for Zoe.
EVIDENCE FROM THE ADC
Tribunal was provided with a report from the ADC dated 13 March 2025 which
outlines the following:
(1) The ADC became involved with Zoe following a report made to them on 14
October 2024 identifying concerns “
lack of home care supports and financial abuse of [Zoe] by her daughter
”. It appears that this complaint was instigated by the NSW
(2) The ADC provided to the Tribunal photographs of the condition of Zoe’s
involvement. Some of these
photographs are included at Appendix A to these Reasons for Decision [Appendix
removed for publication.].
(3) The ADC made contact with the geriatrician on 12 November 2024, who
indicated that he is aware of the concerns regarding the
squalid conditions of
the house. The geriatrician also reported that although Zoe has not been subject
to a geriatrician’s
assessment, “
she is fully dependent for her
lifestyle and financial decision on [Isobel]
”. The geriatrician
also reported age-related cognitive changes.
(4) The ADC undertook an initial meeting with Zoe and Isobel in a public
location on 13 November 2024
reported that although Zoe appeared to understand the questions asked, her
responses were prompted by Isobel throughout the
discussion. Zoe “
very minimal information about her finances and said that [Isobel] manages her
(5) During the first meeting with Isobel and Zoe the ADC provided Isobel with
information regarding My Aged Care. The ADC report
the following:
“We consider the provision of services, including to address the hoarding
and squalor in the home, to be necessary for [Zoe’s]
safety and wellbeing,
however to date [Isobel] has not taken action to arrange home care supports for
[Zoe]. We note that based on
our interactions with [Zoe] she would be unable to
organise and coordinate these services herself and deferred to [Isobel] in
to this issue.”
(6) Zoe is reported to decline a meeting with the ADC at her house.
Ultimately the ADC were required to issue a notice of requirement
to Isobel to
allow the ADC to meet with Zoe at her home, undertake a home inspection, and
obtain a view from Zoe independent of Isobel.
The ADC conducted a home visit on
17 December 2024. On this date the visit was conducted in the front yard in
circumstances where
Zoe and Isobel denied the ADC entry to the property. The ADC
report outlines the following regarding that visit:
“[Isobel] was extremely combative in her response to our visit, despite
receiving written notice, and advised that she would
distress and attitude towards the ADC appeared to influence [Zoe] who was
concerned at her daughter’s
level of distress. Initially [Isobel] refused
to allow the ADC staff to speak privately with [Zoe], however after extensive
discussions
reluctantly agreed to move away from the area of the front yard that
[Zoe] was sitting in, to allow us to speak with some privacy.
[Zoe] said that she is managing her pension by herself and [Bank B] account. She
owns the house and confirms reverse mortgage which
was being paid off jointly
with [Isobel]. She was not aware about the details of mortgage such as amount
and the reason of the mortgage.”
(7) The ADC have taken steps to try to ascertain the nature of Zoe’s
financial affairs. Their report outlines the following:
(a) Zoe’s property at regional NSW is owned in Zoe’s sole name and
is listed as the office address for a real estate
company (a business run by Zoe
and Isobel). The property has an estimated median value of $1.6 million
according to the Domain website.
(b) Zoe has a credit card account and a mortgage account with Bank A. The
mortgage account had a balance of $333,521 with repayments
on an interest only
basis. The loan was taken out in 2005.
(c) Zoe has a bank account with Bank B. She receives around $26,490 annually
from Centrelink, which is paid into the account. Zoe’s
ongoing expenses,
as determined by review of her bank statement, are around $12,000 annually, with
a further $36,000 annually by
way of mortgage repayments.
(d) At a meeting at Hospital A on 24 January 2025, Isobel confirmed that she is
managing Zoe’s affairs pursuant to her appointment
under the EPOA but
refused to provide any information about Zoe’s financial affairs.
(e) The ADC have been unable to obtain further information regarding
arrangements for the repayment of Zoe’s mortgage or other
expenses as
Isobel and Zoe have declined to meet with the ADC to discuss the issues further.
(8) In relation to the need for a substitute decision-maker the ADC report
from our meetings with [Zoe], ADC have observed that she is fully
dependent on [Isobel] for her lifestyle decision and financial management.
also note that [Isobel] appeared to exert a high level of control over
Tribunal was provided a further report from the ADC dated 24 April 2025. This
report outlines:
(1) The ADC issued a further Notice of Requirement on 3 April 2025 requiring Zoe
and Isobel to meet with the ADC at Zoe’s residence
on 16 April 2025. This
meeting was postponed multiple times, with the ADC eventually meeting with Zoe
and Isobel at the property
they are currently residing at on 23 April 2025.
(2) Prior to this visit the ADC attended Zoe property. From the outside of the
the condition of the house (externally) appeared unchanged
with hoarding and rubbish visible. We spoke with one of [Isobel’s]
who was present there and informed us that they are helping [Isobel] to reduce
the rubbish and there was evidence of items
having been burnt.
(3) Isobel showed the ADC a copy of the Bank A mortgage statement with
additional payments totalling $39,777 in the month of February
description listed against these additional repayments is stated as
Legal Loan from [Isobel]
(4) Notwithstanding these additional payments the ADC hold concerns regarding
the sustainability of these arrangements in circumstances
where Zoe’s
expenses far exceed her income. The ADC reports that “[
Isobel] has
declined to provide the ADC information about her employment/income source/s or
confirm how she will continue to contribute
towards [Zoe’s] mortgage
CONSIDERATION – ISSUES RELATING TO MANAGEMENT OF ZOE’S
Review of EGA
below, in relation to the guardianship application, the Tribunal has made
findings that:
(1) Zoe is a person in need of a guardian; and,
(2) Isobel does not meet the requirements under the Act to be appointed as
Zoe’s guardian.
to these findings, the Tribunal finds that the continued appointment of Isobel
as Zoe’s enduring guardian pursuant
to the EGA is inconsistent with
Zoe’s best interests. The Tribunal is satisfied that such appointment
should be revoked and
ordered accordingly.
Guardianship
Application
issue of whether or not Zoe is a person in need of a guardian is a vexed
the one hand the Tribunal was presented with evidence that Zoe’s cognition
is intact, with only mild, age-related cognitive
impairment identified. The
geriatrician notes that Zoe shows no sign of a dementing illness, and she
returned a score of 27/30 on
a MOCA as recently as May 2025.
the other hand, Zoe is a person of advanced age. On geriatric review, Zoe was
assessed with a Clinical Frailty Score of CFS-5,
indicative of a need for help
in relation to higher level IADLs.
evidence presented by the ADC outlines significant concerns with respect to Zoe
being fully dependent on Isobel for all lifestyle
and financial matters. These
concerns are consistent with the GP’s observations.
taking evidence from Zoe in the absence of other parties the Tribunal spoke to
Zoe about the nature of any supports she may require.
Zoe was unable to identify
any support that she may need, indicating that Isobel does everything she needs.
When asked how she might
go about organising additional supports should the need
arise, Zoe appeared unable to comprehend that she may require any kind of
assistance other than that provided to her by Isobel, and accordingly was unable
to elaborate on how she might organise and implement
any necessary support
other stages during the Hearing, Zoe was consistently unable to independently
answer questions regarding her personal circumstances,
regularly turning to
Isobel for prompting. Even after the Tribunal explained the importance of Zoe
answering questions herself, and
that it was okay if her answers were not
correct, Zoe continued to turn to Isobel, and Isobel continued to prompt Zoe
despite the
Tribunal’s cautions.
Hospital Records consistently identify the need for Zoe to receive various
supports to live and function safely in the community.
These recommendations
align with recommendations made by the ADC (pre-dating and post-dating her
admission to hospital) and the recommendations
made by the geriatrician.
has been unable or unwilling to identify the need for additional supports and/or
take steps to implement such supports.
the Tribunal acknowledges that Zoe’s cognitive abilities may be sufficient
for her to make various lifestyle decisions,
her ability to plan and implement
such decisions is compromised having regard to her frailty and her complete
dependence on others.
Tribunal is satisfied that Zoe has a disability as defined by
the Act, namely advanced age.
a consequence of Zoe’s advanced age, and her associated clinical frailty,
she is restricted in one or more lifestyle activities
to the extent that she
requires supervision or social habilitation. The lifestyle activities that are
restricted as a consequence
of Zoe’s advanced age include access to
necessary support services and allied health services, and access to safe,
suitable accommodation consistent with her care needs.
Tribunal is satisfied that Zoe is a person in need of a guardian. She is,
accordingly, a person for whom the Tribunal could make
a guardianship
determined that Zoe is a person for whom the Tribunal could make an order, it is
necessary for the Tribunal to consider whether
an order should be made, in the
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion.
did not support a guardianship order being made. She was consistent in her
views that she was happy with Isobel as her carer and
did not want that to
change. The Tribunal outlined that a carer and a guardian are not the same
thing and attempted to explain to
Zoe the role of a guardian. In response,
Zoe asserted that she does not need someone to make important lifestyle
decisions on her
behalf, and in the event that she did, that Isobel could make
those decisions. Despite consistent recommendations from a range of
medical and
allied health practitioners to the contrary, Zoe did not agree that she needed
any supports other than what Isobel could
provide her.
did not support a guardianship order being made. She was adamant that the EGA
had not yet been enacted, and that Zoe does not
currently need a guardian to
make important decisions on her behalf. This is at odds, however, with the
Hospital Records which consistently
identify that Zoe’s treating team have
consistently engaged with Isobel regarding necessary decisions to be made to
Zoe upon her discharge, and where Isobel was consistently declining
recommendations for follow up allied health care and support
services. When
asked her thoughts regarding Zoe’s ability to independently source and
implement any necessary support services
she may require, Isobel’s answers
to the Tribunal’s questions were not overly responsive to the questions
to an unwillingness or an inability, either independently or with the assistance
of Isobel, Zoe has been unable to implement any
support services in response to
consistent recommendations regarding the need for same. The Tribunal finds that
it would be impracticable
for services to be provided to Zoe in the absence of a
guardianship order.
is no evidence before the Tribunal with respect to any particular cultural or
linguistic considerations relevant to the Tribunal’s
determination.
is unclear to the Tribunal the extent, if at all, that the making of a
guardianship order would have on Zoe’s existing family
relationships. On
the one hand, an order appointing a guardian other than Isobel may have an
impact on the complex relationship dynamics
between Zoe and Isobel. On the
other hand, the appointment of an independent decision-maker may assist in
promoting Zoe’s relationship
with other members of her extended family,
including her grandchildren. To the extent that the making of an order may have
a detrimental
impact on Zoe’s existing family relationships, the Tribunal
finds that such risks are outweighed by the benefit of ensuring
receives necessary and appropriate care.
evidence before the Tribunal outlines the need for appropriate accommodation
decisions to be made on Zoe’s behalf. Since
her discharge from hospital,
she has been residing on a temporary basis with a friend, with the intention of
returning to her home
in due course.
are conflicting reports regarding the suitability of Zoe’s home for her
ongoing accommodation needs. There are (disputed)
allegations that Zoe’s
environment for Zoe to return
to on account of the extent of hoarding and
squalor. From Zoe and Isobel’s perspective it was asserted that the
reason that
Zoe is not currently living in the home is because Isobel is
undertaking a clean-up and basic renovations consequent to Evan’s
In circumstances where the only objective evidence regarding the condition of
Zoe’s home is contained in the ADC reports
(namely the photograph’s
taken by NSW Police – see Appendix A to these Reasons for Decision
[Appendix removed for publication.])
due to Zoe and Isobel denying the
ADC’s further requests to inspect the property, the Tribunal finds that it
is more likely
than not that Zoe’s home is currently an unsafe environment
for her to return to. Accordingly, there is a need for accommodation
to be made to support Zoe’s ongoing care. Aside from Zoe and Isobel, the
consensus of those actively participating
in the Hearing was that it would be
preferable for Zoe to return to her home, provided that it is safe for her to do
as the Separate Representative, supported the making of a guardianship order but
only with the function of accommodation. Mary
opined that Zoe is well-supported
by Isobel with respect to all other lifestyle matters and that there was no need
for the inclusion
of any other functions.
no disrespect intended, the Tribunal cannot accept Mary’s submission.
There are clear and consistent recommendations made
by various members of
Zoe’s multidisciplinary treating team that she requires various support
services and allied health services
to live safely in the community. To date,
Isobel and/or Zoe have proved unable or unwilling to implement these
recommendations. At
Hearing, Isobel did not accept the current need for such
services. She informed the Tribunal that it was her understanding that others
(namely the ADC) were intending to organise an ACAT assessment, and when she
became aware that this was not the case, she indicated
a willingness to organise
the assessment so as to ensure that Zoe could access support services should the
need arise at a later
time. Even if the Tribunal were to accept that Isobel
misunderstood the ADC’s initial recommendations, the need for either
herself or Zoe to organise an ACAT assessment has clearly been articulated on
the available written material, and indeed was re-enforced
by the Tribunal was
the previous Hearing was adjourned.
Tribunal is satisfied that there is a need for a guardian to make decisions on
Zoe’s behalf regarding her access to necessary
support services and allied
health services. Accordingly, the functions of services and health care should
be included in any order
made by the Tribunal.
respect to the issue of consent to medical and dental treatment, the Tribunal is
satisfied that Zoe is currently providing her
own consent to treatment and that
no concerns have been identified on the evidence regarding her ability to make
informed decisions
regarding consent to treatment. Should Zoe’s condition
deteriorate substitute consent to treatment may be made by a ”person
responsible” or otherwise an application can be made to the Tribunal for
consent to such treatment.
outlined ongoing concerns regarding the ability of herself and other extended
family members to freely visit Zoe and/or communicate
with her. It was
suggested to the Tribunal that Isobel has improperly restricted Zoe’s
access to others. Zoe and Isobel denied
that Zoe has been denied access to
others, outlining various behaviours and events that have resulted in a
reluctance from Zoe’s
part to engage with her extended family. It is
unnecessary (and impossible on the current evidence) for the Tribunal to make
findings as to the factors contributing to Zoe’s fractured
relationship with other members of her extended family. The appointment
guardian with an access function, however, will provide an opportunity for
independent consideration as to whether Zoe distancing
herself from other family
members is a reflection of her genuinely held views, or whether it is a
consequence of Isobel’s influence.
all of the circumstances the Tribunal was satisfied that a guardianship order
should be made with the functions of accommodation,
services, health care and
Tribunal was required to consider the suitability of Isobel’s continued
appointment as Zoe’s guardian (either pursuant
to a guardianship order or
pursuant to her appointment under the EGA). At Hearing, there were no
alternative proposals made for the
appointment of a private guardian, with
Kathryn, Mary, and the ADC representative supporting the appointment of the
Public Guardian.
is difficult for the Tribunal to make an assessment of whether Isobel and Zoe
have generally compatible personalities. On the one
hand it is evident that Zoe
and Isobel have a close relationship, having lived together for many years, with
Zoe explicitly indicating
her support for Isobel continuing to be her carer, and
with Zoe having appointed Isobel as her enduring guardian. On the other hand,
the GP, who has known both Zoe and Isobel for many years, reports that Zoe is
afraid of upsetting Isobel and will generally agree
with her to ensure a
peaceful life. It is ultimately unnecessary for the Tribunal to make a finding
as to whether Isobel and Zoe
have generally compatible personalities.
below in the context of the financial management application, there are concerns
regarding the appropriateness of Isobel
managing Zoe’s finances. Isobel is
reported to be financially dependent on Zoe, and any accommodation decisions
made by a guardian
regarding Zoe’s future accommodation will likely have
an impact on the stability of Isobel’s ongoing accommodation. Isobel
denied the opportunity to provide any evidence of her own financial
circumstances in response to the concerns identified by the
ADC. It is not
necessary, in the current circumstances, for the Tribunal to make a positive
finding as to whether these concerns
amount to an undue conflict of
issue of Isobel’s suitability for appointment as Zoe’s guardian
ultimately turns on the issue of whether she is willing
and able to exercise the
functions of guardianship. This requires consideration of whether Isobel is able
to make decisions objectively,
without conflict of interest, and whether Isobel
is able to demonstrate insight. For the reasons outlined below, the Tribunal
that Isobel is not willing and able to exercise the functions of
guardianship, and accordingly the Tribunal cannot be satisfied that
suitable person to be appointed as Zoe’s guardian.
support of this finding the Tribunal notes the following:
(1) Isobel has been uncooperative with the ADC in their investigation of
complaints made regarding concerns for Zoe’s welfare.
The ADC is a
statutory body mandated to promote the rights of older people to live free from
abuse, neglect and exploitation. The
fact that Isobel has failed to meaningfully
cooperate with the ADC to undertake their investigation demonstrates her
inability to
act objectively to promote Zoe’s welfare and interests.
(2) Isobel has failed to act on consistent recommendations from an array of
professionals as to the need for Zoe to access appropriate
support services in
the community, and declined referrals made for appropriate allied health support
in the community consequent
to Zoe’s discharge from
. At Hearing Isobel
continued to deny the need for
. If the Tribunal accepts that
Isobel was acting under the belief that the EGA had not been enacted and that
any decisions regarding
these matters were decisions for Zoe to make
herself, the evidence clearly indicates Zoe’s dependence on others,
particularly
surrounding her discharge from hospital. There is no evidence that
Isobel, in her capacity as Zoe’s carer, has taken any steps
to support Zoe
to implement these recommendations herself, or to encourage Zoe to do so. At
Hearing, Isobel was asked whether, on
reflection, she would have done anything
different to support Zoe upon her discharge from hospital. In response to this
rather than reflecting on her conduct, Isobel became combative with
the Tribunal and demanded that the Tribunal articulate what it
is she should
(3) As discussed above, Isobel is not receptive to acting on professional advice
as it relates to promoting Zoe’s welfare and
(4) Isobel was often evasive to the Tribunal’s questioning, with the
Tribunal regularly needing to bring Isobel back to the
questions asked and
insist on an answer that was responsive to the question.
(5) The fractured relationships amongst Zoe’s daughters are evident on the
material before the Tribunal, and the conduct of
both Isobel and Kathryn at
Hearing re-enforced those concerns. Whilst the Tribunal acknowledges that these
issues are likely contributed
to by multiple parties, having regard to the
nature of the relationships between Isobel and her extended family the Tribunal
be satisfied that Isobel would be able to exercise the functions of
guardianship in a manner consistent with the
principles in the Act,
including promoting Zoe existing family relationships and ensuring that she
consults with significant important
people in Zoe’s life when making
important decisions on Zoe’s behalf.
the Tribunal has had regard to Zoe’s clear wish for Isobel to be her
guardian, the evidence does not support that Isobel
meets the requirements under
the Act to fulfill these responsibilities, and the Tribunal cannot be satisfied
that Isobel continuing
in her appointment under the EGA would sufficiently
promote Zoe’s welfare and interests.
a suitable private person to be appointed as Zoe’s guardian the Tribunal
decided to appoint the Public Guardian.
initially proposed that a guardianship order be made for an initial period of
twelve months based on her believe that twelve
months was a minimum term that
could be included in a guardianship order. Upon the Tribunal explaining that
twelve months is the
maximum term for an initial order (subject to some
exceptions) Mary amended her proposal in support of a shorter order being made.
That proposal, however, was in the context of her recommendation that the order
be made with the sole function of accommodation.
were no other clear proposals made at Hearing regarding the length of a
guardianship order.
regard to the nature of the functions included in the order, and likely delays
that will be incurred with respect to undertaking
an ACAT assessment and
thereafter sourcing the appropriate supports, the Tribunal determined that a
longer order would best promote
Zoe’s interests. Accordingly, the Tribunal
made a guardianship order for an initial period of twelve
CONSIDERATION – ISSUES RELATING TO MANAGEMENT OF
ZOE’S AFFAIRS
Review of EPOA
her application Kathryn sought that the Tribunal undertake a review of the
making of the EPOA and the operation and effect of the
EPOA. She proposed that
the Tribunal “
make myself, and granddaughters EPOA, after review and
explaination (sic) by tribunal that we will not be laible (sic) for any debts
inccurred (sic) by my mother and sister
Tribunal has a discretion as to whether or not to undertake a review of the
EPOA. This discretion may be informed by a general
survey of the evidence
the extent that Kathryn requests the Tribunal to undertake a review of the
making of the EPOA, there is no evidence produced to
the Tribunal to the effect
that Zoe lacked the requisite legal capacity to make the EPOA, and there is
insufficient evidence to ground
a finding that the making of the EPOA is
invalidated for any other reason. Accordingly, the Tribunal declined to
undertake a review
of the making of the EPOA.
Tribunal ultimately determined that it would be in Zoe’s best interests
for a financial management order to be made, and
that her interests would best
be promoted by the appointment of the NSW Trustee as her financial manager. The
effect of this decision
is that the operation of the EPOA will be suspended
whilst the financial management order is in effect:
Powers of Attorney
The basis for the Tribunal’s decision to make a
financial management order is discussed below. For present purposes the Tribunal
notes that the evidence provided to the Tribunal in support of the application
does not support a finding that Isobel has acted with
impropriety in her
appointment under the EPOA, however it also does not support a finding that
Isobel has been managing Zoe’s
affairs in a manner consistent with
Zoe’s best interests.
the written material provided to the Tribunal, and the oral evidence presented
at Hearing, raises concerns as to the efficacy
and appropriateness of Isobel
making decisions regarding the management of Zoe’s affairs at the current
point in time, her
appointment is reflective of Zoe’s clear and
unambiguous wishes that Isobel be responsible for the management of her
affairs. Absent clear evidence of mismanagement by Isobel warranting
the revocation of her appointment, the Tribunal determined that
there is an
insufficient basis to undertake a review of the operation and effect of the
EPOA. Accordingly, the Tribunal declined
to undertake a review of the operation
and effect of the EPOA.
that the Tribunal determined that the financial management should be reviewed by
the Tribunal within twelve months, the preservation
of the EPOA ensures that,
following a period of intervention from the NSW Trustee, appropriate
consideration can be given by the
Tribunal on review to the issue of whether or
not it is consistent with Zoe’s best interests for the order to be revoked
the basis that her affairs could be managed by Isobel pursuant to her
appointment under the EPOA. Such an outcome is not, however,
consistent with
Zoe’s interests at the current time.
Financial Management
Application
financial circumstances, so far as they can be ascertained by the Tribunal, are
reported above in relation to the evidence
provided by the ADC.
Hearing it was difficult for the Tribunal to obtain an understanding, from
Zoe’s perspective, of the nature of her financial
affairs. Consistent with
reports from other sources, Zoe was reliant on Isobel to provide answers
regarding her financial circumstances.
The Tribunal explained that the questions
being asked were to assist the Tribunal to understand Zoe’s understanding
circumstances and stressed the importance of Zoe being able to provide
her answers without influence from others, even if her answers
were incorrect.
Despite these comments from the Tribunal, Isobel continued to prompt Zoe in her
responses, leaving the Tribunal with
considerable doubt as to whether Zoe has a
proper appreciation of the nature of her financial affairs.
Tribunal identified that Zoe’s income is insufficient to continue to
service the mortgage over her property, and that it
appears that there are works
that need to be undertaken on the property that will have financial
implications. The Tribunal asked
Zoe regarding her plans surrounding the
ongoing expenses for managing the household and her ability to service the
mortgage. Zoe
identified an intention for her to sell off some of Evan’s
belongings to contribute to payments towards the mortgage but was
unable to identify any concrete plans regarding the ongoing maintenance of the
Tribunal notes that in circumstances where Isobel lives with Zoe it may be
reasonably expected that Isobel contributes to the
costs associated with
maintaining the household and servicing the mortgage, however, save for what is
reported below, there is no
evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that Isobel
is contributing in such a manner
Various reports have been made that Isobel is reliant on Zoe’s pension
payments and has no independent source of income. Isobel
has consistently denied
requests from the ADC to provide clarity around her financial circumstances, and
at Hearing did not volunteer
evidence relating to these issues.
was alleged by Kathryn that the mortgage had been taken out by Zoe, at least in
part, because Isobel required financial support
from Zoe. When this was put to
Isobel, she denied that the funds from the mortgage were used completely for her
benefit, but did
not offer any evidence regarding the extent, if any, of the
financial support provided to her by Zoe attributable to the mortgage.
ADC outlined that although Zoe’s mortgage has been reduced by around
$30,000 to $40,000 in recent months, the reduction
in the mortgage is a
consequence of lump sum payments made by Isobel (discussed below) and insurance
payouts. There is no evidence
of any sustainable arrangements in place to meet
Zoe’s ongoing financial needs.
asserted that the EPOA has not been enacted and that Zoe maintains
responsibility for the management of her own affairs. Despite
the Tribunal
advising that the terms of the EPOA provide for the EPOA to take effect upon
acceptance by the attorney, Isobel maintained
her position that the EPOA had not
yet been enacted.
of whether Isobel has been acting pursuant to her appointment under the
EPOA, Zoe’s own evidence supports that she
is reliant on Isobel in
relation to the management of her financial affairs, and that Zoe has little
independent understanding of
her own financial circumstances. These observations
are supported by the GP and the ADC.
Tribunal finds that as a consequence of her frailty, mobility issues, and lack
of understanding of her financial circumstances,
Zoe is incapable of managing
her affairs and requires another person to manage her affairs on her
issue of whether or not it is in Zoe’s best interests for a financial
management order to be made turns on whether the Tribunal
is satisfied that the
operation of existing EPOA, without the involvement of the NSW Trustee, is
sufficient to promote Zoe’s
welfare and interests.
Tribunal explained to all parties that if a financial management order were to
be made the Tribunal may appoint a private person
to the role, subject to the
authorities and directions of the NSW Trustee, or otherwise the Tribunal may
commit the management of
Zoe’s estate to the NSW Trustee.
proposed that she be appointed as Zoe’s financial manager, and indicated
her willingness and ability to work under the
supervision of the
NSW Trustee.
and Isobel opposed any variations to the current arrangements, proposing that
Isobel maintain her appointment under the EPOA and
manage Zoe’s finances
in this capacity.
Tribunal made various attempts to obtain Isobel’s views with respect to
whether, if a financial management order were to
be made, she proposed her
appointment under the order. Isobel was combative in her response to the
Tribunal, firstly opposing the
making of a financial management order, then
demanding that the Tribunal inform her of the quantum of fees to be charged by
Trustee under such an order. The Tribunal explained that the fees
charged by the NSW Trustee are set by the NSW Trustee and that
the Tribunal
cannot provide an accurate summary of the associated fees. The Tribunal
reiterated that the question being asked of
Isobel is not whether she agreed to
a financial management order being made, but rather, in the event that a
financial management
order was to be made, whether she wished to be considered
for appointment as the financial manager. After pressing Isobel to provide
a “yes” or “no” response to the question, Isobel advised
that she would seek to be appointed in the event
that an order were to be
response to the Tribunal’s usual probity questions Isobel informed the
(1) She has not been charged or convicted of any criminal offences involving
fraud or dishonesty.
(2) She has previously been bankrupt because of the actions of her ex-spouse,
however, she has been discharged from bankruptcy for
a considerable period of
(3) Isobel denied any inter-related property interests between herself and Zoe,
including denying that there have been any loans
made from Zoe to herself, or
vice versa.
hearing the submissions from the ADC the Tribunal returned to Isobel to provide
her an opportunity to comment on evidence that
is adverse to her case. In
particular, the ADC addressed the Tribunal in relation to a number of
transactions on Zoe’s bank
account from February 2025 with the description
Legal Loan from [Isobel]”.
Those transactions account for a
large portion of the mortgage balance paid down in recent months.
initially told the Tribunal that she has no comment to make regarding those
transactions, that she would want to receive legal
advice before answering any
questions of that nature, and that she can’t be made to answer the
question. The Tribunal explained
to Isobel that the Tribunal was not going to
compel Isobel to comment on the transactions, though outlined that the evidence
within the bank statements is entirely inconsistent with her oral
evidence, and that in fairness she should be provided the opportunity
on the issues. Isobel presented as quite animated and combative, and maintained
her position that she would not provide
further comment on the issue.
response to the Tribunal’s usual probity questions, Kathryn informed the
(1) She has not been charged or convicted of any criminal offences involving
fraud or dishonesty.
(2) She has not been bankrupt or involved in bankruptcy proceedings.
(3) She does not have any inter-related financial interests with Zoe.
and Isobel each raised issues regarding a previous loan made to Kathryn by Zoe.
The Tribunal was informed that years ago, when
Kathryn was a single mother, Zoe
borrowed funds to assist Kathryn and provided her a sum of money of about
$7,000. Zoe and Isobel
asserted that this was a loan that remained unpaid.
Kathryn asserted that she had always understood these funds to have been
to her as a gift and was not aware, prior to the Hearing, that Zoe had
taken a loan to advance these funds, or that there was an
expectation for the
funds to be repaid.
the need to make a finding as to whether the disputed $7,000 gives rise to a
conflict of interest, the Tribunal finds that
the appointment of Kathryn as
Zoe’s financial manager would not promote Zoe’s best interests.
Kathryn’s appointment
is contrary to Zoe’s firmly held views, and
having regard to the fractured family relationships referred to above, the
cannot be satisfied that Kathryn’s appointment as financial
manager would be practicably workable or promote the maintenance
existing family relationships.
respect to Isobel’s suitability to manage Zoe’s financial affairs at
the current time, the Tribunal cannot be satisfied
that this arrangement
(whether by appointment as financial manager or maintenance of the EPOA) would
be consistent with Zoe’s
best interests. In support of this finding the
Tribunal notes:
(1) There is a complete lack of transparency on Isobel’s behalf with
respect to the extent to which her financial circumstances
financial circumstances are intertwined.
(2) Isobel’s evidence was not credible so far as it relates to a purported
loan made by her to Zoe, and whether there is an
expectation of repayment of
such funds.
(3) Despite reluctantly conceding her willingness to manage Zoe’s
financial affairs under the supervision of the NSW Trustee,
having regard to her
conduct and demeanour towards the Tribunal at Hearing, and her unwillingness to
engage with other safeguards,
such as the ADC investigation, the Tribunal cannot
be positively satisfied that Isobel would conduct herself in a manner consistent
with the requirements imposed by the NSW Trustee.
(4) Decisions made by Zoe’s guardian may have financial implications for
both Zoe and Isobel. For example, if a decision is
made by Zoe’s guardian
that she would not be safe to return to her home, such decisions will have
financial implications for
Zoe (potentially extending to the need for her home
to be sold and/or payment towards alternative accommodation) and Isobel (in
of necessitating the need for her to find alternate accommodation without
financial support from Zoe). If tasked with managing Zoe’s
affairs there are lingering doubts as to whether Isobel would make financial
decisions in aid of decisions made by Zoe’s
guardian if she were not in
agreement with such decisions and/or if such decisions were contrary to her own
all of the circumstances the Tribunal was satisfied that Zoe’s best
interests would best be served by the appointment of
the NSW Trustee as her
financial manager, ensuring that objective and transparent decisions can be made
in her best interests.
Tribunal notes that a significant concern at this point in time relates to
objectivity and transparency of Zoe’s financial
circumstances. The
Tribunal formed the view that the appointment of an independent financial
manager is required, at least at the
current point in time. The Tribunal decided
that the appointment of a financial manager should be reviewed by the Tribunal
(1) There has been an opportunity for an independent financial manager to
appropriately investigate the nature of Zoe’s financial
affairs, including
the nature of any interrelated financial interests between Zoe and Isobel;
(2) Following the implementation of any major decisions regarding Zoe’s
ongoing care by her guardian.
these circumstances the Tribunal decided that the financial management order
should be reviewed at the same time that the Tribunal
undertakes its statutory
review of the guardianship order. Accordingly, the Tribunal decided that the
financial management order
should be reviewed by the Tribunal within twelve
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
The Tribunal notes that
although leave was granted to Isobel to be legally represented, she represented
herself at Hearing.
handwritten, and it may be the case that the day identified above is incorrect,
but in any event the report is dated in late
https://www.physio-pedia.com/Clinical_Frailty_Scale
The date of this meeting is inconsistently reported in the ADC, with subsequent
references made to the meeting occurring on 13 December
The Tribunal notes that
Isobel confirmed that she had facilitated Zoe’s attendance on follow up
medical consultations, including
with the cardiologist, however she had not
implemented the recommendations regarding the need for support services and
various allied
interventions.
Isobel told the
Tribunal that she would register Zoe for My Aged Care “in case she needed
something, but she doesn’t
In a raised
voice Isobel said words to the effect of “What could I do
differently?”
arrangement may be consistent with agreements reached between Isobel and Zoe,
however there is a lack of transparency to assist
the Tribunal in assessing this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter