URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DHM [2013] NSWGT 22 (24 July 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 22
(24 JULY 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDERS
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
24 July 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
Ms Robyn Bailey
Professional Member:
Dr Jean Hollis
Community Member:
Ms Faye Druett
Guardianship – voluntary patient under the
Mental Health Act - mental illness – identity disorder – refusal of
and services - Public Guardian appointed as guardian for a period of six
months to make decisions about accommodation, services,
health care and medical
and dental treatment
Financial management - Reviewable order for
six months – estate committed to management by the NSW Trustee and
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 24 July 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal appointed the Public Guardian as Mr DHM’s guardian for a period
of six months to make decisions about Mr DHM’s
accommodation, services,
health care and medical and dental treatment.
Tribunal made a reviewable order for six months appointing the NSW Trustee and
Guardian to manage Mr DHM’s finances.
DHM is a 49 year old man, who was admitted to the Psychiatric Inpatient Unit at
a public hospital in southern Sydney on 26 June
2012. On 22 March 2013, he was
transferred, as a voluntary patient, to the Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit.
Previously, he lived
in a NSW Housing unit. Mr DHM has a number of siblings, who
include Ms NFG, who has provided considerable support and assistance
over many years.
DHM has been diagnosed with a mental illness. He does not recognise himself as
Mr DHM, and insists on being addressed as Mr TND.
As a result of this delusion,
he does not recognise family members as having any meaningful role to play in
PJJ is a Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit Social Worker. He has asked the
Tribunal to appoint a guardian and financial manager
for Mr DHM. The application
supports the appointment of Ms NFG, who has been providing informal support to
Mr DHM for many years.
The Hearing
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate.
Tribunal was of the opinion that it was not possible to attempt to bring the
parties to a settlement, because of the currency
of Mr DHM’s
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
GUARDIANSHIP
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to guardianship
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he has a disability
which prevents him from being able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made?
Who should be
the guardian?
How long should
the order last?
Is Mr DHM someone for whom the Tribunal
could make an order because he has a disability which prevents him from being
able to make
important life decisions
Guardianship Act 1987
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that he/she is “a
person in need of
a guardian.” A person in need of a guardian is “a
person who because of a disability is totally or partially incapable
of managing
his or her person”
(section 3(1)
Guardianship Act 1987
). A person
with a disability is a person who is:
(a) intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act 2007
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation
(section 3(2)
Guardianship Act 1987
DHM, to whom the Tribunal referred, during the course of the hearing, as
‘Mr TND,’ told the Tribunal that he cannot
make decisions on his
own. He supported the appointment of a guardian. Mr DHM’s self-assessment
was entirely consistent with
the opinion of Mr Z, Social Worker, at the
Psychiatric Inpatient Unit at the public hospital. He has known Mr DHM since his
to the unit on 26 June 2012. He confirms that Mr DHM’s mental
illness prevents him from identifying himself correctly, as a
result of the
delusional belief that he is someone else named Mr TND, born in 1928.
such, he does not identify his sisters as his family, his unit or his finances
as his own. He has, therefore, refused contact and
support from family for the
last six months.
previous admissions, Mental Health Services have been able to effect improvement
of symptoms through the use of Clozapine.
However, Mr DHM experienced severe
side effects to this medication and it has been ceased. This prevents his
current treating team
from gaining the previous levels of symptom relief.
DHM’s presentation at the Tribunal hearing was entirely consistent with
the opinion of Mr Z, and with the opinion of Dr Y,
who prepared a Health
Professional Report Form, dated 12 March 2013. Dr Y reports that Mr DHM has
chronic schizophrenia, which is
treatment resistant.
was, consequently, no dispute about the fact that Mr DHM lacks the capacity to
make decisions in his own best interests.
Tribunal is satisfied that Mr DHM has a disability, which prevents him making
important life decisions. He is a person for whom
the Tribunal could make a
guardianship order.
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order
and what order should be made?
applicant gave evidence that Mr DHM has been eligible for discharge from the
Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit at the public hospital
for some months. His
discharge has been impeded by the fact that he does not recognise himself at Mr
DHM. This means that the necessary
paperwork cannot be filled in unless there is
a substitute decision maker. Accordingly, the applicant submitted there is a
a guardian to make decisions about Mr DHM’s accommodation.
also submitted that there will be an urgent need for Mr DHM to be provided with
adequate and appropriate services. However, Mr
DHM refuses services depending on
which identity he acknowledges at any given time. He has been rejected by ADHC
for boarding house
accommodation, because he was unable to identify how he would
obtain services if required. Mr DHM was not able to satisfy ADHC that
know what to do in a crisis.
applicant also submitted there is a need for someone to make decisions about Mr
DHM’s medical treatment and health care.
Again, this primarily stems from
his refusal to acknowledge that he is Mr DHM.
Z gave evidence that the treating team have experienced difficulty identifying
the most appropriate treatment for Mr DHM. In the
past, he has obtained most
benefit from the Clozapine treatment. Due to his side effects, this has been
ceased. However, Mr Z also
submitted that there is a need for a guardian to be
appointed to ensure that there is a coordinated approach to Mr DHM’s
care and medical and dental treatment, depending on where he is living.
It will be necessary, he submitted, for a guardian to be
able to instruct a
boarding house, to call an Ambulance or doctor in a crisis, as Mr DHM would,
himself, be unable to do that.
DHM is currently taking Olanzapine, Atorvastatin and Amisulpride. Mr DHM said:
“I can’t remember things too well”
and agreed that he
needs a guardian.
Tribunal is satisfied, on the basis of this evidence, which was endorsed by Ms
NFG, that there is a need for a guardian to make
decisions about accommodation,
access to services, health care and medical and dental treatment.
Who should be the guardian?
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed.
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements in accordance with
of the Act.
He/she must:
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship;
have no undue
conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person; and
be able and
willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
Guardianship Act 1987
(per Windeyer J in
S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public Guardian
(unreported)
NSW Supreme Court 29 November 1999).
application proposes the appointment of Ms NFG. She has been acting informally
and successfully as Mr DHM’s decision maker
until his most recent mental
illness has made this difficult for her. The fact that Mr DHM does not recognise
her as his sister is
the only impediment to her continuing to do this on an
informal basis.
NFG told the Tribunal that she would very much like to be her brother’s
guardian and to continue the role of decision making
which she has adopted, to
all accounts extremely successfully, in the past.
applicant told the Tribunal that he did not think that it would affect Mr
DHM’s relationship with his sister if she were
to be appointed, as he does
not recognise any relationship at present.
Z told the Tribunal that Ms NFG has been a forceful advocate for Mr DHM in the
past and has performed her role as informal decision
maker extremely well. He
also endorsed Ms NFG’s appointment.
DHM told the Tribunal that he did not want Ms NFG to be appointed. He told the
Tribunal that he was not Mr DHM and did not wish
to be addressed as such. He did
not profess to recognise Ms NFG as his sister, and became somewhat agitated when
the subject was
NFG acknowledged that Mr DHM does not accept her and the rest of his family. She
told the Tribunal that she would make appropriate
decisions. She has the
background and the knowledge that the role would require. She also submitted
that the guardianship role requires
minimal contact, and that until his most
recent stay in hospital, Mr DHM has never distanced himself from his family
Tribunal is entirely satisfied that under normal circumstances Ms NFG would be
the most appropriate person to appoint. The Tribunal
is mindful that it must
consider the Public Guardian to be the guardian of last resort and that it must
make a finding that a private
person who is proposed is not suitable before it
can consider appointing the Public Guardian. However, the Tribunal also notes
the person must have a personality, which is compatible with the person
under guardianship. Whilst Mr DHM does not recognise his
sister, the Tribunal is
of the view that it cannot be said that their personalities are compatible.
this matter, the Tribunal is of the view that Ms NFG is a suitable person to
appoint, but that it would not be in Mr DHM’s
best interests, at the
current time, to appoint her. The Tribunal formed the view, based on Mr
DHM’s presentation at the hearing,
that to appoint Ms NFG at present may
be detrimental to his mental health, as he was adamant that he did not want her
to be involved.
Whilst the Tribunal acknowledges that it is very disappointing
to Ms NFG and her family, the Tribunal is of the view that it is in
DHM’s best interests to make a short order appointing the Public Guardian,
in the hope that when the matter is reviewed,
it will be possible for Ms NFG to
take over the role of guardian. The Tribunal is particularly of this view
because there are urgent
decisions, which need to be made, which may be contrary
to Mr DHM’s wishes. The Tribunal has no doubt that the Public Guardian
will rely extremely heavily on Ms NFG’s input in the decision making
process, as would be appropriate in view of her superior
knowledge of Mr
DHM’s background and needs.
How long should the order
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it was made. The Tribunal decided
to make an order for a period of
six months.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal in relation to financial
management were:
incapable of managing his affairs?
Is there a need
for another person to manage Mr DHM’s affairs and is it in his best
interests for a financial management order
to be made?
should be appointed financial manager?
incapable of managing his affairs?
person’s capability to manage his or her affairs was considered by
Campbell J in the NSW Supreme Court in
Re GHI (a protected person)
Campbell J affirmed the approach enunciated in
2 NSWLR 700
by Powell J, at paragraph 7:
“It is my view that a
person is not shown to be incapable of managing his or her own affairs unless,
at the least, it appears:
(a) that he is incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent fashion with the
ordinary routine affairs of man; and
(b) that by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real risk
that either
(i) he or she may be disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
(ii) that such moneys or property that he or she may possess may be dissipated
or lost ... it is not sufficient in my view merely
to demonstrate that the
person lacks the high level of ability needed to deal with complicated
transactions or that he or she does
not deal with even simple or routine
transactions in the most efficient manner...”
(unreported) NSW Supreme Court 20 March 2000, in dealing with
the capacity test as it has been enunciated in NSW, said that dealing
“ordinary affairs of man” does not simply mean being able to go to
the bank and draw out housekeeping money.
Most people’s affairs, his
Honour said,
“are more complicated than that, and the
ordinary affairs of mankind involve at least planning for the future, working
one will feed oneself and one’s family and how one is going to
generate income and look after capital. Accordingly, whilst
one does not have to
be a person who is capable of managing complex financial affairs, one has to go
beyond just managing household
should be noted that the relevant time for considering whether a person is
incapable of managing his or her affairs is not merely
the day of the hearing
but the reasonably foreseeable future (
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
is no dispute about the fact that Mr DHM lacks the ability to manage his
DHM told the Tribunal that he does not receive any income, as the Centrelink
benefits are paid to Mr DHM, not to Mr TND, whom he
believes himself to be. He
told the Tribunal that he is unable to hold on to any money and that he clearly
needs a financial manager.
Tribunal was also assisted by Mr Z’s report, dated 21 March 2013. Mr Z
confirmed that Mr DHM does not believe he receives
any Centrelink benefits. No
one is currently able to access his property and provide informal support
because of Mr DHM’s refusal
to accept their role in his life. Mr DHM
believes his only source of income is not his to utilise.
Tribunal was satisfied that
Mr DHM is incapable of managing his financial
Is there a need for another person to manage Mr
DHM’s affairs and is it in his best interests for a financial management
to be made?
DHM’s rent and water bills are currently paid from his Centrelink payment.
However, it was submitted that there is a need
for a financial manager to be
appointed to make financial decisions pertinent to his new accommodation. It was
submitted that, in
the absence of a financial management order, accommodation
decisions cannot be made and implemented. The Tribunal believes this submission
NFG told the Tribunal that Mr DHM has three separate accounts: a passbook
account, a transaction account and a term deposit. He
also has a current tenancy
that he does not recognise. It will be important for someone to be appointed to
make decisions in relation
to this tenancy.
this reason, the Tribunal was satisfied that there is a need to appoint someone
to manage Mr DHM’s affairs and it is in
his best interests that an order
Who should be appointed financial manager?
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act 1987
(‘the Act’), the Tribunal must act with
the interests of the person concerned as the paramount consideration and in
with the other principles set out in
of the Act.
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial
management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the person’s
or may commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee and
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of an estate.
NSW Trustee and Guardian now exercises the role of the Protective
Commissioner.
the side of the Protective Commissioner was seen to be the manifest independence
of the statutory office, the advantages of a dispassionate
and neutral approach
in situations of family conflict and divided views as to the best interests of
the person, expertise and experience
in managing estates, an impeccable
reputation and the security provided to an estate against loss or damage.
advantages of the appointment of a family member were more economic management
of smaller estates (that is, freedom from fees)
and a greater familiarity with
assets and liabilities in smaller estates, a greater capacity of a person with a
disability to interact
with the manager so as to exercise a greater influence
over the broad directions of the management of the estate, love and affection
for and knowledge of the protected person and concern for his or her quality of
life, and particular qualities or qualifications
enabling family members to act
as managers.
Court considered that interrelated property interests in a family situation,
where a conflict of interest and duty may be “more
apparent than
real,” should not necessarily present an absolute bar to appointment of a
family member who is otherwise appropriate.
However, when appointing a family
member, a decision maker must be satisfied that the estate, income and capital
assets, will be
utilised to advance the interests and quality of life of a
protected person rather than to eventually increase the assets of the
NFG has managed Mr DHM’s finances on an informal basis successfully for
many years. Whilst this issue was being discussed,
Mr DHM became agitated and
exclaimed loudly
“No more Mr DHM!”
. Whilst Ms NFG is
considered by the Tribunal to be an entirely suitable person to manage Mr
DHM’s finances on a permanent basis,
the Tribunal is of the view that
whilst Mr DHM’s delusions are so active, it would be contrary to his
mental health, in that
it would cause him considerable agitation, to appoint her
to manage his finances. He told the Tribunal that he objected to Ms NFG
Tribunal, therefore, decided to make a short reviewable order, appointing the
NSW Trustee and Guardian.
order will be reviewed in six months.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (569 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter