URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/306.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AQJ v University of New South Wales [2013] NSWADT 306 (31 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
AQJ v University of New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 306
Hearing Date(s):
7 June 2013
Decision Date:
31 December 2013
General Division
S Montgomery, Judicial Member
1. The decisions are affirmed insofar as they relate to the refusal to
release documents that are the subject of a claim of legal
decisions are affirmed in so far as they relate to the refusal to release staff
3. The decision are set aside insofar as they relates to the refusal
to release CATEI information. In its place the decision is made
Applicant is to be given a reasonable opportunity to inspect the withheld CATEI
information in a manner that does not permit
the copying of that
information.
Catchwords:
Access to personal information, legal professional privilege - form of
access - confidentiality - personal factor particular to the
Applicant -
internal deliberation
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Government Information
(Public Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Attorney-General's Department v Cockcroft
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR 180
Federal Police v Propend Finance Pty Ltd (1997) 188 CLR 501
Australians for
Sustainable Development Inc v Barangaroo Delivery Authority
[2013] NSWADT 252
Chan v Department of Education and Training (GD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 7
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Camilleri (GD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 19
Daniels Corp International Pty Limited v Australia Competition &
Consumer Commissioner
[2002] HCA 49
(2002) 213 CLR 543.
Esso Australia
Resources Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR 49
Hargreaves v University of New England
[2013] NSWADT 233
Hurst v Wagga
Wagga City Council
[2011] NSWADT 307
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of
[2006] HCA 45
Seven Network Ltd v News Ltd
[2005] FCA 142
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
Williams v Department
Industry and Investment
[2012] NSWADT 192
Principal judgment
AQJ (Applicant)
University of New South Wales (Respondent)
Representation
D Weinberger (Applicant)
J McLeod (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Thomson Lawyers (Applicant)
P Sheehy (Respondent)
File Number(s):
133061, 133089
REASONS FOR
DIVISION (S MONTGOMERY, (JUDICIAL MEMBER)): In these reasons the names of
private individuals have been anonymised so as to
preserve the privacy of their
personal affairs. In these reasons the Applicant is referred to as AQJ. The
names of agency staff involved
in the performance of official functions are also
anonymised where their identification might reveal the identity of the
is an application for review of a determination by the Respondent, the
University of New South Wales ("the Respondent", "the
University" or "UNSW"), in
regard to two access applications under the
Government Information (Public
Access) Act
") by AQJ. In his access applications AQJ
sought access to information held by the Respondent
Aiken, the Applicant's solicitor, provided an affidavit in which he set out the
background to the application. I do not understand
that to be in dispute.
the end of 2012 AQJ was a student at UNSW. In 2012 he was in the third year of
his degree. 2013 was to be his final year studying
the degree. AQJ was
registered with UNSW's Student Equity and Disability Unit ("SEADU") as he was
and continues to be under a disability
- an acute form of bi-polar
Semester 2, 2012 AQJ was enrolled in two courses at the University ("the
courses"). The courses were both co-ordinated by the
same individual. In these
reasons I will refer to the co-ordinator as Ms S. Ms S was aware of AQJ's
disability from at least August
September 2012 a tutor in one of AQJ's subjects confronted AQJ and accused him
of passing off another student's work as his own
("the plagiarism allegation").
these reasons I will refer to the tutor as Ms M.
S repeated Ms M's allegations by email to AQJ. AQJ forwarded Ms S's email to Mr
Aiken. Mr Aiken attempted to contact Ms S by telephone
with respect to the
matters set out in her email but was unsuccessful. He then sent an email to Ms S
but he did not receive a response
to either his telephone message or to his
Applicant contends that the circumstances in which both Ms M and Ms S approached
and wrote to him with respect to the plagiarism
allegation breached, without
limitation:
a. The UNSW's Student Misconduct Procedures (both as
they were in effect at that time to 30 November 2012, and as replaced); and
b. The UNSW's Student Academic Integrity & Managing Plagiarism:
Guidelines for Staff (Version 1.0, 20 February 2012.
Applicant further contends that from the time that Ms M and Ms S approached him,
his health deteriorated significantly. In November
2012 AQJ's Psychiatrist
directed him to cease work immediately and to rest under supervision for one
to his condition, AQJ applied for special consideration in seeking and obtaining
extensions of time to submit outstanding assessable
work in respect of both
S considered the Applicant's requests for special consideration. A
representative of the SEADU assisted Ms S with her response
to the request that
was subsequently sent to AQJ. Extended dates were granted for submission of the
work and AQJ submitted assessable
work in accordance with those
December 2012 Ms S informed AQJ that he had failed one of the courses ("the
failed subject"). AQJ sent an email to Ms S, and others
with respect to the fail
mark and requested a meeting with members of the University faculty in which the
Applicant studied ("the
Associate Professor within the faculty, Ms C sent an email to Ms S indicating
that she would prepare a response to AQJ's request.
Applicant, through his solicitors, applied for re-assessment of his assessable
work in the failed subject. The re-assessment was
successful.
January 2013 Mr Aiken lodged a Complaint, on behalf of the Applicant, in
accordance with UNSW's published Student Complaint Procedure
in respect of,
among other things, the Applicant's fail mark and the circumstances occurring in
Semester 2, 2012.
January 2013 the Dean of the faculty wrote to Mr Aiken. The Dean confirmed that
the academic assessment and review process of AQJ's
work was conducted in
accordance with UNSW and the faculty's assessment policies and
procedures.
February 2013 a Student Complaints Authorised Officer, Mr Ken Bright, ("the
SCAO") made a decision dismissing the Complaint.
Applicant has appealed the SCAO's determination of the Complaint. He contends
that the circumstances in which Ms M and Ms S made
allegations against him
breached no less than two applicable policies and that the allegations had a
deleterious effect on his health
and condition and consequently UNSW is
responsible for what transpired, in terms of the Applicant's subsequent failure,
and the effect
on his health.
The Access Applications
first access application dated 14 January 2013 ("the First Access Application")
which is the subject of proceedings 133061, sought
the following
1. For the years 2008 to 14 January 2013, all Course and
Teaching Evaluation and Improvement ("CATEI") surveys, whether in final or
form, conducted by or on behalf of UNSW, with respect to or concerning Ms S; and
all CATEI surveys submitted by survey participants
with respect to or concerning
the courses.
2. For the period from 1 July 2012 to 14 January 2013, all emails sent or
received by Ms S or Ms C concerning AQJ.
3. For each of the academic years 2009 - 2012, documents which identify the
number of students enrolled in the courses who completed
the course and the
number of students receiving a final grade in the courses of: fail, pass
conceded; and pass and above.
second access application dated 21 February 2013 ("the Second Access
Application") which is the subject of proceedings 133089,
sought the following
1 All documents held by the SCAO, in respect of a
complaint made by AQJ by letter dated 16 January 2013 from his solicitor,
all documents sent or received by the SCAO in respect of that
Complainant.
2 AQJ noted that a copy of the Complaint need not be produced unless
annotations or comments had been made to it by or on behalf of
University.
summarised his requests as seeking:
a. CATEI reports for years 2008
to 2012 in respect of the courses;
b. Emails passing between Ms S and Ms C concerning AQJ;
c. Course statistics for the courses; and
d. The file held by the SCAO in connection with the Complaint.
noted that the information sought concerns his assessment and treatment by UNSW,
not only in connection with how his work was assessed
and reassessed, but also
in connection with the manner in which he was treated by UNSW as a person with a
disability, how his Complaint
was determined, and statistical information
concerning the quality and evaluation of the courses he undertook, both in 2012,
for a comparative analysis, earlier years.
The Respondent's determination
Respondent's Head of Governance Support, Ms Deborah Gibson, determined the first
access application in March 2013. With the exception
of some emails between UNSW
and the Applicant and/or his representatives Ms Gibson refused access to the
requested information. Ms
Gibson determined to refuse access to some other
emails ("the withheld emails or staff emails") and the remaining documents on
basis that she considered that there is an overriding public interest
against their disclosure.
relation to the CATEI material Ms Gibson stated:
CATEI surveys and their results are one of a number of activities designed to
provide course feedback. They are an internal mechanism
which provides for the
confidential collection of student opinions and are not intended to be treated
as a staff performance evaluation
tool. They are treated confidentially and not
widely disseminated. Students are not restricted from providing opinions about
teachers which might, if made public, be defamatory, or damaging to the
reputation and to the business or professional interests
of their teachers and
of the University. The University's ability to conduct CATEI surveys and make
use of their findings could be
significantly impaired if confidentiality were
not maintained. As the University operates in a competitive environment,
of surveys and/or their results may adversely impact on the
University's competitive advantage.
The performance of individual students is their personal information. In
addition to the reasons already given concerning CATEI, the
information
concerning pass/fail rates is from a very small cohort and may, if released
enable identification of individuals. Disclosure
of CATEI and pass/fail
information would most likely cause speculative discussion of individuals. It
could reasonably be expected
to contravene the information protection principle
] and none of the exceptions set out in that section would apply.
I consider that the public interest considerations against disclosure
outweigh the public interest considerations in favour of disclosure.
It is not practicable to provide copies of the withheld documents with
information for which there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure
relation to the requested emails Ms Gibson stated:
I consider that access should be refused to some of the emails because, for
those emails, the public interest considerations in favour
of disclosure are
outweighed by the public interest considerations against disclosure.
A number of the emails relate to requests for advice and the drafting of
correspondence concerning student progress and assessment.
Such advice and
recommendations are given in the expectation that they will be treated
confidentially. The management of student
progress and assessment is a central
part of the University's functions, and it is essential to the effective conduct
of these functions
that staff can seek and obtain advice in confidence.
Disclosure could undermine this expectation of confidentiality and so damage
effectiveness of the University's processes in the future.
Some of the emails also refer to the progress and assessment of students
other than [AQJ], and this information is not relevant to
the information
applied for.
The University has established processes for advising students about their
progress and assessment results, including opportunities
for students to seek
further information and to lodge appeals or grievances. The public interest in
protecting the integrity of the
University's processes by maintaining the
confidentiality of internal deliberations outweighs the public interest in
disclosing the
withheld emails.
For those emails which are routine in nature and which do not contain the
personal information of individuals, I consider the public
considerations in favour of disclosure outweigh those against disclosure.
I have considered whether it would be practicable to provide copies of the
withheld emails with information for which there is an
overriding public
interest against disclosure deleted. I consider that in some cases it would be
practicable to delete those parts
containing personal information of other
students, but it would not be practicable to delete those parts which are
covered by the
other considerations against disclosure, as doing so would leave
no relevant substantive content in the emails.
Gibson determined the second access application in April 2013. She decided to
provide access to the correspondence between UNSW
and the Applicant and/or his
representatives. Ms Gibson decided to refuse access to the remainder of the
documents. She stated:
The withheld material is draft correspondence, advice and records of
discussions by University staff concerning the complaint. Some
of the documents
in question are also either confidential communications between a lawyer
employed by the University of New South
Wales and other persons or confidential
documents prepared by that lawyer. The University is a 'client' for the purposes
of the definition
of 'client legal privilege' under clause 5(1) of Schedule 1 to
the Act, and the University's employed solicitor is a `lawyer' for
the purposes
of client legal privilege.
The University has established processes for advising students about their
progress and assessment results, including opportunities
for students to seek
further information and to lodge appeals or grievances. The documents were
created in the expectation that they
would be treated confidentially and they
have been treated confidentially by the University. Student progress and
assessment, including
complaint handling are important functions of the
University, and it is essential to the effective conduct of these functions that
staff can seek and obtain advice in the expectation of confidentiality.
A copy of the University's decision concerning your complaint and reasons
have been communicated to you.
The University's Student Complaint Procedure ("the Procedure") imposes
specific requirements concerning confidentiality. I understand
that there is an
ongoing appeal concerning the decision made under the Procedure. Disclosure of
the withheld material would breach
the confidentiality requirements of section
11 of the Procedure. ...
I have had regard to the public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure and the public interest considerations against disclosure
above. On balance, I consider that the public interest considerations in favour
of disclosure are outweighed by the public
interest considerations against
disclosure.
It is not practicable to provide a copy of the records with the information
for which there is an overriding public interest against
disclosure deleted, nor
to provide access by way of creating a new record.
Applicant was not satisfied with the Respondent's determinations and he applied
to the Tribunal for external review. The Applicant's
solicitor, Mr Aiken also
wrote to the Respondent identifying documents which appeared to fall within the
scope of the First Access
Application, but which had not been produced or
identified on the Respondent's schedule of withheld documents.
Respondent subsequently made supplementary decisions in regard to both the first
and second access applications. The Respondent's
Compliance Manager, Mr Paul
Serov, made the supplementary decisions. On 14 May 2013 Mr Serov
determined:
First Access Request
I have decided, under
, to provide access to 2 'Form
A' CATEI 'summary reports' for the courses ... for 2012. A copy of this
information is enclosed.
I have decided, under
, to provide access to some
further emails for which I consider there is not an overriding public interest
against their disclosure.
Copies of the emails for which there is no overriding
public interest against disclosure are enclosed. Personal information of other
persons has been redacted from one of these emails.
I have decided, under
, to provide access to a
document which identifies the number of students enrolled in [the courses] from
2009 - 2012 who completed
the course and the number of students receiving a
final grade in [the courses] of: fail, pass conceded; and pass and above, as
is not an overriding public interest against its disclosure. A copy of
this information is enclosed.
Second Access Request
I have decided, under
, to provide access to some
further documents in relation to which I consider there is not an overriding
public interest against their
disclosure. Copies of the documents for which
there is no overriding public interest against disclosure are enclosed.
16 May 2013 Mr Serov dealt with four further emails that had been identified as
falling within
of the first access application. Mr Serov determined to
refuse access to the emails and stated:
, you have a legally enforceable right to be provided with access to the
information sought, unless there is an overriding public
interest against
disclosure. In making such a determination, agencies must apply the public
interest test under
, which provides that there will only be an overriding
public interest against disclosure where public interest considerations in
favour of disclosure are, on balance, outweighed by those against disclosure. I
have applied the public interest test and determined
that there is an overriding
public interest against disclosure of the information. The information falls
within the description in
clause 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the
provides that
It is to be conclusively presumed that there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure of information that would be privileged
from production in
legal proceedings on the ground of client legal privilege (legal professional
privilege), unless the person in
whose favour the privilege exists has waived
the privilege.
The four emails are confidential communications between a lawyer employed by
the University and another person within the University.
I therefore consider
that this information would be privileged from production in legal proceedings
on the ground of legal professional
privilege. The University has determined not
to waive privilege in regard to this information. In accordance with
, it is to be conclusively presumed that there is an overriding
public interest against disclosure of information that is subject
professional privilege.
Applicant contends that this inadequate and piecemeal disclosure by the
Respondent is reflective of the Respondent's obfuscation
of its obligations
under the Act.
Information in dispute
issues in dispute have narrowed since the commencement of the proceedings
because the Respondent's subsequent determinations have
resulted in a large
volume of documents being released.
Applicant summarised the issues which remain in dispute as follows:
a. With respect to the first access request (proceedings
i. Whether CATEI survey information held by the Respondent for years
2008-2012 for the courses should be provided to the Applicant;
ii. Whether the withheld emails should be provided to the Applicant, or are
free from disclosure on public interest considerations;
iii. Whether four additional documents between Ms C and Mr Paul Sheehy, an
Assistant University Solicitor with the Respondent, are
legally privileged
communications and therefore not subject to disclosure;
b. With respect to the second access request (proceedings 133089):
i. Whether that part of the Complaint file which the Respondent claims
contains legally privileged communications, should be disclosed
matter came before me for hearing on 7 June 2013 at which time the parties
presented evidence and made submissions in support
of their cases
Applicable Legislation
is general agreement on the relevant legislative provisions and the legal
principles that apply.
The object of the
government information to the public by giving members of the public an
enforceable right to access and only restricting
access where there is an
overriding public interest against disclosure: see
subsection 3(1)
subsection 9(1)
Public Interest Test
test to be applied in determining whether there is an overriding public interest
against disclosure is set out in
section 13.
That test is in the following
13 Public interest test
There is an
overriding public interest against disclosure
government information for the purposes of this Act if (and only if) there are
public interest considerations against disclosure
and, on balance, those
considerations outweigh the public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure.
provides that there is a general public interest in favour
of disclosure of government information.
Subsection 12(2)
provides that public
interest considerations in favour of disclosure are not limited. The section
goes on to provide some examples
of public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure of government information. These include:
The following are examples of public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure of information:
(a) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to promote
open discussion of public affairs, enhance Government accountability
contribute to positive and informed debate on issues of public importance.
(b) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to inform the
public about the operations of agencies and, in particular,
their policies and
practices for dealing with members of the public.
(c) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to ensure
effective oversight of the expenditure of public funds.
(d) The information is personal information of the person to whom it is to be
(e) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to reveal or
substantiate that an agency (or a member of an agency)
has engaged in misconduct
or negligent, improper or unlawful conduct.
public interest considerations against disclosure are limited. These are set out
provides for certain government information to be conclusively presumed to
give rise to an overriding public interest consideration
against disclosure.
That information is set out in Schedule 1 of the
. Where government
information falls within this description, the public interest test in
is satisfied without further inquiry. The Respondent has asserted that clause
5 of Schedule 1 applies. That clause states:
5 Legal professional privilege
(1) It is to be conclusively presumed that there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure of information that would be
privileged from
production in legal proceedings on the ground of client legal privilege (legal
professional privilege), unless the
person in whose favour the privilege exists
has waived the privilege.
(2) If an access application is made to an agency in whose favour legal
professional privilege exists in all or some of the government
information to
which access is sought, the agency is required to consider whether it would be
appropriate for the agency to waive
that privilege before the agency refuses to
provide access to government information on the basis of this clause.
(3) A decision that an agency makes under subclause (2) is not a reviewable
decision under
only other public interest considerations against disclosure are those set out
in the table to
section 14.
These are not conclusively presumed to give rise to
an overriding public interest against disclosure. For the purpose of this
application,
the Respondent contends that clauses 1(d), 1(e), 1(f), 1(g), 1(h),
3(a), 3(b) and 4(d) of the
table are applicable:
Responsible and effective government
There is a public interest consideration against disclosure of information if
disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected
to have one or more
of the following effects (whether in a particular case or generally):
(d) prejudice the supply to an agency of confidential information that
facilitates the effective exercise of that agency's functions,
(e) reveal a deliberation or consultation conducted, or an opinion, advice or
recommendation given, in such a way as to prejudice
a deliberative process of
government or an agency,
(f) prejudice the effective exercise by an agency of the agency's
(g) found an action against an agency for breach of confidence or otherwise
result in the disclosure of information provided to an
agency in confidence,
3 Individual rights, judicial processes and natural justice
There is a public interest consideration against disclosure of information if
disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected
to have one or more
of the following effects:
(a) reveal an individual's personal information,
(b) contravene an information protection principle under the
Personal Information Protection Act 1998
or a Health Privacy Principle under the
Health Records and Information Privacy Act 2002
4 Business interests of agencies and other persons
There is a public interest consideration against disclosure of information if
disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected
to have one or more
of the following effects:
(d) prejudice any person's legitimate business, commercial, professional or
financial interests,
'could reasonably be expected to'
has been the subject of judicial
consideration with respect to its use in the
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act
(Cth). The words in the
phrase are to be given their ordinary meaning-. In
Attorney-General's
Department v Cockcroft
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 10 FCR 180
Bowen CJ and Beaumont J held that
the phrase -
requires a judgment to be made by the decision-maker as
to whether it is reasonable, as distinct from something that is irrational,
absurd or ridiculous, to expect that those who would otherwise supply
information of the prescribed kind to the agency would decline
to do so if the
document in question were disclosed under the Act. It is undesirable to attempt
any paraphrase of these words. In
particular it is undesirable to consider the
operation of the provision in terms of probabilities or possibilities or the
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of Treasury
[2006] HCA 45
Hayne J held
(citations removed):
when their Honours said, as they did, that the words required a "judgment to
be made by the decision-maker as to whether it is reasonable,
as distinct from
something that is irrational, absurd or ridiculous," to expect certain
consequences, they are not to be understood
as having used the latter expression
as a paraphrase of the former. Rather, they are to be understood, and have since
been understood,
as doing no more than drawing an emphatic comparison. To do
more would have been, as their Honours correctly said, "to place an unwarranted
gloss upon the relatively plain words of the Act".
respect to each public interest consideration against disclosure upon which it
relies, the Respondent is to show that disclosure
could reasonably be expected
to have the nominated effect.
Prejudice supply of confidential information Clause 1(d)
is a public interest consideration against disclosure if disclosure could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the supply to
an agency of confidential
information that facilitates the effective exercise of that agency's function.
Whether a disclosure will
'prejudice' should be understood in the context of its
ordinary meaning "to cause detriment or disadvantage" or "to impede or derogate
Hurst v Wagga Wagga City Council
[2011] NSWADT 307
determining question is whether, as a question of fact, the information is
confidential. In determining the question of confidential
information a number
of principles apply: see
Williams v Department Industry and Investment
[2012] NSWADT 192
(i) The confidential quality of communications is
a question of fact;
(ii) To establish its confidential quality, information must have been
supplied under an express or implied pledge of confidentiality;
(iii) The confidential quality of the information may be inferred from the
nature of the relationship between the informer and person
(iv) The confidential quality of the information must be determined in the
light of all of the circumstances of the particular case.
information is defined in clause 4 of Schedule 4 of the G1PA Act:
Personal information
(1) In this Act, personal information means information or an opinion
(including information or an opinion forming part of a database
and whether or
not recorded in a material form) about an individual (whether living or dead)
whose identity is apparent or can reasonably
be ascertained from the information
or opinion.
(2) Personal information includes such things as an individual's
fingerprints, retina prints, body samples or genetic characteristics.
(3) Personal information does not include any of the following:
(a) information about an individual who has been dead for more than 30
(b) information about an individual (comprising the individual's name and
non-personal contact details) that reveals nothing more
than the fact that the
person was engaged in the exercise of public functions,
(c) information about an individual that is of a class, or is contained in a
document of a class, prescribed by the regulations for
the purposes of this
provides for consideration of personal factors of the
application. It states:
55 Consideration of personal factors of application
(1) In determining whether there is an overriding public interest against
disclosure of information in response to an access application,
an agency is
entitled to take the following factors (the personal factors of the application)
into account as provided by this section:
(a) the applicant's identity and relationship with any other person,
(b) the applicant's motives for making the access application,
(c) any other factors particular to the applicant.
(2) The personal factors of the application can also be taken into account as
factors in favour of providing the applicant with access
to the information.
(3) The personal factors of the application can be taken into account as
factors against providing access if (and only to the extent
that) those factors
are relevant to the agency's consideration of whether the disclosure of the
information concerned could reasonably
be expected to have any of the effects
referred to in clauses 2-5 (but not clause 1, 6 or 7) of the Table to
(4) An applicant is entitled to provide any evidence or information
concerning the personal factors of the application that the applicant
to be relevant to the determination of whether there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure of the information
applied for.
(5) An agency may, as a precondition to providing access to information to an
applicant, require the applicant to provide evidence
concerning any personal
factors of the application that were relevant to a decision by the agency that
there was not an overriding
public interest against disclosure of the
information and, for that purpose, require the applicant to provide proof of his
(6) An agency is under no obligation to inquire into, or verify claims made
by an access applicant or any other person about, the
personal factors of the
application but is entitled to have regard to evidence or information provided
by the applicant or other
onus is on the Respondent to establish that its decision in regard to the
disputed information is justified: see
subsection 105(1)
The Applicant's case
Applicant relies on affidavit evidence by his solicitor, Mr Aiken.
Mr Aiken's evidence
his affidavit Mr Aiken provided background information of events that lead to
the access applications. He noted that the information
sought in the access
applications concerns the assessment and treatment of the Applicant by the
Respondent in connection with how
his work was assessed and reassessed. It also
concerns the manner in which he was treated as a person with a disability, how
complaint was determined, and statistical information concerning the quality
and evaluation of the courses that he undertook.
Aiken annexed over 300 pages of material to his affidavit. Included in that
material is correspondence between the parties, UNSW
policy documents, and CATEI
related material downloaded from the internet.
Aiken's evidence is that on 17 September 2012 Ms M confronted the Applicant and
accused him of passing off another student's work
as his own and that on 21
September 2012, Ms S repeated the allegations by email to the Applicant.
Applicant contends that the circumstances in which both Ms M and Ms S approached
and wrote to him with respect to the plagiarism
a. The UNSW's Student Misconduct Procedures; and
b. The UNSW's Student Academic Integrity & Managing Plagiarism:
Guidelines for Staff.
Aiken annexed each of those documents to his affidavit.
relation to the CATEI related material downloaded from the internet Mr Aiken
On 9 April 2013 I undertook a search on the Respondent's [faculty] website
blog. I located a posting on that website notifying students
that if they
complete the CATEI survey they can view lecturer feedback on comments and course
data after the results are finalised.
On 8 November 2011, [Mr F of the faculty] sent the Applicant (and others) an
email encouraging the Applicant to complete a CATEI survey
for [the course] and
stated in part:
the course evaluation results summary and comments are able to be viewed by
lots of people, so please be careful about what you write!'.
He also stated that:
'I include all the comments I receive from students via the CATEI process in
my course outline for the next class'.
The Applicant's submissions
Weinberger provided written submissions and also made oral submissions in
relation to the evidence given at the hearing.
submitted that under the
there is an overwhelming presumption in favour
of disclosure. In addition, the Respondent has a number of policies that support
disclosure.
Mr Weinberger referred to a number of those policies and submitted
that, when read together, the tenor of the relevant policies favour
transparency
and disclosure in connection with all matters concerning a student's enrolment,
and in particular, the assessment of
students by the
Respondent.
relation to the withheld emails, Mr Weinberger submitted that as Mr Serov
determined that the Applicant may have access to the
'Complaint File', and that
as that file includes information collated in connection with the first access
application, access to
the withheld emails should be granted.
Weinberger further submitted that the Applicant suspects that the remaining
withheld emails may cause embarrassment to certain
staff of the University.
However, he notes that it is irrelevant if the disclosure of information might
cause embarrassment to, or
loss of confidence in, the University, and it is
irrelevant that information disclosed might be misinterpreted or misunderstood.
He submits that it is overwhelmingly in the public interest that the Applicant
be granted access to information about him that is
held by the Respondent.
Weinberger submitted that this is particularly so when that information may
include exchanges of emails between staff who were
teaching and assessing the
Applicant, and information which may touch upon or reveal the staffs'
perceptions of the Applicant, their
attitudes or prejudices toward him, and the
manner in which those perceptions, attitudes or prejudices may have informed the
treatment by those individuals of the Applicant, including his
assessment and re-assessment. Moreover, where the Applicant contends
Respondent has in fact treated him unfairly, it is overwhelmingly in the public
interest that the Applicant be granted access
to all relevant information that
may support or displace that contention.
the extent that the Respondent relies on the
clause 1(e)
considerations, the Applicant says:
a. the alleged 'deliberation or
consultation' conducted has concluded. Therefore that process can no longer be
`prejudiced';
b. under the Respondent's Assessment Policy, the Respondent's grading
procedures must be 'fair and equitable'. It is fair and equitable
Applicant be given all information that may have formed the basis of his grade.
It is also fair and equitable' that the
Respondent be transparent with respect
to such matters;
c. under the Respondent's Student Code Policy, the Applicant is entitled to
receive timely and clear feedback on assessment. The Applicant
says that the
evidence of Professor Iain Martin, the Vice-President and Deputy Vice-Chancellor
(Academic) at UNSW implies that other
considerations, which are not written,
have been applied in making an assessment of the Applicant's work;
d. the Respondent's has no assessment policies and procedures which permits
consultation and deliberation between staff. The Applicant
is entitled to know
and understand those assessment policies and procedures if they differ from the
published policies and procedures;
e. under the Respondent's published 'Assessment Information Access' the
Course authorities are responsible for ensuring that there
is a clear written
statement of expectations which should include a statement of the objectives of
the course, its assessment plan,
including weights allocated to each significant
assessable component and related submission dates. Mr Weinberger submitted that,
in circumstances where assessment criteria and processes must be clear, it is
difficult to accept the Respondent's contention that
certain deliberations or
consultations should remain private and free from disclosure; and
f. some of the withheld emails post date the period in which the Applicant's
work was actually assessed or re-assessed. Mr Weinberger
submitted that it can
hardly be contended that these involved a deliberation or consultation on
matters concerning the assessment
of the Applicant.
the extent that the Respondent withholds the emails on the basis of clause 1(f)
considerations Mr Weinberger submitted that there
is no evidence from the
Respondent to demonstrate that the release of these emails will prejudice the
effective exercise by an agency
of the agency's functions, in the sense stated
Hurst v Wagga Wagga City Council
at [59-71]. In
Member Molony stated:
To prejudice the effective exercise by an
agency of the agency's functions
This is found at point 1(f) of the Table to s 14.
Mr Hurst submits that the requirement that release "prejudice" the agency's
functions requires more than that release will "hinder
or make more difficult"
the agency's functions. Aside from this, Mr Hurst does not make submissions as
to what prejudice means in
the context. The Information Commissioner submitted -
The word "prejudice" has been found in cases decided under FOl legislation to
have its ordinary meaning: "to cause detriment or disadvantage"
[Re: Maher and
the Attorney General's Department (No 2)
(1986) 4 AAR 266]
or to "impede or
derogate from" [Sobh v Victoria Police
[1994] VicRp 2
(1994) 1 VR 41].
I accept that this adequately summarises the decision on the meaning of
prejudice under the FIO Acts. It is equally applicable in
the context of the
In her statement Ms McCormack said that she has worked with three General
Managers at the agency in Code of Conduct investigations.
She has acquired a
detailed knowledge of the Council's policies, procedures and practices relating
to such investigations. She said
Staff members who are the subject of complaints are given access to the
information in the complaint to ensure procedural fairness.
Nothing in the Code of Conduct authorises a complainant to have access to
staff responses.
Complainants are not given access to staff responses.
The Council's practice in restricting Code of Conduct information is
consistent with s10A of the LGA.
It is the practice of Council that statements made in response to Code of
Conduct complaints are confidential.
Ms McCormack said that in her experience -
" ... the effectiveness of Code of conduct investigations into Council staff
matters relies on information that it provided to, or
produced by, the Council
only being made available to Council officers involved in the investigation
...protection of information in this way promotes and environment of trust
and confidence in which the complainant, staff and witnesses
can provide candid
information to the general manager, and the general manager can determine a
complaint, without fear of the potential
embarrassment or reputational or other
harm that may result from the release of the information in other circumstances
to other people."
These expressions of opinion by Ms McCormack are based on her experience in
an environment where, as a matter of practice, staff responses
Conduct investigations have been kept confidential. She does not depose to
having any experience of code of conduct investigations
where confidentiality
was not maintained.
Given her experience, it is difficult to understand on what basis she can
reasonably claim that the effectiveness of code of conduct
investigations
"relies" on that confidentiality. Her evidence does not disclose any other basis
for the formation of her opinion,
aside from the fact the confidentiality has
been maintained in all the investigations she has been involved in. In those
circumstances
it is difficult to give her opinion as to the consequences of
disclosure any weight, as they are assertions based on her experience,
investigations where confidentiality was maintained as a matter of practice.
Her evidence does not identify any basis for a comparison between
investigations where confidentiality has been maintained, and those
where it has
not. It does not disclose a rational or underlying factual basis for the
conclusion that, if information provided by
staff were disclosed, it could
reasonably be expected that staff would be unlikely to co-operate with
investigative processes. This
strikes me as taking a very dim view of the
integrity of council staff, and of their willingness to ensure that the
processes they
manage are conducted efficiently, effectively and honestly. I
conclude that Ms McCormack opinion is based on limited experience and
considerable speculation. I do not accept that it is reasonably or rationally
I do accept that it is the practice of Council to keep staff disclosures to
Code of Conduct investigations confidential. Ms McCormack,
however, does not
identify or explain how disclosure under the
of information, which has
been treated confidentially, could reasonably expected to prejudice the
effective operation of the Council.
It is submitted on Council's behalf that disclosure would impair the
effectiveness of future Code of Conduct investigations, "because
discourage the future candid and voluntary provisions of information." When one
analyses Ms McCormack's evidence it is apparent
that her opinion on this issue
is an assertion based on her experience, which, on her own evidence, does not
include code of conduct
investigations where confidentiality has not been
maintained. Her evidence discloses no basis for the assertion that staff will be
less than fully forthcoming if information they provide to code of conduct
inquiries is disclosed. Employees of the agency, under
the Code of Conduct, have
obligations to be ethical, honest and accountable, to "carry out lawful
directions" (see 9.4) and to report
suspected breaches of the Code of Conduct
(see 11.6).
Additionally, as the Information Commissioner pointed out in submissions
there is no express confidentiality provision in the Code
of Conduct.
With respect to the submissions concerning
Local Government Act
, the issue, as I understand it, is that under
(b) enables a
council to close its meeting to the public where the discussion concerns
"personnel matters concerning particular individuals
(other than councillors)."
The section also enables closed meeting to be held where other matters such as
confidential information,
and information said to be subject to legal
professional privilege are discussed. The agency argued that its practice in
restricting
access to complaint documents was consistent with that provision.
While I accept that this is the case, the provisions of
Government Act 1993
do not create a further or additional public interests
considerations against disclosure under the
. The permissible public
interests considerations against disclosure are set out in
and cannot be
added to. In every case the decision maker's obligations are to identity the
applicable public interest considerations
in favour of disclosure and those
against, and to then balance them in arriving at a conclusion.
As a consequence the agency has not established that release of documents 4
and 5 could reasonably be expected to prejudice the effective
exercise by the
agency of it's functions,
relation to the withheld CATEI material Mr Weinberger
As a result of a further review of the First GIPA Application the Respondent
has produced the 'Form A' CATEI results for [the courses]
for 2012. That
decision alone tends to undermine much of the Respondent's reasons for
withholding the balance; clearly if these results
are routinely released to
participants to the surveys than there can be no public interest against
disclosure in the wider sense.
Surveys for additional years being available will
assist in not only ascertaining over a reasonable review period what are
views on the respective courses, but are also an important source to
determine if indeed the Respondent is acting upon negative feedback
courses, and being proactive in addressing the negative aspects of any
particular students experience. That could only ever
be in the public
In any event ... an examination of the Respondent's own website reveals
multiple examples of CATEI results (both Form A and Form B)
being routinely and
freely available to students and the public generally ...
The 2013 General Student Information booklet for the Respondent's faculty,
College of Fine Arts, also states under the heading 'CATEI:
Student Feedback on
Courses & Teaching' that An overall response to summary CATEI findings will
be available to the whole class
from your lecturer, Course Convenor, Program
Director or Head of School and will be used to update Course Outlines and inform
curriculum renewal processes' ... Therefore it appears they are
routinely made available.
A 2010 [faculty] Blog posting also informed potential participants of the
CATEI survey for that year that 'if you complete the survey
you can view
lecturer feedback on comments and course data after the results are finalised'
and 'if you complete the survey you are
then given access to see the completed
results for Form A evaluation and so find out what your peers thought' ...
On 8 November 2011 ... a senior lecturer within the [faculty] informed the
Applicant, with respect to the [course] that he includes
all the comments [he]
receives from students via the CATEI process in [his] course outline for the
next class ...
Therefore it is difficult to accept the Respondents statement that this
information is not widely disseminated or routinely available.
Further, staff of the Respondent are clearly notified that they must
participate in CATEI surveys:
a. The UNSW CATEI - Course and Teaching Evaluation and Improvement sheet on
the Respondent's 'teaching gateway' website states that
'staff are expected to
undertake at least one teaching evaluation each year' ...;
of the Learning and Teaching Induction Booklet for New Academic
Staff informs staff that 'Formal evaluation at UNSW is done through
and Teaching Evaluation and Improvement (CATEI) process .... Each course within
a School will be evaluated every 2nd year,
and each permanent member of the
teaching staff will have their teaching evaluated on an annual basis' ...
Accordingly, it is difficult to accept the Respondent's submission that
disclosure of such information may impact on the legitimate
expectations of staff when, with respect, staff are made aware that they must
participate in the surveys and the staff clearly
informed that it is a
requirement of their employment that they so participate in these CATEI surveys.
Indeed, it is certainly in
the public interest that the public have access to
information which may tend to reveal staff who have consistently received
as the Respondent, are acting on negative feedback which may
To the extent the Respondent contends that release of the information will
compromise the confidential basis on which students complete
CATEI surveys, this
seems to be in direct contradiction to the multiple assurances given to
potential participants of the survey,
that everything is provided confidentially
and anonymously ... None of the information produced or available actually
any individual (other than the staff member assessed) and hence the
Applicant cannot see how any confidentiality could be breached.
In any event all
of the CATEI results which have been obtained from the Respondent's website, ...
reveal no such information which
would tend to identify the person completing
the survey. With respect to the CATEI documents withheld, it would also be
to the Respondent to ascertain if any of the responses in the various
surveys do in fact reveal any particular individual, and that
information could
be redacted. Assuming the Tribunal favours redaction, no plausible reason is
advanced against disclosure.
Fundamentally, there is an overwhelming public interest in enabling any
student studying a course at the Respondent's university to
obtain information
relevant to that course which includes information about previous students'
perceptions of staff conducting those
courses and subject content. This
information can inform students not only as to the selection of subjects, but
also the selection
of which tertiary institution they may study at. Moreover,
where undertaking tertiary education is a significant financial investment
any student, the ability to obtain and consider relevant survey data about a
particular university, subject, course or lecturer,
simply underscores the
significant public interest in the distribution of this information.
Furthermore, in circumstances where the Applicant has failed [the failed
subject] for reasons which in his opinion have not been entirely
or adequately
explained to him, and would need to redo the subject in order to progress
through to the completion of his degree,
it is reasonable for him to be provided
information gathered through the CATEI process in order for him to determine
whether his
fail mark could be attributed to, in whole or part, a failure on the
part of the teaching staff of that subject, or alternatively
a failure by the
Respondent to take in to consideration past negative feedback on the subject or
particular lecturers. This is a
personal factor concerning the Applicant.
The Applicant also notes that as a result of the production of the statistics
concerning the pass and failure rates of students undertaking
[the course] in
the past 5 years, and the limited 2012 CATEI statistical information produced to
date, it would appear that:
a. there is an inconsistency between the CATEI form for [the course] and the
statistical information (pass/failure rates) for 2012,
in terms of enrolled
students (CATEI identifies 51, whereas the statistical summary identifies
b. in the years in which [Ms S] has been course co-ordinator for [the course]
there has been a marked increase in failure rates. For
example in year 2010 when
the course co-ordinator was [Ms C] there was a 5% failure rate, in 2011 the
failure rate jumped to 24%
and in 2012 the failure rate was 27.27% (if we accept
that the enrolled students were in fact 33, as opposed to the 51 recorded on
In circumstances where the Respondent is committed to the principles of
course and teaching evaluation and improvement, and the statistical
information
to hand suggests a significant rise in the number of failures in this subject
under [Ms S's] tenure, it is in the public
interest that information be
disclosed which may inform the Applicant, and indeed students generally, of
matters which may be relevant
to them undertaking this course or indeed
continuing on within the [faculty].
relation to the withheld material in relation to which legal privilege has been
asserted the Applicant disputes that legal professional
privilege can attach to
any of the documents.
Weinberger submitted that legal professional privilege protects disclosure to
third parties, and others, of confidential communications
between a client and
their lawyers or the contents of a document, which has been prepared for the
dominant purpose of:
a. The lawyer provided legal advice to the
b. The client being provided with professional legal services relating to an
existing or anticipated legal proceeding.
legal professional privilege to apply, the document in respect of which
privilege is claimed has to have been created for the
dominant purpose of legal
advice, and it must be a communication with a lawyer.
the Applicant does not dispute that Mr Sheehy is in fact a lawyer, the Applicant
contends that as an in-house lawyer, he is
not sufficiently independent of the
Respondent, such that his personal loyalties, duties or interests do not
influence the advice
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
and Seven Network Ltd v News Ltd
[2005] FCA 142.
Mr Weinberger submitted
This lack of independence or objectivity is borne out in a consideration of
the emails which been produced to the Applicant on 15
May 2013 which relate to
the SCAO's responses to certain emails and/or documents prepared by the lawyer.
In particular, the Applicant
refers to the following:
a. an email dated 24 January 2013 in which the SCAO forwards a document
apparently prepared by the lawyer to [Ms A] and states
'as discussed this is
very well written but clearly one lawyer to another'
. A plain reading of
that response suggests that what has been prepared is a proposed response to the
Applicant or his lawyer, as
opposed to the provision of legal advice from an
independent lawyer;
b. ... an email dated 24 January 2013 in which the SCAO forwards to [Ms R] a
document, apparently prepared by the lawyer, in which
the SCAO states
the nature of the complaint it was run past Carol and by way of action I have
this very well written response back to the lawyer'.
He further observes
'I suppose my initial concern is that this is clearly one lawyer talking to
another lawyer so not sure I could ever attempt to pass
this off as something I
just Whipped up'!'.
Again, what seems to be occurring is the lawyer is not
providing independent advice, but simply seeking that the SCAO act as a conduit
to provide a response which may well be to protect the interests of the
Respondent.
To the extent that the Respondent claims information passing between the SCAO
and the lawyer are privileged communications, the Applicant
says that given the
Policy and principles pursuant to which the SCAO is obliged to act, he could not
be a 'client' for the purposes
of privilege attaching. For example the
Complaints policy does not permit the SCAO to seek legal advice from the
Respondent's in
house lawyer. The policy permits that advice being obtained from
'external organisations' but only on matters of procedure ...
Alternatively, if the Respondent claims that the SCAO is the client, the SCAO
has not claimed privilege in the context of the current
Application; rather the
Respondent has and it is not for the Respondent to do so. The Respondent has no
standing to claim privilege.
The proper characterisation of the communications, by reference to the
surrounding emails which refer to that 'advice', and particularly
emails to both [Ms R] and [Ms A], is that the SCAO (probably in breach is his
obligations of confidentiality under the
Policy) gave the Respondents in house
lawyers the 'heads up' of the Complaint and the in house lawyers sought to
prepare self serving
responses for the SCAO to send. Consequently, they are not
privileged communications.
Indeed, that characterisation simply underscores the lack of requisite
independence that the lawyer has, and objectivity between the
giving of advice
and the interests of his employer. Moreover, the fact that the same lawyer is
now acting for the Respondent in these
Proceedings is further evidence of this
lack of requisite independence in the context of giving advice to the SCAO who
under an obligation of procedural fairness.
If the Respondent contends that the client is the Respondent in the capacity
of the respondent to the Complaint, than the Applicant
says that the provision
of the communications by the lawyer to the SCAO constitutes a waiver of that
privilege. Given the reviewed
determination of Mr Serov in connection with the
Second GIPA Application is to the effect that given the Applicant has lodged an
Appeal with respect to the Complaint, and he is entitled to the Complaint file,
that file must include the documents which the SCAO
had, including those in
respect of which privilege is claimed.
With respect to the 4 emails for which privilege is claimed in connection
with the First GIPA Application, that claim must fail on
the same basis of lack
of independence. Also the Applicant notes that with respect to similar emails
from UNSW Legal Office to the
various participants which were identified on the
Respondent's schedule of withheld documents no claim for privilege was made.
Weinberger submitted that Mr Sheehy's experience is meaningless and that the
creation of a file identified as 'Legal-in-Confidence'
is not determinative of
the issue of whether the withheld material attracts legal privilege.
Weinberger submitted that Mr Sheehy could not have been acting independently. He
gave advice to both Ms C and Mr Bright. Further,
there is no evidence in
relation to the dominant purpose nor can an inference be drawn in that regard.
He submitted that all the
advice that Mr Sheehy gave was for a mixed purpose.
Weinberger submitted that Professor Martin was not a candid witness. Professor
Martin agreed that material should be disclosed
unless there is good reason to
withhold it and Mr Weinberger submitted that no good reason has been
of the Act permits this Tribunal to consider personal factors of the
Applicant which may inform the Tribunal decision in deciding
to grant access or
otherwise to the withheld documents. Mr Weinberger submitted that relevant
factors in relation to these requests
The Applicant's
personal factors are that he is a mature aged student, is under a disability and
as such is registered with the Respondent's
SEADU. A psychiatrist's letter has
been provided on behalf of the Applicant.
He contends that
the plagiarism allegations were made in breach of the Respondent's policies, and
those circumstances had a deleterious
effect on his already vulnerable state. As
a consequence he got very sick and his studies suffered.
He contends that
in light of his subsequent treatment by the Respondent, including in terms of
how his work was assessed, he should
be entitled to full disclosure of what went
on between the relevant Respondent staff.
With respect to
the Complaint itself, it is clear on information provided to date that the SCAO
has breached numerous provisions of
the policy, failed to provide the Applicant
procedural fairness and released a copy of the Complaint to others not involved
investigation which amounts to a breach of his obligation of
confidentiality. This is a factor that should inform this Tribunal in
determining whether access to the remaining information should be made.
overwhelmingly in the public interest to ascertain and ensure that individuals
under a disability have been treated fairly and
equitably and to the extent
information held by the Respondent may reveal whether or not that has occurred
in the present case, should
be disclosed.
Applicant seeks an order that all remaining documents sought in the access
applications be disclosed and that the Respondent pay
the Applicant's
The Respondent's case
Respondent relies on affidavit evidence by Ms Gibson; Mr Sheehy; Professor
Martin; and Mr Paul Scimone, the Deputy Director of
UNSW's Institutional
Analysis and Reporting Office. Professor Martin and Mr Sheehy also attended the
hearing, gave evidence and were
cross-examined.
Ms Gibson's evidence
Gibson is the Head of Governance Support at UNSW. The Governance Support unit
administers a range of statutory and internal compliance
obligations, including
those under the
. Ms Gibson was the initial decision maker in relation
to the first and second access applications.
her affidavit affirmed on 13 May 2013 Ms Gibson outlined that steps she took in
relation to the first and second access applications
for the purpose of
determining those applications.
Gibson was not required for cross-examination at the hearing.
Mr Scimone's evidence
Scimone is the Deputy Director of the Institutional Analysis and Reporting
Office ("IARO") at UNSW. His accountabilities include
facilitating the
development, implementation, management and review of effective business
intelligence, forecasting, data analysis
systems and application development
systems to inform the executive of the strategic direction of UNSW. He also
guides business decisions
across all areas of business activity, including:
research, learning and teaching, recruitment and budgets. He assists the
of IARO to meet UNSW internal management reporting and external
statutory reporting of relevant data to State and Federal Government
Departments.
Scimone is responsible for managing the system development, implementation and
maintenance of the CATEI process. In his affidavit
sworn 14 May 2013 Mr Scimone
provided a detailed outline of the process. He described that content of the
survey as follows:
In each CATEI survey, students are invited
a) provide their answers to up to 10 'multiple choice' questions relating to
the course they have just completed (or are about to
complete), using a 6 point
scale ranging from 'Strongly Agree' to 'Strongly Disagree', with an additional
option of 'N/A'; (Rating
scale Items) and
b) provide 'freeform' comments in response to 2 further questions within each
survey (Open-ended Items), namely:
The best features of this course [or lecturer's or tutor's teaching] were';
'This course [or lecturer's or tutor's teaching] could be improved by.'
Students are not in any way guided as to the way in which they should answer
the 10 Rating Scale Items and are not in any way restricted
as to the content of
the written comments they can provide in response to the Open-ended Items.
Accordingly, through their written
comments, students can provide feedback on
any aspect of a course or its teaching (or individual teachers), and they can be
as specific
or as general as they want to be.
The completion of CATEI surveys at UNSW is voluntary. However, students are
strongly encouraged by their lecturers and tutors to complete
CATEI surveys and
to provide honest answers when they do so, in the expectation that their
comments will not be able to be used against
them, will be treated
confidentially and will not be disseminated outside UNSW. The email that is sent
to students prior to completing
an online survey ... states the following:
"Please be assured that all individual responses to the surveys are
confidential and will only be reported in aggregated form. Your
response cannot be identified."
There are 4 types of CATEI surveys:
Form A: Course Evaluation, which is used for the overall course evaluation
(Form A Survey);
Form B: Large Group Teaching Evaluation, which is used for evaluating the
large group teaching component of a course (such as lectures)
Form C: Small Group Teaching Evaluation, which is used for evaluating the
small group teaching component of a course (such as tutorials)
(Form C Survey);
Form D: Studio/design based Teaching, which is used for evaluating the
studio/design based teaching component of a course (as applicable)
As the names of the different forms suggest, a Form A Survey is focused on
collecting feedback in relation to the course itself, whereas
Forms B, C and D
Surveys are focused on collecting feedback on the teaching of the courses.
However, all four types of form contain
up to 10 Rating Scale Items and the two
Open-ended Items.
A Form A Survey has 8 standard questions (questions 1-7 and 10) that form
part of the survey each time the survey is administered,
and 2 questions
(questions 8 and 9) that can be varied. Forms B, C and D Surveys have 7 standard
questions (questions 1-6 and 10)
and 3 variable questions (questions 7, 8 and
Once students have submitted their completed CATEI surveys (either in hard
copy form or online, as applicable), the completed surveys
are provided to IARO
for analysis and collation. IARO then uploads the data obtained from the surveys
onto an internal UNSW database,
and produces what is known as a CATEI 'summary
report' (Summary Report). A Summary Report is usually a 1 or 2 page document
In addition to producing the Summary Report, IARO also produces, in relation
to each CATEI survey, a separate document that contains
the 'free-form' comments
(in an aggregated form) that have been provided by respondents to the 2
Open-ended Items in each survey
(Student Comments').
Once a Summary Report is prepared by IARO, IARO sends an automated email to
selected members of staff (who I refer to as Viewers)
to inform them that they
can access the applicable Summary Report and Student Comments document via the
CATEI or myUNSW internet
portal. The portal can only be accessed by Viewers
using their unique staff login ID and password. ... The identity of Viewers is
determined by the relevant School's CATEI administrator. The Summary Report and
Student Comments document is only made available
to the following Viewers:
The UNSW course convenor for the relevant course and the School/Faculty CATEI
administrator (in the case of CATEI Form A); and
The UNSW lecturers/tutors who taught the courses that were evaluated in the
particular survey (for CATEI Forms B, C and D).
The relevant UNSW Head of School, Associate Dean (Education) and the Dean of
the Faculty in which the course is taught and owned (who
all form part of the
course convenor's/tutor's/lecturer's line management), as well as any other
Viewers from the School (School
Viewers) or Faculty (Faculty Viewers) (generally
Executive Officers to the Head of School, Associate Dean (Education) and the
are also able to view Summary Reports and Student Comments that relate to
courses taught and owned in their School or Faculty, however
they may not
necessarily be sent the documents as a matter of course. In addition, senior
central administrative staff from the Division
of Deputy Vice-Chancellor
(Academic), IARO, and UNSW Learning and Teaching Unit are able to access and
view all CATEI reports.
In all cases:
academic staff will have access only to CATEI survey data relating
specifically to their course or teaching;
Heads of School and School Viewers will only have access to data specific to
courses and teachers within their School; and
Deans, Associate Deans (Education), and Faculty Viewers will only have access
to data specific to courses and teachers within their
In addition to staff members accessing CATEI data, a very small number of
students are able to access a discrete amount of the data
obtained from the
answers to the Rating Scale Items in relation to Form A surveys, specifically
those students who were enrolled
in the relevant course that has been surveyed.
Those students are only able to access the Summary Reports that relate to
Form A Surveys (Form A Summary Report). The students are not able to
access any Student Comments document relating to the course,
and cannot access
any Summary Reports or Student Comments relating to Forms B, C or D Surveys.
Students are able to access the Form
A Summary Report via their myUNSW account
(which requires students to log in using their unique login ID and password).
A Summary Report is available for viewing by students of the course for
a period of about 1 month after it has been prepared by IARO.
Scimone stated that he is of the view that disclosure of the CATEI information
(except for the summary information in respect of
Form A surveys to students who
undertook the relevant course that is the subject of the survey) is likely to
prejudice the frequency
of the completion of CATEI surveys and therefore the
provision of the feedback contained in them. In that way, the amount of
information
which informs how UNSW structures and improves its courses, and on
which it liaises with its academic staff with a view to improving
courses, may
well decrease.
cross-examination Mr Scimone stated that the 2012 CATEI Form A had been released
in full. He stated that while he had given
Ms Gibson the freehand comments,
those comments have not been released. He accepted that it is possible that the
CATEI information
might be available from the internet.
Professor Martin's evidence
Martin is the Vice-President and Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic) at UNSW. One
of his accountabilities is to ensure that
the quality of teaching and learning
within UNSW is improved.
Martin stated that CATEI surveys provide one way that teaching is evaluated at
UNSW. Through that process UNSW and its academic
teaching staff are able to
obtain voluntary and anonymous feedback from their students on the students'
perception of the quality
of their teaching and their courses. Its overall
purpose is to facilitate enhancement of student learning through the continual
improvement
of courses and teaching.
his affidavit sworn 13 May 2013 Professor Martin stated:
information that is provided by students through the CATEI process is based on
their perception of the quality of the course and
its teaching, and is therefore
highly subjective. Students are encouraged to give honest and open answers in
response to the survey
questions in the expectation that their answers will be
treated confidentially and that they will not be able to be identified. Students
are not restricted in any way in how they can respond to CATEI surveys. Whilst
this is important to ensuring that the best possible
and sometimes does mean that students provide comments that may be insulting and
offensive to staff members
and/or potentially defamatory of them. On occasion
such comments include mention of other students. It can also mean that highly
personal information is disclosed about teaching staff. For all of the above
reasons, I believe that the data that is provided by
students through the CATEI
process should be treated as strictly confidential information and should only
be accessible to those
faculty senior management who have a role overseeing those people. I do not
believe that the information should be made available to anyone other than the
individual course convenors, individual teaching staff
who are being evaluated,
and their line management (namely the relevant Head of School, Associate Dean
(Education) and Dean of the
However, I also think it is appropriate that students who undertook the
relevant course that is being assessed are allowed to access
summary statistical
data about the course that is produced as a result of the CATEI process. But
apart from that, and for the reasons
set out above and below, I do not believe
that those students (or anyone else, apart from those people I have identified
above) should
be allowed to access comments that have been made by students
the delivery of academic services by UNSW.
I am of the view that (apart from the summary statistical data referred to
above), if UNSW were required to make any of the information
it obtains from
students through the CATEI process publicly available (including available to
students), it would be likely to have
the following effects:
It would prejudice the supply to UNSW of frank and honest answers by
students, if they feel there is a risk that their comments might
identify them.
As a result, it could prejudice the effectiveness of the CATEI process and of
UNSW's teaching functions, as UNSW's
teaching functions are dependent on the
continued feedback provided by students as part of the CATEI process for its
improvement;
It would result in the disclosure of information that has been provided by
students to UNSW in the expectation that the information
would be treated by
UNSW confidentially;
It would reveal confidential information about staff of UNSW, in the event
that comments are made about staff in a Students Comments
document that identify
a member of staff;
Given that UNSW staff members are identified by name in CATEI Forms B, C and
D, disclosure of those forms would reveal the staff member's
information. The Student Comments would also reveal opinions and other personal
information about the staff members;
A public disclosure of students' opinions about members of academic staff and
their perceived abilities as teachers might also be
prejudicial to the
individual staff member's legitimate professional and other interests. This is
because it may affect their ability
to gain academic positions or promotions
(either within UNSW or at other institutions), attract funding for their
academic (including
research) interests, collaborate with other academics and
publish journals and other papers, which are all critical to an academic's
livelihood; and
I consider that disclosing CATEI information may compromise the ability of
academic staff to most effectively work within the University
environment, and
therefore prejudice the effective exercise by UNSW of its core functions.
his affidavit sworn 4 June 2013 Professor Martin stated
The University's approach to the information it obtains from students via the
CATEI process is that it treats that information confidentially
and does not,
either as a routine matter or otherwise, disseminate that information to
students (with the exception of the summary
statistical data that is made
available to students of a particular course ... or to the public at large. Nor
does it make the information
generally available within the University
The fact that a very small number of CATEI-related material may have
historically been made publicly available by what appears to
be a very small
number of UNSW academic staff should, in my view, be placed in the context of
the University as a large academic
institution that employs thousands of
academic staff and offers a very large number of courses each year. The fact
that certain academics
may take the view that it is appropriate for them to make
CATEI information relating to their courses or teaching publicly available
not change my view that the data that is provided to UNSW by students through
the CATEI process should be treated by UNSW as
confidential information. I
believe the correct approach is that (with the exception of the summary
statistical CATEI data that is
made available to the students of a particular
course) the information obtained by the University through the CATEI process
only be made accessible by the University to those who are responsible
for running and teaching the courses that have been assessed
and those within
senior management who have a role overseeing those people.
The purpose of the CATEI process is to obtain information that can then be
used to improve the quality of UNSW's courses and the quality
teaching. If an individual academic chooses to disclose to future students the
results of past CATEI surveys (in a way
that is not capable of identifying the
students who provided the information) for the purpose of demonstrating how the
lecturer will
use the information to improve the quality of their courses and
teaching, I do not believe that is inappropriate. However, the choice
disclose the information is and must be made solely by the individual academic
concerned, not by the University, and to my knowledge
only a very few academics
choose to disclose the information.
The results that are obtained by UNSW through the CATEI process are not used
by UNSW as a disciplinary or ranking measure. Given that
the information
obtained through the CATEI process is based on students' subjective opinions
from their own perceptions, I do not
believe that it is appropriate that the comments and other data be used as a
disciplinary measure.
For the same reasons, I do not believe that it would be
appropriate for the information to used by others to 'rank' teachers, and
believe this may result if the CATEI information were to become publicly
accessible.
relation to the withheld emails, Professor Martin stated that he has reviewed
each of those emails and that he supports the decision
not to disclose them. He
In summary, the emails contain:
Opinions expressed by several academics about individual students' (including
but not limited to [AQJ's]) work and their progress
in the course, and students'
perceived ability to successfully complete the course. They represent
consultation between staff about
those issues. (I refer to an email from [Ms M]
to [Ms S] dated 24 August 2012; I also refer to an email from [Ms S] to [Ms M]
August 2012 and an email from [Ms S] to [Ms M] dated 21 September 2012);
A written update (dated 21 September 2012) provided by one academic ([Ms M])
to another ([Ms S]) following a meeting with [AQJ] and
a request for advice on
how to manage [AQJ's] progress in the course (I refer to an email from [Ms S] to
[Ms C] dated 24 September
2012, and email from [Ms C] to [Ms S] dated 24
September 2012);
A confidential opinion expressing an academics' preliminary view as to the
mark that [AQJ] should receive in relation to an examination
that he undertook
as part of his course, based on the academies review of the work (I refer to an
email from [Ms S] to [Ms C] dated
7 November 2012);
Draft marks and comments contained in assessment sheets relating to items of
assessment that had been submitted by [AQJ], and a request
for additional
comments (I refer to an email from [Ms S] to [Ms C] dated 11 December 2012);
A confidential and detailed written summary of issues relating to [AQJ's]
progress in [the course] sent in an email (attaching a document)
from [Ms S] to
[Ms C] dated 19 December 2012;
Comments on how items of assessable work submitted by [AQJ] were assessed and
in relation to communications between an academic staff
member ([Ms C]) and the
lawyer for [AQJ], about [AQJ's] academic progress (I refer to an email [Ms S] to
[Ms C] and [Mr P] dated
21 December 2012; I also refer to an email from [Ms S]
to [Ms C] dated 7 January 2013); and
Comments and communications from academic staff to other academic staff in
response to communications sent by [AQJ's] lawyer, for
the purpose of informing
a response to the lawyer (I refer to an email from [Ms S] to [Ms C] and [Mr P]
dated 21 December 2012; I
also refer to email from [Ms S] to [Ms C] dated 5
January 2013; I also refer to an email from [Mr F] to [Ms C] dated 14 January
The assessment of students' work is a core part of the University's
functions. Assessment is not carried out through an automated
process, but by
staff of the University applying their own education, knowledge, training and
experience to the work that is submitted
and evaluating whether or not it meets
the assessment criteria for that piece of work. Confidential consultation and
deliberation
between staff are in my opinion a central part of that process.
I believe it is an important part of the assessment process at UNSW that
academic staff not only apply their own knowledge and perspective
to individual
assessment items, but also communicate with, and seek views from, other academic
staff before they assess an individual
student's work.
Partly for this reason, students' work at UNSW is often assessed by a number
of staff members forming a panel to perform a collective
assessment of a
student's work, especially for those assessments where students are required to
make verbal presentations of their
The deliberative process that takes place when academics discuss and provide
their own comments on students' work is important as
it ensures that individual
viewpoints are tested and allows for more than just one perspective to be given
to a student's work and
more than one just one critique to be applied to it. For
this reason, anything that may potentially prevent or hinder that deliberative
process could critically affect the quality and outcomes of student
assessment.
I consider that academic staff of UNSW should be allowed to freely and
professionally express and seek opinions about students' progress,
preliminary views of the marks students should attain for assessments and their
view of students' ability, in the expectation
that those views will be
communicated and treated in confidence. If such views and opinions were to be
made publicly available, I
believe it would have the potential to result in a
less rigorous deliberative process. Further it will discourage academics from
engaging in such a process in the first place, which in my opinion would be
detrimental to academic standards at UNSW.
Based on my experience, I also believe that it is important to the effective
functioning of the University that academic staff members
be allowed to provide
advice to their colleagues for the purpose of informing responses to students
and their representatives, in
the expectation that such views will be treated
confidentially and will not be subject to public exposure. If there is a risk
such advice might be disclosed, this may have the effect of making staff
members reluctant to express their views and provide assistance
colleagues when such assistance is requested. That outcome would also in my view
be detrimental to the delivery of student
outcomes within UNSW environment.
his affidavit sworn 4 June 2013 Professor Martin stated
I have reviewed each of the emails that UNSW has withheld from disclosure to
the applicant in respect of his GIPA Application. In
my view, there is nothing
in the emails to show that the applicant was treated inappropriately by the
academic members of staff of
the Faculty ... Rather, they show evidence of
professional consideration of the performance of both the applicant and the
other students
of the course as a whole.
cross-examination Professor Martin stated that he considered the factors in
favour of release of the withheld material. In his
opinion material relating to
a student's grades should be released. He further stated that he is of the view
that the Applicant should
have access to the material he seeks unless the
release would interfere with the proper operation of the university. The emails
issue involved discussion about the academic performance of the class.
Professor Martin stated that he considered that in setting
assessment and
standards it is important that academics can discuss class performance.
Martin agreed that the Applicant's concerns relating to an allegation of
plagiarism was a factor in favour of disclosure
of documents relating to that
issue. He acknowledged that some CATEI forms from 2012 have been released to
students and accepted
that it is probable that the students who had received
that information would have disclosed it to others. However, he did not accept
that the information should be released to the Applicant. He stated that it is
necessary to have a consistent approach with respect
to quality control. In his
opinion it is important to act in accordance with the agreement that was reached
with the academic staff
and students. He maintains this view notwithstanding the
possibility that the information may be readily obtained by an internet
Martin agreed that information should be released unless there is a good reason
to not release it. He contends that the
Respondent has established that good
reasons exist to not release the withheld material.
Mr Sheehy's evidence
Sheehy is employed by UNSW as an Assistant University Solicitor in UNSW's Legal
Office. In that position he provides advice in
the capacity of an in-house legal
counsel. Throughout his employment with UNSW, he has held a current practicing
certificate and
has been entitled to practice as a solicitor in
his affidavit sworn on 28 May 2013 Mr Sheehy stated that from time to time he
receives direct requests for advice from University
employees in relation to
legal issues affecting the University, its staff, and/or its students. He
receives instructions from both
academic and non-academic employees of the
University.
relation to the conduct of his legal practice Mr Sheehy stated:
I see my role as Assistant University Solicitor to provide independent and
professional legal advice to UNSW and to manage, in an
independent way,
litigation for UNSW. I am conscious of my ethical obligations as a solicitor in
the giving of advice to UNSW and
in the conduct of litigation for UNSW.
I carry out my role on the basis that:
I am an officer of, and owe duties to, the Supreme Court of New South
I am required to be professionally detached in the giving of advice to UNSW
and in the conduct of litigation for UNSW.
The legal advice I give is confidential to UNSW and subject to legal
professional privilege. For this reason, I will often (but not
always) write
"Privileged and Confidential" on documents and emails I create, and sometimes
advise recipients not to forward the
document or email to anyone outside of
I am to give legal advice to UNSW in the same way as an external lawyer would
provide legal advice to UNSW.
My employment with UNSW does not influence the nature or content of legal
advice I give to UNSW.
I do not regard my employment as being in jeopardy if I was to give advice to
UNSW that was contrary to the wishes of UNSW (although
such a circumstance has
not arisen in my employment with UNSW).
In my role as Assistant University Solicitor I do not make (and have not
made) commercial or operational decisions in light of the
advice I give to UNSW
or the litigation I manage for UNSW. It is the responsibility of those employees
to whom I give the relevant
advice to make such decisions.
The Legal Office opens and maintains its own files in relation to the matters
upon which it provides advice (Legal Files). When such
Legal Files are opened,
they are marked as 'Restricted - Legal-in-Confidence'. Access to the documents
that are contained in Legal
Files is restricted to persons who work within the
Legal Office (as well as members of UNSW's Records and Archives Office, for
administrative
relation to the instructions he received from Ms C, Mr Sheehy
On or about 10 January 2013, I was contacted by telephone by
a woman who identified herself as [Ms C]. She said words to the effect
needed some advice from the Legal Office in relation to a matter involving a
UNSW student (whom she identified as the applicant),
and requested a meeting
with me to discuss the same. We arranged to meet later that day. Shortly
following her telephone call, she
sent me an email which contained some
background information for me to review ahead of our meeting later that day.
Later on or about the same day, I had a meeting with [Ms C] in my office,
during which she sought and I provided advice to her on
various matters relating
to legal aspects of her dealings with the applicant and the lawyer who was
acting on his behalf.
From on or about 11 January to on or about 14 January 2013, I exchanged
numerous emails with [Ms C] in relation to the matters upon
which she sought my
advice. The emails contained either legal advice I provided to [Ms C] or
requests for legal advice from her.
In providing advice to [Ms C] in respect of the matter involving the
applicant, I did so in my capacity as the Assistant University
Solicitor ...
Shortly after providing the advice to [Ms C] referred to above, I caused a
Legal File to be opened in relation to the advice I had
given to [Ms C], and the
documents and communications that related to that advice were thereafter placed
on that Legal File.
relation to the instructions he received from the SCAO, Mr Sheehy
On or about 22 January 2013, I attended a meeting with Ms Kirby [the head of
UNSW's Legal Office] and Mr Ken Bright in Ms Kirby's
office. I am aware that Mr
Bright is the University's Student Conduct and Appeals Officer (SCAO). During
the meeting, Mr Bright informed
Ms Kirby and I that a complaint had been made by
the applicant under the University's Student Complaint Procedure (Student
Complaint).
I recall that at or shortly after that meeting Mr Bright showed me a
copy of a letter that had been sent to him by Mr Luke Aiken
of Thomsons Lawyers
dated 16 January 2013, which set out the Student Complaint.
In or about the period 22 January to 21 February 2013, Mr Bright requested
advice from Ms Kirby and I for the purpose of his investigation
of the Student
Complaint. Mr Bright also requested advice from Ms Kirby and I for the purpose
of responding to communications he
had received from Mr Aiken as part of that
investigation. I provided legal advice to Mr Bright in response to his requests
context. That advice was either in an oral form or contained in emails I
sent to Mr Bright. ...
In providing advice to Mr Bright in respect of the Student Complaint, I did
so in my capacity as the Assistant University Solicitor
and on the basis set out
Shortly after they were created, I caused my versions of the documents and
communications that related to the advice requested by
and provided to Mr Bright
in respect of the Student Complaint to be placed on the Legal File I had opened
after being consulted by
Sheehy identified a number of emails which fall within the scope of the
Applicant's access applications and which Mr Sheehy asserts
are subject to legal
privilege. He stated that the documents include a number of emails received or
sent by either Mr Sheehy or Ms
Kirby in the context of providing advice to Ms C
and Mr Bright. To his knowledge, none of the privileged emails have been
to the Applicant, or to anyone outside of UNSW.
Sheehy noted that although it is possible to be done, seeking to redact all of
the privileged communications that appear in those
documents, and leaving the
non-privileged communications, would render the documents devoid of meaningful
content, or would result
in the further disclosure of material that has already
been provided to the Applicant.
relation to the withheld privileged communications, Mr Sheehy identified the
subject matter of the communication and the basis
of the privilege claim. The
reasons he provided for the claim included the assertion that the communication
a request for
legal advice and a summary of previous advice;
a request for
legal advice;
a request for
legal advice and legal advice ;
a response to a
request for advice;
a response to a
request for legal advice and draft correspondence;
legal advice and
draft correspondence;
legal advice, a
response to legal advice and further information; or
information
provided for the purpose of obtaining legal advice
respect of those email threads already provided to the Applicant, Mr Sheehy
noted that the privileged communications contained
in them were redacted prior
to disclosure to the Applicant. Only the non-privileged parts of the email
threads have been disclosed.
Mr Sheehy stated that in those cases, it was
possible to produce the emails in a redacted form without depriving the
remaining, non-privileged,
content of particular substantive meaning in the
context of these proceedings. He identified the redacted material by reference
the withheld privileged communications.
Sheehy noted that the Applicant's solicitor had advised him that the Applicant
challenges the University's claim for legal professional
privilege. In relation
to that issue, Mr Sheehy was required for cross-examination. He oversees the
evaluation of academic staff
performance and promotion at UNSW.
cross-examination Mr Sheehy agreed that some of the withheld material in
relation to which legal privilege has been asserted
contain advice about
procedures but stated that they did not contain advice about policy. He stated
that he had given advice to Ms
C in relation to legal issues relevant to her
response to the Applicant's solicitor. These included considerations regarding
legislation.
Sheehy agreed that he had provided advice to Mr Bright and also agreed that Mr
Bright was conducting an independent review. However
he denied that any conflict
existed because the advice he had provided to Mr Bright was in a different
Sheehy agreed that he had he had provided advice for mixed purposes and that in
his affidavit he had not given evidence that the
dominant purpose was
The Respondent's submissions
McLeod provided written submissions and also made oral submissions in relation
to the evidence given at the hearing.
McLeod submitted that the task of the Tribunal is to determine whether the
Respondent has discharged the burden to establish that
the factors against
disclosure outweigh those in favour of release of the withheld information.
submits that the public interest in disclosure is limited. It concerns one
student and one subject and involves sensitive information
of that one
relation to the withheld material in relation to which legal privilege has been
asserted Mr McLeod submitted that the Tribunal
should accept Mr Sheehy as a
witness of truth and should be satisfied that the dominant purpose was the
giving of legal advice. He
submitted that Mr Sheehy's evidence was to provide
the context in which the material was created. It is not necessary that he
the dominant purpose. He submitted that the legal privilege claim is
made out and that the legal privilege has not been waived.
his written submissions Mr McLeod submitted:
UNSW's position is that the privileged nature of the 21 communications
withheld based on its claim for legal professional privilege
is self-evident
from an inspection of those documents. It contends that with reference to the
parties to those communications, their
nature, and the circumstances in which
they were made, it is plain that a proper claim for legal professional privilege
made in respect of those documents. Accordingly, the conclusive
presumption of overriding public interest against disclosure pursuant
5 of Schedule 1 of the
applies to those documents. Again, the claim
relates to 21 documents, and if the challenge to the claim is pressed, it is not
anticipated
that the issue will be a difficult one for the Tribunal to resolve
once it inspects the relevant documentation in the light of the
UNSW's position is that the documents are plainly subject to a proper claim
of legal professional privilege by UNSW, and therefore
that the conclusive
presumption against disclosure contained in clause 5 of Schedule 1 to the
relation to the withheld emails, Mr McLeod submitted that Professor Martin's
evidence goes to the Respondent's position that academic
consultation is
important in a situation where a student's performance is borderline. Professor
Martin's evidence identified the
boundaries of what material should be released.
The Respondent's position is that transparency is preferable but where there is
reason to withhold material it should not be released.
his written submissions Mr McLeod submitted:
... if the Staff Emails in fact contain consultation or deliberation in
relation to the progress of a student (as UNSW contend they
do), the parties to
them are self-evidently involved in providing academic services in the Faculty
in which the applicant is a student.
UNSW contends that in relation to the Staff Emails and an application of the
required balancing exercise, any interest in disclosure
is significantly
outweighed by the factors weighing against disclosure. In relation to the
former, it is conceded that, as identified
in the decision of Ms Gibson on the
first GIPA application dated 4 March 2013, self-evidently, disclosure of the
documents may be
justified on the basis that "disclosure would contribute to
transparency in the University's processes for managing student progress
assessment".
However, with reference to the factors set out in the
balancing those factors against those in favour of disclosure, it is plain that
overall, the relevant factors weigh significantly
against disclosure of this
material. In particular, UNSW relies on the factors set out in clauses 1(e) and
1(f) of the
table, namely:
Clause 1(e) - reveal a deliberation or consultation conducted, or an opinion,
advice or recommendation given, in such a way as to
prejudice a deliberative
process of government or an agency; and
Clause 1(f) - prejudice the effective exercise by an agency of the agency's
A review of the Staff Emails reveals private and confidential exchanges
between staff about the academic progress of the applicant
(and in three cases
other students), and also (in respect of a small number of them) about the most
appropriate way in which to respond
to enquiries made on his behalf by his legal
representative. They are the very types of communications that, by their nature,
vital to be kept confidential and not be subject to student disclosure in
order to avoid compromising the process of deliberation
and consultation between
academic staff at a tertiary institution. It is UNSW's position that, as
confirmed by the affidavit of Professor
Martin (and the reasons set out by Ms
Gibson in respect of the
documents), disclosure of communications such as
those recorded in the Staff Emails (including but not limited to a scenario
or in which the academic progress of a student is in issue) would
compromise the very deliberative and consultative process which
is at the heart
of delivering student outcomes in a tertiary academic environment.
Specifically with reference to clause 1(f) of the
table, not only
would disclosure of the Staff Emails undermine the consultative process, but, in
doing so, it would prejudice the
effective exercise of the ultimate core
function which an academic institution is charged with delivering - namely, the
of academic services with a view to properly equipping students with
the skills required in a chosen field to embark on working life.
It is submitted that a logical reading of the Staff Emails in the light of
the statutory scheme set out in the
results in the balancing factors
weighing heavily in favour of nondisclosure of Staff Emails. In assessing the
Staff Emails against
, one should take a common sense approach and
be mindful that it is of course a reality of University life that from time to
students will be aggrieved by certain decisions affecting their academic
progress, and seek to review them. Importantly, there is
a process for that.
Following a process of further consultation and deliberation between academic
staff, a student may remain in
strong disagreement with an outcome - that has
happened in the instant case in relation to the applicant's enrolment in [the
Importantly however, the
removes emotion from decisions in
relation to disclosure by requiring that the decision must be made within an
objective framework
proscribed by the
in which the decision maker is
required to assess all of the relevant factors which objectively bear either for
or against disclosure
in applying the public interest test (with the factors
against being confined to those set out in the
table). When that
exercise is completed in relation to the Staff Emails, particularly in the
context of the affidavits of Professor
Martin (the second most senior
administrator at UNSW) and Ms Gibson, it is plain that the factors against
disclosure of the Staff
Emails outweigh the factors in favour of it.
It is submitted that the application for the remaining contentious documents
should be dismissed.
McLeod submitted that the withheld CATEI material contains the personal
information of the academics and that the release of the
material would give a
level of validity that was above that applicable to information available
through Facebook, Twitter and other
social media sources.
his written submissions Mr McLeod submitted:
In Ms Gibson's decision in relation to the
CATEI documents, she
identified two factors in favour of disclosure, being: that disclosure may
contribute to public discussion of
student perceptions regarding their learning
experience; and that disclosure may contribute to the public discussion of the
performance
of students.
The factors that she considered ultimately outweighed those in favour of
disclosure are those which are set out in clauses 1(d), 1(f),
1(g), 1(h), clause
3 (a), 3(b) and 4(d) of the
table. UNSW particularly relies on
clauses 1(d), 1(f), 1(g) and 3(a), namely:
Clause 1(d) - prejudice the supply to an agency of confidential information
that facilitates the effective exercise of that agency's
Clause 1(f) - prejudice the effective exercise by an agency of the agency's
Claude 1(g) - found an action against an agency for breach of confidence or
otherwise result in disclosure of information provided
to an agency in
confidence; and
Clause 3(a) - reveal an individual's personal information.
... Mr Scimone identifies that a central concern is the risk that disclosure
will compromise the confidential basis on which students
complete CATEI surveys,
and therefore decrease the level of information that UNSW receives by way of
also provides evidence of the importance of CATEI
information and its role in delivering student outcomes ... He identifies a
of factors as to its importance and in relation to his concerns if the
information is disclosed, including that: he, like Mr Scimone,
recognises that
unless the specific student feedback can be provided without fear of disclosure,
there is a risk that the information
will not be provided as readily; he draws
the logical link between the delivery of UNSW's ability to collect that
information and
the delivery of student outcomes, because the information
assists UNSW to improve and enhance the delivery of academic services;
identifies the prejudicial effect on UNSW and its staff if the identities of
staff members and comments about them are publicised
and distributed amongst the
University community (including the student population) and/or potentially to
the public ...
Significantly, the affidavits of Professor Martin and Mr Scimone disclose
that CATEI surveys are provided to students and answered
by them on the basis
that they are to be completed and treated confidentially. As to that, the email
which is sent to students inviting
them to complete the survey includes the
following content:
Dear Student,
Course and Teaching Evaluations are a vital part of the University of New
South Wales strategy to provide an excellent standard of
teaching. It enables to
monitor the impact of their teaching and it informs their efforts to improve
student learning.
Please be assured that all individual responses to the surveys are
confidential and will only be reported in aggregated form. Your
responses cannot be identified.
With thanks in anticipation,
Professor lain Martin
Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic)
Plainly, and with reference to clause 1(g) of the
table, the information
provided in response to the CATEI surveys is done in confidence, and the fact
that disclosure would be contrary
to that is a further particular factor
weighing against disclosure of the CATEI information that UNSW has not
Further, a large amount of information is provided in "free-form" responses,
meaning specific comments by individuals about academic
staff (whose identities
are apparent in Form B, C and D CATEI reports) are provided.
In the above setting, it is submitted the disclosure of the Form A
consolidated statistical information, but not the balance of the
Form A, B, C
and D CATEI information, strikes the right balance in respect of disclosure of
CATEI information. A student who undertakes
a relevant course is able to have
access as to a body of statistics about student appraisals of that course, but
not see what others
have said about an individual academic staff member (that
information being reserved for those in senior academic positions and/or
the relevant faculty in the University). As to that, the logical basis for the
disclosure of the Form A consolidated information,
but not information derived
from Forms B, C, or D (or the freeform Form A information) is grounded in a
distinction Mr Scimone identifies
in paragraph 20 of his affidavit, namely that
Forms B, C and D information relates to information specific to UNSW's lecturers
tutors, whereas Form A information is in respect of a course as a whole
(albeit that in raising the course has a whole, the Form
A free-form answers
have scope for specific responses to be provided about academics who teach in
the relevant course). Further,
Forms B, C and D typically identify (often in
pre-populated form) the particular academic in relation to whom the comments are
The names of the academics can also be disclosed in the students'
answers to the free-form questions as there is no restriction on
what students
can say in response to those questions.
It is also significant that once it is provided to UNSW by students, there is
very limited disclosure of the CATEI information by
UNSW, and that UNSW has
procedures in place to preserve the limitations on the publication and
distribution of that information.
The summary statistical Form A data can only
be accessed by students in the course that the information relates to, only
password protected access, and it is only made available to students for
around 1 month: see paragraph 21 of the Scimone affidavit.
Apart from that, it
is only certain staff and senior management with a connection to the course
under consideration who have access
to the information.
It is in the above context that UNSW contends that the
factors contained in clauses 1(d), 1(f), 1(g) and 3(a) outweigh any relevant
factors in support of disclosing that information.
The particular concern with
the clause 3(a) factor (in relation to the potential to reveal personal
information) is a concern not
just with the disclosure of a student's identity,
but importantly, the disclosure to the broader community (and the student
population)
of information in relation to academics which is provided
subjectively and without being tested.
Plainly, UNSW is operating in an environment where the delivery of its
service should be able to be informed by the provision, without
disclosure, of certain specific information in relation to its academic staff.
In the light of the factors referred to above,
the nondisclosure of the Form B,
C and D information and the Form A free-form information is appropriate in the
context of the evidence
of Professor Martin and Mr Scimone, and bearing in mind
the statutory scheme against which it should be assessed. The application
the remaining
documents should be dismissed.
Consideration
noted above, the issues which remain in dispute concern:
survey information;
ii. withheld emails;
iii. documents subject to a claim of legal privilege
CATEI survey information
is not in dispute that the CATEI survey information facilitates the effective
exercise of UNSW's functions. CATEI surveys are designed
to provide course
Students are not restricted from providing
opinions about their teachers. CATEI
surveys provide one way that teaching is evaluated at UNSW. Its overall purpose
is to facilitate
enhancement of student learning through improvement of courses
and teaching thereby giving UNSW a competitive advantage.
number of factors have been identified in favour of disclosure of the CATEI
survey information. It is common ground that disclosure
of the information may
contribute to the public discussion of student perceptions regarding their
learning experiences in the courses.
This could be of benefit to UNSW students
considering undertaking the courses and also to students who are considering
UNSW. A number of personal factor particular to the Applicant have
been identified and I am able to take these into account pursuant
. The Applicant has also identified the probability that at least
some of the CATEI information that is sought has already been provided
students and has made its way into social media outlets. I agree that this is
also a factor in favour of disclosure of the
CATEI survey
information.
public interest considerations against disclosure are those set out in the table
. These are not conclusively presumed to give rise
to an overriding public interest against disclosure. The Respondent has pointed
to a number of considerations against disclosure. In particular it relies on the
confidential nature of the CATEI survey process
and asserts that disclosure of
the information could result in the disclosure of information provided in
confidence and could prejudice
the supply of the information. The Respondent
further contends that the information might be defamatory, and disclosure might
damaging to the reputation and to the business or professional interests of
the teachers and of the University.
accept that if made out, these are factors for considerations against
disclosure.
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Camilleri (GD)
[2012] NSWADTAP
, at [24] and [25], the Appeal Panel noted the structured approach within the
to the question of whether an agency has properly refused acess. In
that regard the Appeal Panel said the following:
24 Putting to one
side the cases where a conclusive presumption is relied upon, the Act envisages
a two-step approach to the question
of whether information has been properly
25 The new Act has a more structured approach to the decision-making task
than was seen under the previous legislation. The agency
case for refusal must
rely on one or more of the
Table considerations. The Tribunal's task
is then to weigh that case against the factors favouring disclosure
mindful of the injunctions that appear in both
. It is important, in
our view, that the Tribunal proceed in the structured way reflected by these
provisions. The Table considerations
are concerned with systemic features of the
operation of government.
the Tribunal is satisfied that one or more of the public interest considerations
against disclosure in the table to
applies to the information in
issue, it must weigh those factors against the public interest considerations in
favour of disclosure,
to ascertain where the balance lies. In doing so, the
Tribunal must have regard to the general public interest in favour of disclosure
subsection 12(1)
and the requirements of
section 15.
Ultimately,
in determining where the balance lies between the competing interests, it 'is a
question of fact and degree, requiring
the weighing of competing matters, and is
a task that is not amenable to mathematical calculation': see
Hurst v Wagga
Wagga City Council
requirements were recently considered by Deputy President Higgins in
Australians for Sustainable Development Inc v Barangaroo Delivery
[2013] NSWADT 252.
The Deputy President stated at paragraphs [56]
56 The public interest considerations against disclosure
- generally
As set out above, the public interest considerations in cl 1 and cl 4 of the
table to subs 14(2) of the
are predicated with the words - 'could
reasonably be expected to' have the prescribed effect as set out in one or more
of the paragraphs
in each clause. It is accepted that these words are to be
given their ordinary meaning and 'require a judgement to be made by the
decision-maker as to whether it is reasonable, as distinct from something that
is irrational, absurd or ridiculous': see
Attorney-General's Department v
(1986) 10 FCR180, 64 ALR, per Bowen CJ and Beaumont J, at 190 and
106, as applied in
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of Treasury
Re Lobo and Department of Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] AATA 705
(2011) 124 ALD 238
, at [62] to [64] and [74],
Nature Conservation Council v
Department of Trade and Investment, Regional Infrastructure and Services (NSW)
[2012] NSWADT 195
Hurst v Wagga Wagga City Council
, at [56] and [57] and
Woodhouse v City of Sydney Council
[2012] NSWADT 95
57 The abovementioned remarks of Bowen CJ and Beaumont J, in
(supra), have been widely accepted. However, it is instructive to repeat their
observations in full:
[In] our opinion, in the present context, the words "could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the future supply of information" were
intended to receive
their ordinary meaning. That is to say, they require a judgment to be made by
the decision-maker as to whether
it is reasonable, as distinct from something
that is irrational, absurd or ridiculous, to expect that those who would
otherwise supply
information of the prescribed kind to the Commonwealth or any
agency would decline to do so if the document in question were disclosed
the Act. It is undesirable to attempt any paraphrase of these words. In
particular, it is undesirable to consider the operation
of the provision in
terms of probabilities or possibilities or the like. To construe
s 43(1)(c)(ii)
as depending in its application upon the occurrence of certain events in terms
of any specific degree of likelihood or probability
is, in our view, to place an
unwarranted gloss upon the relatively plain words of the Act. It is preferable
to confine the inquiry
to whether the expectation claimed was reasonably based
(see Kioa v Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
per Gibbs CJ and Mason J).
The majority of the Tribunal thought that an assessment of what was more
probable than than not was called for. As Woodward J has
pointed out, there are
difficulties in this approach for the legislature has chosen not to introduce
the notion of a "probable" result
(cf Ex parte White; In re White
[1885] UKLawRpKQB 8
(1985) 14 QBD
It is also unnecessary to consider whether an "even chance" or something
of that kind is needed. It is preferable to confine oneself
to the language of
the provision itself and to attempt to form an opinion, on the evidence, as to
what can reasonably be expected
to happen if disclosure occurs. In our opinion,
in departing from the terms of
s 43(1)(c)(ii)
and requiring the applicants to
establish a case on the balance of probabilities, the majority of the Tribunal
fell into error in
their construction of the provision.
[bold emphasis added]
58 In the same decision, at p 196, Sheppard J made the following remark:
... stringent though that test may be, it does not go so far as to require
the decision-maker to be satisfied upon a balance of probabilities
production of the document will in fact prejudice the future supply of
information.
59 Although
(supra), concerned the meaning of the term in
the context of s 43(1)(c)(ii) of the Commonwealth
Freedom of Information Act
, (FOI Act (Cth)), as I have indicated above, it has been accepted that
the term, as used in other exemptions in that Act, the exemptions
in Schedule 1
of the former NSW
Freedom of Information Act
1989 (FOI Act (repealed))
and in the table to subs 14(2) of the
, have the same meaning.
Cockcroft's
(supra) case was considered and applied in
Australia Pty Ltd v Public Interest Advocacy Centre
[1992] FCA 241
(1992) 36 FCR 111
At 176, after reciting the abovementioned paragraphs from the decision
, the Court (per Davies, Wilcox and Einfeld JJ) said:
Their Honours did not suggest, as was submitted by Mr Bayne, that it was
sufficient that there be a possibility not irrational, absurd
or ridiculous that
the specified consequence would occur. Their Honours specifically rejected that
approach, saying that the words
"could reasonably be expected" meant what they
said. The practical application of their Honours' view will not necessarily lead
a result different from that proposed by Sheppard J.
In the application of
, there would ordinarily be material before
the decision-maker which would show whether or not the commercial value of the
information
would be or could be expected to be destroyed or diminished if the
information were disclosed. It would be for the decision-maker
to determine
whether, if there were an expectation that this would occur, the expectation was
reasonable.
... the question under
is not whether there is a reasonable basis
for a claim for exemption but whether the commercial value of the information
could reasonably
be expected to be destroyed or diminished if it were disclosed.
These two questions are different. The decision-maker is concerned,
not with the
reasonableness of the claimant's behaviour, but with the effect of disclosure.
61 In my view, the approach adopted by their Honours above, remains the
correct approach in determining whether the disclosure of
information 'could
reasonably be expected to' have one or more of the effects as prescribed in the
clauses in the table to subs 14(2)
. That is, the inquiry is not
whether the occurrence of the prescribed effect is likely, possible or probable.
The inquiry is whether
the expectation of the claimed effect is reasonably based
(cf the approach in
Nature Conservation Council
(supra), at [179]).
62 The public interest considerations in favour of disclosure examples in
subs 12(2), I note, are also predicated with the words 'could
reasonably be
expected' to 'promote', 'enhance', inform' and 'insure' public discussion,
Government accountability etc. The term
'could reasonably be expected' in this
context must have the same meaning.
63 Clause 1(d) prejudice supply of confidential information
(supra) at [27] to [33], the Appeal Panel considered the
operation of the public interest consideration against disclosure in cl
the table of subs 14(2) of the
and said the following:
27 The approach to be adopted is similar to that commended by the Appeal
Panel under the previous legislation, there in connection
with cl 13(b)(ii). ...
Director General, Department of Education & Training v Mullett
[2002] NSWADTAP 13 (Mullett)
, the Appeal Panel said:
58 In our view cl 13(b)(ii) requires the Tribunal to engage in a relatively
abstract analysis. It must ask whether material of the
kind sought to be
protected on the present occasion would, if released, prejudice the supply of
similar material to government in
the future, as a matter of reasonable
expectation. That requires the Tribunal to characterise the nature of the
material sought to
be protected on the present occasion; to identify the extent
to which material of that kind can only be obtained, or can only reasonably
obtained, by confidential communication; the extent to which guarantees of
confidentiality may be necessary. We agree with the
dicta of Young CJ in Ryder v
[1985] VR 870
as to how a similar question arising under the Victorian FOI
Act's in-confidence exemption (whether disclosure would be reasonably
impair the ability of an agency to obtain information communicated in
confidence) should be approached. His Honour said
`The question then is, would disclosure of the information sought impair
(i.e. damage) the ability of the [agency] to obtain similar
information in
future. ... It may be noted that it is the ability of the [agency] that must be
impaired. The paragraph is not concerned
with the question whether the
particular doctor whose report is disclosed will give similar information in
future but with whether
the agency will be able to obtain such information. ...'
29 This approach was endorsed in many subsequent Tribunal and Appeal Panel
decisions. The same approach is required, as we see it,
in relation to many of
Table considerations. They squarely focus on considerations relating to
the conduct of the business of government. ...
31 In this case the Tribunal was required to form an opinion on whether
disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected
to have the effect of
prejudicing the supply to an agency of confidential information that facilitates
the effective exercise of
the agency's functions (cl 1(d)); or, ...
33 In our view, the question of whether the information supplied is
'confidential information' must be examined, primarily at least,
by reference to
the agency's evidence as to the conditions under which it conducts the service
within which the information was received.
64 As outlined above, for the cl 1(d) public interest consideration to apply,
the information in issue must not only be 'confidential
information', it must
also be information that facilitates the effective exercise of that agency's
65 The Tribunal has accepted that the word 'prejudice', in the context of the
public interest considerations against disclosure, is
to be given its ordinary
meaning, namely: 'to cause detriment or disadvantage': see
McLennan v University of New England
[2013] NSWADT 113
Sobh v Victoria Police
(1993) 1 VR 41.
66 Clause 1(e) reveal an opinion, advice, or recommendation so as to
prejudice a deliberative process of government or an agency
67 In order for this public interest consideration against disclosure to
apply, it is necessary to establish a connection between
the particular opinion,
advice or recommendation and the relevant deliberative process of the agency:
Van der Wall v University of Sydney
[2008] NSWADT 213
Re Waterford and Department of the Treasury (No 2)
[1984] AATA 67
(1984) 5 ALD 588
68 Clause 1(g) disclose information provided to the agency in
It is well established that even where information has not expressly been
provided to an agency in confidence, this can be inferred
from the circumstances
in which it was provided. ...
the circumstances of this matter I accept that provision of the CATEI
information facilitates the effective exercise of UNSW's
functions. I also
accept that students provide the CATEI information in confidence. While it
appears that individual teachers may
differ in the view that they take and the
use to which they put the CATEI information, the Respondent's public
representation to
students is an assurance that all individual responses to the
surveys are confidential.
also accept that the Respondent's policy is that there is to be very limited
disclosure of the CATEI information.
my view, the publication and distribution of the CATEI information could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the supply of information
by students in the
future, as they would no longer regard the survey process as confidential. That
being the case it is reasonable
to expect that students may be more guarded in
the comments that they make than if they understood the process to be
confidential.
This is turn could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
effective exercise of the agency's functions in that it could impact upon
useful mechanism for obtaining feedback from students and the benefits that flow
from obtaining that information.
the CATEI information were released to the Applicant, no restriction can be
placed on the uses to which he puts it. I am satisfied
that that the
table factors contained in clauses 1(d), 1(f), 1(g) would be made out if the
CATEI information were published and distributed.
accept that the CATEI information contains the personal information of some
academics and students i.e. students' opinions about
members of academic staff
and their perceived abilities as teachers. I also accept that disclosure of the
information could reasonably
be expected to reveal an individual's personal
information.
balance, it is my view that there are public interest considerations against
disclosure and that those considerations outweigh
the public interest
considerations in favour of disclosure in the form requested by the Applicant
i.e. a copy of the CATEI information.
it is also my view that the balance would not be against disclosure if the
Applicant were given access to view the CATEI
information rather than given a
copy of the information.
makes provision for the form in which access can be provided.
That section is in the following terms:
72 Forms of access
(1) Access to government information in response to an access application may
be provided in any of the following ways:
(a) by providing a reasonable opportunity to inspect a record containing the
information,
provides that where a decision is made to grant access to government
information, subject to the prescribed exceptions, that access
is unconditional.
subsection 73(2)
(2) A condition may be imposed
as to how a right of access may be exercised (such as a condition that prevents
an applicant making
notes from or taking a copy of a record that is made
available for inspection) but only to avoid there being an overriding public
interest against disclosure of the information.
my view, if access were granted on an inspection basis, with no right to obtain
a copy of the CATEI information, while an individual's
personal information
might be revealed, to a significant extent the confidentiality of the
information would be protected.
form of access would satisfy the Applicant's purpose in seeking the information
and would also preserve the limitations on the
publication and distribution of
that information. It should meet the Respondent's concern to not jeopardise
confidentiality of the
CATEI survey process and should not impact adversely on
the University's competitive advantage.
Applicant and/or his legal representative are to be given a reasonable
opportunity to inspect the withheld CATEI information in
a manner that does not
permit the copying of that information.
The withheld emails
Respondent contends that the public interest considerations in favour of
disclosure of the withheld emails are outweighed by the
public interest
considerations against disclosure.
number of factors have been identified in favour of disclosure of the withheld
emails. The parties to the emails are involved in
providing academic services in
the faculty in which the Applicant is a student. It is common ground that
disclosure would contribute
to transparency in the University's processes for
managing student progress and assessment.
noted above, number of personal factor particular to the Applicant have been
identified and I am able to take these into account
pursuant to
. The possibility that the emails may include exchanges between
staff teaching and assessing the Applicant, which may touch upon or
staffs' perceptions of the Applicant and may have affected his assessment is a
factor in favour of disclosure. Disclosure
might support or displace the
Applicant's contention that the Respondent has treated him
Applicant has referred to Mr Serov's determination that the Applicant may have
access to the 'Complaint File', which includes
withheld emails. The Applicant
contends that this is a factor in favour of disclosure of the emails.
relation to the Respondent's assertion that disclosure of the emails might
prejudice a deliberative process, it is relevant that
the alleged 'deliberation
or consultation' conducted has concluded.
Applicant has referred to the Respondent's assessment procedures and contends
that there is no policy or procedure that permits
consultation and deliberation
between staff. The possibility that the emails may reveal assessment policies
and procedures that have
been adopted and which differ from the published
policies and procedures is a factor in favour of disclosure of the emails.
Respondent identified a number of factors that it contends are to be weighed
against disclosure of the emails. In particular,
UNSW relies on the factors set
out in clauses 1(e) and 1(f) of the table to
section 14.
is UNSW's position that disclosure of the emails would compromise the
deliberative and consultative process that is at the heart
of delivering student
outcomes. It contends that disclosure would also prejudice the effective
exercise of the core function of delivering
academic services.
Martin's evidence provides a summary of the content of the emails. He also
expressed an opinion as to the deliberative process
that takes place when
academics discuss and comments on students' work. It is his view that disclosure
of the opinions of the academics
may potentially prevent or hinder that
deliberative process and could affect the quality and outcomes of student
assessment. He believes
that a less rigorous deliberative process could result
if such views and opinions were to be made publicly available. He also believes
that it would discourage academics from engaging in such a process in the first
place. Staff members might be reluctant to express
their views and provide
assistance to their colleagues when such assistance is requested, and that would
be detrimental to academic
standards at UNSW.
accept that these are public interest considerations against disclosure.
do not accept that disclosure of the emails could prejudice a deliberative
process, as that process has concluded. However, I do
accept that the disclosure
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the effective exercise UNSW's
functions. In my view, it is reasonable
to expect that academics might be
reluctant to express their views and provide assistance to their colleagues if
they were aware
that those views and comments could be made publicly. Failure to
comply with assessment policies is not a matter before this Tribunal
no further comment in relation to that assertion.
my opinion Professor Martin has provided a reasonable summary of the content of
the emails. As will be apparent from that summary,
the content of the emails
would not assist the Applicant in ascertaining how his work was assessed.
balance, it is my view that the public interest considerations against
disclosure outweigh the public interest considerations in
favour of disclosure
of the withheld emails.
follows, in my view, that the decision to refuse access to the withheld emails
was the correct and preferable decision.
Documents subject to a claim of legal privilege
provides that government information described in Schedule 1 of the
is to be conclusively presumed to give rise to a public interest
consideration against disclosure. Included in clause 5 of this Schedule
information that would be privileged from production in legal proceedings on the
ground of client legal privilege (legal professional
privilege) unless the
person in whose favour the privilege exists has waived the
the present case the Respondent's privilege claim is based on an asserted legal
advice privilege.
professional privilege arises from a lawyer/client relationship and applies to
"confidential communications" between the lawyer
(as legal advisor) and the
client where the dominant purpose
of the communication is either to
enable the legal advisor to give or the client to receive legal advice; or to be
used in pending
or contemplated proceedings. See
Esso Australia Resources Ltd
v Commissioner of Taxation
as affirmed in
Daniels Corp International Pty Limited v
Australia Competition & Consumer Commissioner
213 CLR 543.
privilege extends to advice which is of a non-legal character where that
non-legal advice is connected to the giving of legal
advice or for contemplated
or pending litigation and to copies of documents that are not privileged where
the copy is made for the
dominant purpose
of obtaining legal advice or
for use in pending or contemplated litigation (see
Australian Federal Police
v Propend Finance Pty Ltd
188 CLR 501 at 509, 550, 597).
privilege applies to confidential communications between government agencies and
their salaried legal officers provided they have
the necessary degree of
independence (see
Waterford v Commonwealth
at 62 and 73).
Chan v Department of Education and Training
NSWADTAP 7:
'The agency carries the onus of proof in
establishing that documents are exempt on the ground of legal professional
under s 61 of the FOI Act: 'the burden of establishing that the
determination is justified lies on the agency'. As Graham J said in
Corporation Ltd v Minister for Communications, Information Technology and the
Arts (No 2)
'It is for a party claiming privilege to show that the documents for which
the claim is made are privileged. He may succeed in achieving
this objective by
pointing to the nature of the documents or by evidence describing the
circumstances in which they were brought
into existence, but it should not be
thought that the privilege is necessarily or conclusively established by resort
to any verbal
formula or ritual. The Court has power to examine the documents
for itself, a power which has been exercised too sparingly in the
springing possibly from a misplaced reluctance to go behind the formal claim of
privilege. It should not be forgotten that
in many instances the character of
the documents the subject of the claim will illuminate the purpose for which
they were brought
into existence [various authorities cited].'
It is necessary to establish that in-house legal staff had the requisite
degree of independence to bring the affected documents within
the purview of
privilege, having regard to the principles laid down by the High Court in
Waterford v The Commonwealth of Australia
163 CLR 54.
While Gibbs CJ in
Attorney General (NT) v Kearney
158 CLR 500
at 510 was inclined to the view that the privilege
only be claimed by a lawyer who has been admitted to practice, the law is now
clear that the privilege
does extend a situation where a non-qualified
person, such as a law clerk, is giving advice subject to the supervision of a
practitioner:
see, for example,
Glengallan Inv P/L & Ors v Arthur
Andersen & Ors; Equuscorp P/L & Anor v Glengallan Inv P/L
per Williams JA at [19]; see also,
Southern Cross Commodities
Pty Ltd (In Liq) v Crinis
[1984] VicRp 61
VR 697 (Young
recently considered clause 5 of Schedule 1 to the
Hargreaves v
University of New England
[2013] NSWADT 233.
In that matter I noted at
paragraph [18]
The question arises as to whether the common law or
Evidence Act
provisions apply. Judicial Member Molony considered
this issue in the matter of
Fitzpatrick v NSW Office of Liquor and Gaming
[2010] NSWADT 72
and more recently in
Colefax v Department of Education and
Communities
[2013] NSWADT 75.
Colefax v Department of Education and
Communities
Director General, Attorney General's Department v Cianfrano (GD)
[2006] NSWADTAP 26
the Appeal Panel held that legal professional privilege for
purpose of the
Freedom of Information Act
1987 was legal professional
privilege at common law, rather than client legal privilege under Division 1 of
Evidence Act
Fitzpatrick v NSW Office of
Liquor and Gaming
[2010] NSWADT 72
I found that given the subsequent
enactment of
Evidence Act
that, at [70] -
... the test for whether a document would be "privileged from production in
legal proceedings on the ground of legal professional
privilege" in proceedings
in NSW courts, is now determined by the client legal privilege provisions in
Division 1 of
Evidence Act 1995
and not by the common law of
legal professional privilege.
That conclusion is not one with which all other members of the Tribunal have
agreed: see for example
McGuirk v University of New South Wales
NSWADT 169.
25 Since the commencement of the
there have been a number of
decisions dealing with the issue of client legal privilege, in which the issue
of whether the common
Evidence Act
provisions apply has not been
addressed. This is so because the conclusion would have been the same no matter
which law was applied.
26 For myself, I consider that the question of whether or not information is
privileged from production in legal proceedings on the
ground of client legal
privilege is to be determined by reference to the client legal privilege
provisions in Division 1 of
Evidence Act 1995
. This is so for
the reasons I gave in
Fitzpatrick
and because the legislature in the
has specifically referred to the term " client legal privilege," which is
that used in the
Evidence Act
. In contrast, the Freedom of Information
Act 1987 used the term legal professional privilege. The use of the
terminology in my view evidences an intention that those provisions
Hargreaves,
I agree with that view. In the circumstances of
this matter my conclusion would have been the same no matter which law is
the present matter I have been provided copies of the documents that are the
subject of the claim.
issue arose in regard to whether Mr Sheehy, as an in-house solicitor, had the
requisite degree of independence to bring the affected
documents within the
purview of privilege. On the evidence before me I have no doubt that Mr Sheehy
had the requisite degree of independence.
It is clear from the documents that he
was providing advice in a solicitor - client relationship. In my view, that was
the case in
regard to Mr Bright, notwithstanding the independent functions of
the SCAO. The SCAO is a unit within UNSW and as such Mr Bright
was entitled to
access the services of UNSW's Legal Office. If any privilege attaches to the
advice he received, then the Respondent
is entitled to assert a claim of legal
have considered the copies of the documents that are the subject of the claim.
In my view they clearly fall within the scope of
section 118
. In my view, it is information to which legal professional
privilege applies.
I am wrong that the Respondent is entitled to assert a claim of legal privilege
over SCAO documents and in fact the SCAO is the
client, then access application
seeking information held by the SCAO would be properly directed to the SCAO and
not the Respondent.
If that were the case then the information held by the SCAO
would not be within the scope of an access application directed towards
Respondent.
overriding context was clearly the provision of confidential legal advice from a
practising legal practitioner to the client.
am satisfied that the documents were created for the 'dominant purpose' of
giving or obtaining legal advice. I am also satisfied
that the advice was given
as independent advice. That is made plain from the contents of the documents.
has been no suggestion of an express waiver concerning the advice. I do not
accept that the provision of the communications
by Mr Sheehy to the SCAO
constitutes a waiver of privilege.
privilege claim is therefore justified. That being the case it is to be
conclusively presumed that there is an overriding public
interest against
disclosure of that information. The Tribunal has no discretion as to whether or
not there is an overriding public
interest against disclosure. The Applicant has
no statutory entitlement to be provided with government information where there
an overriding public interest against disclosure.
the circumstances, the correct and preferable decision is to refuse access to
the documents that are subject to a claim of legal
do not consider that an order for costs is warranted in the circumstances of
this matter.
1. The decisions are affirmed insofar as they relate to the refusal to
release documents that are the subject of a claim of legal
2. The decisions are affirmed in so far as they relate to the refusal to
release staff emails.
3. The decisions are set aside insofar as they relates to the refusal to
release CATEI information. In its place the decision is made
that the Applicant
is to be given a reasonable opportunity to inspect the withheld CATEI
information in a manner that does not permit
the copying of that
information.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (541 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter