URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/279.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority v Burwood RSL Club Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 279; (4 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority v Burwood RSL Club Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 279
Hearing Date(s):
25 July 2025
Date of Orders:
04 November 2025
Decision Date:
4 November 2025
Appeal Panel
A Britton, Deputy President
G Blake AM SC, Principal Member
(1) The Appeal is allowed.
(2) Order 1 made on 4 April 2025 is
set aside and the following order is substituted for it:
application for administrative review of the decision of the appellant notified
on 19 July 2024 to impose a condition that
gaming machines are to cease
operation by 2:00 am under
Liquor Act 2007
(NSW) on the club licence
held by the respondent is dismissed.”
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW — administrative review — approval to remove
club licence to new premises –whether decision to
impose conditions on
licence is an administrative reviewable decision
WORDS AND PHRASES —
meaning of “in relation to”
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1987 (NSW), ss 7, 9, 55,
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Gaming and Liquor Administration Act 2007
Gaming and Liquor Administration Regulation 2008
(NSW), cl 5B
Gaming and Liquor Administration Regulation 2016
(NSW), cl 7
Gaming and Liquor Administration Regulation 2024
(NSW), cll 2, 4,
Gaming Machines Act 2001
Interpretation Act 1987
Liquor Act 2007
Cases Cited:
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[2005] HCA 7
Independent
Liquor and Gaming Authority v Whitebull HTL Pty Ltd; Independent Liquor and
Gaming Authority v Area Hotel UT Pty Ltd;
Independent Liquor and Gaming
Authority v The Griffith Hotel Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 224
Kinsman v Independent
Liquor & Gaming Authority
[2023] NSWCATAD 335
Master Education Services
Ply Ltd v Ketchell
(2008) 236 CLR 101
[2008] HCA 38
O’Grady v Northern
Queensland Co Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 356
[1990] HCA 16
R v Ross-Jones; Ex parte
Green (1984) 156 CLR 185;
[1984] HCA 82
Wilson v Chan & Naylor Parramatta
Pty Ltd atf Chan & Naylor Parramatta Trust
[2020] NSWCA 62
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Note,
Gaming and Liquor Administration Amendment Bill 2015
Gaming and Liquor Administration Amendment Bill 2015
Principal judgment
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority (Appellant)
Burwood RSL Club Ltd
(Respondent)
Representation:
T Prince, S Hoare (Appellant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor (Appellant)
Pigott Stinson
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00168891
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
Burwood RSL Club Ltd v Independent Liquor & Gaming Authority
NSWCATAD 78
Date of Decision:
4 April 2025
K Ransome, Principal Member
File Number(s):
2024/00292937
REASONS FOR DECISION
September 2023, Burwood RSL Club Ltd (the Club) applied to the Independent
Liquor and Gaming Authority (the Authority) for approval
to remove its club
licence from the Club’s existing premises to proposed new premises on
George Street, Burwood. In June 2024,
the Authority approved that application,
and imposed several conditions on the Club’s licence, including that by
2:00 am the
Club cease operating gaming machines (the impugned condition). The
Club applied under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(ADR Act) to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal (NCAT) for
“administrative review” of the decision to impose
that condition
(the ADR application).
Authority requested the Tribunal to dismiss the ADR application, contending that
the decision to impose the impugned condition
was not an “administratively
reviewable decision”. The Tribunal rejected that argument and found it
had authority to
decide the ADR application:
Burwood RSL Club Ltd v
Independent Liquor & Gaming Authority
[2025] NSWCATAD 78
(the Dismissal
Authority appeals from the Dismissal Decision. The central question raised by
this appeal is whether the decision to impose the
impugned condition is an
administratively reviewable decision for the purpose of the ADR Act. For the
reasons given below the answer
to that question is no. Therefore, NCAT does not
have administrative review jurisdiction over that decision.
considering the issues arising for determination, we have set out or made
observations on the following matters:
(1) the key statutory provisions;
(2) the background to the Authority’s decision;
(3) the background to the appeal;
(4) the appeal; and
(5) the jurisdiction of the Appeal Panel.
The key statutory provisions
Liquor Act 2007
(NSW) contains provisions dealing with
the principal offences relating to the sale and supply of liquor.
deals with the requirement of a licence to sell liquor, and relevantly
7 Licence required to sell liquor
(1) A person must not sell liquor unless the person is
authorised to do so by a licence.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or imprisonment for 12 months, or both.
) contains preliminary provisions dealing with liquor
deals with the types of liquor licences and the
authorisation conferred by a liquor licence, and relevantly states:
10 Types of licences and authorisation conferred by
(1) The following types of licences may be granted and held
under this Act—
(b) club licence,
(2) A licence authorises the licensee to sell or supply liquor
in accordance with this Act and the conditions of the licence.
11 contains general provisions dealing with licence conditions, and
11 Licence conditions—general provisions
(1) A licence is subject to—
(a) such conditions as may be imposed, or are taken to have
been imposed, by the Authority or the Secretary (whether at the time
the licence
is granted or at any later time) under this Act, and
(b) such conditions as are imposed by this Act or prescribed by
the regulations, and
(c) such other conditions as are authorised to be imposed on
the licence under this Act.
(1A) (Repealed)
(2) A licensee must comply with any conditions to which the
licence is subject.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or imprisonment for 12 months, or both.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a condition to which a
licence is subject includes any provision of this Act that imposes a requirement
or restriction (other than as an offence) on or in relation to the licence,
licensee or licensed premises concerned.
The times during which licensed premises are authorised to trade is an example
of such a requirement.
11A, 12A and 12B specifies conditions on all types of liquor licences.
3 Division 3 (ss 18-20) contains provisions dealing with club licences. Section
20 specifies conditions on all club licences.
4 Division 1 (ss 40-47) contains provisions relating to licence applications and
granting of licences. Section 44 provides for
the making of submissions to the
Authority in relation to licence applications, and relevantly states:
44 Submissions to Authority in relation to licence
applications
(2) If any such submission is made to the Authority, the
Authority is to take the submission into consideration before deciding
or not to grant the licence.
45 deals with decisions made by the Authority in relation to licence
applications, and relevantly states:
45 Decision of Authority in relation to licence
applications
(1) The Authority may, after considering an application for a
licence and any submissions received by the Authority in relation
application, grant the licence or refuse to grant the licence. The Authority may
determine the application whether or not
the Secretary has provided a report in
relation to the application.
4 Division 2 (ss 48-58) contains miscellaneous provisions relating to licences
and licence-related authorisations. Section 53
confers power on the Authority to
impose, vary or revoke licence conditions, and relevantly states:
53 Authority may impose, vary or revoke licence
(1) Without limiting any other provision of this Act, the
Authority may at any time—
(a) on application by the Secretary or the Commissioner of
(b) on the Authority’s own initiative,
impose conditions on a licence.
(2) The Authority may at any time—
(a) on application by the licensee, the Secretary or the
Commissioner of Police, or
(b) on the Authority’s own initiative,
vary or revoke a condition of a licence that has been imposed (or taken to have
been imposed) by the Authority under this Act.
(4) The Authority must not impose a condition on a licence
after it has been granted, or vary or revoke a condition that has been
(or taken to have been imposed) by the Authority, unless the Authority
(a) given the licensee a reasonable opportunity to make
submissions in relation to the proposed decision, and
(b) taken any such submissions into consideration before making
the decision.
4 Division 3 (ss 59-64) contains provisions dealing with licence removals and
transfers. Section 59 deals with the removal of
licence to other premises, and
relevantly states:
59 Removal of licence to other premises
(1) A licensee may apply to the Authority for approval to
remove the licence to premises other than those specified in the licence.
(3) An application for approval to remove a licence to other
premises is to be dealt with and determined by the Authority as if
application for the granting of a licence in respect of those other premises.
Accordingly, the provisions of Division
1, in particular, extend to an
application for the removal of a licence to other premises as if it were an
application for a licence.
ADR Act and relevant enabling legislation
ADR Act provides for the circumstances in which the Tribunal has administrative
review jurisdiction over a decision of an administrator:
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act), s 30(1).
ADR Act defines an administratively reviewable decision to be a decision of an
administrator over which the Tribunal has administrative
review jurisdiction: s
7(1); see also NCAT Act, s 30(3).
has administrative review jurisdiction over a decision, or class of decisions,
of an administrator if enabling legislation provides
that applications may be
made to the Tribunal for administrative review: ADR Act, s 9(1).
this appeal the relevant enabling legislation is
Liquor Administration Act 2007
(GLA Act) read with cl 7 of the
Gaming and Liquor Administration Regulation 2016
(NSW) (2016 GLA
Regulation).
13A of the GLA Act provides for a review by the Tribunal of certain decisions of
the Authority, and relevantly states:
13A Review by NCAT of certain decisions of Authority
(1) A relevant person who is aggrieved by a decision of the
Authority in relation to an application made under a provision of the
liquor legislation prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
prescribed application
) may apply to NCAT for an
administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
of that decision.
(5) In this section,
relevant person
in relation
to a prescribed application means—
(a) the applicant, or
(b) a person—
(i) who was required to be notified of the prescribed
application, and
(ii) who made a submission to the Authority or the Secretary in
respect of the prescribed application.
7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation, which commenced on 12 August 2016 and was repealed
on 1 September 2024, dealt with administratively
reviewable decisions, and
7 Administratively reviewable decisions
For the purposes of section 13A of the Act, the following applications made on
or after 1 March 2016 are prescribed—
(a) an application for the granting or removal under the
(i) a hotel licence, or
(ii) a club licence, or
(iii) an on-premises licence that relates to a public
entertainment venue (other than a cinema or a theatre), or
(iv) a packaged liquor licence (other than a packaged liquor
licence that is limited to the sale of liquor only by means of taking
over the telephone, by facsimile or mail order, or through an internet site),
(b) an application for an ongoing extended trading
authorisation in relation to a licence referred to in paragraph (a) that would
result in trading after midnight,
(c) an application to vary or revoke a condition of a licence
imposed by the Authority that would result in trading after midnight,
relation to a licence referred to in paragraph (a) (i)–(iii),
(d) an application to increase a gaming machine threshold under
Gaming Machines Act 2001
that is required to be
accompanied by a class 2 LIA under
of that Act,
(e) an application specified in clause 6 in respect of which a
delegation given by the Authority to a designated Public Service
employee to
exercise the Authority’s decision-making function is in force.
2024 GLA Regulation
Gaming and Liquor Administration Regulation 2024
(NSW) (2024
GLA Regulation) contains preliminary provisions. Clause 2 states that the 2024
GLA Regulation commences on 1 September
2024. Clause 4 is in substantially
identical terms to cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation. Clause 10 deals with
savings, and states:
An act, matter or thing that, immediately before the repeal of the
Liquor Administration Regulation 2016
, had effect under that regulation
continues to have effect under this regulation.
The background to the Authority’s decision
4 September 2023, the Club lodged several applications with the Authority,
including for:
(1) approval to remove the Club’s licence from the Club’s existing
premises in Shaftesbury Road Burwood to proposed new
premises (the new premises)
(the licence removal application);
(2) an extended trading authorisation under
(3) approval to transfer of gaming machine entitlements to the new premises
Gaming Machines Act 2001
(NSW) (GM Act).
9 April 2024, the Authority prepared a Recommendation Paper with respect to the
Club’s applications (the 9 April 2024 Recommendation)
which recommended
that the applications be approved and that if approved conditions in Annexure A
be imposed under
a meeting on 19 June 2024, by resolution the Authority adopted the 9 April 2024
Recommendation (the 19 June 2024 Decision). The
minutes of that meeting
Liquor and Gaming Applications
Burwood RSL Club Burwood - club removal, extended
trading authorisation, non-restricted area authorisation, club functions
authorisation
and gaming machine entitlement lease transfer
The Authority noted the size and significance to the local community of the
club’s new promises and considered the risk factors
and mitigating factors
as highlighted in the paper, particularly in relation to late night gaming. The
Authority noted that the submission
from the applicant in relation to the
potential imposition of a late-night gaming condition did not provide strong
data or evidence
to back up the reasons why such a condition should not be
imposed and agreed to impose a condition prohibiting gaming after 2am on
minimisation grounds.
Resolution 24/161:
The Authority resolved to:
the applications for:
a. Club licence removal for premises located at 2 George
Street, Burwood NSW 2134
b. Gaming machine threshold increase of 294 (from 0 to 294) for
the new premises
c. Gaming machine entitlement transfer of 294 to the new
the trading hours recommended be imposed on
the licence listed in Annexure A to the Board Agenda Item 3.19 on 15 May
the authorisations applied for:
a. Club functions authorisation
b. Non-restricted area authorisation
c. Extended trading authorisation
conditions on the licence as listed In
Annexure A, but including a late-night gaming condition which prohibits the club
from operating
gaming machines after 2am.”
18 July 2024, the Authority gave notice of the 19 June 2024 decision to the Club
in the following terms:
Licence number LIQC300226069
We first considered the applications at the meetings of 17 April 2024 and 15 May
2024 and, following consideration of further information,
decided on 19 June
2024 to approve the applications above under
sections 22
Registered Clubs Act 1976
sections 19
Gaming Machines Act 2001
- with the conditions
set out in Schedule 1.
Schedule 1: Licence conditions to be imposed - Burwood RSL Club
Condition to be imposed
Description
Late night gaming
Gaming machines are to cease operation by 2:00 AM.
The background to the appeal
27 August 2024, the Authority requested the Tribunal to dismiss the ADR
application.
4 April 2025, following a hearing the Tribunal (Principal Member, K Ransome) by
the Dismissal Decision dismissed the application
made by the Authority seeking
that the Tribunal dismiss the ADR application.
2 May 2025, the Authority lodged a notice of appeal in which:
(1) in section 5A, it appeals against order 1 of the Dismissal Decision;
(2) in section 5B, it sets out:
(a) the following ground of appeal:
“The Tribunal erred in concluding (T [32], [371, [39]) that the
June 2024 decision under
Liquor Act 2007
to impose a condition on the Respondent’s club licence is a decision over
which the Tribunal has administrative review
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) and s 13A of
Liquor Administration Act 2007
(b) the following question of law raised by the appeal:
“Does the Tribunal have administrative review jurisdiction under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Administrative Decisions
and s 13A of the Administration Act over the Appellant’s 19
June 2024 decision under
to impose a condition on the
Respondent’s club licence?”
(3) in section 5C, its sets out the orders which it contends the Appeal Panel
should make:
“1. Leave be granted to the Authority to appeal, to the
extent that leave is required having regard to
Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force v FYH
[2024] NSWCATAP 176
2. The appeal be allowed.
3. Order 1 made on 4 April 2025 be set aside and substituted
with an order that:
“The application for administrative review of the decision of the
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority notified on 19 July
2024 to impose a
condition that gaming machines are to cease operation by 2:00 am under
Liquor Act 2007
(NSW) on the club licence held by the Burwood RSL Club Ltd
is dismissed.”
(4) in section 6B, it states that it is not asking for leave to appeal unless
order 1 of the Dismissal Decision is an interlocutory
12 May 2025, the Club lodged its reply to appeal, in which it supports the 4
April 2025 reasons and contends that leave to appeal
against order 1 of the
Dismissal Decision is not required.
The jurisdiction of the
Appeal Panel
80(1) of the NCAT Act allows a party to proceedings in which the Tribunal makes
an internally appealable decision, to appeal
the decision to an Appeal Panel. An
administrative review decision is an internally appealable decision: NCAT Act, s
32(1)(a) and
(4). The decision of the Tribunal was an administrative review
decision under s 30(5) of the NCAT Act and is therefore appealable
to an Appeal
appeals against an internally appealable decision may be made in the case of any
kind of decision (including an ancillary
decision) other than an interlocutory
decision as of right on a question of law, or with the leave of the Appeal
Panel, on any other
grounds: NCAT Act, s 80(2)(b).
Appeal Panel may make such orders as it considers appropriate in light of its
decision on the appeal, including but not limited
to any one or more of orders
that the appeal is to be allowed or dismissed, and the decision under appeal is
to be set aside and
for another decision to be substituted for it: NCAT Act,
s 81(1)(a) and (d).
The appeal is on a question of
Dismissal Decision is an ancillary decision within par (a) of the definition of
that expression in s 4(1) of the NCAT Act. The
Authority may appeal that
decision as of right on a question of law: NCAT Act, s 80(2)(b).
Authority asserts that the appeal raises the following question of
“Does the Tribunal have administrative review jurisdiction under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Administrative Decisions
and s 13A of the Administration Act over the Appellant’s 19
June 2024 decision under
to impose a condition on the
Respondent’s club licence?”
New South Wales Court of Appeal (Leeming and White JJA) in
Wilson v Chan
& Naylor Parramatta Pty Ltd atf Chan & Naylor Parramatta Trust
[2020] NSWCA 62
Wilson v Chan
) granted leave to appeal under s 83(1) of
the NCAT Act on the question of law as to the power of the Tribunal in
proceedings arising
under a federal statute and at [4] said: “
pure question of law, which does not turn on evidence
consider that the approach in
Wilson v Chan
with respect to the
identification of a question of law under s 83(1) of the NCAT Act applies
equally to the identification of a
question of law under s 80(2)(b) of the NCAT
Act. We are satisfied that the question specified in the Notice of Appeal is
pure question of law, which does not turn on evidence and so is a
question of law within s 80(2)(b) of the NCAT Act. It follows that
the appeal of
the Authority is as of right.
Did the Tribunal err in finding it
had administrative review jurisdiction over the impugned condition?
considering this question, we have summarised the submissions of the
The Authority’s appeal submissions in
Authority by way of introduction submits that the 19 June 2024 Decision
comprised several decisions including the decision approving
the licence removal
application under
and the decision on the
Authority’s own initiative imposing conditions on the Club licence under
(which is referred to as the Condition
Decision). The Tribunal is not vested with administrative review jurisdiction
over the Condition
Decision which is not within the meaning of s 13A(1) of the
GLA Act a “
decision of the Authority in relation to an application made
under a provision of the gaming and liquor legislation
” prescribed by
the regulations made for the purposes of that provision. Properly construed, s
13A(1) operates to vest the
Tribunal with administrative review jurisdiction
only over prescribed applications specified in cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation.
The Condition Decision was not a decision with respect to such a prescribed
application. The Tribunal is not vested by s 13A(1)
with administrative review
time as or coincidentally
with the Authority’s decision to approve the
licence removal application which is a prescribed application under cl 7(a)(ii)
of the 2016 GLA Regulation.
Authority has referred to several authorities in various statutory contexts
which have considered the degree of connection that
must be shown between the
two subject matters joined by the expression “in relation to”. The
two principal authorities
R v Ross-Jones; Ex parte Green
[1984] HCA 82
Ex parte Green
O’Grady v Northern
Queensland Co Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 356
[1990] HCA 16
Ex parte Green
, the High Court considered the definition of
“matrimonial cause” in
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) in deciding whether an application by a man to stay the enforcement by a
third person of a judgment obtained against him in
a State Supreme Court in
proceedings that were not a matrimonial cause, or to set that judgment aside,
were “any other proceedings...
in relation to... proceedings” within
par (f) , relevantly, “between the parties to a marriage with respect to
the property
of the parties to the marriage” within par (ca). Gibbs
CJ held at 196-197 “to come within par (f) the proceedings in
must bear an appropriate relationship to other proceedings of the kind referred
to”, such as where “the order
sought in the later proceedings would
reverse or vary the effect of the order made in the former”; “it is
that what is done in one of the proceedings would indirectly affect
the practical outcome of the other proceedings”. Wilson
and Dawson JJ at
210 held that the proceedings in question must have a “necessary relation
to” the other proceedings,
with a mere “coincidental”
relationship being insufficient.
, the High Court considered s 80(1) of the
(Qld) which conferred on a Wardens Court exclusive jurisdiction in all
actions “arising in relation to mining or to any mining
The question was whether a counterclaim in proceedings in the Supreme Court of
Queensland was an action “arising
in relation to mining” within the
opening sentence of s 80(1) or “with respect to any matter arising between
relation to mining” within par (g). Dawson J held at
“The crucial question is whether the proceedings constituted by the
respondent’s counterclaim were proceedings in relation
to mining or to any
mining tenement. The words “in relation to”, read out of context,
are wide enough to cover every
conceivable connexion. But those words should not
be read out of context, which in this case is provided by the
(Q). What is required is a relevant relationship, having regard to the
scope of the Act. Where jurisdiction is dependent upon a relation
matter or thing, something more than a coincidental or mere connexion -
something in the nature of a relevant relationship
– is necessary.”
Authority advances five reasons why a decision to be “in relation
to” an application prescribed for the purposes of
s 13A(1) of the GLA Act
must be of that application. Put another way, the decision of which review is
sought must have a legally
“necessary relation to” the application
made under a prescribed provision for five reasons:
(1) that interpretation is consistent with the function of s 13A(1) of the GLA
Act in conferring administrative review jurisdiction.
It would be anomalous for
Parliament to have enabled administrative review of a decision simply because it
happens, in the particular
case, to have a factual or coincidental connection
with the determination of an application under a prescribed provision. A mere
factual or coincidental connection is not one that the Parliament can be taken
to have considered “merited the legislative
conferral of a right of ...
review upon those aggrieved” which in a different context was the question
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR 99
[2005] HCA 7
) at [79] (Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ);
(2) that interpretation coheres with s 13A(5) of the GLA Act, which defines the
“relevant persons” who if aggrieved have
standing under s 13A(1)
“in relation to the prescribed application”. Those “relevant
persons” are (a) the
applicant and (b) persons required to be notified and
who made submissions on the application. The identification of the
persons” underlines the focus on that which is applied for
by the application made by the applicant under the prescribed provision.
also emphasises the significance within the scheme of the “gaming and
liquor legislation” (which is defined in s
4) administered pursuant to the
GLA Act of public consultation and submissions, which are to be facilitated and
considered with respect
to defined applications.
(3) that interpretation reflects the objects of the
Gaming and Liquor
Administration Amendment Bill 2015
(NSW) (2015 GLA Bill) which inserted s 13A
into the GLA Act, and the extrinsic material thereto:
(a) the Overview of Bill in the Explanatory note relevantly stated:
“The objects of this Bill are as follows:
(d) to provide for the administrative review of certain decisions of the
Authority by the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
South Wales
(b) in the Second Reading speech, the responsible Minister explained the review
of decisions to be provided by the amendments which
became s 13A and s 36A
(Legislative Assembly,
, 27 October 2015, 5328) (emphasis added):
“The bill provides for licensing decisions to be reviewed in certain
circumstances. For decisions made by the Independent Liquor
Authority, a review will be available from the New South Wales Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
in relation to contentious liquor and gaming
applications, such as the grant of a new hotel or packaged liquor licence
The types of applications determined by the Independent Liquor and Gaming
Authority that can be reviewed by the New South Wales
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal will be prescribed by regulation prior to the commencement of the
“The bill also enables delegated decisions made by Liquor and Gaming NSW
to be reviewed by the Independent Liquor and Gaming
Authority. This is to ensure
that the exercise of the delegation continues to be done in a way that the
Authority considers to be
appropriate.
The delegated decisions that can be
reviewed by the authority will be limited to applications that will be
prescribed by regulation
and will include the grant or removal of a liquor
(c) following debate, the Minister added (Legislative Assembly,
27 October 2015, 5350):
“The bill enables certain licensing decisions to be subject to a merit
review ... the decisions for which a merit review can
be sought by NCAT will
also be prescribed by regulation. NCAT will be able to review a decision made by
the authority based on the
material that was before the authority at the time
its decision was made; in other words, a merits-based review.”
(d) during Committee in the Legislative Council, when stating the
Government’s opposition to (unsuccessful) amendments intended
the “relevant persons” specified in s 13A(5), the Parliamentary
Secretary said (Legislative Council,
, 11 November 2015, 5599)
(emphasis added):
“Opposition amendment No. 7 proposes to extend to a far greater category
of people the standing to appeal to the NSW Civil
and Administrative Tribunal
It is not appropriate that standing be given to any person for a
review of an Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority [ILGA] decision
This will lead to longer delays in deciding applications.
It is appropriate
to limit the standing so that those who are directly affected, and who have
engaged in the application
by making submissions, are able
to seek a review.”
(e) by equating the application with the decision (“in relation to
contentious liquor and gaming applications, such as the
grant of a new hotel or
packaged liquor licence”; “applications that ... will include the
grant or removal of a liquor
licence”; “certain licensing decisions
... prescribed by regulation”), the Minister’s and Parliamentary
Secretary’s
speeches indicate ss 36A(1)(d) and 13A were intended to enable
review of decisions to grant or to refuse the applications prescribed
purpose of the relevant provision. Those are the “certain
circumstances” in which review was enabled.
(4) that interpretation fits with and furthers the scheme of the gaming and
liquor legislation, a scheme which must be interpreted
harmoniously, as
explained by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Independent Liquor and
Gaming Authority v Whitebull HTL Pty Ltd; Independent Liquor and Gaming
Authority v Area Hotel UT Pty Ltd;
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority v The
Griffith Hotel Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 224
) at [109],
[113]-[114], [134]:
(a) on the one hand,
governs the determination of an
application for a licence or, in accordance with
, an application to
remove a licence.
Section 45(1)
makes clear that the Authority’s decision
on an application to remove a licence to other premises is binary: to
grant the licence or refuse the licence
reinforced by
, which states that the Authority is to take any submission
into consideration before deciding “
whether or not to grant the
Section 44(2)
itself forms part of the consultation process
established by Div 1 of
, which requires public notice be given of and
enables the giving of submissions regarding an application for a licence or its
That consultation process assumes that the Authority’s decision
is to grant or refuse that which has been its subject. Otherwise,
public’s opportunity to comment would be undermined, the statutory
importance of which is emphasised by the standing conferred
by s 13A(5)(b)
of the GLA Act on persons who exercise that opportunity;
(b) on the other hand, the exercise of the power under
to impose conditions on a liquor licence is not linked to the exercise of the
power under
to grant or refuse an application for a licence or its
removal. Rather the exercise of the power under
exercised at any time
” on the Authority’s own initiative or on
application by the Secretary or Commissioner of Police, but, tellingly, not
application by the licensee. The New South Wales Court of Appeal in
at [127]-[128] said (Kirk JA with Meagher JA and Griffiths AJA
“[127] ... The power in
may be exercised at any time. As the
Authority pointed out, if, say, a significant concern arose about the use of
gaming machines
in connection with liquor at a venue, at a time unconnected to
any particular application being made by the licensee under the GM
Act, then it
would be surprising if the regulator could not act to address that concern.
[128] More broadly, if a concern arose about significant (and perhaps
unforeseen) harm being caused by the use of gaming machines
at a particular
venue, even if not especially linked to alcohol consumption, it might be thought
to be surprising that it could only
be addressed if and when the licensee made
some application under the GM Act.”
(c) the same pattern appears in the GM Act, with the binary decision to grant or
refuse a licence (or to grant or refuse an application
to increase a gaming
machine threshold under s 34) distinguished from any decision as to the
conditions to be imposed on a licence
so granted: see ss 88, 95A, 101, 102
(licence applications); s 104 (conditions).
(5) that interpretation is consonant with cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation.
Clause 7 is relevantly identical to the predecessor cl
Liquor Administration Regulation 2008
(NSW) (2008 GLA Regulation). Clause 5B
was introduced on 1 March 2016, at the same time that s 13A was inserted into
the GLA Act.
In those circumstances, the terms of cl 5B (and cl 7) can inform
the nature of the scheme of gaming and liquor legislation and the
s 13A within it: see
Master Education Services Ply Ltd v Ketchell
(2008) 236 CLR 101
[2008] HCA 38
Master Education Services
(Gummow ACJ, Kirby, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ). Clause 7(c), like
cl 5B(c) before it, indicates that it was not intended
to vest the Tribunal
with jurisdiction administratively to review the Authority’s decision to
impose any condition on a licence.
Rather, the Authority was intended to be
vested with jurisdiction administratively to review only decisions made in
relation to applications
under s 53(2) (but not decisions of the
Authority’s own initiative) to “vary or revoke conditions of a
licence imposed
by the Authority that would result in trading after
midnight”: see
Kinsman v Independent Liquor & Gaming Authority
[2023] NSWCATAD 335
) at [34]-[35] for the scope of such
conditions. The deliberate limitation on the scope of cl 7(c) would be
undermined if decisions
to impose other types of conditions were the subject of
administrative review.
42 Applying these five reasons, the Condition Decision was not “in
relation to” the licence removal application. The
Condition Decision was
not a decision to refuse or to grant the Club’s application under
to remove its licence to new premises. It had no legally
“necessary relation to” the application made under a prescribed
provision. This is underlined by the distinction drawn in the statutory scheme
between the determination of licence applications
and the imposition of any
conditions upon such licences. Within that scheme, “at any time” and
irrespective of the licence
removal application under
, the Authority was
free, of its own initiative, to make the Condition Decision under
The Club’s appeal submissions
Club submits that the effect of the construction of s 13A(1) of the GLA Act
submitted by the Authority is to confer an administrative
review jurisdiction in
respect of an approval or a refusal of a removal application but (1) in the case
of an approval, not the terms
on which a removed licence is to operate, for
example hours and/or conditions, or (2) in the case of a refusal, to approve the
of the licence but not determine the conditions for its operation at the
new premises. This is an inconvenient construction of s
13A(1), which is a
consideration tending against it being the “proper”
construction.
Club submits that the first reason advanced by the Authority might be apposite
to circumstances where it, as it can, apropos of
no application to it, decide to
impose a condition on an individual licence or a group of licences, but that is
not the case. The
late-night gaming condition was imposed (1) in the context of
the licence removal application, and as part of the Authority’s
consideration of it, (2) in respect of the licence at the premises to which the
Club proposed removal, but not at its current premises,
and in and by the same
resolution approving the licence removal application. The relationship of the
late-night gaming condition
to the licence removal application is not accurately
described as merely factual or coincidental.
to the second reason advanced by the Authority, the Club submits that the
definition for the purposes of s 13A(1) of the GLA Act
of “relevant
person” in s 13A(5) does not suggest a narrow meaning. Whatever the
proper interpretation of “...
decision ...”, the Club is by
operation of s 13A(5) a “relevant person” for the purposes of s
13A(1). That definition
does nothing to indicate a wide or narrow meaning of
“decision in relation to”.
to the third reason advanced by the Authority, the Club submits that the
extrinsic material relied upon does not compel the construction
Tribunal does not have the jurisdiction or power to determine terms and
conditions. The language of the speeches shifts,
without emphasis, elaboration
or explanation between the different subject matters of (1) “decisions in
relation to”
(in s 13A(1) of the GLA Act), and (2)
“applications” (in cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation), and does so at
a time when
the text of s 13A(1) was known but that of cl 7 was not. The
speeches manifest no clear parliamentary intention or understanding
“in relation to” means “of”. lf a specific, narrow
administrative review jurisdiction had been intended,
it is surprising that the
words “in relation to”, which are commonly understood as being
indicative of an imprecise but
extended relationship, were deployed rather than
the specific, narrow and confining word “of”.
to the fourth reason advanced by the Authority, the Club submits that it is
probably incorrect to characterise a decision to grant
an application or approve
a removal as “binary” and contends:
(1) approvals, like grants, are always on terms, for example hours and
conditions, the content of which will nearly always be relevant
to the decision
to approve or grant;
(2) contrary to the Authority’s submission that the exercise of the power
to impose conditions on a liquor licence
is not linked to the exercise of the power under
to grant or refuse an
application for a licence or its removal, that
allows the imposition of a
condition any time indicates that a decision to impose a condition in relation
to an application by a
licensee for a grant or an approval, is one of the times
contemplated by
for the exercise of the power. Unsurprisingly,
recognises that the occasion of a grant (and thus an
approval) may be the one of the times envisaged for an exercise of the power
(3) the Authority’s submission that in other gaming and liquor legislation
there is a decision that is properly described as
“binary” takes the
issue nowhere. As the Authority acknowledges, the outcome of such an application
may result in condition
imposed under the
(4) nothing in
suggests that a decision to exercise the power
to impose conditions on a licence as part
of the process of considering whether or not to approve a removal will not be a
“in relation to” that application.
to the fifth reason advanced by the Authority, the Club submits that, while
accepting that cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation should
be construed in the same
way as cl 5B of the 2008 GLA Regulation, there are no decisions construing
was a decision that there had been no such
application to the Authority “... to vary ... a condition ... that would
in a trading after midnight” within cll 7(b) and (c) of the 2016
GLA Regulation. Neither the Authority’s submission nor
the decision in
assist in the resolution of the issue.
licence removal application was granted, on terms, but the Club was aggrieved
thereby; the decision to grant remains reviewable
under s 13A(1) of the GLA Act.
On such a review the Tribunal under s 63(2) of the ADR Act “... may
exercise all the functions
conferred or imposed on the administrator who made
the decision ...”. Among the functions and powers relevant to deciding to
approve a removal is the power of the Authority under s 53(1) of the
t to “... impose conditions on a licence.” The Tribunal is
required under s 63(1) of the ADR Act to consider whether the
licence removal
application, as approved, was the correct and preferable decision having regard
to the material before it and whether,
having regard to that material,
application should be approved. The material before the Tribunal may be
different from that before
the Authority, or be assessed and evaluated by the
Tribunal differently from the way it was assessed and evaluated by the
On an application to review a refusal of an application, the power
is exercisable by the Tribunal.
the Authority’s construction of s 13A(1) of the GLA Act, the local consent
authority (1) would be permitted to apply for
review of the grant or approval to
contend for refusal of the application, but (2) could not contend for the grant
or approval of
the application on terms or conditions different to those decided
upon by the Authority. Such a construction is unlikely to quell
contentious
controversy which is one of the objects of s 13A(1).
Authority’s appeal submissions in reply
Authority has responded to six aspects of the Club’s appeal
submissions.
as to the Club’s submission that the Authority’s construction of s
13A of the GLA Act is an “inconvenient”
one, why this construction
results in inconvenience of a kind with which the Parliament might have been
concerned is not explained.
The Authority’s construction does not lead to
inconvenience. The Parliament’s object was to render only a
“limited” class of decisions reviewable on
their merits as explained by the responsible Minister in the Second Reading
speech in the Legislative Assembly for the 2015 GLA Bill.
the Club’s assertion that the definition in s 13A(5) of the GLA Act of the
“relevant persons” who if aggrieved
have standing under s 13A(1)
informs matters is without explanation. The significance of the definition is
the identification of
those persons by reference to the application made by the
applicant under a prescribed provision.
as to the Club’s submission that the words “in relation to”
are to be “understood as being indicative
of an imprecise but extended
relationship”, this submission does not engage with the authorities relied
upon by the Authority.
Those authorities indicate that the “nature and
breadth” of the requisite relationship turns on the text, context and
purpose of the particular provision. In the context of provisions conferring
Ex parte Green
that a “relevant relationship”, of a kind which the Parliament can
be taken to have considered “merited the
conferral of a right of
review”, is required.
Ex parte Green
further show that, in this context, a mere factual or coincidental relationship
is ordinarily insufficient. Rather, adapted to s
13A of the GLA Act, the
“relevant relationship” between a decision of which review is sought
and an application made
under a prescribed provision is that the decision bears
a legally “necessary relation to” the application.
the Club’s submission that it is probably incorrect to characterise a
decision to grant an application or approve
a removal as binary seeks to blunt
the significance of the distinction drawn in the gaming and liquor legislation
between the decision
to grant or refuse an application for a licence or its
removal, and any decision as to the conditions to be imposed on such a licence.
The Club’s submission ignores the statutory text: a decision under
is to either “grant or refuse” an
application for a licence or its removal; conditions may relevantly be imposed
any time”, “on the Authority’s own initiative”
While conditions may, in particular fact patterns, happen to be so
imposed coincidentally with the grant or refusal of an application
for a licence
or removal, they do not, within the statutory scheme, bear a legally
“necessary relation to” that application.
the Club accepts that cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation and cl 5B of the 2008 GLA
Regulation can inform the nature of the scheme
of the gaming and liquor
legislation and the place of s 13A of the GLA Act within it. But the
Club’s submissions do not then
explain how the careful limitation of cl
7(c) and cl 5B(c) to a narrow and certain class of conditions imposed on a
licence would
not be undermined if decisions to impose other types of conditions
were, by factual coincidence, capable of being the subject of
administrative
the Club’s submission in reliance on s 63(2) of the ADR Act begs the
question. Read in the context of s 63(1), s 63(2)
of the ADR Act empowers the
Tribunal to exercise functions conferred on the Authority only for the purpose
of determining an application
for administrative review under the ADR Act of an
administratively reviewable decision. But here there is no administratively
decision. Insofar as the Club’s submission seeks to identify
the Authority’s decision under s 45(1) to grant the Club’s
application under
to remove its club licence to
new premises as the relevant decision, it is not a “relevant person who is
aggrieved by [that]
decision” within the meaning of s 13A of the GLA Act.
The grant of the licence removal application has not had any adverse
effect upon
the rights or interests of the Club. Unsurprisingly, the Club, does not seek to
disturb that decision (as to which the
only alternate outcome would be refusal).
Rather, the Club is aggrieved by the Condition Decision under
. But that decision is not one made “in relation
to” an application under a prescribed provision within the meaning of
13A of the GLA Act.
Consideration
is common ground between the parties that by virtue of cl 10 of the 2024 GLA
Regulation the Principal Decision was to be made,
and the decision on appeal, is
to be made, on the basis that the 2016 GLA Regulation is operative.
accept that the Tribunal did not have administrative review jurisdiction over
the 19 June 2024 Decision so far as the imposition
of the impugned condition on
the Club licence substantially for the reasons set out in the Authority appeal
submissions.
19 June 2024 Decision on its proper construction is not a single decision but
comprises several decisions made under different
statutory provisions, including
the decision approving the licence removal application under
and the decision on the Authority’s own initiative
imposing conditions on the Club’s licence under
accordance with the approach taken to the proper construction of the expression
“in relation to” in the particular
statutory contexts in
Ex parte Green
, the degree of connection that
must be shown between the decision and the prescribed application in s 13A(1) of
the GLA Act is that
the decision bears a legally “necessary relation
to” the application.
decision to impose the impugned condition does not bear a legally
“necessary relation to” the licence removal application.
Authority has power under
conditions on a liquor licence at any time on its own initiative. The fact that
the Authority imposed the impugned condition
at the same time as it made the
decision under
to grant the licence removal
application does not establish the existence of the requisite legally
“necessary relation to”
the licence removal application. There was
only a coincidental connection between the two.
is a clear distinction in the
between the power under
determine an application for a licence, or under
to determine an
application to remove a licence, and the power under
conditions on a licence. The power to determine applications for a licence or
for the removal of a licence is not linked
to the power to impose conditions on
a licence. The power of the Authority in relation to applications for a licence
or for the removal
of a licence is binary in the sense that it may grant or
refuse the application. The power of the Authority to impose conditions
required part of the process of determining applications for a licence or for
the removal of a licence, but may be exercised
at any time on its own
initiative.
construction of s 13A(1) of the GLA Act advanced by the Club would lead to the
anomalous situation where a relevant person within
s 13A(5) could seek
administrative review of a decision by the Authority to impose a condition at
the same time as it determined
an application for a licence or for the removal
of a licence on the basis it came within cl 7(a) of 2016 GLA Regulation, but
not seek administrative review of a decision by the Authority to impose a
condition at any other time unless it was in relation to
an application to vary
or revoke a condition of a licence imposed by the Authority that would result in
trading after midnight within
cl 7(c) of 2016 GLA Regulation. The same anomaly
would apply under cl 4 of the 2024 GLA Regulation in respect of decisions made
1 September 2024.
do not consider that it is necessary to use extrinsic material to determine the
meaning of s 13A(1) of the GLA Act pursuant to
Interpretation
(NSW). The meaning of this provision is clear when regard is paid
(1) the text of cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation;
(2) the distinction in the
between the powers under
determine an application for a licence and under
to determine an
application to remove a licence, and the power under
conditions on a licence; and
(3) the principles applicable to the construction of the expression “in
relation to” in the context of the conferral
of jurisdiction on a decision
making body.
do not consider that the identical terms of cl 7 of the 2016 GLA Regulation and
cl 5B of the 2008 GLA Regulation inform the nature
of the scheme of the gaming
and liquor legislation and the place of s 13A of the GLA Act within it in
accordance with the principles
Master Education Services
at [19]. The
absence of any judicial consideration of cl 5B, which may be taken to have been
confirmed by the enactment of cl 7,
is significant.
was decided
after the enactment of cl 7.
Club’s submission that the Authority’s construction of s 13A of the
GLA Act is an “inconvenient” one assumes
that s 13A(1) of the GLA
Act on its proper construction should permit a relevant person to seek an
administrative review of conditions
imposed on a liquor licence. However,
contrary to this submission, the scope of the review is confined to applications
to the applications
specified in cl 7 of 2016 GLA
Regulation.
make the following orders:
(1) The Appeal is allowed.
(2) Order 1 made on 4 April 2025 is set aside and the following order is
substituted for it:
“The application for administrative review of the decision of the
appellant notified on 19 July 2024 to impose a condition that
gaming machines
are to cease operation by 2:00 am under
Liquor Act 2007
on the club licence held by the respondent is dismissed.”
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (380 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter