URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2012/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v ROOPRA (No 1) [2012] NSWDT 5 (20 December 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
CHAITAN SINGH ROOPRA
MATTER NUMBER: DT02/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
DEN0001247933
REASONS FOR DECISION
(RE: COMPLAINTS ONE,
THREE AND FOUR)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Roopra (No 1) [2012] NSWDT 5
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr Fernandez of Counsel instructed by Ms Lewis, Solicitor,
Health Care Complaints Commission.
Chaitan Singh Roopra
(Respondent) represented by Mr Stowe of Counsel
instructed by Mr Cockburn, Solicitor, McLachlan Thorpe Partners.
FILE NUMBER: DT02/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr George Wing AM (Dentist
Em. Prof. Keith Lester (Dentist Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 21 November, 19 December 2011, 5 & 9 March 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 20 December 2012 (Re: Complaints One, Three and
FINDINGS (in summary): All Particulars of all Complaints established
(reliance on Certificates of Conviction). Complaints One, Three
established. The Respondent has been convicted of nine criminal offences, and is
guilty of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Tribunal reserved on final determination regarding Complaint Two (not a suitable
person to hold registration),
Orders and Costs.
CATCHWORDS: Dentist – conviction for nine criminal offences -
aggravated indecent assault victim under 16 years - aggravated
assault victim under authority (s61M(1))
Crimes Act 1900
conviction for criminal offences - not a suitable person - unsatisfactory
professional conduct – professional misconduct.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – ss 55(1), 55(1)(b), 55(1)(h),
139B, 139E, 144(a), 144(b), 144(e), 145A, 167;
Health Care Complaints Act
Crimes Act 1900
Dental Practice Act 2001
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw (1938)
[1938] HCA 34
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association (1960)
[1960] HCA 40
Health Care Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
HCCC v VU [2012]
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Dental Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional Councils
Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney on
21 November 2011 to conduct
an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 28 June 2011
in relation to a
previously registered dentist, Chaitan Singh Roopra (the Respondent). Only
administrative matters were attended
to on 21 November 2011 as the Tribunal was
unable to gain access to a secure hearing room. The Tribunal convened at the
Downing Centre
on 19 December 2011 with the Respondent present. The Respondent
had requested to be present during the Inquiry and the fact of his
incarceration
necessitated the utilisation of a secure hearing room. The Tribunal continued at
the HPCA Hearing Room on 5 March 2012
in the absence of the Respondent with his
the time the Inquiry convened the Respondent was an inmate at the Metropolitan
Special Purpose Centre at Long Bay. The earliest
release date is January 2013
and his sentence expires sometime in 2015.
Complaint alleges the Respondent has been convicted of nine criminal offences in
New South Wales (section 144(a
) National Law
), that he is not a suitable
person to hold registration as a dentist (section 144(e)), that he is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct (section 144(b))
with respect to the improper and unethical conduct – being the conduct
relating to his nine convictions.
the application of the parties it was decided that the Tribunal would publish a
Reasons for Decision as to Findings re the Complaints
(noting the admission of
the Particulars of Complaint and the non-contesting of Complaints 1, 3 and 4 by
the Respondent) and allow
the parties a further opportunity to make submissions
as to appropriate orders and as to costs. This is the Reasons for Decision
respect to Findings with regard to the Complaints.
The Complaint
Amended Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a dentist previously
registered under the
Dental Practice Act
(repealed):
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been convicted of nine criminal offences in New South Wales:
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
5 October, 2010 in Sydney NSW, the practitioner pleaded guilty and was convicted
of nine criminal offences, namely:
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under the age of 16 years pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
on 15 September 2008 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 6 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South Wales.
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 6 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South Wales.
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 6 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South Wales.
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 16 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South
indecent assault - victim under authority pursuant to
on 16 February 2009 at Penrith in the state of New South
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is not a suitable person to hold registration as a
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
COMPLAINT THREE
The practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of Section139B of the National Law in that
he has engaged in
other improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of dentistry.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
COMPLAINT FOUR
The practitioner has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
meaning of Section139B of the National Law, namely, improper
or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of dentistry in that he
(i) Engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration; and/or
(ii) Has engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together,
amount to conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint 1.
The Law – preliminary matters
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in a civil
issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process
by which reasonable satisfaction is
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Appearances
per headnotes.
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the names of
Miss A, Miss B and Miss C (being the victims
of the offences) and the names of
other witnesses that may tend to identify Miss A, Miss B and Miss C) in
accordance with Schedule
5D Clause 7 of the Act as indicated in the schedule
annexed hereto and marked ‘C’. Any information beyond that contained
in this Reasons document which may identify them is also not to be published.
Annexure C will only be attached to the original Reasons
for Decision held by
the Registry and must not be reproduced.
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
HCCC became exhibits 1
– 52. The documents initially relied upon by the Respondent consisted of
two volumes, volume 1 –
exhibits R1 to R 48 and volume 2 – exhibits
R1 – R19. An additional volume – R3 – being the clinical notes
relating to the Respondent held by Dr Kheray also came into evidence.
following people gave evidence before the Tribunal: the Respondent, Mrs Dharini
Roopra (the Respondent’s wife), Dr Jasvinder
Kheray (the
Respondent’s treating General Practitioner and his brother-in-law), Dr
Christopher Lennings (Psychologist).
information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1967 in Kenya and, as a young child, moved to Zambia with
his family. He and his family then moved to
Australia in 1975. He was quite
good at sports and popular in school, being class captain in Year 6. The
Respondent completed Years
11 and 12 at Sydney Grammar School, then attended The
University of Sydney, where he completed his dental degree in slightly more
the minimum time of five years, graduating in 1992.
Respondent married in 1996, is currently separated from his wife by the fact of
his incarceration, and has two children. After
graduating from The University
of Sydney the Respondent worked in various hospitals until opening his private
practice in Penrith
in 1995, and later a second surgery in Blacktown. He has
worked as a dentist continuously since that time, and has enrolled in a
of Business (accounting) degree with the University of South Australia
(‘until his current offences derailed the studies’
of Dr Lennings).
Respondent was convicted of ‘Larceny as a Servant’ at Parramatta
Local Court on 1 July 1988. The Respondent was fined
$500 and ordered to pay $50
compensation. The Tribunal has no other information regarding the nature of this
is evidence before the Tribunal that the Respondent has a history of poor
health, suffering from non-insulin dependent diabetes,
obstructive sleep apnoea
and chronic back pain, for which he requires medication. He reports that he
also suffers spondylosis, severe
right nerve root compression, exhaustion,
depression, high cholesterol and a low alcohol tolerance. The Respondent has a
of obesity and is reported as suffering from partial
offences were committed by the Respondent from September 2008 to early 2009. A
complaint was made to police in October 2008 and
February 2009 and a search
warrant was executed by police on the Respondent’s home and practice on 17
February 2009. The Respondent
was arrested on the same day.
an Inquiry held by the Dental Board of NSW (Board Inquiry) conditions on the
Respondent’s Registration were imposed by
the Board on 27 March 2009 (see
Respondent pleaded guilty to certain offences on 5 October 2010 and went into
custody on 7 January 2011. He was sentenced by the
Local Court on 10 February
2011 and by the District Court on 24 March 2011. The Respondent’s
registration was suspended by
the Dental Council of NSW (Council) on 11 October
2010. The Respondent received notification of the complaint from the HCCC on 5
November 2010.
Background of the Complaint
regarding the Respondent’s conduct were made to the police and
investigations commenced. Ultimately the Respondent
was convicted of the
offences listed in the Particulars of Complaint.
complaints regarding the conduct of the Respondent eventually came to the
attention of the Board.
Board held an Inquiry on 27 March 2009. A written submission was provided on
behalf of the Respondent (exhibit 51). Part of this
submission (paragraph 5)
provoked considerable cross-examination of the Respondent as detailed later.
Paragraph 5 of that submission
We are instructed that he maintains his innocence of the charges. Dr
Roopra is entitled to the presumption of innocence unless and
until a jury
determines that he is guilty of some or all of the charges. At this stage, a
full Police Brief has not been served.
a result of the conduct coming to the attention of the Board the following
conditions were placed upon his registration:
The delegates, exercising the power of the Dental Board of NSW, under
Dental Practice Act 2001
, have determined that the following
conditions be placed upon the registration of Chaitan S. Roopra to take effect
from 3 April 2009:
dentist may only practise in his dental surgery rooms, with an adult dental
assistant present at all times and must not consult
any patient outside his
surgery rooms.
dentist must not provide treatment or consultation to any person under the age
of 16 years without the presence during the whole
treatment period, of the
parent, guardian or adult family member of that person, and an adult dental
nursing assistant, approved
by the Board.
dentist must not provide treatment or consultation to any person aged between 16
and 18 years without the presence during the
entire treatment period, of an
adult dental nursing assistant approved by the Board.
“Conditions of Practice Sheet” provided by the Board to the dentist,
will form a record for each of the patients under
18 years treated by the
dentist. It will record the patient’s name, address and date of birth;
the date and time and the treatment
provided; the name and signature of the
patient’s parent, guardian or adult family member and the name and
signature of the
adult dental nursing assistant, certifying that they have been
present during the treatment period.
completed and signed “Conditions of Practice Sheet” must form part
of the patient’s records and retained pursuant
to the provisions of the
Dental Practice Regulation. It is to be available for inspection of officers of
conditions are effective from 6pm Friday April 3, 2009 and may be reviewed at
any time by the Board, including if the Board
is advised of any changes to the
bail conditions and if any further charges are laid against the dentist or when
the charges are
dealt with by the court.
Respondent wrote to the Dental Council on 6 October 2010 stating that he had
pleaded guilty to the charges against him.
Council held a further Inquiry on 11 October 2010 (transcript at exhibit 7). At
the conclusion of the Inquiry the Respondent’s
Registration was suspended.
HCCC investigated the matter and lodged a Complaint with the Tribunal on 28 June
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence as well as
the attendance of some witnesses for the Respondent.
Evidence of
A was a 15 year old girl who sought employment with the Respondent. She is the
victim with respect to the convictions set out
in Particulars (a) to (d)
inclusive of each of the Complaints before the Tribunal. She provided a
statement to the HCCC dated 9 October
2008 (exhibit 8). Part of the statement
reads as follows (paragraphs 4 – 26):
September, 2008, I decided that I would look for some
work to earn some money. Rather than look for jobs in the paper, I decided
advertise that I was looking for work on a website called
‘Gumtree.com.au’. This advertisement was titled ‘15
needs work desperately’.
Wednesday 10
September, 2008, I received a reply to my
advertisement on the website that someone had enquired about my advertisement.
to email and provided my mobile number 0411 XXXXXX so that the person
could contact me.
9.00pm on Monday 10
September, 2008, I received a call from a male
called Chaitan ROOPRA on mobile telephone number 0428 XXXX08. We had a short
conversation
and he told me that he was a Dentist at Penrith and that he was
after someone to clean his home studio and sort out files. He also
told me that
his Dental Studio was called ‘Broadwalk Dental’, High Street,
Penrith. We arranged that I would meet him
the following day at 11:00pm
at his Dental Studio in High Street for a training day. This
training was to go from 11:00pm
on Thursday 11
September, 2008, I caught
the train to Penrith and attended the Dental Studio at Penrith and met with
Chaitan. Chaitan spoke with
me and told me what I would be doing if I worked
for him. This included making up filing boxes, filing and cleaning at the
Studio. I was there for about 20 mins and before I left, he gave me
$20.00 for my time. I went to Westfields
and bought a drink before
catching the train home. Later that afternoon he called me and made
arrangements for me to meet him on
September, 2008 to start
work by cleaning his house at 11 Higgins Street, Penrith.
on Monday 15
September 2008, I attended the
carpark behind the Broadwalk Dental Studio on High Street, Penrith. Chaitan
told me to meet him there
because he did not want his staff finding out that I
was working for him. He also said that they would get jealous because I was
getting cash in hand.
soon as I met up with him, we walked to his car so that he could drive me to his
, Penrith. Before we drove anywhere, Chaitan took out
a piece of paper titled ‘Home Office Services Cleaning Contract’.
read the piece of paper which included my duties that I would have to do. At
the time I read the paper, I thought it strange
that it said, ‘Massage and
personal services as required’. I trusted Chaitan at the time that it was
a normal thing
for me to sign so I signed it without asking any questions.
After I signed it, he put it back in his briefcase. He did not give
left and drove to Chaitan’s house and when we arrived he said,
“Meet me around the back door.”
I walked around the back of the house and he let me in through a garage
door at the back of the house. The house is single storey
brick house. When
looking at the front of the house there is no garage door just a front door. At
the back of the house, there
is a garage door and two other small doors which is
one for the house and one for the office.
showed me the office which was very messy, there were boxes and paperwork
everywhere, and it looked like a bomb hit it or
something. Chaitan walked into
the main house area and came back into the office with a drink of water and some
grapes. He put
the water and grapes on the cupboard and then he closed the
blinds and locked the office door. There was a single mattress leaning
office wall and Chaitan pulled it down and placed it on the floor. I thought
this a bit strange and started to get scared.
sat down on the mattress. He took off his shirt which was a white collared
shirt. There was some body lotion near the mattress
and he handed it to me and
“Massage my back.”
I put some of the lotion on his back and kneeled near the mattress and
started to massage his back. I was a bit scared and did not
want to get to
close to him. I did not want to do it, but he is a big man and I
thought that he would hurt me if I did not do what he asked.
a while, he lay on his back and asked me to massage his stomach, again I did
what he asked. While I was massaging his stomach
I knelt on the mattress.
Chaitan had a lot of hair on his chest and stomach. While I was massaging his
stomach he was rubbing his
penis on top of his clothing. After a couple of
minutes he took off his long work pants but left his underpants on. Chaitan
asked me to massage his legs. I was very nervous by this time and did not
want to say ‘No’ in case he got angry. I
massaged his legs and he
told me to start massaging his thighs so I did.
a couple of minutes, Chaitan pulled his penis out from his underpants and asked
me to rub it and massage it. I did not want
to do that, but was just scared. I
rubbed his penis and he showed me how to massage it. I placed my hand around
his penis and was
moving my hand up and down. Chaitan pulled me down onto his
chest so that I was closer to him and started to rub my breasts on top
clothing. He then pulled my top down and took my breast out of my bra and
licked my breast. I cannot remember which one.
Not long after that he
ejaculated on my hand. At this time I nearly started to cry and Chaitan told me
to stop massaging him.
got up and walked into the bathroom in the office. I washed my hands and stayed
in there for a while. When I came out he was back
in the office and dressed in
the same clothes. Chaitan told me some general things he wanted done in the
office and I started to
clean up the office. Chaitan was in and out of the
office while I did it. Not long after we left the house and drove to the Dental
Surgery and dropped off something. I did not go into the surgery, he gave me
$15.00 and told me to go and get some lunch and meet
him back there in 10
met him back at the carpark 10 minutes later and we drove to the post office and
bought some stamps and then back to Chaitan’s
house. We went back into
the office and before I started cleaning, Chaitan asked me to massage him
sat down on the mattress and took off his shirt again. I put some of the lotion
on his back and kneeled near the mattress
and started to massage his back.
After a while, he lay on his back and asked me to massage his stomach, again I
did what he asked.
While I was massaging his stomach I knelt on the mattress.
After a few minutes he took off his pants and again left his underpants
Chaitan then asked me to massage his legs and pulled out his penis and asked me
to rub it again.
placed my hand around his penis and was moving my hand up and down. Chaitan
again pulled me down onto his chest so that I was closer
to him and started to
rub my breasts on top of my clothing, before pulling my top down and licking my
breasts. Not long after that
he ejaculated on my hand and I let go of his
penis. I went to the bathroom again and washed my hands and when I came out
was dressed. I continued to clean and about 1-2 hours later Chaitan
drove me to Penrith Railway Station and caught the train to
Town Hall for a job
interview at McDonalds at 5:30pm. After that interview I caught the train back
I did not tell my dad or step-mother
because I just wanted to forget about it and pretend it did not happen. Plus
Chaitan had told
me that what I did for him was a discreet service and he did
not want anyone to know including his staff at the Dental
was supposed to go back on Sunday 21
September, 2008, but I did not
go. I did not go because I was scared that the same thing would happen again.
Because I did not
turn up, Chaitan called me about lunch time and asked where I
was. I told him that I was not coming because of what happened the
and that I did not feel comfortable working for him anymore. He apologised for
what he did, but I could tell he did not
mean it. I then hung
called me on my mobile a few times during the week asking me to come back and
work for him but I told him ‘No’.
And then I did not hear from him
for a while.
Wednesday 8
October, 2008, I had a text message from Chaitan from
his mobile phone number 0428 XXXX08. The message said,
“I will leave a resume for you with reception at Penrith with
$30. I would like to apologise to you.”
6:00pm that day, I attended the Broadwalk Dental Surgery, Penrith after catching
the train there. I could not get there any
earlier because I had doctor’s
appointments that day. When I got there, the surgery was closing. The
reception was still
there and saw me meet up with Chaitan. She then left and
Chaitan and I were the only ones there.
opened his office and turned on his laptop and started writing me a reference
and printed it out and gave it to me. He then asked
me if I wanted to come back
to his house and do a little more cleaning and that way he would pay me $150.00.
At first I said ‘No’,
but then he convinced me and said that he felt
bad about what had happened before and was upset about it and basically wanted
make up for it. He said he would never hurt me and that it would not happen
again. Because of this I agreed to go do some more
cleaning for the
drove me back to his place. It was dark and we walked in through the front door
of the house. We walked into the office
and Chaitan hand wrote a contract
stating that I would be cleaning and massaging and asked me to sign it. I did
not sign it. Because
I did not sign it, Chaitan got a little bit angry and
threw his handsfree home phone handset across the room. Chaitan then wrote
another contract stating that I would just be cleaning and I signed it. I
started to clean the office and while I was cleaning was
was getting late and I told him I was hungry, he offered to cook me something to
eat, but I said ‘No’ because I was
scared he might put something in
my food. He had a Thai menu, and he let me pick what I wanted off the menu. He
left the room to
order the Thai and while he was out of the office I continued
to clean and while sorting through some files, I saw my original contract
signed on the 15
September, 2008. I took this contract and hid it
in my pants.
left a short time later to pick up the Thai food. While he was gone I looked
around the house and watched TV. When he came
back with the food, I saw that he
had some alcohol. He has bought heaps of different flavours of ‘Vodka
Cruisers’ because
he said he did not know what flavour I liked. He also
has some bottles called ‘Ruski’. We sat at the table and started
eating the food. He asked why I was not drinking my alcohol and I told him I
wanted to wait for a special occasion. I lied though
because I do not drink
alcohol, I have tried it and do not like the taste of it. He offered me some
red wine, but I also refused
that. We sat and ate and he ate and drank some red
wine. After dinner, Chaitan drove me home. He said it was not safe for me to
be catching the train home so late. Chaitan drove me to my street because I did
not want him to see where I lived. Before I got
out of the car, Chaitan said,
“What do I get?”
I said, “What do you mean?”
He said, “Don’t I get a hug or anything?”
I gave him a hug.
He said, “Am I going to see you again?”
I said, “Yes.”
Chaitan then gave me $50.00 dollars because I did not do much cleaning
and I got out of the car and walked home. I got home about
11:00pm that night.
The only reason that I told him that I would see him again was because I just
wanted to tell him what he wanted
to hear so that I could go. I have not heard
from him since he dropped me home this day.
Tribunal notes that a partly written reference for Miss A was found via the
‘contract’ referred to by Miss A in her statement reads as follows
(exhibit 9):
____________ of ___________________
I will provide the following services for Chaitan Roopra
St Penrith:
Domestic cleaning, including floors, sinks bathrooms and ironing of
Office cleaning
Filing and sorting documents
Ironing and washing.
Massage and personal services as required
I agree I will wear the clothes as required.
I will provide the above willingly and I agree I will be paid a cash rate
of $10 per hour. No overtime superannuation or leave applies
I agree I will provide services on a confidential basis and do so of my
own free will.
I agree this is on a short term basis.
I will not divulge the contract details to anyone else and that I agree
that at the end of the contract I will not pursue these matters
Signed:___________________
15/9/08______________
advertisement placed by Miss A on the Gumtree website read (in part) as follows
(exhibit 10):
Hello im [Miss A].
due to some very odd
family issues
i have been forced to
support myself
i need to find a job and a
house when I do this
i one day again wish to...
was evidence that Miss A was under 16 years of age at the time the offences were
committed and that she made complaint of the
conduct of the Respondent to her
father’s partner on 8 October 2008.
Evidence of Miss B
B gave a statement to police on 17 February 2009 (exhibit 17). At the time she
gave the statement she was 16 years of age.
B stated that she had attended the Respondent’s practice for the purpose
of being interviewed for a job. Miss B had applied
for the job via an email to
the Respondent – answering an advertisement placed by the Respondent on
‘Job seekers’.
During the job interview Miss B had with the
Respondent he stated that her duties would include
‘helping him
out....personally’
which she interpreted to mean that she would be
asked to attend to things such as obtaining his coffee and the like (page 142).
Respondent wrote down a list of duties she would be expected to attend to
which included
‘personal something’
and asked Miss B to sign
the document.
B gave the ages of the other employees working at the Respondent’s
surgeries as between 17 and 19 years of age.
B described how she went with the Respondent in his car on one occasion. She
thought the purpose of the trip was to travel to
a shop to purchase books and
folders. Instead of travelling to the shop the Respondent drove to his home and
through to a room off
the garage. The Respondent went to the bathroom and
returned having changed from his business trousers into a pair of cargo shorts.
The Respondent then told Miss B to give him a massage, which she proceeded to
taking some books and files off a shelf the Respondent gave Miss B a $10 note
and told her to give him a hug. The Respondent
then started rubbing her breast.
The Respondent then
prior to her walking out of the room.
B stated that the reason why she ‘
wanted the money so bad’
was because she wanted to repay her parents for the course they had paid for
her to attend.
B stated that the Respondent told her not to tell her parents about his conduct.
He said if she
‘let me down’
in that regard he would
Respondent then drove Miss B back to his surgery. Miss B stated that she was
crying by the time she arrived back in the surgery
and the two other young
female staff members asked her what had happened. Miss B told them
what had happened. On the advice of one of the
young female staff members Miss B left the practice before the Respondent
to the surgery after parking his car.
B stated that she was to be paid a wage of $4 per hour while she was being
trained. This is supported by documentation found
when police executed a search
warrant on the Respondent’s properties (exhibit 19).
statement of Miss B regarding informing the two young female staff members of
what had occurred is supported by their statements
Evidence of Miss C
C provided a statement to the police dated 24 February 2009 (exhibit 26).
C attended a job interview with the Respondent on 4 February 2009 organised
through an employment agency. During the interview
the Respondent informed Miss
C that he wanted her to work a
‘trial day’
and what he was
looking for was a person who could undertake receptionist duties as well as
‘personal duties’
. Miss C stated that she thought that
this meant attending to matters such as banking.
C attended the surgery for the purpose of undertaking the trial day of work on 6
February 2009. At around 1pm the Respondent
walked out of his office with some
files. Miss C stated that he handed her the files and asked her to follow him.
They left the surgery
and walked to his car. The Respondent drove the car a
short distance then stopped the car and removed a diary from the glove box
his car. The Respondent proceeded to write in the diary, he then read it out to
Miss C and asked her to read and sign it. Miss
C could not remember the exact
wording of the statement; however, she did recall that it essentially said he
could ask her to do
‘anything and everything’
. The Respondent
also asked her not to tell anyone about what she had signed. The Respondent then
proceeded to drive to his home,
although Miss C was unaware whose house it was.
The Respondent told Miss C that she should come with him into the house. Miss C
she was nervous as she was not sure of the reasons why they were at the
Respondent’s house. Miss C recalled that the Respondent
‘I’m feeling tense and need a massage’.
statement continued (at paragraphs 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19) as
Roopra asked me to give him a massage and tapped his shoulder. I felt sick; I
thought it was inappropriate to ask for a massage
at his house. I didn’t
want to do it but I didn’t want to lose my job. I walked behind Dr Roopra
and stood there while
he was sitting. I started to massage Dr Roopra’s
shoulders. He had a white button up business shirt and black tailored pants.
The shoulder massage went for about two minutes.
Roopra stood up and walked to the back of the house. He told me to follow him
which I did after hesitating. I walked into a room
which was a real mess and
looked like a storage room. Dr Roopra was standing to my right. Dr Roopra
reached over and grabbed my
left breast with his left hand. He was caressing my
breast for a couple of seconds. As he was doing this, I said, “No,
I tried to back away but he grabbed even harder. Dr Roopra
ignored me but let go eventually. I saw Dr Roopra put a mattress down
floor. The Mattress was already in the room but was leaning against a table.
Dr Roopra laid the mattress down and closed
the door. Dr Roopra lay on the
mattress. He asked me for more of a massage. At this stage, I just wanted to
get out of the house.
I was scared. Dr Roopra asked me to take off his pants.
I shook my head as if to say no. He kicked off his shoes and took his
himself. I then heard a knock on the front door. Dr Roopra got up and dressed
himself. He unlocked the door of the room
we were in. As I was following him
out of the room, Dr Roopra slapped me really hard on my backside. This really
hurt. I followed
him toward the front door. As I was following him he took a
hold of my arm and told me to get in a room near the kitchen. He led
this room. I didn’t want to go in the room but I felt like I had no
choice. Dr Roopra told me to be quiet. He left
me in the room and closed the
door behind him. I locked the door from the inside so he couldn’t get
back in. I could hear
him speaking to a male voice at the front door for a
couple of minutes. As he was doing this I started crying because I was
heard Dr Roopra come back to where I was. I unlocked the door because I was
going to try and get past him to get out of the house.
He grabbed my left arm
which made me stop. At this stage he was standing slightly to my left. He then
got his left hand and tried
to put it on my right breast under my clothes. He
had trouble doing this because I was wearing a button up business shirt with
shirt underneath. He got his hand through onto the skin of the top of
my breast. I said, “Stop, don’t do this”.
I had tears in my
eyes but I had stopped crying because I didn’t want him to see me crying.
He ignored me again. I said,
“No No” and was trying to get away
from him, but he still had hold of my left arm around the bicep so I
get away. He had a really firm grip. He eventually let go. Dr
Roopra took a bunch of papers from the room I was just in and told
them. I took the papers.
left his house and got into his car and he drove back to the same car park near
the Dentist Surgery. We didn’t talk on the
walked back to the Surgery. I was still carrying the papers he gave me. I took
the papers into the back room of the surgery and
put them down. I went back to
the Reception area. I took one of Dr Roopra’s business cards because I
thought about going
to the police. There were clients in the room so I got back
to work. I really wanted to leave and wanted to tell the receptionist
happened. I wanted to ask her if the same thing happened to her. I
didn’t leave because I didn’t want it to look
bad for my Employment
Agency. For the rest of the day I kept quiet.
C stated that the she received two calls from the Respondent’s mobile
telephone number at 11.04pm that night. She did not
answer either of these
calls. On the following Monday (9 February 2009) Miss C went to the employment
agency and reported the Respondent’s
conduct. Apart from informing Miss C
that they could not take any action with respect to the conduct they did inform
her that the
Respondent had specifically requested he be provided with
‘young girls’
in February 2009 Miss C became aware that there were news reports regarding the
Respondent. About a week later she made a report
to the police.
Statement of the ‘Job Placement Officer’ and the
‘Employment Consultant’ of the employment agency of Miss
following description of Miss C was provided to police by the Job Placement
Officer of the employment agency that sent her to
the interview with the
Respondent (paragraph 6 – exhibit 29):
Miss C is about 20 or 21 years old, and an attractive girl with
medium-length brown hair, a clear complexion, and has a young face
look younger than her age. She’s about 5’5”, medium build
with a large bust. As far as her personality
goes, she is quite shy and
definitely lacks confidence and I would describe her as a slow-learner.
I’ve always had to draw
information out of her. Miss C hasn’t had
much luck with her job seeking and lacked vocational direction; she seemed a bit
lost and didn’t know where she’d fit in. Miss C has a low-level
education, leaving school after Year 10. Despite these
factors, she seemed keen
to find a job.
statement also records that the Respondent had placed quite a number of
advertisements through the agency during the period August
2008 to February 2009
and the Job Placement Officer stated this was a high number to have placed
without the position being filled.
She further commented that
had been referred to the Respondent in response to these
advertisements. The statement to the police also recorded that Miss C made
complaint about the conduct of the Respondent to the agency and while conveying
the events began to cry and asked for support in
reporting the matter to the
Job Placement Officer stated that when the Respondent rang her with a request
for an advertisement he said:
I want females aged 16 to 25, and someone with no experience. Minimum of
a School Certificate, must be very well presented because
they would be dealing
with customers, and well-spoken. They need good hygiene practices.
statement continued:
I always referred girls that fit the above criteria, and I referred one
lady who was in her 50’s who was interviewed but unsuccessful
the job. I even offered ETIP which is Employment Training Incentive Payments,
which means that
Employment would subsidise part of the
trainee’s wage for the first 6 months of employment to cover the cost of
re-skilling
and re-training the new trainee.
Job Placement Officer made the following statement regarding conversations she
had with the Respondent on Monday 9 February 2009
and Tuesday 10 February
On Monday the 9
of February 2009, I rang Dr Roopra to confirm
that Miss C had started, that she had done her trial and to see how she
Dr Roopra said,
“She started on the Thursday for a trial, she did
“How many hours did she do?”
Dr Roopra said as though he was busy,
“I’ll call you tomorrow.”
The next day, Tuesday the 10
of February 2009, I called Dr
Roopra again.
“She did 7½ hours on Thursday and 7½ hours on
“Was that paid?” as it is a policy of
Employment that there are not to be any unpaid trials for any longer than 3
hours (unless agreed prior by all parties).
Dr Roopra assured me,
“Yes, it will be paid. I want to look at bringing her back in. She
was supposed to work the Saturday but she messaged me and
wouldn’t be coming in because her sister had a baby.”
employee of the agency (the employment consultant) also gave a statement to
police which corroborated Miss C’s statement
regarding having informed the
agency of the Respondent’s behaviour (exhibit 30). This statement
mentioned the fact that Miss
C may encounter problems with Centrelink as a
result of leaving the employment with the Respondent unless there was an
explanation.
The statement also recorded the observation that when Miss C
attended the agency the week following the incident with the Respondent
made no effort with respect to her presentation (i.e. no make-up/hair done), an
issue that had previously been attended to
police executed a search warrant on the Respondent’s home. Two photographs
of Miss A were found on a laptop computer (exhibit
41 and 42). A document
containing Miss A’s mobile telephone number was also located in a document
on the laptop computer. The
character reference and
‘Home office
cleaning service contract’
were also located on a computer at the
Respondent’s residence. Evidence regarding serious charges relating to
other women has
been totally disregarded by this Tribunal as they did not
Statements from other staff members of the
Respondent’s Practice
from two other staff members (both young females) at the Respondent’s
practice record that they became aware of the
complaint of Miss B and were
shocked or distressed by the nature of Miss B’s complaint. One statement
recorded there had been
discussion amongst the staff regarding the fact that
they were, like Miss B, all ‘Islanders’, meaning that they were
of Pacific Island ethnicity (exhibit 24 and 25).
Miscellaneous documentary evidence in the Respondent’s
Respondent placed considerable evidence before the Tribunal. Much of the
information is replicated in other places. The Tribunal
notes documents such as
Indictments, Probation and Parole reports, Pre-Sentence Consultation Report, and
receipts for relationship
counselling the Respondent and his wife undertook in
2009 and 2010.
Evidence of Dr Lennings
Lennings is a clinical psychologist who provided reports dated 5 November 2011
(volume 1 – exhibit R 8) and 10 November 2010
(volume 1 – exhibit 9)
on behalf of the Respondent. Dr Lennings also gave evidence to the Tribunal.
his initial report Dr Lennings stated that he had interviewed the Respondent
both in person and by telephone, and determined that
the Respondent
did not evidence poor mood or distortions of language or thought
indicative of a major mental illness’.
Dr Lennings stated that the
Respondent ‘
admits the offences, and tells me these are his first and
only sexual offences’.
Dr Lennings stated that the Respondent told
him he was ‘
totally depressed at the time of the current offences and
was not thinking.’
Dr Lennings' assessment of the Respondent also
His relationship with his wife had gone to pieces, he was apathetic,
uncaring and isolated. At the time he was neglecting himself,
and had poor
self-esteem, and his health was deteriorating.
He says he knew what he was doing was wrong but seemed able to suppress
those feelings of guilt to continue with the offences ...
and could ignore the
implications of his behaviour.
Lennings further stated that the Respondent told him he ‘
would have 6
double shots of coffee and go into hateful moods ... and it was in those moods
that that the offences would take place’
. The report also noted that
the Respondent advised that he has no tolerance to alcohol and a
genetic predisposition that makes it hard to metabolise alcohol.
Nonetheless at
the time of the offences he was drinking alcohol’.
Lennings' report refers to events in 2004-2006 and again in 2009 involving
medical issues for the Respondent’s family which
resulted in the
Respondent feeling
‘emotionally drained’
. It goes on to note
that the Respondent advises he engaged in futures share trading in 2008 and lost
‘close to $200,000’
when the GFC occurred (exhibit R1 – 9).
Dr Lennings states that ‘
this loss of money (and pride) seems to have
been one of the critical issues weighing on his mind and depressing him during
of time of the offences’
. Further, Dr Lennings states that
when the Respondent lost the money he ‘
experienced a kind of hypomanic
episode, the offences occurring in the context of this kind of odd sexually
driven behaviour’
. The report further stated that the Respondent
...that he was not sleeping and had sleep apnoea at the time.
He did not have a regular sleep routine for four nights a week because
late at night trading shares until 3am on the US market and would come home to
sleep at lunch time’.
Lennings stated that the Respondent
‘says that prior to that time he
was not on any medication, although on his account he says he was
(exhibit R1 – 9 – page 49)
notes that the Respondent reported having periods of
‘mood swings’
and experiencing hyperactive behaviours, yet at
other times was
‘unable to get motivated.’
Dr Lennings also
reported that the Respondent
‘found it hard to manage boredom,
especially with new staff, finding the training of staff difficult.’
Lennings' report stated that the Respondent
‘...accepts that there was
some planning in the offences and he was sexually aggressive and manipulative,
and accepts that he
targeted youthful looking women...’.
Dr Lennings
also reported that the Respondent
‘told me that his victims were more
Lennings also stated that the Respondent
‘has had significant problems
with having sexual relationships with his wife for some years’.
Lennings stated that the Respondent
‘met his additional sexual needs
during this period ... by attending massage parlours’.
Dr Lennings
further stated that he briefly interviewed the Respondent's wife, and that she
had reported that the Respondent
‘seemed confused and
at the time of the offences. She stated that their
attendance at marriage counselling was
‘unable to manage the problems
she had to deal with’.
The Respondent’s wife also confirmed
that the Respondent would
‘swing between moods’
‘could not get stable’.
Lennings produced a second report dated 5 November 2011 following a telephone
interview with the Respondent on 3 November 2011.
In that report Dr Lennings
stated that the Respondent discussed with him his wish to return to practising
dentistry, and that the
offences occurred in the context of his
occupational role but not against his patients but rather misusing his position
as an employer
to attract staff he then took advantage of’
Lennings reported that the Respondent is working every day and has become
engrossed in art,
‘reads widely from the library and has enrolled in an
accounting degree’
. The Respondent indicated that his marriage is
intact and that he is
‘reading the issues of communication and learning
how to be more open in his communication’.
Dr Lennings stated that
the Department of Corrective Services has confirmed that
Respondent is rated a low risk’.
Dr Lennings reiterated his earlier
view that the Respondent’s risk of reoffending remains in the lowest
classification and
‘his appreciable risk of offending again is
therefore negligible’
. Dr Lennings also stated that the Respondent
appears to understand the link between engaging in behaviours that
reduce the risk of depression and the potential for recidivism
his oral evidence Dr Lennings provided details of the manner in which he
interviewed the Respondent and his wife in order to prepare
his reports (T155).
Later in his evidence Dr Lennings stated that he had formed the view that the
Respondent was not being as defensive
in the manner he answered questions as
many others in his situation. Dr Lennings evidence continued
He wasn't trying to blame it on the fact that he hadn't had enough sex
with his wife, or that he was drinking too much, or that there
defensiveness. For instance, he was equating getting a bit hypermanic from
drinking too much coffee but, on the whole, I
thought that he was giving a
fairly reasonable approach for someone who hadn't yet gone through treatment.
in his evidence Dr Lennings elaborated on this aspect of his interviews with the
Respondent. The Respondent stated that he had
been in a ‘
emotional situation’
where he was feeling extremely guilty about
losing the money and
‘just lost the plot’
. In the second
interview he had reported to Dr Lennings that his excessive reaction to drinking
alcohol may have had something to
do with his conduct (T171).
Lennings provided a lengthy and detailed account of the reasoning behind his
view that there is a low risk that the Respondent
will re-offend. A low risk
equates to something between 7 to 12 out of 100 people expected to recidivate
within a 15 year period
(T161). It was Dr Lennings opinion that other
considerations relevant to recidivism were, in the Respondent’s case,
that it was unlikely that the Respondent would re-offend (T163 &
in his evidence Dr Lennings detailed the risk factors that may contribute to the
Respondent re-offending as follows (T173):
Well, I think the risk factors for Mr Roopra are going to be the rate
will probably be firstly a failure in mood control. I think
that will be one
particular risk factor. The second one will be overwork, trying to do too much,
trying to buttress his sense of
selfesteem, because he is feeling he is failing
at work, so the third one may well be sexual frustration within his relationship
and not being able to meet his sexual needs, so I think they are probably, with
reference to Mr Roopra, the main concerns that you
would have. So it would be
largely around his work habits, his mood control and factors occurring within
his relationship.
to what circumstances may pose the highest risk of the Respondent re-offending
Dr Lennings gave the following evidence (T174):
I think the most
normally you go on the modus operandi, what did he do last time. That is the
most likely thing he is going to repeat,
so in this case it would be taking in a
young staff member for the purpose of training or something else like that and
to groom that person into meeting his sexual needs. That would be
probably the most likely risk scenario. Another risk scenario
would be him
developing again some kind of professional relationship with a vulnerable young
person, probably through teaching if
he got into teaching or something else like
that. Although that is not part of his modus operandi to date, one imagines a
in that what he has to do is firstly encourage a dependence between a
person and himself and then take advantage of that dependence
so there is a
grooming stage involved, a capacity to make use of some form of institutional
authority and then, if he is experiencing
the destabilizing factors, there is
always a potential to act out on those, providing he doesn't have insight into
his behaviour
on those kinds of things.
asked questions by way of cross-examination Dr Lennings stated that he had not
received a copy of the Respondent’s statement
or a transcript of his
evidence to the Tribunal.
Lennings expressed the view that the Respondent would have enjoyed the sexual
activity subject of the offences (T172).
Lennings was asked the following question at T175:
Q. I'm just wondering whether you would agree that it was not just a
misusing of his position as an employer but also misusing his
position as a
registered health practitioner?
A. In an indirect way, because his position as a registered health
practitioner allowed him to be an employer, but it was essentially
the power associated with his capacity to be able to employ people. Whether he
was a health practitioner or whether he
was an accountant, the issue arises that
he was in a position of authority where he could employ people and that was the
Dr Lennings had recommended to the Respondent that he undertake a sexual
offenders’ course there was no evidence to
show that the treatment is
likely to reduce the likely rate of recidivism as the level is already at such a
low rate. Despite this
view Dr Lennings still supported the Respondent’s
attendance at such a course (being the one offered by Rev Dr Powell) which
expected would be somewhere around 12 to 18 months in duration. Dr Lennings
indicated that he considered that the Respondent’s
mood could be monitored
and if there were any concerns he should be seeking assistance from a
psychiatrist or a psychologist with
the possibility of the prescription of
antidepressant medications. Overwork was a risk factor he saw in the future for
the Respondent
as it was in Dr Lennings’ view
‘both a contributor
and a symptom’
(T176-177). Dr Lennings also advised he was of the view
that the Respondent should take steps to seek treatment for his sexual
frustration
(T177). Later in his evidence Dr Lennings mentioned another course
of a similar nature to the one offered by Rev Dr Powell. This
course has a
waiting list of about six months and takes 18 months to two years to graduate.
Alternatively a private practitioner
could offer the same type of counselling
and would accomplish the same kinds of outcomes in a shorter period of time
although the
group setting was preferable from a clinical perspective and an
outcomes perspective (T183). Dr Lennings expected that private practitioners
with the right type of expertise in this area (these being few in number) would
have a waiting list of several months. He also advised
that the attendance at
such courses may involve commitments during usual business hours.
in his evidence Dr Lennings expressed the following view about the treatment
requirements of the Respondent post release from
(T179-180):
Q. I think as a final question from the Tribunal, do
you see that once the Respondent is released from prison that he will need a
period of time to have some treatment to address the sexual deviance matters
that you have identified?
A. To be perfectly honest, a search of the literature suggests that for a
low risk offender treatment has very little impact because
their likelihood of
recidivism is so low. In this particular instance, however, I think Mr Roopra
would benefit from treatment because
for him it will be a way of gaining some
insight and making sense of his behaviour and alerting him to kinds of sign
posts that he
needs to make sure he avoids in the future. I don't think that
his risk of reoffending, his risk of relapse, is going to be hugely
affected by
treatment, simply because it is pretty unlikely he is going to reoffend anyway,
but to the extent that he will find some
personal meaning in going through that
process, that it may assist in avoiding some of the things that start the
offending train,
then there may be some benefit to it.
Q. And staying under the care of a psychiatrist or a psychologist would
that be something that would be of benefit?
A. I certainly think that given that I believe that the most likely
scenario for reoffending would be the emergence of a significant
episode, with some of these hypermanic elements in it again, and I think
checkups with a psychologist or psychiatrist
would be useful. To my mind, to be
perfectly honest, I think he would be better off if he was to go through
Reverend Peter Powell's
program, for some kind of checkin with a psychiatrist,
because it is a psychiatrist who can prescribe medications and it is probably
going to be a front line attack for any depression that he may go on to
experience.
Q. So medication will form a part of his future?
A. If he experiences another episode of depression, yes, because
medications work more quickly than psychotherapy. Within two to
six weeks the
therapeutic effect of the medication should become noticeable.
Lennings expressed the view that the Respondent asking for an increase in his
anti-depressant medications was a good sign but expected
that this should be
accompanied by the seeking of additional counselling to further assist with the
increase in emotional difficulties
he expected would have prompted such a
request (T177).
Lennings had a record in his notes that the Respondent had attended marital
counselling. Dr Lennings had formed the view that the
Respondent didn’t
respond well to that counsellor. Dr Lennings notes record that the counsellor
had become concerned about
the Respondent and referred him to some anger
management programs but there did not appear to have been anything specific the
had done in response to this referral (T178). Dr Lennings expressed
the view that he considered that referral to such a course was
appropriate at
the time but that the anger issues were indicative of the underlying depression
and so referral to deal with the depressive
syndrome would have been more
the Tribunal notes
the evidence given by Dr Kheray of his attempt to refer the
Respondent on to an appropriate practitioner under the GP Mental Health
Plan system and his report of the Respondent’s resistance to this move on
the basis of the fact that he was already receiving
counselling (from the
marriage counsellor).
Rev Dr Peter Powell
number of documents of the nature of preliminary documentation regarding the
course offered by Rev Dr Peter Powell came into evidence
as volume 1 –
exhibit 10). Dr Lennings has recommended that the Respondent complete a course
such as the one offered by Rev
Dr Peter Powell. The documents in evidence
indicate the Respondent has agreed to the terms of the Assessment offered by
this program,
acknowledging that there is limited confidentiality given the
nature of the treatment program, and has given permission for the program
access all relevant records regarding the offences. The Tribunal also notes that
the Respondent has prepared a one page document
setting out goals in preparation
for the program.
his goals document the Respondent acknowledges that he assaulted
and vulnerable ladies’
, that he abused his position of authority and
trust, that his actions were serious and that they had long term effects on
A, B and C. It goes on to state that he seeks and requires
‘rehabilitation, treatment and appropriate guidance’.
appears that in principle the Respondent has been accepted into this course.
Evidence of Mrs Dharini Roopra
Dharini Roopra is the wife of the Respondent. She gave evidence on the last day
of the Tribunal Inquiry.
Roopra advised the Executive Officer of the Council that the Respondent had been
taken into custody on 10 February 2011 by way
of a letter dated 14 February 2011
and that he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment on 25 March 2011 by way of
an email dated
8 April 2011 (exhibit 46).
copy of two affidavits provided by Mrs Roopra in support of the
Respondent’s application to the Local Court for Bail came
into evidence as
exhibits 52(a) and 52(b).
first affidavit dated 11 March 2009 sets out the usual background details
required for the consideration of bail. Under cross-examination
Mrs Roopra was
taken to paragraph 16 of this affidavit which reads:
He has informed me that he is not guilty of the offences as charged. I do
not, by divulging this to the Court, seek to render myself
compellable as a
witness against my husband, other than that he has said to me, of and concerning
the charges, that he is not guilty.
second affidavit provided by Mrs Roopra to the Local Court in support of the
Respondent’s application for Bail was dated
17 March 2009. This affidavit
provided details of the arrangements that could be made to supervise the
Respondent in his practice
and proposed place of residence (with his parents) if
Bail was granted.
Roopra provided a statement dated 14 November 2011 (volume 1 - exhibit R2(a)).
the heading ‘Background’ Mrs Roopra recounts that she had noticed
during 2008 and 2009 that there was a difference
in the Respondent’s
behaviour. Mrs Roopra stated in paragraph 2:
He appeared stressed and prone to mood swings. I could see that Chaitan
was in a depressed state. However, attempts by myself and
family were futile in
addressing these issues. We have now come to the realisation that there were a
number of factors affecting
Chaitan at the time and these have led to his
offending behaviour.
Roopra stated that the Respondent showed
‘great remorse and regret for
his actions’
answer to questions from the Tribunal regarding the conditions listed under the
heading ‘Physical Conditions’, Mrs
Roopra agreed that they were not
aware that the Respondent suffered from sleep apnoea until after the offending
behaviour came to
light when they were looking for ‘answers’. In her
statement Mrs Roopra reports that the Respondent suffered from diabetes,
cholesterol, back pain, hypertension, sleep apnoea and obesity.
paragraph 4 of Mrs Roopra’s statement she reports that the Respondent was
suffering from depression at the time of the offences
and details various
stressors that contributed thereto which included various family illnesses and
financial stresses due to the
Respondent’s considerable loss on the stock
market. The statement records that the Respondent was prescribed
anti-depressants
when he was released on bail and
‘his outlook has
improved dramatically’.
Mrs Roopra also advises of her attendance with
the Respondent at counselling sessions.
Roopra records the Respondent having told her of his intention to continue with
counselling and psychiatric help
‘in order for him to make a full
The Tribunal is unsure as to whether this relates to
marriage guidance counselling or anger management counselling or both. She also
provides details of the preliminary steps she has undertaken on behalf of the
Respondent to organise enrolment of the Respondent
in a course for sex offenders
at the ‘Pastoral Counselling Institute’ with Rev Dr Peter Powell as
suggested by Dr Lennings.
It was Mrs Roopra’s evidence that this course
was organised for the Respondent once he was released from custody.
Roopra details the support she and the Respondent have received from family,
friends, colleagues and the community. She expresses
the view in paragraph 11
‘This overwhelming support I feel is a great indication of the
strength of character that Chaitan possesses’
Roopra records that she worked as the Practice Manager with the Respondent while
he was working after he was released on bail.
She reported that the Respondent
worked ‘very well’ with the staff who spoke favourably of his
abilities as a dentist.
Roopra’s statement records that she had been married to the Respondent for
15 years, that he had always been a
‘loving husband’
‘worked hard to provide for our family’.
She was of the view
that the Respondent was well regarded in the profession (the Tribunal notes that
she had worked as the Practice
Manager in the past), the community, his friends
and other colleagues.
number of future work options for the Respondent are set out in paragraph 14 by
Mrs Roopra. One option listed is working in his
own practice. In this event Mrs
Roopra indicates that she will
‘endeavour to continue my role as
Practice Manager and assist Chaitan where needed in the future’.
Roopra also gave evidence before the District Court (commencing at page 15 of
exhibit 47). She stated that during 2006 she had
become alienated from her
husband, that he was behaving erratically, had mood swings, was working long
hours, had a multitude of
health problems including becoming quite obese. There
had also been a dispute between them regarding the management of his practice
and Mrs Roopra expressed the view that she was a more competent practice manager
than the Respondent.
Roopra stated that the Respondent had been co-operative in attendance for
marriage counselling which had helped
but she felt
there were issues he could not deal with. Mrs Roopra stated that she had noticed
‘drastic change
’ in the Respondent since he had been
charged with the offences in that he was communicating a lot better with
us’ and was pleasant to work with. Mrs Roopra gave evidence
that the Respondent had the support of his family, and would do
so after he was
released from custody. She stated he had become
‘much more spiritual,
and taken a much greater interest in his heritage’
. Mrs Roopra gave
evidence of the considerable financial strain (resulting in the sale of
investment properties and one practice)
that had been placed upon the family as
a consequence of the Respondent’s offending.
her oral evidence before the Tribunal Mrs Roopra stated that she was visiting
her husband on a fortnightly basis and speaking to
him on the telephone most
often on a daily basis while he has been incarcerated. She felt her relationship
with her husband was currently
quite good and positive with open communication
between them. She has found him to be quite jovial. There was not much conflict
them despite there being very important matters for them to discuss
Roopra confirmed her evidence that she had observed that her husband had been
quite unstable during the period 2008 to 2009 when
he was quite irritable,
erratic, moody, difficult to communicate with, looked low and was
self-absorbed’
Roopra reported to the Tribunal that she had noticed
‘quite a dramatic
improvement’
in his emotional state as he was now much calmer, he
discussed things openly, he was happier and more spiritual and generally more
positive (T187). The Respondent had been taking steps such as improving his
fitness with exercise and medication (which he was now
taking regularly) and
taking guidance from the Ministers available. Mrs Roopra reports that the
Respondent had attempted to undertake
a course whilst he is incarcerated but had
not yet been accepted into that course. He was also looking to gain a lot of
and counselling in the future.
Roopra gave evidence that the Respondent had stated during their conversations
that he wanted to return to work and that he intended
on working hard but knew
he needed to keep the stress levels down so that he could give more time to the
family and their children,
essentially to improve his work-life balance.
Roopra indicated her willingness to work as the Practice Manager should the
Respondent be permitted to continue practising as
Roopra confirmed that she had communicated with the co-ordinator of the program
run by Rev Dr Powell and there had been confirmation
that the Respondent was
eligible for admission into the program (T189).
Roopra confirmed under cross-examination that she had been present in court when
the District Court judge made his remarks on
Sentence. At around this time she
had seen the Statement of Facts. She also confirmed that she had provided
statements for the purpose
of those court proceedings and had had a chance to
read the reports of Dr Lennings.
Roopra confirmed that she had worked as the Practice Manager for the Respondent
before their children were born and then again
while the Respondent was out on
bail pending being sentenced. In around 2005-2006 they had a falling out
regarding financial matters
concerning the practice although with hindsight she
can now see it was actually more about poor communication (T192).
Roopra stated that she had remained the practice manager after the Respondent
was incarcerated and that the practice had now been
sold. The decision to sell
the practice was made after the period of incarceration was made known. She
stated that they had had discussions
regarding keeping the practice running so
that he could return to working after he was released from gaol (T194). One of
the options
discussed was the Respondent returning to work in his practice once
he was free to do so.
Roopra gave evidence that on 17 February 2009 she received a telephone call
informing her that the police were executing a search
warrant on her home. She
also received a telephone call from her husband wherein he informed her he had
been arrested and needed
the assistance of a solicitor (T195).
Respondent was taken into custody shortly after this and Mrs Roopra visited him
twice a week for the three weeks he was in custody
pending bail. During this
time she assisted in gathering the materials required for the bail application
as she wished to have him
released so he could come home. Mrs Roopra stated she
wanted to know the details of why the Respondent was in trouble but they had
been advised not to discuss it and there were constraints on how much discussion
could take place because of the corrective services
system. Further, she was
focussed on attending to the necessary arrangements and looking after her
husband’s welfare. Mrs Roopra
made arrangements for legal representation
with the assistance of the Respondent’s father and brother.
the Respondent was released from custody preparation had to be made for the
Dental Board Inquiry. While undertaking this preparation
the Respondent informed
Mrs Roopra that one of the outcomes from the Inquiry may be that he would be
suspended from practising as
a dentist (T197).
the Fact Sheet was available the Respondent informed her that there were some
anomalies in the facts that would be contested.
Quite early on in the process
the Respondent had informed her that he was not guilty of the charges (T199). At
that stage she was
aware that there were two women involved in making
allegations.
part of the preparation of the material for the Respondent’s bail
application Mrs Roopra prepared and swore an affidavit
with the help of her
husband’s legal representatives. Mrs Roopra accepted that this affidavit
may also have been used for the
Board Inquiry. Mrs Roopra was also aware that
references were prepared for the purpose of the bail application. She was also
that they were changed slightly so that they referred to the Board Inquiry
cross-examination Mrs Roopra was taken to exhibits 52A and 52B. The first being
her affidavit of 11 March 2009 (being just before
the bail hearing) and the
second sworn on 19 March 2009. With respect to the first affidavit Mrs Roopra
agreed that she had set out
some background material regarding her husband and
provided details of his personal characteristics and practice. Mrs Roopra was
then taken to paragraph 16 of the affidavit wherein she stated that the
Respondent had
‘informed her that he is not guilty of the offences as
. The affidavit went on to deal with matters such as the
reasons why she wanted the court to consider granting bail to the
Respondent.
answer to questions from the Tribunal Mrs Roopra gave evidence that while he has
been in gaol the Respondent was administering
his medication and taking his
blood sugar levels regularly for himself (without supervision).
Roopra also provided additional information regarding the marriage counselling
she and her husband had received. She stated that
this had started in 2006
– 2007 as an attempt to resolve the problems they were having but it did
not progress
‘very far at that point’
(T203). With hindsight
she feels that all of the issues the Respondent was dealing with at that time
probably resulted in the lack
of progress at that time. Mrs Roopra gave evidence
that the process was much more successful when they returned to counselling once
he was released on bail as he was more
. Mrs Roopra
stated that the Respondent was more accepting of his responsibilities and his
actions and could discuss them openly.
Roopra recalled that something about anger management had come up during the
course of this counselling. This had not been taken
any further at the time
because of the constraints of the bail conditions. She expressed the view that
this was definitely something
her husband needed and it was something that he
wanted to do for himself although she considered that he was already a calmer
and had taken ‘
great measures’
to improve himself.
Roopra gave evidence regarding her contact with the person who assists with the
administration relating to the Rev Dr Powell course.
It is Mrs Roopra’s
understanding that if the Respondent is released on 7 January 2013 that there
would be a course starting
in February or March for which he would be eligible.
Roopra confirmed that the Respondent had only sought treatment for his sleep
apnoea when he was out on bail although she had known
he had a problem with
sleep for a long time as he had back pain and was a heavy snorer.
Roopra gave evidence that she was aware of the fact that the Respondent suffered
from anxiety in relation to giving injections
to patients. She understood this
was because it caused pain. She expressed the view that the Respondent was a
proficient and skilled
Roopra gave evidence that she looked positively towards the future of her
relationship with her husband and it was their intention
to work on their
relationship (T207). Further, she thought the Respondent was ready to work
through the issues now whereas he had
not been when they attended marriage
guidance counselling earlier on.
Evidence of Dr Jasvinder Kheray
Kheray is the Respondent’s treating general practitioner and also his
brother-in-law. He provided a reference dated 3 November
2011 (exhibit R34)
which is summarised elsewhere in this document (see below).
Kheray also provided a copy of the clinical notes he held regarding the
Respondent which came into evidence as exhibit R3.
clinical notes of Dr Kheray confirm that the Respondent was first
‘diagnosed’ with depression on 24 March 2009. This
appears in the form of a Depression Anxiety Stress Score (DASS 21). There is
handwriting on the top of the DASS 21 form,
which reads: ‘Depression
Anxiety Depression Stress Score in the last week’. This is crossed out
totally with the second
‘Depression’ being crossed out twice. There
was a handwritten word ‘Depression’ on the page which was in
handwriting (T146). Dr Kheray stated in oral evidence that this was not his
handwriting.
Kheray’s clinical notes also confirm that Obstructive Sleep Apnoea in the
Respondent was first diagnosed as a result of a
‘Sleep Report’ from
‘Healthy Sleep Solutions’ dated 26 October 2010.
appears from Dr Kheray’s notes and from his responses in oral evidence
before the Tribunal, that the Respondent was only
diagnosed with diabetes, high
blood pressure and obesity prior to the time he was arrested. The depression and
issues with sleep
are matters that came to Dr Kheray’s attention after the
Respondent was released on bail.
Dr Kheray notes on 17/2/11 (page 1 of R3) that the Respondent is suffering from
‘major depression’
the report of Dr Lennings dated 10
November 2010 records that the Respondent ‘....
is not however currently
depressed ....’.
oral evidence, Dr Kheray indicated his stated interpretation of the Respondent
having depression before March 2009 was that the
Respondent complained of
tiredness, back pain and (undiagnosed at that time) sleep apnoea. In response to
questions on his interpretations
of the Respondent’s depression before
July 1009, and his suitability as a relation of the Respondent to be the
Respondent’s
medical practitioner, Dr Kheray noted (T138.37,
That was a brick wall in between us in that he never used to talk about
whether he was having a problem at home, or was feeling depression.
terms of both his statement in support of the Respondent (exhibit R34), and his
evidence, there seems to a question over Dr Kheray’s
detailed awareness of
the actual offences committed by the Respondent (around T142):
Q. Have you spoken to Mr Roopra about the offences that he has committed?
A. Very superficially.
Q. Superficially, what does that mean? What did you say and what did he
A. It was more a talk from him that what has happened actually that he
felt remorse and guilt and he wanted help. He wanted help and
he was quite eager
to have all the help actually when he comes out and I could only boost his
confidence and say probably, you know,
you are doing well and when you come out
probably you need to sort this out.
Q. Do you know what it was that Mr Roopra actually did to these women?
Q. What is it that you know that he did to these women?
A. He had some indecent assaults that I am aware of.
Q. Do you know what he did to commit the indecent assaults on these women?
A. Superficially I know, yes.
Q. What is it that you know?
A. A few things happened at his own place and over the time.
Q. What were the physical acts that Mr Roopra committed on these women, do
A. It was just inappropriate touching.
Q. Inappropriate touching where?
A. Not sure.
Q. And by whom?
A. By Dr Roopra.
Q. And who told you this information on what it was exactly that Mr Roopra
did to these women?
A. The family.
Q. Did he ever sit down and talk to you while he has been in gaol and say
Q. He has never talked to you about the offences itself?
A. That's correct.
response to questions from the Tribunal Dr Kheray provided further details
regarding his clinical notes (exhibit R3). Dr Kheray
stated that in around March
2009 he was going to prepare a GP Mental Health Plan for the Respondent but the
Respondent had
as he stated that he was already
visiting his own psychologist (called Bridgit) in the Penrith area
Tribunal asked Dr Kheray about the contents of the pre-sentence report he had
provided to the District Court. Dr Kheray clarified
that only two of the six
medical issues recorded in the document were evident at the time the Respondent
first consulted him in 2005
– being diabetes and hypertension. Dr Kheray
clarified that two of the items on the list were in fact the same thing (being
hypertension and high blood pressure – T148).
Kheray was aware that the Respondent also consulted another general medical
practitioner in Penrith (Dr Obied). Dr Kheray accepted
that it was possible that
the Respondent was not as honest and open with him as he could have been given
their familial relationship
by marriage (T150).
Kheray stated he had not suspected that the Respondent was depressed prior to
the time he was arrested as he had not mentioned
to him his daytime tiredness
and the fact that he had not felt well (T150).
answer to questions from the Tribunal Dr Kheray confirmed the
superficial’
discussions he had with the Respondent regarding his
conduct as follows (T151):
Q. Did you ever discuss with him what was it in his whole make up that
made him commit these indiscretions, we will call it? Did you
discuss that with
A. I discussed it very superficially, not in deep.
Q. So you didn't discuss his sexual behaviour or he didn't discuss that
A. He was very inclosed
(as transcribed)
with that but he discussed
very superficially what made him to do that and his answer was more that he was
silly actually and he
felt very embarrassed about the discussion and in talking
Kheray gave evidence that he had increased the Respondent’s dose of
antidepressant medication at the Respondent’s request
on 7 December 2010
Statement of Mrs Prean Kheray
Prean Kheray provided a statement dated 8 November 2011 (Volume 1 - exhibit R3).
Mrs Kheray is the eldest sister of the Respondent
and the wife of Dr Kheray.
Kheray stated that prior to and after sentencing the Respondent had expressed to
‘deep remorse and regret’
and had accepted his punishment
‘He made a heartfelt
apology to the complainants and their families and the community at the
sentencing hearing’
Kheray reported that the Respondent always worked very hard but it had been at
the expense of his health and well-being. Since
being sentenced the Respondent
had commenced using a C-PAP machine at night to manage his sleep apnoea and he
had also been
‘much more careful with his health issues’.
Kheray had maintained contact with the Respondent through correspondence and
visits in person since 10 February 2010. She had
found him to be
communicative and open’
and had also said he needed to balance his own
commitments so that he could be more involved with the wider family.
Kheray reports on her brother’s interest in art and music as well as his
studies for a Bachelor of Business degree. The
statement also speaks of the
Respondent’s spiritual growth, of him having undergone a
‘reflective period’
, his care for his health as well as his
dedication to dentistry. She understood that the Respondent had engaged with the
prison Chaplain
Service and was
‘keen to complete’
Corrective Services CORE Program for sex offenders. Mrs Kheray expresses the
view that there is wholehearted support for the
Respondent from his wife, his
parents, his immediate and wider family and friends
‘as we know that
this episode was totally out of character’
. She was also of the view
that the Respondent had
‘made every effort to come to terms with the
circumstances that led to his current situation’.
Kheray also gave evidence before the District Court (exhibit 47 commencing at
page 19). Mrs Kheray stated that the Respondent’s
conduct had brought
shame on her family and a
‘lot of problems in terms of social
but that the family had agreed to stand by the Respondent
and assist him. She further stated that at family meetings the Respondent
had to demonstrate that he was not going to re-offend and was going to
rehabilitate. Mrs Kheray stated she had noticed the Respondent
had changed since
he had been charged with the offences so that he was now more involved with the
family, attended social events
and engaged in musical pursuits.
Statement of Mr Sarwan Roopra
Roopra (snr) provided a statement dated 4 December 2011 (part Volume 1 - exhibit
R3). Mr Roopra (snr) is the Respondent’s
Roopra (snr) stated that since the Respondent had been in custody he had noticed
positive changes in his son. He had become
‘more stable, open and
honest with the family and is more like his old self’
. In retrospect
he saw that the Respondent had become
‘very depressed’
from the family.
Roopra (snr) states that the Respondent would like an opportunity to prove
himself and would not take
‘any chances for granted’
strong family ties of the Respondent are detailed by Mr Roopra (snr), including
details of the support the family has provided
to him. The Respondent’s
interest in traditional music and his ties to the community were detailed.
suffering (physical, emotional and financial) of the Respondent throughout this
episode is noted by Mr Roopra (snr) who considers
the Respondent has now
realised great faith in God. Mr Roopra (snr) entreats the Tribunal to allow the
Respondent an opportunity
to work in his chosen profession as he is a changed
person, has a family to care for and it will assist him to resettle back in to
the community.
Statement of Mrs Jeevanjeet Roopra
Roopra (snr) provided a statement dated 4 December 2011 (part Volume 1 - exhibit
R3). Mrs Roopra (snr) is the Respondent’s
Roopra (snr) stated that she has kept in contact with her son through letters,
telephone calls and visits. During these discussions
they have discussed the
dark period of his life when he was always stressed, impatient and avoided
family gatherings. She had assumed
this was due to work commitments and was not
aware he was suffering from depression (it is unclear from the statement how Mrs
(snr) came to this awareness). Mrs Roopra (snr) considers her son to be a
‘changed man’
as he has had a change in his thinking and
‘evolved at a great pace’
. The Respondent expressed her deep
regret over what occurred and the impact of his actions on the individuals and
their families.
Roopra (snr) states that the Respondent is more communicative with his family
regarding his feelings, is looking after his health,
and misses the company of
his family and friends.
Roopra (snr) reports that the members of their religious community regularly ask
after the Respondent and pray for him. The Respondent’s
talent in art is
Roopra (snr) reports that her son has always been a gentle loving and dutiful
son and had assisted her and her husband when they
had experienced various
health problems. She considers that her son has been given a
and that he will come out a
. Her trust that he will not re-offend is partly due to the
‘re-discovery of his religious and spiritual roots’
Roopra (snr) entreats the Tribunal to allow the Respondent to have a second
chance to work as a dentist.
Respondent’s evidence to the District Court
Respondent gave evidence to the District Court on 10 February 2011. At page 7 of
the transcript (exhibit 47) the Respondent stated
the following when asked about
his attitude towards his own conduct:
I felt very sick at the time. I’m appalled by my behaviour,
I’m very sorry for all the hurt I caused to the victims,
I just want to
say I’m sorry I’m just so appalled by my behaviour at the time, I
just find it – I don’t know,
I can’t explain fully why I was
in that state of mind, but there it was. I’m just appalled.
asked about the information he had provided to Dr Lennings the Respondent states
that he had told him the truth. The following
evidence in chief was given by the
Respondent (at pages 7 and 8 of the transcript – exhibit 47 – as
transcribed):
acknowledged to Dr Lennings that looking back there was a degree of planning
you indicated to Dr Lennings that you thought it seemed to be about power in
particular?
I think there was an element of power, an element of – I obviously abused
my position and I thought that was a power that
was related to power and
control. I think I had lost control of my life.
we just go into that to a degree, you talked to Dr Lennings and indicated in the
report that you had had a number of intersecting
stressors in your life and that
you now recognise that you were on effectively a downward spiral is it?
correct I at the time I was basically gambling on the share market, I was an
untreated diabetic. I had suffered sleep apnoea,
again untreated, sleeping
during the day, I was often diminished, diminished capacity. I was working 12
hours in the day and after
six or seven days of the week like that I can
remember having too much coffee. I would have anywhere up to six or seven
double shot
espressos in the day. My sugar levels were uncontrolled and you
know I obviously wasn’t communicating with those around me.
wasn’t communicating well at that time with anybody and these factors put
me in that position of diminished – I just
felt that I didn’t have
control of my life and I’ve got controls my mind, I just literally lost
you having difficulties in terms of your marriage?
was, I was, I was, as I said I wasn’t communicating with those, anyone
around me, my brother, sisters and so I was pushing
them away and I didn’t
listen to them, I didn’t listen to advice given to
going to that, were there attempts by your relatives and your doctor to
doctor said are you depressed at the time and I didn’t admit to it. My
– we saw marriage counselling and I didn’t
admit to them, to the
marriage counsellor that I was depressed all the time, I just rejected it. I
felt that I was the sort of person
that this couldn’t happen to and you
know I was above it, I was somehow above getting sick, I was very
were described at the time as being obese?
you lost a considerable amount of weight?
have, I have lost quite a bit of weight. My mum’s been – my wife
put me on a diet and I’ve been–
far as your obesity was concerned were you in denial about that too?
yes I was in denial, my entire being was in denial like you know I was – I
hated myself to be honest and that was the denial.
asked why he thought he had committed the offences the Respondent stated (page 9
of the transcript – exhibit 47):
I just think I was caught up in a bad web in a whirlpool and I just
didn’t know how to get out of it, I asked for help, that’s
Respondent acknowledged that there was an element of coercion involved in his
Respondent stated that his wife suffered from breast cancer between 2006 and
2008 and that his mother had also suffered from breast
cancer. His wife had been
his practice manager up until 2006. This had ceased in 2006 due to there being a
lack of communication
between them and they were arguing over financial and
other matters. After this time the Respondent managed the finances of the
At around this time he commenced share trading (at night) which he
accepted was effectively gambling with his own superannuation
fund. Ultimately,
the Respondent reports that his losses amounted to around $200,000.
Respondent was asked what insight he had gained from having discussions with Dr
Lennings and he gave the following evidence:
Well, in so far as an insight, I think that there was
number of factors at that time and they all seemed to coalesce at the same time
and I think I succumbed physically and mentally.
I think that’s how I
look back upon it and he also made me realise that how wrong my actions were and
that I deeply regret
them. I described it to Dr Lennings as a great, watching a
great chandelier come crashing down. I think that’s the imagery
that’s the way I in my mind, I just see it as one big fall from
Respondent’s evidence then continued as follows (exhibit 47,pages 10-11,
as transcribed):
indicated I think that you’re aware of the tragic consequences that
you’ve caused to the victims of these
the victims, to their families, to the communities, I’m humble, I’ve
lost apologies.
you think you will ever commit an offence of any similar nature ever
I’ll never dare anything like that.
Respondent gave evidence that he was taking Metformin, Lipitor, Diamicron, and
Pristiq in addition to using a C-PAP machine for
sleep apnoea and a salbutamol
pump for asthma.
Respondent informed the Court that his capacity to practise dentistry had been
‘terminated’ by the Dental Board. The
Tribunal notes at this point
that the Respondent’s registration was suspended by the Council on 11
October 2010.
The Respondent’s statement - exhibit R1
Respondent provided a statement to the Tribunal (exhibit R1) undated which forms
annexure B hereto.
his oral evidence the Respondent clarified Paragraph 4 by indicating that none
of the charges that did not proceed related to Misses
A, B or C (i.e. he pleaded
guilty in court to all of the charges in relation to Misses A, B and C).
Transcript of Board Inquiry and Council Inquiry
transcript of the Board Inquiry held on 27 March 2009 (exhibit 4) the
Respondent’s legal practitioner asked for clarification
as to who would
have access to the transcript (page 3). The Respondent was informed that the
transcript could be provided to the
police if a subpoena was issued to the
Board. On the basis of this advice the Respondent’s legal representative
indicated that
the Respondent would
‘exercise very great caution in
what questions he answered’
the Inquiry the Respondent mentioned that over the years his brother had
‘helped out’
in the practice from
in addition to Mrs Roopra
‘doing the books’
for the practice.
the Board Inquiry the Respondent was asked by the Chairperson whether or not he
appreciated that his conduct was connected
to his dental practice. The
Respondent refused to respond to this question on the basis of legal advice.
the Council Inquiry held on 11 October 2010 (exhibit 7) the Respondent’s
legal adviser clarified that the Respondent
had pleaded guilty to nine charges
with respect to three complainants, there originally having been 16 charges.
way of a letter or submission made by his legal representative to the Board on
27 March 2009 the Respondent maintained he was innocent
of the criminal charges
but refused to answer any questions regarding the facts of the matters (exhibit
3). The Tribunal notes that
the Board Inquiry was looking at 16 charges, of
which only nine ultimately proceeded. The Respondent pleaded guilty to the
that proceeded.
Oral evidence – the Respondent
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal on 19 December 2011.
in his evidence in chief the Respondent stated (T9):
Q. Dr Roopra, what is your present view about the conduct that gave rise
to the offences which you are presently concerned with?
A. My conduct was appalling and I can't justify or can't rationalise it.
I can't condone my behaviour in any sense. I truly regret
my actions and the
consequences that have been very dire, so yeah.
balance of the Respondent’s examination in chief succinctly summarises
many relevant issues (T10 - 13):
Q. Dr Roopra, how would you describe your emotional and mental state
during the period of the offending conduct in late 2008 and
early 2009?
A. Well, my emotional state was that I was in turmoil at that time. I
was having a very difficult time communicating. My wife and
I were arguing and
fighting about things back then and, you know, I felt I was out of control. I'd
lost control of my life and I
think my actions were those of trying to exert
power or some sort of authority and gain or regain some sort of control of my
Q. You refer to emotional turmoil. In what respects were your emotions
in turmoil?
A. Well, I was angry. I was lying to myself, lying to my wife as well.
I'd lost a lot of money on share gambling and I didn't tell
her about that. I
was basically lying to myself.
Q. What were the factors that you consider contributed to that state of
emotional turmoil which you described?
A. I think my health was not good. I had sleep apnoea and didn't use a
machine. That was one thing. I was diabetic, diagnosed
as diabetic, and didn't take my medications and, looking back, I was very
depressed at that time and didn't know it.
Q. Were there any life circumstances around that time that you considered
related to your emotional turmoil?
A. My wife got breast cancer and my Mum was diagnosed with breast cancer
at that time as well. It was tough.
Q. Were there any aspects of the conduct of your practice which you
considered contributed to your state of emotional turmoil at
A. I just think the whole period in my life was very mixed up
and it was not only just the practice, it was my personal life as well,
think both of those played into one another and contributed to what I
Q. Focusing first on the aspects of your practice which you say
contributed to your state of mind at the time, what were the aspects
practice that contributed?
A. I was running a very busy practice and, you know, I didn't manage it
very well. I didn't control the finances well and I didn't
manage the staff
very well. Looking back now, that created a lot of stress on a daily
Q. And focusing now on your personal life, what aspects of your personal
life do you say contributed to your emotional turmoil?
A. My personal relationship with my wife and we stopped communicating and
talking about things and not being honest with ourselves
basically, or myself
not being honest with her.
Q. You referred to the fact that you weren't being honest to yourself and
to your wife. What matters were you not being honest about
to yourself and your
A. Firstly, the financial aspect but also over a period of time we
distanced ourselves and that caused a lot of anguish to me, a
lot of anxiety for
me and I didn't know how to seek help. I didn't seek help. I was in a state of
denial. I denied that I needed
Q. You referred to financial difficulties. What exactly were
A. I'd lost of lot of money on share gambling. I'd lost over, I think,
Q. You referred to the fact that you were in a state of denial. Did you
discuss with your GP, Dr Kheray, any concerns you had about
your condition at
A. Well, he had raised the issue with me on a number of occasions but,
you know, I denied it and I didn't really I didn't really
take it up.
Q. Why did you choose not to raise these concerns you had about your
emotional condition with Dr Kheray?
A. I think I lived the socalled successful dentist's life and people
thought I had money, or I had those sorts of things and I just
didn't want to be
seen as a failure, and facing that was difficult for me.
Q. Taking into account what you have said, why do you think you committed
the offences for which you are now gaoled?
A. I think because I was trying to control, to gain some control in my
life. I think I did it as a means, as an exercise in power,
as a form of I
abused the authority that I did have as an exercise of power.
Q. Have you taken any steps since the time of your arrest to prevent the
likelihood of that offending conduct recurring?
A. Yes. Firstly myself, I've looked at myself and my own impulses and my
own mood behaviour and I have taken medication for that,
and also looking at my
own spiritual self and seeing what path that God takes me on and I find that
meditate and also externally I have support from
my family, my wife, and that gives me strength.
Q. Since the time of your arrest, have you undertaken any
counselling?
A. Yes. We went to counselling. We went to see a
counsellor in Penrith and she was very good. We went through some issues, some
anger management as well and communicating, and ways to communicate.
Q. Is this counselling you undertook with your wife?
Q. And what did you perceive as being the benefit you derived from that
counselling in terms of preventing the likelihood of a recurrence
A. Selfawareness, being aware, if I am losing control or if I'm not in a
good place, being aware of the triggers of that, being honest
and open and
talking to people about problems and she went through just basic communication
Q. You referred to becoming aware of triggers of your emotional state.
What have you identified as the triggers of your emotional
A. Well, the triggers could be anything that leads to a
stressful any stress really and managing that stress, managing it in a way
doesn't lead to anger, doesn't lead to repercussions, doesn't lead to further
problems and helping manage the situations. For
example, I might previously
have found that I would get angry if somebody said something to me and I would
act in an angry way and
now I realise that is just not the way to react and I
have got to remain calm and control myself in those sorts of situations.
Q. You referred earlier to a condition of sleep apnoea. When was that
condition diagnosed?
A. It was diagnosed after
I was arrested but I must have had it for many years because I was always
snoring, so I knew as a dentist
I knew that I had a problem with sleep apnoea
but I didn't again I was in a state of denial, if you like. I didn't proceed
either but I was diagnosed in one of the worst categories of sleep
apnoea. I knew that I had a problem because I would go to sleep
during the day
and my decisions would be bad decisions. I had a lack of judgment. I wouldn't
make very good decisions.
Q. And how would you describe your present emotional and mental
A. I'm a lot better and calmer now. I take my medications. I
take my diabetic medications now and I have a good routine. My emotional
now is a lot calmer. I have support and I talk to my wife and family, my
brother and sisters and I get a lot of support from
that, so my emotional state
is a lot calmer now and I am able to recognise situations a lot better.
Q. What is your personal view about the likelihood that you will
A. I won't be reoffending. No, I won't be reoffending. I
have enough internal and external checks and balances in my life now for
Q. What gives you the confidence that you are of the belief that you will
not reoffend?
A. Well, I just think I was in a bad place at a bad time in that period
of my life and I don't think I will ever get to that again.
Q. Why is it that you wish to continue your practice of
A. Well, I enjoyed my dentistry. I still think I have a lot to give to
the community. I still think I can contribute in some way
and I had a good
practice with a lot of good patients and they still remember me and I would like
to think that I could contribute
positively to that.
Q. What is the present state of your relationship with your wife?
A. Very good. We talk. She comes and visits and it is very good,
cross-examination the Respondent was taken to the events of the morning of 15
September 2008 when he ejaculated after rubbing his
penis up and down on Miss A
(then aged 15) and he gave the following evidence (T13):
Q. When did you start to feel sorry for doing that?
A. I knew it was the wrong thing to do but I was not in an emotional
state where I would say I had a rational mind. I was in an
irrational state of
mind. I don't think I felt really sorry until, you know, until I was arrested
and I started to make the realisation
that I had been in a very, very bad
Respondent provided a similar response when asked when it was that he started to
feel sorry for his actions of rubbing and licking
Miss A’s breasts. The
Respondent was then asked the following questions (T14):
Q. When was that, that you came to a realisation as to how bad your
actions had been?
A. Yes, I would say that would be after I was arrested because I was not
in a good place or a good state of mind until after that,
until I was taken out
of that entire milieu of environment.
Q. When was it after you were arrested that you came to realise that you
were sorry for those offences against
on the morning of 15
A. I don't think there was an exact moment. I think it was a process, a
psychological process that developed over time, and awareness
that developed in
that the reality of what I had done and the enormous gravitas.
Respondent continued with answering cross-examination questions stating that
although he was physically aware of his actions at
the time he was not
‘emotionally balanced’
at the time. The Respondent stated
that the process of self-realisation that his actions had been wrong began when
he was arrested
on 9 February 2009.
Respondent gave evidence that he remembered his conduct towards both Miss B and
Miss C and would repeat the evidence regarding
Miss A (set out above) about when
it was that he started to feel sorry for his actions and realise how wrong they
were (T15-16).
Respondent accepted that from early on he realised that the criminal charges he
was facing were serious and would likely have
an impact upon his ability to
practice as a dentist.
cross-examination the Respondent was taken in detail to the various Court
Attendance Notices and the Indictment. He accepted
that there were no issues in
relation to the three victims (being Miss A, Miss B and Miss C) described in the
Court Attendance Notices
that did not end up in the Indictment (T24). The
Respondent’s understanding of this position was confirmed by the following
Q. It is not as if these were additional allegations beyond what was in
the court attendance notices in relation to those three victims
that ended up as
counts on the indictment; is that correct to say?
A. Yes, correct.
Respondent was also taken during cross-examination through the Summary of Facts
prepared for the purpose of the sentencing proceedings
in the District Court and
the Statements provided by each victim to the police (commencing at T24). This
process was undertaken paragraph
by paragraph with respect to the written
material relating to Miss A but more globally in relation to Miss B and Miss C.
being taken through this process with respect to Miss A the Respondent gave the
following evidence (T33-34):
Q. What you have just noticed by going through comparing the statement
to the District Court facts, Mr Roopra, is that those two
documents are substantially the same, correct?
Q. There are no allegations of conduct contained in the statement of
facts which are not also contained in the District Court facts,
A. Correct.
Q. What Ms [Miss A] alleged in her statement to the police is what you
pleaded guilty to in your sentencing in the District Court?
A. Essentially, yes.
Q. Essentially or exactly?
A. Well, I can't recall that phone throwing incident that she talked
Q. What about the conduct? What about your conduct?
A. Yes, I would have no yes, correct.
Q. And the four offences [Miss A] set out in her statement were the four
offences that you pleaded guilty to?
A. Correct, at the time.
Q. It is not as if [Miss A] alleged other offences against you?
A. No, I was just going back to the phone. I can't remember throwing the
phone. That's what got me.
Q. There was nothing taken out of [Miss A]'s statement in terms of the
offences that you have admitted?
Q. That is already contained there in the statement of facts, is that
respect to the comparison between the Summary of Facts and the Statement of Miss
B the Respondent gave the following evidence
Q. Is it correct to say in relation to
the offences she
describes in her statement are exactly the same as the offences set out in the
agreed facts for sentencing?
Q. The events that she describes in her statement to police dated 24
February 2009 are set out in the District Court facts, commencing
at paragraph
16, up until and including paragraph 30, is that correct?
A. Yes, correct.
Q. They are substantially the same, those two documents?
Q. Would you agree with that?
Q. There is no conduct which
refers to in her statement
which has been taken out, is that so?
A. Correct.
Q. In addition, nothing has been added to the District Court facts that
aren't already contained in
Q. Is that so?
A. That is correct.
respect to the comparison between the Summary of Facts and the Statement of Miss
C the Respondent gave the following evidence
(T35 - 36):
Q. And it is the case that the allegations that
in her recorded interview with police are the same as the offences that you
pleaded guilty to, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. What's contained in
's recorded interview with police
is summarised as set out in those paragraphs of the District Court facts,
A. Correct.
Q. There are no other allegations contained in
of interview which were taken out of the agreed facts, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. In addition, the agreed facts don't add any detail to anything already
contained in
's agreed facts, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. The offences that
set out in her recorded interview
are the same as the offences referred to in the agreed facts, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. And they are the same as the counts of the indictment which you
pleaded guilty to, correct?
A. Correct.
Respondent agreed that each of the facts recorded in the Summary of Facts was as
described by the witnesses in their Police Statements
save for a minor point
relating to Miss A as follows (T32):
Q. And can you see at paragraph 12 of the District Court facts that sets
out in substance what I have just read to you from paragraph
Q. It doesn't contain the information about you getting angry and
throwing your hands free phone though, does it?
Q. But that is what happened, wasn't it? You did get angry and you did
throw your hands free phone, didn't you?
A. Well, it's not in the agreed facts there.
Q. Yes, but that is what happened you did get angry and you did throw
your hands free phone, didn't you?
A. I can't recall that.
Respondent then gave the following evidence in cross-examination in relation to
the contents of his statement (Exhibit R1 –
1 see reproduced as annexure B
Q. I want to take you to paragraph 4 of your statement. The first
sentence is "I was charged with offences that went beyond the
charges I pleaded
guilty to". Can you see that?
Q. Can you see that in relation to [Miss A, Miss B and Miss C] that you
were not charged with any offences that went beyond the charges
you pleaded
guilty to, correct?
Q. The next sentence is aspects of those charges were withdrawn, can you
Q. And it's the case in relation to [Miss A, Miss B and Miss C] that
there weren't aspects of those charges which were withdrawn,
Q. You are agreeing with what I have just said, is that so?
A. Correct.
Q. The third sentence in paragraph 4 is "after negotiations with the DPP
I pleaded guilty to the offences on the basis of a set of
agreed facts", can you
A. Correct.
Q. Those negotiations involved other complaints and other complainants,
Q. But it is the case in relation to [Miss A, Miss B and Miss C] that
there were no negotiations about what was to form a set of
agreed facts,
A. Correct.
Respondent was asked questions about the day the police executed a search
warrant on his home and practice. This was the same
day that the Respondent was
charged with various offences. The Respondent stated that he did not inform his
wife of the reason why
he was ringing her from the police station to ask for the
name of a solicitor as the police had already provided her with information
to why he was in custody (T37-38). The Respondent stated that he did not speak
to his wife about the offences until about two
or three weeks later while he was
in Silverwater Prison. The Respondent gave evidence that his wife had visited
‘probably twice’
before he was granted bail. On each
occasion the visit was for an hour but there were four visitors so the
conversation was more
a communal conversation.
Respondent was then asked the following questions (T39):
Q. Yes, but your wife must have been worried about the fact that you were
A. I think so.
Q. She must have been very concerned about why you were in gaol?
A. She already knew on the day that I had been arrested.
Q. Did she talk to you about it? Did she say tell me what
A. No, she didn't.
Q. She didn't ask you at all?
A. No, she didn't. She was more angry, more upset and more perplexed by
what was occurring and there were a lot of issues to take
care of in the
immediacy, so what happened was not a question that she really came to, until a
little later when the dust had settled,
if you like.
T 39-41 the Respondent was asked about the details of the conversations he had
with his wife while he was on remand as follows:
Q. You said your wife didn't ask you why you were in custody?
Q. What about you? Did you want to tell her why you were in
A. Absolutely. I did say to her immediately that I was apologetic and
very sorry about what had happened. We didn't go into the
details about what
had happened until later.
Q. What did you tell her you were apologetic for?
A. About everything. I think it was be a continuing thing
transcribed)
. I was just sorry our lives had come to this.
Q. You were apologising to your wife for the situation in the
A. Correct, as well as my behaviour. It was not only just apologising
for the situation, it was also for my entire behaviour, so
in a sense I was
apologising that our relationship had deteriorated to such a level that it had
come to this, so the apology was
on many levels, if you like.
Q. What were those levels?
A. Those levels were a personal level between ourselves, that
professionally I had allowed well, from a community point of view
I had allowed
our name to be besmirched and professionally I had let her down in terms of my
profession as well as for her, for her
Q. Did you talk about your behaviour which resulted in you going into
A. We didn't address that until a little bit later because we realised
there were a lot of issues there and we needed professional
immediate cause and effect. We
looked at it and said well, obviously we need to
talk to someone and we sought professional counselling, rather than a personal
on one dialogue, if you like.
Q. What was it that you needed help with?
A. I think I was in a bad place. I don't think there was any doubt as to
that. My behaviour speaks to that. I think I needed help
from a personal point
of view and I was seeking some answers and I wanted her to be a part of that
journey, rather than for her to
leave, which she could have done. You know, it
was well on the cards that she was about to leave me and, you know, I said to
look, I understand if you do leave. It is not something that I take lightly
and if you want to stay with me then we should seek
counselling and seek
professional help. That was where the discussion of, you know, what are we
going to do next came up.
Q. What did you say to her about your behaviour towards [Miss A, Miss B
and Miss C]?
A. When eventually that did come up, obviously I said I was abhorred by
my behaviour. I was distraught that I had acted in such
a way. It didn't come
up immediately though, it came up as a process, in due process, if you
Q. I am sorry, I didn't mean to talk over you. Please finish your
A. It didn't come up straight away. I probably came to the in response
to your question, I probably came to that a couple of months
later, maybe once I
had got bail and we had a chat about it.
Q. I want you to restrict yourself to your time in custody. What did you
say to your wife, if anything, about your behaviour towards
[Miss A, Miss B and
A. Yes, I was very sorry towards the girls, to the young ladies who were
victims. That's what I said to her.
Q. You said that to her while you were in gaol?
A. I believe I did.
Q. Did you tell you
(as transcribed)
while you were in custody,
before you got bail, that you were innocent of the charges?
Q. Are you sure about that?
A. I didn't approach it in terms of innocence or guilt. I approach it in
terms of where am I now. I didn't think of it in terms
of innocence or guilt at
that stage. I was in too much of a confused and shocked state, to be honest
Q. Isn't it very easy to either say you did something or you didn't do
A. Yes, on one level it is but you are in a state of shock at that time.
It is very difficult to actually come around to the reality
of a situation. You
are in gaol for the first time and you are in a displaced place. It is a
shocking, completely shocking environment.
Q. The reason you were in gaol was because a number of young women had
made allegations about your conduct towards them?
A. This is true. I don't deny that at all.
Q. To be clear, you are saying while you were in custody you said to your
wife you were very sorry for what you had done towards
the young ladies,
Q. Once you were released from custody you spoke in further detail to
your wife about that, is that so?
A. That's correct.
Respondent was asked more detailed questions regarding his conduct towards each
of the patients. With respect to Miss A the Respondent
confirmed that when he
spoke to Miss A on the telephone he had informed her that he was a dentist and
made arrangements for her to
attend his dental practice. The Respondent further
agreed that after he had committed the initial offences he had contacted Miss
to inform her that he would leave a reference regarding the work she had
undertaken for him at the reception of his practice (T42-3).
The reference which
the Respondent had signed referred to work duties undertaken by Miss A in his
dental practice. The Respondent
agreed that it was when Miss A came to collect
this reference that he took Miss A to his home. Later in cross-examination the
agreed that he had made several attempts to contact Miss A after the
first assault and ultimately resorted to the
‘deception’
of a reference and money to have her return to
his practice (T54). At T54-55 the Respondent gave the following evidence
this second instance of assaults against Miss A:
Q. A ploy to do what?
A. Unfortunately it was, you know, may have been towards committing
further offences.
Q. That's why when she came to your surgery you offered to pay her $150
for cleaning, correct?
A. Yes, correct.
Q. And when you made her that offer what you wanted to do was take her
Q. That's why when you took her back to your house you designed another
contract for her?
A. Correct.
Q. Which included cleaning and massaging, correct?
Q. Even though you had committed four offences on 15 September?
Q. You were going to commit more offences on [Miss A], correct?
A. Quite possibly.
Q. It wasn't possible was it, it was going to happen, wasn't it?
A. Well, yes.
Q. After she left your house on 8 October you drove her home to
[omitted], correct?
Q. Did that take you about an hour to drive to [omitted] from
A. It would be, yes.
Q. There were two photographs taken of [Miss A] which were on your
Q. That was at the time a search warrant was conducted. You are aware of
that, aren't you?
Respondent stated that the pictures had been downloaded onto his computer as
they had been part of the advertisement placed by
Miss A on the ‘Gum
Tree’ website.
respect to Miss C the Respondent accepted that she had been referred to his
practice in response to an advertisement that was
placed with an employment
agency and that her CV had been forwarded to him via the practice email address
(T43). The Respondent gave
the following evidence regarding his contact with
Miss C (T44):
Q. You told her that you wanted someone for reception but someone who
could also handle personal duties, is that correct?
Q. On the day of her trial, before you took her back to your house, you
gave her some files to hold as you left your practice, correct?
Q. And that was to make out to other people that she was involved in
doing work for you as part of her trial at the practice, correct?
Q. After you drove [Miss C] back to the surgery after taking her to your
house, you gave her a number of papers to take back into
the practice,
Q. And the purpose of that was to make out to other people that she had
been involved in doing work as part of her job with you at
the practice,
Respondent agreed that all of the details he had provided to the employment
agency indicated he wanted an employee for his dental
practice. He further
agreed that he provided a positive report back to the agency after Miss C had
attended (T44-45).
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his interactions with Miss B
Q. I want to ask you now about [Miss B]. You called her to come in for
an interview for a dental assistant traineeship at Blacktown,
Q. And you had put an ad on the internet for a dental assistant
traineeship, correct?
Q. She signed a contract in relation to taking part in an unpaid trial
day at your Penrith surgery, correct?
Q. And the contract that you gave her, which you asked her to sign,
included the normal things a dental assistant would do, correct?
Q. You told her in order to fulfil her traineeship she would have to work
at the dental practice for six months, correct?
Q. And you would understand that when you told her that, that is what she
would have believed she would need to do in order to become
Q. [Miss B] assisted you in seeing patients, correct?
Q. You taught her or someone else from your practice taught her how to
sterilise at the surgery?
Q. When you took her back to your house you gave her a number of folders
and books, correct?
Q. And the purpose of that was to make out to other people that she was
leaving in order to do work for you, is that so?
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the context of his conduct
Q. Mr Roopra, you would accept in each of the ways that I have just taken
you to in relation to [Miss A, Miss C and Miss B] that
each of those contacts
had something to do with your practice, correct?
Q. The only way you could have employed each of those three women was
through your position as a dentist, correct?
Respondent was taken to a part of the Remarks on Sentence during
cross-examination as follows (T47):
Q. And can you see at just above halfway down that page there is this
sentence, "Having said that, it must be borne in mind the offender
position as a dentist, a person who the complainants would naturally accept was
a person of good character to employ each
of the complainants". Can you see
Q. And you would agree with that, wouldn't you?
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination regarding the
matters he was cognisant of when he made contact
with Miss A
Q. Mr Roopra, when you saw the ad put up by [Miss A] on gumtree.com.au
you knew that she was a young person, didn't you?
Q. You knew she was 15 years old?
Q. When you went looking at that ad, you had in mind at that time that
that was someone who you would target, would that be fair
A. That would be fair to say.
Q. Even before you made the first contact you were looking for young
women, correct?
A. Yes, yes.
Q. And the ad had the heading 15 Year Old Needs Work Desperately?
Q. Do you recall that?
Q. You could tell from the ad that she was a person who needed to support
Q. And you could tell from the ad that she did need work desperately, is
in his cross-examination the Respondent agreed that when he made contact with
Miss A he knew he would target her to commit offences
against (T49). The
Respondent also gave evidence regarding the creation of the contract Miss A
signed as follows (T50):
Q. When you met her you realised that she was young and inexperienced,
Q. And you gave her a contract to sign, correct?
Q. This is a contract that you had already had prepared even before you
met her, is that so?
A. No, I don't think so.
Q. Can you turn to page 67 of the material which is at exhibit 9?
Q. Can you see that that's the contract that [Miss A] signed?
Q. You gave that to her when you were in the car, before you drove to
your house for the first time on 15 September 2008?
Q. It had already been prepared?
A. That one had, yes.
Q. All that needed to be put in was her name and where she was
A. Correct.
Q. And when you say that one had, are you saying this particular
A. I thought that you meant when I had interviewed her I had prepared
this. No, that's correct.
Q. You had met her on 10 September?
A. Correct and I had no contract at that stage. That's what I meant by
further cross-examination regarding the contract he had Miss A sign the
Respondent stated that he had used the word
‘willingly’
that contract as he intended to be deceptive (T51.12). The Respondent continued
with the following evidence (T51-52):
Q. The purpose of this contract was to give [Miss A] the belief that what
you would ask her to do would be a part of this contract,
Q. And that what she would be doing would be done willingly,
Q. So if she later made a complaint you would take out this contract and
say whatever was done was done willingly, correct?
Q. The purpose of this contract was also to make sure that [Miss A]
didn't say anything to anyone about what you did to her, correct?
Q. That's why you have got that it would be done on a confidential basis,
Q. That's why you also included at the end of the contract she would not
pursue these matters any further, correct?
Respondent gave evidence that when the police executed the search warrant on his
printed out in anticipation of
committing offences (T53).
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination regarding matter
he was cognisant of when he made contact with
Miss B (T48):
Q. [Miss B] was 16 years old, wasn't she?
Q. When you put on the ad up on the internet for a trainee dental
assistant you were looking for more young women, correct?
Q. Because that's who you were going to target in terms of your conduct,
Q. And so when [Miss B] applied and you found that she was 16, that's
something you bore in mind in deciding whether to see her at
Q. You told her that you would give her a dental traineeship,
Q. You had no intention of giving her a dental traineeship, did
A. On reflection, no.
Q. The reason you got her to come to see you was because you were going
to commit offences against her, correct?
in his evidence the Respondent agreed that he had obtained a signed contract
from Miss B for the same reasons he had obtained
the contract from Miss A.
Further, the purpose of taking her to his home at a time he knew his wife and
children would not be home
was for the purpose of committing offences. The
mattress located in his office was to facilitate this process (T56). The
agreed he told Miss B not to tell her parents or the staff about his
conduct towards her with the threat of not entering into the
dental traineeship
with her if she did so (T57).
Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-examination regarding the
matters he was cognisant of when he made contact
with Miss C
Q. [Miss C] had been sent by the [omitted] Employment Agency to you,
Q. Did you notice that she was quite a shy woman?
Q. Did you notice that she was a woman who lacked confidence?
A. I'm not sure if I noticed that.
Q. Would you describe her as a person who might be a slow
A. I didn't notice that.
Q. If you turn to page 185 of the material, which is at exhibit
Q. You can see at paragraph 6 there the [Job Placement Officer], who made
that statement?
Q. Describes her as a person who was quite shy. You agreed with
Q. [Job Placement Officer] described [Miss C] as a person who definitely
lacks confidence. You can see that description?
Q. Does that remind you that [Miss C] was a person who definitely lacked
selfconfidence?
A. I didn't think that at the time but, upon reflection, that is a valid
statement to make.
Q. You will see that [Job Placement Officer] refers to [Miss C] as a slow
learner. Can you see that?
A. Yes. I wasn't made I didn't assess her in terms of her learning
Q. When you spoke to her did you get a feeling that she might have been a
person who was not very intelligent?
A. No, I got the impression that she was shy.
Respondent accepted that he had obtained a signed contract from Miss C for the
same purpose he had done so with Miss A. That he
had taken her to his home at a
time he knew his wife and children would not be home and for the purpose of
committing offences against
Miss C. This was interrupted (by a knock at the
front door of the home) and the Respondent gave the following evidence about
then occurred (T57-58):
Q. And when [Miss C] went to leave the house you blocked her from leaving
by standing in the doorway, correct?
Q. And that's when you committed one of the offences, is that so?
A. That's right.
Q. In fact, when you put your hand onto the skin on top of her breast she
said "stop, don't do this", correct?
Q. And she had tears in her eyes at the time?
Q. You saw those tears?
A. I can't recall.
Q. Could you recall her saying "stop, don't do this"?
A. Yes, I recall that.
Q. She said "no, no", and tried to move away from you?
Q. But you were holding her by the arm, correct?
Q. Until you decided to let go of her?
Respondent confirmed that he knew his wife and children would not be home when
he took Misses A, B and C to his home. Further,
he accepted that he had a
mattress in his home office for the purpose of using while committing the
offences (T53-54).
Respondent was cross-examined about the Board Inquiry held on 27 March 2009
shortly after the Respondent was released on bail.
The Respondent agreed that he
was aware that his practising certificate may have been suspended by the Board
and therefore he put
before the Board everything he could to avoid this from
happening. The Respondent accepted that he had read the affidavits, references
and submissions that were placed before the Board Inquiry (T72-73). He also
accepted that he knew that his conduct towards Misses
A, B and C was wrong at
the time of his actions (T75). The Respondent was then taken to paragraph 5 of
the written submission placed
before the Board Inquiry which included
are instructed by Dr Roopra that he maintains his innocence of the
. A further denial of guilt is made in paragraph 13 of these
submissions (exhibit 51). The Respondent stated that this was the advice
had been given based upon the Brief as it was at that time. The Respondent also
agreed that it contained the statements from
Misses A, B and C. In paragraph 16
the submission relied on references attesting to his previous good character,
these references
having been provided on the basis of his attestation to his
innocence. The Respondent gave the following evidence regarding this
the submissions (T78):
Q. And you knew when that was written, that that related to the fact of
you not having committed these offences, is that correct?
A. Correct. This is dated 26 March 2009 so this is just a month after I
had gotten out, received bail and, as you were saying, trying
to get my life
everything that was possible in order
to get my life back together because
within the context of those parameters would that not be a reasonable thing to
do? I mean,
I was just taking advice and yes, I take full responsibility for my
actions. I take I fully understand that, but I was trying to
piece my life
together on the advice that I had been given. I had just been granted bail and
I had just gotten out of hospital.
Now, I was considering all the advice given
at that point in time and it was just not one single thing. This is a
complicated time
in our lives. Everything was up in the air so it was not a
simple matter of pinning it down to one thing or another. It was not
These affidavits that were written were written carefully and they were written
in the context of what was occurring at
Q. You were doing everything to make sure that your practising
certificate was not suspended by the Dental Board?
A. As I am doing today, sir. I'm here because I would like to not only
apologise to the victims, to the community, to my family,
but to my fraternity,
to my collegiate fraternities, those who I practised dentistry for. I have
every right therefore to say that
yes, I am very, very sorry for my actions but
I would also like the Board to consider that I'd like to one day practice again.
all that this is about.
Respondent’s cross-examination continued as follows
Q. You knew as at 27 March 2009 that you were not innocent of the charges
relating to [Miss A, Miss B and Miss C], correct?
A. Yes, that's right. But as you quite rightly say, innocent of those
charges. The allegations against me then were much wider
than that, which of
those charges I was against it. I maintain that.
Q. There is nothing in here in these submissions about you being innocent
of some charges but not of others, correct?
A. Well, that's not for me to quibble about. You asked me whether I was
innocent or guilty. I still maintain that I was innocent
of the totality of
what was before me and I had every right to do that. That was my advice then
and still is.
Q. You believed you had the right to place before the Dental Board this
sentence written by your solicitor "we are instructed by
Dr Roopra that he
maintains his innocence of the charges." You believed you had that right, did
A. No, I don't think I had. I had the right to defend myself.
Q. What were you defending yourself from when you were appeared before
the Dental Board on 27 March 2009?
A. The totality of the charges before them, the totality of the charges,
not the ones in particular that I was charged for.
Respondent was then taken to the transcript of the Board Inquiry (exhibit 4
– page 15) and asked the following questions
in cross-examination
Q. If you look just under halfway down that page you can see that the
Chair of the Dental Board said this to you, "Mr Roopra, I would
point out to you
that it's not the board's role to determine the truth of the allegations made
against you in the criminal proceedings".
Can you see that?
Q. That was explained to you quite clearly, wasn't it?
Q. The chair went on to say "it's not the board's role to determine the
truth of the allegations made out in the court appearance
notices or the facts
sheets". Can you see that?
Q. The chair went on to say "it's the role of the board under section 72
and the role of the members sitting here today at this hearing
to identify
whether there is a sufficient basis to conclude that action is necessary for the
purposes of protecting the life and
physical and mental health of any person in
the public interest". Can you see that?
Q. You knew that you weren't defending yourself against the totality of
the matters when you appeared before the Dental Board on
27 March, didn't
Q. So what you agreed to do was you agreed to these submissions being
made before the Dental Board saying that you maintained your
innocence of the
charges, correct?
Q. And that is because you were going to do whatever you could do to make
sure that your practising certificate was not going to
be suspended,
re-examination the Respondent was taken to the submissions made on his behalf to
the Board Inquiry which stated that the full police
Brief had not been received
at that point. The Respondent was also referred to the evidence he had given
under cross-examination
to the effect that he had the statements of Misses A, B
and C as at the time of the Board Inquiry. The Respondent was re-examined
follows (T99):
Q. At this stage do you have any precise recollection one way or the
other as to whether you had in your possession at that time
the statements by
[Miss A, Miss B and Miss C]?
A. Prior to answering that question, just looking at the date that you
are asking me in March 29th, I'd just been out of gaol, I'd
just attempted my
own life and you are asking me a very specific question. I don't think that
anybody could quite, you know, answer
that honestly and truthfully and say yes,
I remember that very specific document being in front of me. No, I cannot say
that I specifically
recall that. My mind at that time was one of turmoil. All
that I was doing and I specifically recall, yes, I was trying to save
certificate. Yes, I was trying to save my dental registration. I was not
trying to mislead. I was not trying to mislead
at that point in time. I was
being presented information. If you ask me specifically what documents were in
front of me at that
point of time, there were three full briefs in front of me,
advice from lawyers and whether this practice was being followed. There
whole lot of questions. I didn't know whether my wife was going to stay with me
at that point in time or not. These were
very difficult times. For us to go
back and look at these sorts of issues without taking into account the entire
complexity and
the entire general milieu of that point of time in my life is
not, I feel, a fair look at the entire picture.
Q. Just to get back to the particular question then, do you at the moment
have a precise recollection of whether you had those statements
before you at
the time of the hearing?
A. No. No, I don't.
Respondent was further re-examined about the submission made on his behalf to
the Board Inquiry regarding his innocence and he
gave the following evidence
(T101-102):
Q. Can I take you to paragraph 5 of those submissions? The first
sentence of paragraph 5 is "we are instructed by Dr Roopra that
he maintains his
innocence over charges". You were asked certain questions in relation to that
paragraph and you agreed that you
saw that it was contained in the submissions
when it was presented to the Dental Board and you gave evidence that you gave
instructions
to Mr Thorpe, who prepared the submissions, consistent with
paragraph 5 and you stated that you gave those instructions that you
innocent of the charges, based on advice that you had received from your
lawyers. What advice was it that you received from
your lawyers which informed
your instructions to them that you were innocent of the charges?
A. Well, they looked at the entire brief as they had in front of them at
that moment in time and came to that view that they would
advise me at that
point in time to plead innocent. This was the advice that I was given.
Q. You referred before to the fact that there was the additional charges
which were later dropped, which you contested, and you gave
evidence earlier on
to the effect that you considered yourself innocent of the totality of the
charges that were being pressed against
Q. Do you recall receiving any advice as to whether it was appropriate to
plead innocent or guilty by reference to the totality of
the charges, as opposed
to particular charges then pressed against you?
A. Yes, the advice given to me at that stage was that on the basis of the
totality of the charges to plead innocent.
Q. At the time that those submissions were prepared did you consider that
that statement "we are instructed by Dr Roopra that he
maintains his innocence
of the charges" constituted a misleading characterisation of your
Q. But at that time did you have a view as to your innocence or guilt in
relation to the charges related to
[Miss A, Miss C and Miss B]
Q. What was your view at that stage as to your innocence or guilt in
respect of those charges?
A. In respect to the three victims I was guilty.
Q. How do you then reconcile your belief that it was not a
misrepresentation to convey to the board that you maintained your innocence
the charges?
A. Because when I was asked a question I was asked the questions in terms
of the totality of the charges, not in individual cases.
Respondent was taken to the affidavits sworn by his wife that were placed before
the Dental Board Inquiry. He agreed that he knew
he was not innocent of the
charges at the time yet he allowed his wife to put an affidavit that set out the
statement he made to
her earlier. Cross-examination of the Respondent continued
as follows (T81):
Q. When you read that, you knew that wasn't correct about you being
innocent of the charges, correct?
Q. Yet you allowed that to be placed before the Dental Board to be taken
into account as to whether your practising certificate would
be suspended or
not, correct?
Q. Mr Roopra, when you did that, you knowingly mislead the members of the
Dental Board, didn't you?
Q. When you allowed the submissions by Mr Thorpe to be placed before
the Dental Board, referring to your innocence of the charges,
you knowingly
misled the members of the Dental Board, didn't you?
evidence of the Respondent was dealt with in re-examination. The Respondent
stated that as he sat in the witness box before the
Tribunal he had no
recollection of this document. He then gave the following evidence regarding his
recollection at the time it was
submitted to the court on the occasion of his
bail application (T103-104):
Q. At the time that it was submitted to the court?
A. No, I cannot be expected to remember every single paragraph in every
single document that was put forward to me at this particular
time. I think
that is just inhuman. It is inhuman. It is impossible for me to ascertain that
this was put forward to me and that
I read through every single paragraph and
that I signed off on it. I cannot see that that is simply possible, given that
given also that the date is 11 March 2009. I would like the Tribunal
please to take into consideration my mind set at this particular
time. I cannot
stress more strongly on that and if I am to be hung and quartered on whether I
read some document or not, I don't
see that that is of great significance. I
did not try in any way, shape or form to deliberately mislead the Dental
Tribunal when
I got out of gaol. I was, yes, trying to save my registration but
I was not trying to mislead.
Q. Dr Roopra, leaving aside whether it would be reasonable to expect you
to remember it, do you at the moment have a recollection
that you reviewed
paragraph 16 of this affidavit at the time that it was sworn and presented to
the court in support of your bail
application?
further re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence about the
manner in which he reviewed the affidavits that were
placed before the court in
support of his bail application (T105):
Q. To the best of your recollection, what was the nature of review you
undertook in respect of those affidavits at the time?
A. I reviewed them in the sense that asking if these were the most
effective way of achieving an outcome that was I going to get
bail or not.
That's all.
Q. Do you have a recollection as to the thoroughness with which you
reviewed the factual matters in those affidavits at the time?
A. Again, my mental state was not at a stage where I could even be
expected to do so and no, I don't.
Q. When you say "no, I don't", do you mean that you don't have a
recollection one way or the other as to how thoroughly you reviewed
A. Sorry, I did not I know that I did not review them very
thoroughly.
Respondent was asked questions in the Council Inquiry (11/10/10) regarding the
view formed by the Board Inquiry (27/3/09) that
he had indicated his innocence
in relation to the charges but by the time of the Council Inquiry had pleaded
guilty to a number of
the offences he had been charged with as at the date of
the Board Inquiry. The Respondent informed the Inquiry that he had not intended
to mislead the Board (see exhibit 7 – T page 19.7). The Respondent gave
the following evidence (T82):
Q. If you turn to page 56, can you see that the President of the Tribunal
last asked you a question commencing at line 4 which is
this "okay Dr Roopra, I
will put to you that you actually misled the delegates of the board at the last
meeting." Can you see that
Q. And your answer was "I tried not to"?
Q. "That was not my intention at all", correct?
Q. Now, you never agreed to the fact that you did mislead the Dental
Tribunal, did you, the Dental Board?
A. As I said, I tried not to.
Q. "That was not my intention at all"; that was your answer?
A. That was my answer.
Q. Why didn't you say this, I did mislead the board?
A. Well at that stage, as I said, I was looking at a different set of
allegations at that period in March as to what was put in front
October, so things had, I believe, materially changed so that's why I had said
what I said.
re-examination the Respondent was taken to his evidence under cross-examination
regarding misleading the Board Inquiry and the
Respondent gave the following
evidence (T102):
Q. Dr Roopra, you were ultimately asked questions by my learned friend in
relation to paragraph 5 of those submissions and it was
put to you that you, in
allowing those submissions to be put on your behalf, "knowingly mislead the
board", questions in relation
to your position. You responded yes to that.
What did you mean when you agreed with the proposition that you "knowingly
the board"?
A. Well, I understand that the board may have had that perception that I
was misleading them. However, my intent was never to mislead
them. However, if
there is a perception then I can't I cannot disagree with them if that's fair
decision. I never fully intended
to mislead them as such. I was only trying to
act as honestly as I saw it. I think that's how I saw it.
was further re-examination of the Respondent regarding the evidence he had given
in cross-examination about misleading of the
Board Inquiry. The Respondent gave
the following (T105 and 106):
Q. You were asked a number of questions about that paragraph by my
learned friend and there was a line of questioning to this effect:
to you that you knew that paragraph 16 was not correct and you responded yes,
and it was put to you that you knowingly
misled the board in relation to
paragraph 16, in respect of which you again said yes. What did you mean by your
responses to those
A. Well, I understood the questions to be as one of perception on the
part. Did the board perceive me as misleading them and I believe
because that's what John Lockwood was saying to me, that you have mislead us.
I, at that stage, was in no position to argue
with the board over whether I had
misled them or not. Clearly my intent was not to mislead them but they had the
perception that
I had and I did not have the courage I did not have the courage
and even today I am reticent of saying to the board, look, I'm sorry
but I don't
mean to mislead you but that's my intent. The lawyers might say something else.
They might be nitpicking and pick up
little things but no, I'm just seeing it
the way I'm seeing it. My perception is if the board sees that I am misleading
that's their perception of the events as it is instigated or funneled
through the prosecution side. That's fine. But it is not
my intent to do so
and it never has been.
...................................
Q. Did you consider that there were any limits in relation to what you
were prepared to do in order to ensure that your certificate
A. Of course. Of course one has to consider that the entire process of
being here, one has to consider was it worth it me even showing
up. I have to
consider whether I am going to spend the money, whether my family is going to,
is it worth it for me, is it worth
it for my family, is it worth it for the
entire process. Is it a feasible is it a feasible project to undertake and
there are elements
to that. One doesn't just go in there and say look, I'm
going to throw a bouncer, bowl a bouncer every ball. No, one takes these
on advice and one takes these things in due consideration. It was with due
consideration to the limits and also due consideration
to whether I had
something to give to the dental community or not. I had to take that into
consideration. I know other cases may
have said well, it's not worth it. It's
not worth it me even being here and that may well be the case, but I know for my
and my family's sake and the community's sake, and even for the people
I have wronged, especially for the people I have wronged,
I need to do the right
thing. I think I need to do the right thing. If I had stayed home, or stayed
in my cell today and decided
not to come, I think I would have been doing the
wrong thing and that I had to take into consideration. There are certain limits
within a legal sense and that really is your job. I'm not a lawyer, I'm a
dentist, or I was a dentist and I take everything on advice.
If a lawyer says
well, you did this and you mislead somebody, well, it may be the case that I may
have done that, but I didn't intend
to. My intent was not to mislead. My word
was yes. I may have said yes, but why did I say yes? It is not for me I
yes because I wanted to mislead the entire Dental Board. Prof Wing
was one of my tutors. I'm not going to go and mislead people
like that. I have
no intent to do that. These are my tutors and my mentors. I feel that I'm here
to tell them my story. I'm here
because I need to explain where I was at that
particular time. I know that I have perplexed them. I know that I have let
and that's why I am here today.
in cross-examination the Respondent accepted that as at October 2010 the only
criminal matters that were proceeding against
him related to his conduct towards
Misses A, B and C and that he accepted all of the allegations made by these
women yet he did not
inform the Council Inquiry that he had mislead in any
manner the Board Inquiry held in March 2009.
re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the reason
why he had pleaded guilty and the reason he was
undertaking courses whilst
incarcerated (T99-100):
Q. Dr Roopra, you were asked a number of questions about your ultimate
plea of guilty in respect of criminal charges and it was put
to you that you
pleaded guilty because you would get a better outcome and you responded yes to
that question. Apart from your desire
to get a better outcome, were there any
other reasons as to why you pleaded guilty to the criminal charges?
A. I think it was a gradual spiritual process, a selfawareness, an
inherent understanding of the wrongfulness of my actions and that
overnight dawning, that was something that took some time to develop. It was
not only legal advice that came into that
reckoning. It was also spiritual
advice that came to the fore. It did not come overnight. It did not come
lightly. Whilst we
may say that it is easy to say that you know whether you are
doing right or you know that you are doing wrong, I don't think that
material. What is material is that over a period of time, I came to the
realisation, selfrealisation is a slow process and it
takes some time. It took
me some time.
Q. You were asked certain questions about programs of rehabilitation that
you were pursuing in gaol. What intentions do you presently
have in relation to
seeking counselling, or participation in rehabilitation programs once you are
released from gaol?
A. Well, I've enrolled to do the Pastoral Care Institute program with
Dr Powell. If he doesn't retire then I will do the course
with him. If he
does retire I will do Dr Lennings course, if he takes me on as one of his
cases. That's two avenues I am pursuing
and in gaol, while I am there, I am
trying to obviously enrol but given the fact I am on automatic release it is
very difficult for
me to try to get onto the program ahead of those people who
are not on automatic release.
Q. Would you be prepared to give undertakings to undertake whatever
programs for counselling and rehabilitation might be recommend
by a psychiatric
A. Absolutely.
Q. As a condition of your registration?
A. That would be welcome. That would be very welcome.
further cross-examination (under leave from questions arising from
re-examination questions allowed over objection) the Respondent
following evidence regarding the submissions made to the Board Inquiry and his
mental state at that time (T107& 108-109
& 110-116):
Q. Were there any questions that you stopped me and said I don't
understand the question that you are asking?
A. I can't recall.
Q. That took place today, you can't recall that?
A. No, I can't.
Q. If there were any questions where you didn't understand what I was
saying you would have said to me I don't understand the question,
A. Logically.
Q. Was that a yes or a no?
Q. I asked you earlier about your understanding of what was put in the
submissions written by Mr Thorpe, which were placed before
the Dental Board
on 27 March. Do you remember that, 2009?
..........................
Q. You spoke to Mr Thorpe before you went to the Dental Board about
what was going to happen at the Dental Board, correct?
Q. In fact these submissions prepared by Mr Thorpe were prepared the
day before you appeared at the Dental Board, correct?
Q. They are dated 26 March 2009. Can you see that at page four?
Q. He gave that to you on the day before the appearance at the Dental
Board, is this correct, this is Mr Thorpe?
A. I think he gave this to me, if I recall correctly, which I may not,
that he gave me these the day that we actually went to the
Q. And he told you, Mr Roopra, these are the submissions I'm going to
place before the Dental Board. He told you that, didn't he?
A. Well, he may have said words to that effect.
Q. What else did he tell you about the submissions?
A. Well, he just told me of them in a general sense, not in a particular
sense. He didn't go through paragraph 1 is this, paragraph
paragraphs 3 and 4 is this, so if you are asking me a particular question about
a particular paragraph then no, I don't
recall a particular paragraph in a
particular statement on a particular date or time.
Q. The question I asked you is what else did he say to you about the
submissions. What is your answer to that question?
A. I can't recall.
Q. Mr Thorpe wasn't going to be making up things that he put in
these submissions, correct?
A. I don't believe so.
Q. Well, yes or no, was he going to make it up?
Q. So when Mr Thorpe said at paragraph 5 of these submissions "we
are instructed by Dr Roopra that he maintains his innocence of
the charges" you
told him that, didn't you?
A. On the basis of the charges that were in front of us at the time,
Q. You didn't tell him look, I'm guilty in relation to [Miss A, Miss C
and Miss B]? Did you tell him that?
A. As I said before, Mr Fernandez, the entire environment of that, you
have got to go back to that period of time. It is not a simple
matter of did he
say this or did he say that. I think you are pinning it down to particulars
which may or may not have occurred.
I cannot recall that, in all honesty. You
cannot recall what you were doing on 27 March either.
.......................
Q. What was your state of mind when you went before the Dental Board on
27 March 2009?
A. Well, as I said before, I was in the process of change. I was in the
process of a psychological change. It is not easy to quantify
Q. You were capable of coherent thought, weren't you?
A. I would have needed a psychological evaluation for that. I didn't
have one at this point in time.
Q. You understood the purpose of these proceedings on 27 March 2009,
didn't you?
A. I believe so.
Q. They were explained to you in that part of the transcript at page 15
that I took you to. Do you recall that?
A. Where is page 15?
................
Q. I took you to that part earlier where the chair of the Dental Board
told you what the purpose of the proceedings were?
Q. You never said anything when you appeared before the Dental Board
that day, is
that correct?
A. No, but again, I am not qualified to judge whether I am in a fit state
Q. These were proceedings that were going to affect your ability to
continue to practice dentistry. You understand that, don't you?
A. Yes, but at that particular time I was not in a fit state, I was not
in a I cannot objectively determine if I was in a fit state
or not. Is that
what you are asking me, was I in a fit state or not, but I am not a
psychologist.
Q. You were in a fit state of mind to object to providing information to
the board when they asked you, correct?
A. Yes, but that state of mind may not have been may not have been of a
rational mind altogether.
Q. Turn to page 26, if you would, of the transcript of 27 March 2009.
You will see at the top of page 26 you were asked questions
by the chair of the
Dental Board about the brief of evidence and it being a partial brief. Can you
Q. You can see the fourth note, fourth transcription line, there is a
question by the chair where you were asked, "are you prepared
to provide that
partial brief of evidence to the board?" Can you see that?
Q. Your answer was "no", correct?
Q. The next question was, "is there a reason why you won't provide it?"
And your answer was "yes there is". Can you see that?
Q. The next question by the chair was "what's the reason?" And your
answer was "it's a matter that is prejudicial and irrelevant
to the board's
conditions". Can you see that?
Q. So you were at a state where you were able to enunciate an objection
and say why you objected to that material being provided,
A. The very next line is "I had taken legal advice". The chair said "you
advance that on the basis you have taken legal advice?"
I had enunciated that
was on the basis of legal advice given to me by Mr Thorpe.
Q. Would you listen to the question I asked you and answer that question?
The question was not about legal advice. The question
was you were in a
position to object to material being provided and to explain why,
A. Correct.
Q. If you turn to page 27 you will see about a third of the way down that
page that the chair of the board asked you this question:
"In relation to these
criminal proceedings I have questions in terms of the employment circumstances.
Do you accept, Dr Roopra,
that you employed each of the five complainants?" Can
you see that?
Q. And you said "on legal advice I can't answer that question",
Q. You were of sufficient soundness of mind to say you weren't going to
answer the question and why, correct?
Q. And then there were further questions by the chair about the legal
advice that you were given and you said on legal advice you
couldn't answer
those questions, correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. Is that correct?
A. Correct.
Q. You were asked about references that were provided and you were able
to talk about those references, who those references were
from and what they
were provided for, is that correct?
Q. If you look over at page 28 your wife gave some answers but you were
asked questions about those references and you knew that
those references had
been placed before the Dental Board, correct?
Q. If you turn to page 30, you were asked at the very top of that page,
"do you have any comments on the similarities and patterns
of the complaints
there?" Can you see that?
Q. And you said "on legal advice I'm not able to answer that question",
Q. You were of sufficient mind to be able to make an objection to being
asked to give an answer, correct?
Q. You were asked a further question about five females and you once
again declined to answer by saying on legal advice you couldn't
comment. Can
you see that?
Q. The complaint is not that you had legal advice, the fact of the matter
is you were of sufficient mind to raise an objection to
providing information,
A. I was also of sufficient mind the corollary to that is I was of
sufficient mind to receive legal advice, not to object only.
Q. The question I asked you was you were of sufficient mind to raise an
objection to providing the answer to that question, correct?
A. Fair enough, correct.
Q. The next question was "the board also has concerns about the
connection of these complaints to your dental practice and I understand
connected to your dental practice". That is the question asked by the chair.
You can see that there?
Q. And you answered "on legal advice I can't answer that question",
Q. Mr Roopra, you weren't a person who was incoherent at the time of this
hearing on 27 March 2009, were you?
A. I didn't say I was incoherent.
Q. You knew full well what your legal rights were and you asserted them,
didn't you?
A. I was taking legal advice, yes.
Q. You asserted your legal rights, didn't you?
A. I was taking legal advice, yes.
Q. Are you able to answer the question I asked you? You asserted your
legal rights?
Q. And that means you knew what the questions were and knew what the
consequences were to you of answering those questions? Do you
A. At that point in time, yes.
Q. I'm only asking you about 27 March 2009?
A. Thank you.
Q. There is no criticism that you took objections on the basis of legal
advice, you understand?
A. I understand.
Q. They are questions about your functions at the time of your appearance
before the Dental Board, do you understand?
Q. Do you understand that?
Q. At the time that you appeared at the Dental Board you were aware that
critically important to the board was whether these allegations
or what was the
effect of these allegations on your ability to practice, that's so, isn't
A. Correct.
Q. Critical to that is the fact that you maintained your innocence of the
charges; that's so, isn't it?
A. As they were presented at that particular time, yes.
Q. But nowhere in the submissions that you allowed to be placed before
the Dental Board by Mr Thorpe did you have him draw a distinction
offences that you accepted your guilt to and offences that you did not accept
your guilt to, correct?
A. That was the advice that I was given at that stage, not to do
Q. The point I'm making is you didn't say to Mr Thorpe, look I'm
maintaining any innocence in respect of two of the complainants
relation to three of them. You didn't say that?
A. That would be circumventing the entire legal process, wouldn't it?
Q. Answer the question I am asking. You didn't say to Mr Thorpe, I
am accepting my guilt to two of the complainants but not to three
that's correct?
Q. You could have said to Mr Thorpe, what I want you to do is take
out what you have said in paragraph five?
A. I could have said that but I could have said a lot of things. You can
make a hyperbole and a hypothetical out of a decision where
it could have or
should have. It is not making much sense to me in that sense.
Q. Your innocence to the charges was the critical matter?
A. In a sense the entirety and the totality of the charges, yes, I agree
with you there. I maintain that position.
Q. What position do you maintain?
A. That the entirety and the totality of the charges was I was innocent
of the entirety and the totality of the charges as presented
to me on that
Q. How could you have been innocent of the charges relating to [Miss A,
Miss B and Miss C]?
A. Of those I was not but the entirety of the charges at the time,
because that was the legal process I was going through. The legal
process, as
you know, doesn't look I don't understand the entire legal process. That was
the advice I was given at that point in
time. I only acted on that.
Q. You weren't sitting impassively back accepting them, were you?
A. To an extent I was.
Q. Weren't you providing instructions to your lawyers as to how you
wanted the proceeding conducted?
A. In any meetings with these lawyers I have found it is not entirely up
to the client, it is very much so up to the solicitor and
to the barrister and
whoever is representing you, that they provide you with a strategy or advice.
It is not a simple matter of
you go in there and say I am this or I am that, no.
These are very complex issues and they go to the very heart of the legal
I'm not privy to as many cases as you are, sir, and I'm not certainly
a lawyer. I am only as a layman going to a lawyer, listening
to the advice that
they give me so in a sense yes, impassive.
Q. You are not blindly going to follow the advice and strategy of your
lawyers, are you?
A. Depends how good they are.
Q. Did you think Mr Thorpe was a good lawyer?
A. I thought he was very good.
Q. So you must have thought he would present the case for you as best as
he possibly could?
A. Why should he not do so?
Q. Part of that was advice to the Dental Board that you maintained your
innocence of the charges?
A. As presented on 27 March in that submission, yes.
Q. I take you to exhibit 52A, which is the affidavit from your wife. Can
you go to paragraph 16?
A. Which date are we talking about?
Q. 11 March 2009. You are aware when you went before the
Dental Board they were concerned about your ability to practise when you
these charges over you, correct?
Q. That's why you went with the arrangements, for example, about having a
Q. And why you went with arrangements about your wife returning as your
practice manager?
A. And I'm still concerned about those very issues.
Q. I am asking you about the hearing of 29 March 2009, about the hearing
of the Dental Board; do you understand that?
Q. You are well aware in paragraph 16 that your wife said "he has
informed me that he is not guilty of the offences as charged",
A. As charged.
Q. Yes, correct. You were very well aware of that, weren't you?
A. Yes. Well, paragraph 16 of this particular document, no, the
particularisation, as I said before, the general yes, the particular
you are asking me if I was aware of this very particular document, the very page
in paragraph 16 and annotation or sentence,
then my answer to you is no. I
cannot be reasonably expected yet again I answer you that I cannot be
reasonably expected to have
each document by paragraph in my memory, especially
when I have just got out of gaol and applying for bail and trying to put the
glue back into my life. I cannot being expected to do that, sir.
Q. That's the second time you have seen this document, the affidavit of
11 March, wasn't it?
A. The second time from when? When was the first time?
Q. For your bail application at Penrith?
Q. This document had been prepared for your bail application, is that
A. Yes, but I was only presented as a prisoner at my bail application. I
did not see the document.
Q. Your lawyers did not tell you they had made arrangements with your
wife to prepare this?
A. I didn't see this particular document.
Q. You didn't see this document?
A. How can I be given a document? I am a prisoner in a cell. There is
no way. You couldn't get the affidavit to the prisoner in
Q. You hadn't been sent it afterwards to say this is the
A. I was out on bail and that was afterwards. Only in a general sense we
had moved on to the next issue. The next issue was trying
to put our practice
examination from questions arising was followed by some clarification questions
from the Tribunal. The Respondent gave the following
(T117-118):
Q. Mr Roopra, on the occasion that you came before the Dental Board in
March 2009, you were informed at the beginning of the proceedings
that what they
were there to do was not to ascertain whether or not you were guilty of the
conduct, is that the case?
A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. And is it the case that what they told you they were there to do was
to see if there was a sufficient basis to conclude that action
was necessary for
the purposes of protecting the life or physical or mental health of any person
in the public interest?
Q. Do you recall that?
A. I do recall that, yes. Dr Lockwood did say that to me.
Q. In your experience as a registered dentist do you think it would have
been an important matter for the board to know what your
position was with
respect to your guilt on each of the counts that you were charged with?
A. I think it would be, yes. I think it would be of relevance.
Q. If you look at what was put in paragraph 5 of the submissions, that
document that we have been using, if you look in paragraph
5 there, does that
make it clear that your position was in fact you were guilty of some of those
A. Paragraph 5.
Q. It is the one headed Submissions to the Dental Board exhibit
A. Can you restate the question? I find this whole thing a little bit I
don't want to have words put in my mouth.
Q. That is certainly not my intention. You were informed at the
beginning of that Dental Board inquiry about what they were there
Q. They were not there to determine whether you were guilty of the
offences, that is not their role?
Q. Their role was in the interests of protecting the public?
Q. And my next question to you was as a registered dentist do you think
that the members of the board that were conducting that inquiry
would like to
have known if you considered yourself guilty of some of those charges that you
were facing?
A. I certainly would, yes.
Q. And then I'm asking you, if you look at the contents of paragraph 5,
would that convey to them that you were of the view that
you were guilty of some
of those charges but not others?
A. No, it wouldn't.
Respondent was then asked a question by his own Counsel (by way of a question
arising from the Tribunal’s questions) as
follows (T118):
Q. Dr Roopra, Madam Chairman asked you whether you were of the view
whether it was important for the board to know what was your
position as to the
guilt in respect of individual offences and you responded yes. Do you recall
whether you had turned your mind
to that fact at the time of the hearing on 27
A. I didn't, to be honest. At that stage I was more interested in what
has happening
(as transcribed)
to the practice, what we were going
through at that time in terms of putting the pieces back together. Innocence or
guilt, at that
stage I was more leaving it up to the solicitors. In a sense I
was a passive person in that entire process. You can't go into the
solicitors's
office and say look, I am going to go swashbucklingly innocent through the
entire thing, or I'm guilty and here we do
go. It doesn't happen like that.
The reality is it is a very complex situation and it does change from month to
month. My position
did alter through that period of time and there were good
reasons for that, but they were not at any stage about misleading the Dental
cross-examination the Respondent admitted his inability to justify his actions
in relation to the subject of his convictions.
The Respondent stated that he
regrets the conduct because of the dire consequences it had for him and his
Respondent confirmed under cross-examination that he had informed Dr Lennings
that for about the six months preceding the offences
against Miss A he had been
attending ‘massage parlours’ for the purpose of obtaining massages
that included masturbation.
The Respondent also agreed that he then indulged in
sexual conduct with each of Miss A, Miss B and Miss C from which he derived
(T59). The Respondent then gave the following evidence
Q. You knew what you were doing on each occasion with each of these
women, didn't you?
Q. You knew what you were doing was wrong, didn't you?
Q. You continued to do it, didn't you?
Q. You knew that [Miss A]and [Miss C] and [Miss B] objected to you
touching them, correct?
Q. You knew [Miss A] didn't agree to you touching her?
Q. You continued with this activity until the time that you were
arrested, correct?
Q. After [Miss C] had left and not returned, you then found [Miss B],
Q. In fact it was two days after [Miss C] had left that you then made
Respondent was asked about when in the process he had pleaded guilty to the
charges. The Respondent gave evidence that he could
not recall although he
accepted that this was the most important decision he had to make during this
process. The Respondent offered
the following explanation
but it did take some time for that awareness of me to develop. It did take some
time. It wasn't something that my own sense
of guilt didn't come straight away.
As I said before, I was emotionally unstable at the time and whilst you are
saying things are
carefully planned, I also do not think that I was of sound
mind at that time.
Q. You apologised to your wife while you were in custody, saying you were
very sorry about what you had done towards the young ladies?
A. Yes, that's true.
Q. Were you saying at a very early stage that you accepted your
A. Yes, I did accept my conduct at a very early stage. However, it is a
process. It is not an immediate you wake up one morning.
It wasn't like that
Q. What was the process?
A. Well, I think it took some time. It was a psychological process and
psychological processes can take some time, I believe.
Q. Wasn't the process looking at the facts and deciding whether those
facts had taken place or not taken place?
A. Yes, but you have to remember that I was not of a rational
Q. You were irrational even after you were in custody?
A. To some extent because being in custody is also a shock to the system.
That produces another set of circumstances which I had
to deal with, so whilst I
was in some sense rational on one level, I may have been irrational on another
level, having to deal with
a lot of things at that time.
Q. Who did you speak to about your irrational mind?
A. I spoke to psychologists. Psychologists did come to me, psychology
people from MSBC at Silverwater and, you know, the fact that
I tried to commit
suicide speaks for itself in terms of rationality or irrationality.
Q. When did the irrational mind end?
A. I'm not sure. Again, I can't put an exact date and time to these
things but I think it is a matter of a process.
Q. Part of your process in terms of making this critical decision was you
had a number of conferences with your lawyers, correct?
A. Yes, correct. I was taking advice.
Q. You had Mr McClintock, a senior counsel, appear for you at your
sentencing in the District Court?
A. Yes, he did.
Q. How long had he been your barrister for?
A. I can't remember. I can't recall the exact date, sorry.
Q. He had given you advice in relation to the evidence contained in the
brief of evidence?
A. Yes, he had.
Q. Why did you plead guilty to each of those nine counts on the
indictment?
A. That was the advice. Again, that was part of the psychological
process that I was undergoing, as well as legal advice that I
received at that
particular time.
Q. Were you advised that you could plead guilty at some earlier point
than before the District Court?
A. Yes I was.
Q. Were you advised that you would get a rate of discount on your
sentence the earlier you pleaded guilty?
A. Yes I was.
.....................
Q. Your matters were sent from the Local Court to the District Court.
Were you aware of that?
A. Yes. They ended up here at the Downing Centre.
Q. And once your matters were in the District Court that there was some
negotiations with the Crown, correct?
A. Yes, from what I recall there were no negotiations as such prior to
that. There were only negotiations, as you say, at the level
that when we came
to Downing Centre. I can't recall any other negotiations or discussions taking
place prior to that.
Q. When there were those negotiations, the number of charges that were
against you were reduced to the nine that you pleaded guilty
A. Yes, that's right.
Q. You knew that was a favourable outcome for you?
A. Well, I was still going to gaol and I accepted that as well. So I
don't know whether I saw it as favourable. I saw it as a spiritual
that I needed to make amends for the wrongs that I had done. I don't say
whether it was favourable or unfavourable. That
is what I had to do in order to
make amends for the wrong I had done. I realise that now. I don't see it as
favourable to myself
or unfavourable to myself.
Respondent gave evidence that he had put his name on the waiting list to
complete the CORE course whilst in prison but there was
a waiting list for the
course (T63). The Respondent stated that he was in a course called ‘Season
for Growth’ which was
run by Sister Teresa which included components on
spirituality, on change management and on anger management. The Respondent
the course as
‘an accredited corrective services program with
a spiritual hint’
Respondent also gave evidence that he had looked to take the anger management
course whilst in custody called ‘Think First’
as recommended by Dr
Lennings. However, this course had been discontinued and had been replaced by a
program called ‘Calm’.
The Respondent stated he had put his name on
the waiting list for this course (T66).
asked in cross-examination whether there was a risk that he would commit
offences in the future the Respondent replied (T67):
I accept that there is always a risk. Having once offended there is
always a risk of recidivism. That is the very nature of recidivism.
matter of internal checks and balances as well as external checks and balances,
being accountable, being honest about it
and accepting of the fact yes, there is
some element of risk. However it is not only risk that one has to consider.
consider the likelihood of those events occurring or those
circumstances developing again and whether or not they will be those
same environment or same milieu will occur is hopefully not the case.
Respondent gave evidence that he had raised his medical conditions (the sleep
apnoea and the depression) with medical practitioners
but they had not taken
these matters any further until after he had been arrested and charged with the
offences. The Tribunal notes
at this point that this position is not
corroborated by the evidence of Dr Kheray or his clinical records (exhibit
Respondent agreed that he had not informed his medical practitioner or his wife
of his depression until after his arrest. He had
also not informed the marriage
counsellor of his depression.
his sleep apnoea was investigated it was found to be in the worst category. The
Respondent also gave evidence that he was drinking
four to five glasses of wine
a night without his wife knowing (T69).
Respondent was asked questions by the Tribunal regarding the contents of the
Pre-Sentence Report (exhibit R1 - 5) that was placed
before the District Court.
In particular the Respondent was asked about the record in that document that
the Respondent had been
assessed as unsuitable for a Community Service Order on
the basis of his health. The Respondent reported to the Tribunal that his
problems had now improved and gave the following evidence
Q. Would you consider yourself fit for light duties at this
A. Yes, absolutely, yeah, absolutely. Look, certainly much more than I
used to be, for sure. That's for sure. I would like to
say as well, Prof, to
the dental community, one of the reasons I wanted to come here was to apologise
most heartfelt to my fellow
brothers and sisters who are dentists. I have given
them a bad name and to my mentors, to my tutors, who I have let down, I felt
very badly and I do feel very badly about that.
his oral evidence that Respondent agreed that he had targeted the victims of his
crimes. He gave contradictory evidence about the
preparation of the ‘job
description’ before the interviews.
to the matter of when he pleaded guilty to the charges, the Respondent stated
that he had relied upon legal advice, and had pleaded
guilty because of the
likelihood of there being a better outcome.
re-examination the Respondent was taken to police records that listed the
charges faced by the Respondent as at April 2009 and
he gave the following
evidence (T97):
Q. And you see there that the first four charges are described as sexual
intercourse without consent?
Q. What was your position in respect of those charges?
A. I was innocent.
Respondent then confirmed that after the sexual assault without consent charges
were dropped that he pleaded guilty to the balance
(T96). The Tribunal notes
that the balance of the charges, being the indecent assault charges appear to
have proceeded to conviction.
Respondent gave evidence that his losses on the stock market amounted to
approximately $230,000. This loss had occurred over an
eight month period in
2008. He had not informed his wife of these losses. The monies came from the
family superannuation account
as well as out of the general account
re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence to clarify a phrase he
had used in the reference he had provided to Miss
Q. In the sentence that reads "[Miss A] provided me with volunteer
general office duties", what did you mean by the word "volunteer"?
A. I cannot recall exactly what I meant by that. I think it was more
along the path of that I didn't have to pay her tax. That
was what if I
remember correctly I put that word in there because I didn't want that I didn't
want to have access to TFN and go
through. I think it relates more to the super
and the other, the fact that I put superannuation into the other part, the
contract, though I must say that the entirety of the contracts and the
character reference is bizarre, at the best, so I cannot fully
succinct answer on that one unfortunately, other than to say that would be my
presumption.
Q. But it was something to do with not having to pay her tax?
A. Yes, I think it was more to do with that. I don't think it had to do
with willingness, as Mr Fernandez was alluding to earlier.
It was more to
do with the tax nature of it.
further re-examination the Respondent was asked about part of Miss A’s
statement (paragraph 19 - exhibit 8) as follows (T84-85):
Q. And there you can see that [Miss A] writes "I was supposed to go back
on Sunday, 21 September 2008 but I did not go"?
Q. Can I just ask you, were your wife and children due to be home on
Sunday, 21 September 2008?
A. I can't recall but I would assume that I cannot recall if they were
supposed to be in that day or not. No, I can't say.
Respondent gave evidence that for a period of about two years commencing in
around 2006 (or 2007) his wife was not working as
his full time Practice Manager
although she was still performing some of these duties by working after hours
and at weekend as she
had a full time job elsewhere. When she was working full
time as the Practice Manager she attended to the hiring of staff (T86).
Respondent confirmed that this period of time included the period when he
committed the offences against the three victims (T85).
The Respondent
I fully admit I offended at the times she wasn't there. I will be honest
Respondent gave evidence that there had been considerable disagreement between
him and his wife as early as 2005 regarding the
practice accounting. This
tension remained even after his wife had found a full time job elsewhere. At T92
the Respondent stated
that the dispute was like
and he now accepts that he was being stubborn and not listening
to his wife.
Respondent also elaborated on the work stresses he was under. The Respondent
stated he was seeing up to 30 patients a day and
he considered that this was
excessive and that he had
‘burnt both ends of the candle’
that he had not
himself very well (T86). The
Tribunal enquired of the Respondent how it was that he managed to have time away
from his practice during
the middle of the day (in order to commit these
offences). The Respondent indicated that there may have been a gap in his
appointments
and he may also have had to move patients (T91).
Tribunal asked the Respondent to clarify what was meant by a statement in the
material before the Tribunal regarding his practice
Q. There was a statement in the document that came from your counsel,
"Dr Roopra provided skill and viable expert referral services
in the area
which have to date not been replaced". What does that mean, that you have
provided you had a lot of referred patients
or that you referred the
A. Well, Prof, I worked quite closely with the prosthetists in the area.
This is something that prosthetists, for me, were a good
way of leveraging time
because as you know, in dentures there are so many adjustments you can come back
for up to 10 adjustments
on a lower denture. You can be all week with Ms
Smith's lower denture, so I used the referral network of the prosthetists in the
area as a good way for me to do, say, even just a lower implant, place one lower
implant or two lower implants and then the prosthetist
would place the denture
over the top, so this was an area that I think was that Mr Conchina who
wrote that one?
Q. No, Dr Badway?
A. Annie Badway. She was aware of that. In our many discussions, you
know, what do you do in certain cases and lower full cases
are not somewhere I
particularly wanted to go and I used to refer that out to the prosthetists in
Q. Doesn't she think that other dentists could provide that
A. I think she was being a bit kind to me there, sir, to be
Respondent confirmed that his sleep issues had been evident since 2007 (T94).
The Tribunal also asked the Respondent questions
regarding the impact of his
various health issues upon his patients (T93) as follows:
Q. I have one other question of a rather general nature. You talk a lot
in your statements and subsequently about the effect of
your unmedicated
sicknesses?
Q. Health issues and stress, the effect on you. Do you think there was
any effect on your patients during that period?
A. I think there was. You know, I have reflected upon this and I do
think that some of my decisions on patients were not the best
of decisions. I
look back on it now and I think that my decision making process in terms of,
especially with the sleep apnoea, I
don't think my judgment was the best and
this did, I do think, play a big role. I have tried to get this across, even
with Dr Lennings's
evaluations I have said to him yes, the sleep apnoea, I do
think the sleeping during the day and trying to make a sound decision
of treatment planning, treatment planning is, as you know, a very complicated
exercise. If you get the treatment plan right
you can pretty much then 1 to 10
and I don't think my treatment planning was the best treatment plan that I could
have given at that
particular time. This is on I'm very cognizant of this,
nowadays even in my cell I insist on taking my Sleep Ap
before and above anything else. I find if I don't have the Sleep Ap
machine my next day I know I haven't slept.
Q. Did you get that Sleep Ap
machine through a respiratory
physician? Have you been assessed?
A. Yes, yes. Hindsight is wonderful and after all this occurred we went
and got full I had the tests done and the airways and everything
tested and I
was in the worst, one of the worst cases that he had seen in terms of hypoxia.
He said that I wasn't getting a lot
of oxygen to the brain. He was just
marvelling at how I had functioned at all, to be honest.
T 86 - 89 the Respondent provided the Tribunal with details regarding complaints
that had been made against him of a clinical nature.
He estimated that about ten
complaints had been dealt with by the Board over a period of about five years
and that he would have
dealt with about 20 per year within his practice during
this time. In answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent stated
unable to say whether this was a high number as he was not aware of any
‘averages’ and he did have a high volume
Respondent was asked a direct question about the record made by Dr Lennings in
his report regarding apologising to the victims
(T90) and whether he had in fact
done so as follows:
Q. In the report made by Dr Lennings, you indicated that you would like
to apologise to the victims by a letter?
Q. Have you in fact done that?
A. I have approached parole again. Parole is difficult to the processes
they have are not that clear as to how I go about that,
but I have approached
parole about that, so yes. I've got to go back in January. That is my next
time that I am seeing parole so,
again, I will bring that up. For all of my
even the victims issues, for all of my courses always well, the offender
programs that
I am doing, at each of the meetings I have with psychology,
welfare or parole, I bring up these issues and try to get ahead on what
in terms of rehabilitation.
Respondent provided the following explanation as to why he was carrying
dentistry text books with him when he attended upon Dr
Lennings for the purpose
of the preparation of Dr Lennings’ report (T90):
Q. When you attended one of the interviews with Dr Lennings you took some
dentistry books in your bag?
Q. Can you tell me what those books were?
A. Funnily enough I had my ortho textbook, which I really like. So I
take Prophets, I like Bill Prophets textbook on Ortho, because
orthodontics is probably the uniting mechanism for dentistry. What else did I
have that day? I think I had Dental Anatomy
For Students, Dental Anatomy
Johnson and Moore that I had that day.
Q. Why did you have them in your bag?
A. I have always been interested in dentistry and even to this day I have
asked some of my colleagues who have written my references
to send me some
dental journals so I can keep up and continue my studies in dentistry. I was
saying to Mr Stowe earlier that, you
know, can the board look at giving me
some research to do. I wouldn't mind going to Westmead and doing some research
like to still contribute to dentistry.
Respondent was also asked about his report to Dr Lennings that he had sat on
some ‘committees’ of a dental nature.
The Respondent gave the
following evidence (T90-91):
Q. Also in Dr Lennings's report you indicated that you are a member of
dental fraternities and you sat on committees with professional
bodies. Could
you elaborate on that?
A. I would go to the last course, for example, that I did was the POS,
Progressive Orthodontics Seminars course which is an orthodontic
course run for
GP dentists. I was a member of the IV sedation group, which is Dr what's
his name? He is at Westmead. I was a
member of the Paediatric Society as well
which does a lot of –
does a lot of the early intervention
orthodontic work as well. The other one that I liked being a member of was
Westmead Hospital.
I was always a member of the Westmead Hospital and I do a
lot of my own self research in areas. I would go there and pick a subject
try and understand it a little bit more.
Q. Can you tell me what role you had at Westmead Hospital?
A. At the beginning I was a clinical what they say is a clinical
associate, when I first started, when I graduated so I was a tutor
there for a
while and then I ran one of the hospitals at Auburn before then, for Westmead,
and after that I went into private practice.
At Westmead I was only a clinical
or Prof would know, the juniors who are new graduates are sometimes asked to
current 5th or 4th year and I was just one of the signatories.
I wasn't really very high up at all I was just a signatory for the
Q. So when you told Dr Lennings that you were a member of dental
fraternities, you were talking about the IV sedation group?
Q. Paediatric Society?
Q. Are they the two that you were talking about?
AAOO, I recall, I think they are all
Australian, I can't remember what the exact one is.
Q. And sat on committees with professional bodies, what were
A. It wasn't really sat on committees as such, I attended the dinners and
the golf days really. I went to a lot of the golf days.
I didn't actually sit
on any committees. I went to the golf days and to the days that they
Q. So would it be accurate to record that you have sat on committees in
professional bodies?
A. I wouldn't say that, no. I would retract that.
Respondent was asked about the emotional difficulties he reported to Dr Lennings
around the giving of injections to patients.
The Respondent gave the following
evidence (T93-94):
Q. You mentioned to Dr Lennings that you had emotional difficulties with
giving injections?
Q. Even though you were seeing, by your own count 6,000 or 7,000 patients
Q. Do you still have that problem?
A. I don't think I have as much. I think that was again part of the
judgmental issues that I had. I think that was probably part
of that shifting
from a normal judgment. I would say that's part of it. I don't think I have.
I would like to test that again,
knowing what I know now and having been through
my experience, I would like to reevaluate that.
Tribunal also asked the Respondent to elaborate on the anger issues that had
been reported by Dr Lennings (and his wife to some
extent) and he gave the
following evidence (T96):
Q. You have mentioned that you at times were angry?
Q. I am just wondering if you could elaborate on what period of time you
are talking about and how that anger would manifest itself?
A. I think more towards when I lost the money. I think that triggered a
lot of the negativity that lead to my offending behaviour.
And then I was
particularly deceptive in my dealings with my close ones. My close ones I was
angry and whenever they did bring
up problems I was in denial and part of that
denial, of course, is why are you asking me about that. You certainly get on to
anger of how dare you ask me a question like that and I think that passive
aggressiveness manifested itself in those moments of are
you going to talk to me
honestly or are you yet again going to be lying to yourself and everyone else
around you. Other people could
see what I was going through and I just didn't
listen. So that's what that was. Now I think I'm much more aware of my own
deficiencies.
Going back to the accounts, last year I enrolled in financial
accounting through open learning because I had had some problems with
over the years. I thought well, I've just got to learn something. I've got to
go and find out what this accounting equation
is all about. I went and did the
first part of an accounting degree, you know, the open learning one, and I've
done financial 1
now so I've got a better understanding that if it provides me
with the opportunity I will be able to utilise that information. It
is not only
anger management, I think it's the practicalities of where are the problems that
I have in my life and I'm trying to
just address those.
Dr Firoz Vellani
Vellani provided a character reference for the Respondent in November 2010,
which he updated on 26 October 2011. In his original
reference, Dr Vellani
stated that he had known the Respondent for approximately 28 years, having first
met at Sydney Grammar School.
Dr Vellani stated that he knows family is a
central part of the Respondent’s life and that he knows him to be a
‘perceptive, intelligent, softly spoken and good-natured
individual.’
his original reference Dr Vellani stated that the Respondent’s friends and
family were shocked and unable to believe that
he had been charged with these
offences, because
‘the type of behaviour with which he was charged was
completely out of character.’
his updated reference, Dr Vellani stated that he understood from the
Respondent’s family that the Respondent was maintaining
attitude whilst in prison, and that he had taken steps towards his recovery by
undergoing counselling and psychological
treatment. He stated that
‘it appeared he is coming to terms with his previous shortcomings, and
in doing so, the Respondent is reducing the likelihood
of ever reoffending
He stated that he did
‘not believe there would be
any benefit to the community to prevent him from practising
Dr Alexander Erdstein
Erdstein provided a character reference for the Respondent in November 2010,
which he updated on 24 October 2011. In his original
reference, Dr Erdstein
stated that he had known the Respondent for approximately 28 years, having first
met at Sydney Grammar School.
Dr Erdstein stated the Respondent is
‘loyal and good-hearted.’
He stated that the Respondent has
‘much remorse and regret with respect to the victims’
and that he realised he had made an
‘error in judgement which has
caused much emotional suffering’
for the victims.
his original reference Dr Erdstein also stated that the Respondent had several
medical conditions and, as a respiratory and sleep
disorder physician, he
believed these conditions, left untreated as with the Respondent,
affect daytime functioning to a significant degree’
the Respondent’s
way of his updated reference dated 24 October 2011, Dr Erdstein stated that the
Respondent’s rehabilitation suggested that
the Respondent
still make a substantial contribution to the dental health of his
community,’
and that he felt that the Respondent would not
Dr Sunthra Manickam
Manickam provided a character reference for the Respondent dated 5 February
2011, which he updated on 31 October 2011. In his
original reference, Dr
Manickam stated that he had known the Respondent for many years, including
working with him as an anaesthetist
for some 15 years.
He stated that
the Respondent had become a
‘role model in his own community’
‘success story of an immigrant who triumphed over
Manickam stated that the Respondent was aware that his Punjabi community and the
wider Australian community would
‘condemn his actions’
‘consider his offences a serious breach of trust and conduct that
is reprehensible of a professional in a position of power.’
Manickam stated that he felt the actions of the Respondent were
way of his updated reference, Dr Manickam stated that whilst on bail, he had
seen the Respondent treat patients with care and respect
and that many of his
patients told Dr Manickam how happy they were with the way the Respondent had
looked after them. He further
stated that he did
‘not believe it would
be necessary for protection of the public, or otherwise beneficial for the
community, to prevent him from
practising again.’
Mr Rudy Concina
Concina provided a character reference for the Respondent on 4 February 2011 and
a further, updated, reference on 31 October 2011.
In his original reference, Mr
Concina stated that he had known the Respondent for over 15 years, having met
through the dental industry,
and has also been a friend of the Respondent and
attended many family gatherings with him.
Concina stated that the Respondent possessed positive personal characteristics,
such as being
‘a fair leader in a team network’
‘reserved and quiet in nature’
‘very respectful
to his peers’
. He stated that the Respondent is
‘remorseful’
‘hopes for forgiveness’
for his actions. Mr Concina expressed his fear for the Respondent’s state
of mind, stating that the Respondent was
‘clearly in a depressed state
and has ‘lost confidence’ he once
his updated reference, Mr Concina added that he has visited the Respondent
occasionally since his incarceration and found him
‘calm and in good
. He stated that the Respondent is now
reflective about his life and has gained an understanding of his prior depressed
He stated that many of the Respondent’s patients have
asked about his wellbeing and
‘miss his practice not
operating.’
He stated that the
‘community would surely
benefit from the Respondent being able to practice as a Dentist in the
Miss Sabrina George
George provided a character reference for the Respondent on 8 November 2010 and
a further, updated, reference on 31 October 2011.
In her original reference,
Miss George stated that she had known the Respondent for four years, having been
his dental assistant
for that time.
George stated in her original reference that the Respondent was
‘understanding and helpful’
. She stated that the Respondent
was sorry for what he had done, that the charges were
‘devastating’
for his family, and that he was embarrassed by
losing his business and standing in the community. Miss George indicated that
noticed he is
‘in a depressed state’
and that she
‘sympathised’
with the Respondent and his
her updated reference, Miss George stated that she was aware that the Respondent
was receiving support and treatment while in prison,
and that she was
‘organising’
to visit the Respondent in custody. Miss George
stated that the Respondent was
‘great to work for’
‘a good team and a positive and busy work place’
. She stated
that many patients miss his service and still ask about the Respondent and that
the Respondent
‘can provide a worthwhile service to the
community.’
Miss Natasha Cass
Cass provided a character reference for the Respondent on 1 November 2010 and a
further, updated, reference on 25 October 2011.
In her original reference, Miss
Cass stated that she had known the Respondent for approximately 19 months,
having worked with the
Respondent during that time.
Cass stated in her original reference that the Respondent was an
‘honest, hardworking, generous family man’
. She stated that
the Respondent worked with her in a
‘professional’
‘feel uncomfortable at any
. Miss Cass stated that she was
‘sure he is sorry for
caused, and that in her opinion he had
‘shown great
way of her updated reference, Miss Cass stated that the Respondent had been
receiving treatment and counselling and had been helping
others while serving
his sentence
‘which is very much in his good nature.’
stated that the community had been asking when the Respondent would be returning
to his practice, and that he was a
‘very kind, friendly and spiritual
man who would only benefit the community’
should he return to his
Reverend David King
King provided a character reference for the Respondent on 10 November 2010 and a
further, updated, reference on 26 October 2011.
In his original reference, Rev.
King stated that he had known the Respondent for approximately 15 years, having
been a patient of
the Respondent’s dental practice.
King stated in his original reference that the Respondent was
and diligent in his work’
. He stated that the Respondent had accepted
his guilt and that he was pleased the Respondent had done so, and was reflecting
life and future. Rev. King stated that he wished the Respondent well for
the future and believed he is ‘
unlikely to reoffend’
his updated reference Rev. King stated that following his sentencing the
Respondent showed
‘contrition’
for his offences and
‘a strong desire to participate in appropriate therapy’
Rev. King stated that if the Respondent
‘successfully’
completed the required programs and
‘within any restrictions that may
be placed upon him’
he believed the
Respondent could
‘continue to make a valuable contribution to the community in the
profession of dentistry.’
He stated that he had confidence that the
Respondent had a
‘low risk of re-offending’
Reverend Manmohan Sian
written character reference was provided by Mr Sian in March 2009, which he
updated on 3 November 2011, on behalf of the Respondent.
In his original
reference Mr Sian stated that he had known the Respondent and his family since
1985 in his capacity as a Sikh Priest.
He stated that the Respondent and his
family participated in singing hymns and had a good standing in the community.
Mr Sian stated
that the Respondent continues to provide community services and
that he is a
‘law abiding citizen who displays integrity and has a
gentle nature.’
his updated reference in November 2011, Mr Sian added that the Respondent has
continued to support the Sikh community by donating
to the annual Sikh games and
to local religious organisations supported throughout the community. Mr Sian
stated that the Respondent
‘regained spirituality and regularly
participated in religious teaching and reflection sessions’
participated in music activities in the community.
Sian stated that the Respondent was a
‘well respected Dentist and has
provided exceptional service to his patients.’
Reverend Gurdev Singh
Singh provided a written character reference on behalf of the Respondent in
October 2011. In the reference Rev. Singh stated
that he knew from the family
that while incarcerated the Respondent had recently been employed as a clerk and
was partaking in chaplain
‘to further his spiritual
. Rev. Singh stated that the Respondent had
great strides in accepting his wrong doings’
and that he had been
‘trying to stay cognitively and spiritually healthy with the use of
He stated that the Respondent had shown remorse for his
Singh stated that the Respondent’s dental practice was highly regarded in
the Sikh community, and that he understood that
the Respondent was
very keen to undergo the required relevant counselling and psychology
courses that are available and necessary for total recovery.’
indicated that he thought there would be
‘no likelihood’
the Respondent re-offending.
Mr Bernard Rowles
Rowles provided a written character reference on behalf of the Respondent on 8
November 2010 and an updated reference on 26 October
2011. The index of
documents provided for the Respondent’s documents indicates that Mr Rowles
is the Respondent’s patient.
In his original reference Mr Rowles stated
that it was
‘totally out of character’
for the Respondent to
have committed the offences, and that the Respondent has
‘shown remorse
for the victims and their families’
his updated reference, Mr Rowles stated that he is sure that the Respondent
‘has a lot to give his community should he be allowed to continue to
practice Dentistry’
, and stated that the Respondent understands
‘that he must do things differently’
Mr Claro Villon
Villon provided a character reference on behalf of the Respondent on 5 January
2011 and a further, updated, reference on 26 October
2011, in which he
reiterated the contents of his earlier reference, and provided further support.
In his earlier reference, Mr Villon
stated that he had known the Respondent
since they were undergraduate students, and that the Respondent was
‘trustworthy, straightforward and honest’,
and that he
‘lives for his work’
. In his reference Mr Villon stated that
the Respondent had suffered
‘besmirched the good name of his
family and compromised the future of his sons’.
his updated reference, Mr Villon stated that the Respondent was rehabilitating
himself and would
‘make the required changes to his
. Mr Villon indicated that the Respondent was regaining his
spirituality and had the continued support of his family.
Mr Gurmel Sidhu
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Sidhu
on 23 October 2011, in which he reiterated the
contents of his previous
reference provided in January 2011. In his earlier reference, Mr Sidhu
confirmed that he had known the
Respondent for approximately 35 years, and was
good friends with the Respondent’s parents.
Sidhu stated that the Respondent had
‘acknowledged and accepted
responsibility for his behaviour’
‘remorseful and
understood’
what he had done. Mr Sidhu stated that the
Respondent’s actions have had
‘a massive detrimental effect on
his mental health’
his updated reference, Mr Sidhu mentioned that the Respondent is being
rehabilitated,
‘has fully cooperated with the authorities...and has
been a model prisoner.’
Mr Sidhu stated that the Respondent has
‘a strong empathy for others’
‘confident’
that the Respondent
‘would not reoffend
due to his positive attitude towards accepting
liability.’
Dr David Lee
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr Lee
on 25 October 2011, in which he reiterated the contents
of his previous
reference provided in March 2009. In his earlier reference, Dr Lee confirmed
that he had known the Respondent since
1989, and had been good friends since
Lee stated the he felt
‘extreme shock’
Respondent’s arrest and was not
‘aware of any predisposing
characteristics’
that would lead to the Respondent’s behaviour.
He stated that the Respondent is a
‘fine upstanding citizen’
‘his position of trust within the community should not be
his updated reference, Dr Lee reiterated his statements of his original
reference, and stated that the Respondent now
‘showed remorse and
contrition for his actions’
. Dr Lee stated that
‘due to systemic rehabilitation
efforts, there is no likelihood of the Respondent
reoffending’.
Dr Harminder Sian
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr Sian
on 24 October 2011, in which he reiterated the contents
of his previous
reference provided in March 2009. In the earlier reference, Dr Sian confirmed
that he had known the Respondent as
a friend and colleague for 20 years, and had
initially been impressed by his
‘great intellect and good
Dr Sian stated that the Respondent was a
of the Sikh and dental communities.
his updated reference, Dr Sian reiterated his earlier reference and stated that
the Respondent had
‘come to terms’
with his situation and had
‘taken steps to re-evaluate his outlook on life’
confirmed that the Respondent had much support in the Sikh community and did
‘not believe it would be necessary for protection of the public, or
otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Dr Mahes Wanigesekera
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr
Wanigesekera on 24 October 2011, in which he reiterated
the contents of his
previous reference provided in March 2009. In the earlier reference, Dr
Wanigesekera confirmed that he had known
the Respondent as a friend and
colleague for 20 years
Dr Wanigesekera stated that the Respondent had
‘honesty, dependability, sincerity, integrity and civility’
‘should be allowed to continue practicing as a
his updated reference, Dr Wanigesekera reiterated his earlier reference and
stated that the Respondent had
‘accepted the sentence’
‘taken steps to ensure he does not reoffend’
Wanigesekera stated that with the continued support of his family and his
increased knowledge he did
‘not believe he would reoffend again if
allowed to practice dentistry again.’
Dr Ashwini Badve
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr Badve
on 25 October 2011, in which he reiterated the
contents of his previous
reference provided in March 2009. In the earlier reference, Dr Badve stated
that he had known the Respondent
since 1988 when they both attended at Sydney
University, and remained good friends and regularly socialised together with
their families.
Dr Badve stated that the Respondent was a very skilled dentist
and performed complex dental treatment. He stated that the Respondent
‘an intelligent man with a cheerful disposition’
‘courteous, helpful and generous’.
his updated reference, Dr Badve reiterated his earlier reference and stated that
the Respondent was
‘keenly aware of the trauma and hurt he has caused
to his family’
‘started to make amends in many
. Dr Badve stated that the Respondent is undertaking counselling
and further study and that if he received the
‘not believe it would be necessary for
protection of the public, or otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent
practising again.’
Dr Sangeeta Vellani
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr
Vellani on 31 October 2011, in which she reiterated the
contents of her previous
reference provided in March 2009. In the earlier reference, Dr Vellani stated
that she had known the Respondent
since 1985 when they both attended Sydney
University, and that the Respondent had been
‘like a brother’
to her. Dr Vellani stated that she was
‘very shocked’
hear about the situation and felt it was
‘completely out of
for the Respondent to have behaved in this
her updated reference, Dr Vellani reiterated her earlier reference and stated
that the Respondent had continued support from his
family and friends and was
‘taking appropriate steps to address his failings and his depression by
undergoing counselling and psychological treatment’.
She too did
‘not believe it would be necessary for protection of the public, or
otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Miss Sukhpreet Kaur
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Miss
Kaur on 2 November 2011. In that reference, Miss Kaur
stated that she had
worked as a dental nurse for the Respondent from November 2009 to October 2010
and that she found his
‘approach to dental care both professional and
‘team members were highly
. She stated that she was
‘confident his skills
will be valuable to the community and the public in future’
‘not believe it would be necessary for protection of the public, or
otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Miss Ravi Inder Singh Rai
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Miss Rai
on 1 November 2011. In that reference, Miss Rai
stated that she had worked as a
dental nurse for the Respondent from June 2010 to October 2010 and that she
found the practice to
‘as one happy family with nice working
environment’
and the Respondent treated his patients
dignity & respect’
. She stated that the Respondent’s
‘expertise and experience as a dentist is a great asset, which should
not be wasted’,
and that allowing the Respondent to practice in some
capacity would
‘prove quite beneficial for the community and the field
of dentistry.’
Mrs Carla Maripa-Campora
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mrs
Maripa-Campora on 26 October 2011, in which she reiterated
the contents of her
previous reference provided in March 2009. In her earlier reference, Mrs
Maripa-Campora stated that she had
known the Respondent for approximately 20
years, as she had been close friends with the Respondent’s wife (prior to
their marriage).
Mrs Maripa-Campora stated that she and her children were
patients of the Respondent at his Penrith surgery, and has
always to be professional, and his conduct exemplary’
‘never had any cause for complaint, or witnessed any unseemly conduct
by the Respondent or any of his staff.’
She stated that she has
referred his services to many family and friends and to other mothers of
children from her children’s
her updated reference, Mrs Maripa-Campora reiterated her earlier reference and
confirmed that she remains a close friend of the
Respondent’s wife, and
understands that the Respondent is
‘responding very well to
counselling’
and also she did
‘not believe it would be
necessary for protection of the public, or otherwise beneficial for the
community, to prevent him from
practising again.’
Miss Nina David
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Miss
David on 28 October 2011. In that reference, Miss
David stated that she is a
student and has been a patient of the Respondent’s from 2007 to 2010, save
for the short period
of time his practice was closed in 2009. Miss David stated
that she was happy to return to his practice at that time, and that he
‘was a good dentist and the other staff were also friendly and
Miss David stated that she hoped the Respondent could
‘continue to work as a Dentist in the future.’
Miss Jennifer Sada
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Miss
Sada on 28 October 2011. In her reference, Miss Sada
stated that she had been a
patient of the Respondents in 2010, having been referred to him by other family
members. Miss Sada stated
that the Respondent
‘was a good
‘was comfortable with him and his staff who
took good care of me while I had sedation.’
Miss Sada stated that she
hoped the Respondent was able to continue to work as a dentist as he
‘was a benefit to the Penrith area.’
Mr Ross McGarrity
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr
McGarrity on 26 October 2011. In his reference, Mr McGarrity
stated that he was
a local business owner in the Penrith area and had been a patient and friend of
the Respondent for approximately
15 years. Mr McGarrity stated that he has
visited the Respondent in prison and that the Respondent has shown
‘great sorrow’
for his actions and has spoken to him about
the psychology courses and rehabilitation he is pursuing. Mr McGarrity stated
found the Respondent to be
‘extremely professional’
in his work and a
‘valued member of our business community’
Mr McGarrity stated that the Respondent’s services
‘would remain
extremely valuable to the community’
and would like to see the
‘continue to practice in some capacity.’
Mr John Singleton
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr
Singleton on 3 October 2011. In his reference, Mr Singleton
stated that he had
been a patient of the Respondent in 2010. Mr Singleton stated that he found the
Respondent to be
‘very helpful’
to patients who needed urgent
dental work. He stated that the Respondent’s
‘skill level as a
dentist was valuable in our area and is now sorely missed’
and that he
hoped the Respondent
‘is able to continue his profession in the
Dr Jasvinder Kheray
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Dr
Kheray on 3 November 2011. The Tribunal notes that Dr
Kheray also gave oral
evidence before the Tribunal. In his oral evidence Dr Kheray stated he was the
Respondent’s brother-in-law
– a matter not disclosed in the written
character reference. Dr Kheray explained in his oral evidence that this fact was
not mentioned in his reference. He was unsure as to whether this fact came
to the attention of the District Court as he did not give
evidence (T145). Dr
Kheray also indicated in his oral evidence that he had little information
regarding the criminal convictions
of the Respondent as recorded
his written character reference Dr Kheray stated
‘.... I understand and
have full knowledge of the nature of the charges in Dr Roopra’s
. In his reference, Dr Kheray stated that he had been the
Respondent’s family physician for approximately ten years, and that
visited the Respondent in custody. Dr Kheray stated that the Respondent is
endeavouring to better himself by undertaking
business courses and counselling,
and spiritual reflection sessions. Dr Kheray stated that the Respondent has
‘expressed his desire to apologise to the victims’
‘accepts the responsibility of his actions’.
that he believed the Respondent could
‘still provide a good dental
service to the community’
and believed
‘it is unlikely that
the Respondent will reoffend as he has had time to reflect deeply about his
behaviour and has very strong
family support.’
At no point in this
reference does Dr Kheray indicate he is the Respondent’s brother-in-law.
Mr Ranbir Singh Bedi
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Bedi
in October 2011, in which he reiterated the contents
of his previous reference
provided in February 2009. In his earlier reference, Mr Bedi confirmed that he
had known the Respondent
for approximately 20 years in his capacity as the
President of the Sikh Association of Sydney. He stated that
all association members have a cordial & meaningful relation’
the Respondent and his family, and the Respondent is
‘honest and a man
of good moral character.’
his updated reference, Mr Bedi reiterated his earlier reference and stated the
Sikh community has continued to support the Respondent.
He stated that the
‘is highly regarded as a dental professional’
‘his services are sorely missed.’
Mr Bedi, like others, did
‘not believe it would necessary for protection of the public, or
otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Mr Jasbir Singh Thind
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Thind
on 4 November 2011. In his reference, Mr Thind
stated that he had known the
Respondent for 30 years in the Sikh Association, and later in his capacity as
the General Secretary
of the Sikh Association of Sydney. Mr Thind stated that
the Respondent is a
‘sincere and astute professional’
‘highly valued.’
He stated that loss of the
Respondent’s services is
‘felt greatly’,
particularly
to the non-English speaking patients and that the community supports the
Respondent for the
‘continuation of his career and practice.’
Mr Manmohan Singh Wasdave
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr
Wasdave in November 2011, in which he reiterated the
contents of his previous
reference provided in March 2009. In his earlier reference, Mr Wasdave
confirmed that he had known the
Respondent since 1985 when his family first
migrated and joined the Sikh community, and that his family had always had
‘good standing in the community’.
Mr Wasdave stated that the
Respondent is
‘a law abiding citizen who displays integrity and has a
gentle nature.’
his updated reference, Mr Wasdave stated that the Respondent has supported the
Sikh community by way of donations, and has regained
his spirituality since his
incarceration. He stated that the Respondent is a
‘well respected
Dentist and has provided exceptional service to his patients.’
Wasdave also expressed the view that he did
‘not believe it would
necessary for protection of the public, or otherwise beneficial for the
community, to prevent him
[meaning the Respondent]
from practising
Mr Rajinder Singh Saini
written character reference was provided on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Saini
in October 2011, in which he reiterated the contents
of his previous reference
provided in February 2009. In the earlier reference, Mr Saini confirmed that he
had known the Respondent
since 1975, and had seen him grow from a young boy to a
‘qualified and successful Dentist’
Saini stated that the Respondent came from a well loved and respected family and
that he has always been a support to his parents.
Mr Saini stated that he
considered the Respondent to be a
‘very caring and compassionate
‘very approachable and is always willing to
lend a helping hand’
. He stated that the Respondent is a
‘good upstanding citizen’
Mr Kuljit (Bob) Sahota
Sahota provided a written character reference on behalf of the Respondent in
March 2009, to which he provided an update in November
2011. In his earlier
reference, Mr Sahota stated that he had known the Respondent since the
‘early 1970s’
as both their families were involved with the
Sikh community. The Tribunal notes at this point the evidence from the
Respondent that
he arrived in Australia in 1975.
Sahota stated that the Respondent’s family was held in ‘very high
esteem in the Sikh community’. Mr Sahota stated
that, as a banker, he was
‘instrumental in having business and personal loans approved’ for
the Respondent to enable
him to open his first dental practice. Mr Sahota
stated that his wife and children were often socially involved with those of the
Respondent and that he had always considered the Respondent
thorough gentleman’
. He further stated that in the 35 years he had
known the Respondent he considered him to be of the
‘well respected member of the Sikh
his updated reference, Mr Sahota stated that he had been informed by the
Respondent’s family that the Respondent had been
prisoner since his incarceration’
spirituality’
and had received
‘tremendous support’
from his friends and family. Mr Sahota also stated that the Respondent had
donated funds to local religious organisations and sporting
Mr Tejinder Sian
Sian provided a written reference on behalf of the Respondent in March 2009
which he also updated in November 2011. In his prior
reference, Mr Sian stated
that he had known the Respondent for over 26 years and had found him to be
‘a person of the highest integrity, solid family values and an honest,
law-abiding member of our society’
. Mr Sian stated that the
Respondent had always been a
‘talented sportsman’
and that he
had captained and led his local cricket teams to victories in various
competitions. Mr Sian stated that the Respondent
had financially supported the
Sikh community Games.
his updated reference, Mr Sian stood by his earlier comments and added further
observations. He stated that he understood from
the Respondent’s family
that he has
‘found peace through a regained spirituality and he is now
regularly participating in religious teaching and reflection
. He indicated that he found it
‘encouraging’
that the Respondent had
‘reached out
for assistance through counselling and psychological treatment and has enrolled
in relevant courses to gain further
improvements’
Sian stated that the Respondent’s
‘close friends and the entire
Sikh community in Sydney share this sentence with him’
. He indicated
the community supported the Respondent and his family, would do all that they
can to help him re-enter the community
‘a fully rehabilitated
‘not allow him to dip into a state of
confusion or depression again’
. Mr Sian stated that the community
‘all benefit from allowing him to work in his chosen
Mr Gurcharn Singh Sidhu
Sidhu provided a written reference on behalf of the Respondent in March 2009
which he also updated in October 2011. In his prior
reference, Mr Sidhu stated
that he had known the Respondent since 1975. He stated that he has held many
prominent positions in the
Sikh Association of Sydney, and the Respondent and
his father were instrumental in helping lay the foundation of that Sikh
Mr Sidhu stated that the Respondent’s many
‘satisfied patients’
‘testimony’
the Respondent follows the principle of
‘honest work and truthful
instilled in him by his parents.
his updated reference, Mr Sidhu stated that he has had recent contact with the
Respondent’s family and
‘it appears the whole family is pleased
with his progress’
. He further states that
‘it appears the
Respondent has understood his trigger points that lead to his previous
dysfunctional behaviour and he seems
highly unlikely to
re-offend.’
Dr Surjit Singh Rana
Rana provided a written reference on behalf of the Respondent in March 2009
which he also updated in October 2011. In his prior
reference, Dr Rana stated
that he had known the Respondent and his family for 30 years. He found the
‘devoted to his work’, ‘very
proficient’
always put duty before self.’
Rana confirmed that he had friends who were
‘impressed by his courtesy
and efficiency’
‘highly regarded for ethical
behaviour.’
his updated reference, Dr Rada stated that the Respondent has continued to be
supported by the community and has been studying
and attending counselling and
psychology sessions. Dr Rada stated that he was
‘confident the
Respondent will not reoffend’
and that he also did
believe it would be necessary for protection of the public, or otherwise
beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Mr Gurdeep Singh Bharaj
Bharaj provided a written reference on behalf of the Respondent in February 2009
which he also updated in October 2011. In his
prior reference, Mr Bharaj stated
that he had known the Respondent and his family for 28 years. It was his
opinion that the Respondent
‘reliable, highly respected, polite and
understanding,’
and that he had
‘a good standing in our Sikh
community.’
his updated reference, Mr Bharaj stated that he understood from the
Respondent’s family that he
‘has shown great sorrow for his
actions and has become a more spiritual and understanding person.’
stated that he and his family were
‘supportive of the Respondent
returning to practice as a dentist.’
He added that he too did
‘not believe it would be necessary for protection of the public, or
otherwise beneficial for the community, to prevent him from
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions which were supplemented by oral
submissions. The transcript reflects the oral submissions
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent also provided a written outline of submissions which were
supplemented by oral submissions. The transcript reflects
the oral submissions
supplementary submission was made by the Respondent regarding the HCCC
submission that the Respondent intentionally misled the Dental
Respondent also handed up a document headed ‘Proposed
Orders/Conditions’. After discussions during the submissions
phase of the
Inquiry, upon the application of the parties, determination of Orders is to be
considered in a further phase of the
Tribunal’s consideration of the Submissions
Tribunal has considered the entirety of the submissions made by both parties.
the Tribunal has formed the view that the Respondent was not as honest or frank
as he could have been with the Board during
the Board Inquiry this is not a
matter that is determinative of the findings made herein. The Tribunal has taken
into consideration
the submission that the Respondent had the benefit of legal
advice during the Board Inquiry. Further, there are other factors that
the weight of such a finding not being the determinative
Findings re Particulars and Complaints
Tribunal notes that the Particulars are established by the Certificates of
Conviction contained in the evidence. The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent did
not contest Complaints 1, 3 and 4. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the
evidence supports
findings with respect to Complaints 1, 3 and 4 in that the
Respondent has been convicted of nine criminal offences, that the conduct
improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice of dentistry.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in the Particulars is of such
a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of the
Respondent’s registration. The Tribunal therefore finds professional
misconduct of a very serious nature.
was clear from the outset that the true contest between the parties was as to
whether the conduct rendered the Respondent to currently
be not a suitable
person to hold registration.
Tribunal notes that the phrase ‘suitable person’ is not defined in
the National Law. However some assistance as to
its meaning is provided by
section 55(1) of the
National Law
which gives the grounds upon which the
National Board may decide that an individual is not a ‘suitable
person’ to hold
a general registration in a health profession. This is an
appropriate consideration in the view of the Tribunal as when it comes
consideration of criminal conduct it would not be appropriate for a different
standard to be applied to a person making an application
for registration as
opposed to a person already holding registration. Those grounds include: s
‘having regard to the individual’s criminal
history to the extent that is relevant to the individual’s practice
profession, the individual is not, in the Board’s opinion, an appropriate
person to practice the profession or it is
not in the public interest for the
individual to practice the profession’
and s 55(1)(h) –
‘in the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other reason
not a fit and proper person for general registration in
profession.’
clearly the criminal conduct of the Respondent is not only of a very serious
nature, it also relates to his practice as a dentist
as it provided him with a
level of trust and a facade of legitimacy. The HCCC have firmly established the
conduct related to the
practice or purported practice of dentistry. Even if it
had not occurred within this setting, the Tribunal is of the view that a
criminal record of this nature would prove to be a significant barrier to
registration.
Consideration
of the fact that the Respondent is still serving a term of imprisonment is also
relevant to this determination. The
Tribunal also notes that the criminal
conduct of the Respondent cannot be characterised as ‘one off’ or
term fit and proper person has been considered in protective jurisdictions such
as is being exercised in this matter and a wide
view of the matter should be
taken (see, for example,
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279).
is also the view of the Tribunal that considerations such as the maintenance of
the reputation of the profession and the trust
that is reposed in the profession
by the public are also matters relevant to the determination of the question of
suitability of
an individual for registration.
the factors described by Basten JA in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
related to the question of character, it
is the view of this Tribunal that such factors have relevance to the wider
question of whether
a person is suitable to hold registration.
considered in
to [71] may also provide
assistance to the Tribunal in the ultimate determination of Complaint Two in
this matter. At paragraph 71
the Tribunal in that matter
This Tribunal is of the view that professional integrity, personal
integrity, insight into the reason why the conduct attracted the
criticism of the Tribunal, insight into the steps required to remediate any
personal or professional deficits identified by
the offensive conduct, steps
taken towards such remediation, the Respondent’s otherwise good character,
the nature of the Respondent’s
prior professional practise including any
prior misconduct are some of the matters to be explored and appropriately
weighed by the
Tribunal in determining suitability at the current time.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent was not a suitable person to hold
registration as a dentist at the time he committed
the offences. The Tribunal
has had the benefit of a significant amount of material regarding the
Respondent’s attendance before
a Board Inquiry in March 2009. The Tribunal
has formed the view that the Respondent was not a suitable person to hold
registration
at that time. It is of significant concern that the
Respondent’s evidence is that, in essence, he was willing to do whatever
it took to retain his registration, that he may not have read all of the
material that was placed before the Board Inquiry and that
he may not have even
been in a mental state where he was capable of understanding that material. The
Tribunal notes that the Respondent
returned to practising whilst out on bail. If
the Respondent was as impaired as his evidence indicates then it is of concern
Tribunal that he may have been working when he was unfit to do so.
any case, the Tribunal has not been provided with evidence other than statements
of family members, which support the evidence
of the Respondent that he faced
particular stresses at the relevant period. There is nothing, for example, that
supports the losses
claimed by the Respondent to have been made as a result of
his activities on the stock market or the high workload he claims to have
this time or that this was distinct from his work pattern at other times. If
these matters fall within the normal range of
the vicissitudes of daily life it
would be difficult for the Tribunal to place much weight on these factors
explaining the extraordinary
conduct of the Respondent.
Tribunal also observed that the Respondent’s general practitioner was
under some constraints both with the treatment he
provided to the Respondent and
the evidence he gave to the Tribunal due to the familial relationship that
existed between them.
Tribunal notes the care taken by the Board Inquiry to explain to the Respondent
the role of the Board Inquiry being to protect
the public safety and not to
determine his guilt or otherwise to the charges he was facing. While there is no
doubt certain tensions
bear upon a practitioner placed in the situation where
the practitioner must simultaneously answer to both the regulatory authority
well as the criminal justice system over the same conduct, the obligations
placed upon registered health practitioners to provide
a frank account of their
conduct cannot be overridden. The Respondent chose to place evidence and
submissions before the Board Inquiry
professing his innocence when he knew that
it was, at least in part, untrue. If the Respondent was not prepared to indicate
part of the charges he admitted to and which he did not then the only
proper course for the Respondent to have taken at that point
was to offer no
comment with respect to matter. Even if the Tribunal is wrong on this point, the
Tribunal has formed the view that
the Respondent was not, at the time he gave
evidence before the Tribunal, a suitable person to hold registration.
Tribunal notes that at the time he appeared before the Board Inquiry the full
extent of the Respondent’s conduct was not
able to be considered by the
Inquiry, that the Respondent had not taken any steps to remediate the deficits
manifest in the conduct,
nor did the Respondent have any insight into how he may
go about such remediation.
at the time the Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal the Tribunal
observed that there is still a lack of genuine insight
into the consequences of
his actions for the victims of the offences. When asked a cross-examination
question directly as to whether
he had apologised to the victims the Respondent
indicated that he had not done so and provided an explanation relying on his
of contact with the Parole Service (see paragraph 238 above). The
Respondent is able to list the courses he intends or is undertaking,
to say that he is taking better care of his numerous health issues, he gave
evidence of productively using his time in
prison, and he is certainly looking
forward to being released from gaol so that he can take full benefit of the
support of his family
and friends as detailed in the numerous documents before
the Tribunal. The Respondent has clearly taken on board the advice of Dr
Lennings that he will have to work at reformation.
Tribunal is however troubled by the Respondent’s continued vacillation in
his evidence on certain issues, his focus on the
consequences of his actions on
himself and his family rather than appropriate regard for the victims and the
general lack of candour
the Tribunal found with elements of his evidence as
illustrated by the extracts of his evidence set out above.
is of concern that the Respondent placed significant reliance on the advice
provided to him at the Board Inquiry and the Council
Inquiry as a reason for
allowing material regarding his denial of the charges to be put on his behalf
that was, at the very least,
not entirely frank. There is nothing that the
Tribunal has heard that would allow it to be comfortably satisfied that the
has now embraced and is appropriately appreciative of the protective
role of this Tribunal and the other regulatory bodies exercise
(such as the
Board and Council).
Tribunal is mindful of the requirements for a determination of a complaint of
this nature to be made as at the current time. Given
the submission of the
parties that a determination of Orders should be made by the Tribunal after the
parties have had an opportunity
to consider the Tribunals determination with
respect to the Complaints, the Tribunal will reserve on the determination of
Two until ‘phase two’ of the Inquiry.
an aside, the Tribunal notes that such a course would overcome any disadvantage
that may be said to arise from the fact that the
Respondent remains, as at the
date of this decision, incarcerated. It appears the Respondent is due for
release shortly and this
will no doubt facilitate the preparation for the next
phase of the Inquiry.
accordance with the submissions of the parties the matter will be relisted for
submissions as to appropriate orders, including
the order as to
Publication
copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal adviser
2) The HCCC,
Dental Board of Australia,
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
Dental Council of New South Wales.
___________________
___________________
George Wing AM
___________________
Keith Lester
___________________
Sandra Everett
Annexure A – Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Statement of the Respondent (R1)
Annexure C – Schedule of Names
HCCC v ROOPRA
INDEX TO DOCUMENTS
IN THE DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HCCC v DR CHAITAN ROOPRA
DOCUMENTS OF THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS
FORMAL DOCUMENTS
Evidentiary Certificate
DENTAL COUNCIL DOCUMENTS
Letter of complaint from the Dental Board of NSW of 1 May 2009
Transcript of the Section 72 Proceedings held on 27 March 2009
Letter of 11 October 2010 from the Dental Council of NSW to the Commission
advising section 150 proceedings to be held
Letter of 15 October 2010 from the Dental Council of NSW to the Commission
advising section 150 held and Dr Roopra’s registration
Transcript of the Section 150 Proceedings held on 11 October 2010
INVESTIGATION DOCUMENTS
Statement of Miss A of 10 October 2008 taken by NSW Police attaching the
documents at Tabs 8 to 10
Contract signed by Miss A on 15 September 2008 at request of Dr
Copy of Miss A’s advertisement posted on
‘Gumtree.com.au’
Hand written two page note by Miss A
Statement of Miss A of 23 July 2010 attaching the document at Tab 13
Birth Certificate of Miss A (now known as Miss A)
Statement of Miss A’s step-mother of 22 October 2008 taken by NSW
Statement of Virgin Blue Security Intelligence Officer of 19 March 2009
attaching the document at Tab 16
Virgin Blue travel plan for Dr Roopra for 9 October 2008
Transcript of NSW Police record of interview with Miss B conducted on 17
February 2009 attaching the documents at Tabs 18 to 20
Two sketch drawings by Miss B of the layout of XXXXXX Street, Penrith
Two post it notes written by Dr Roopra re Miss B
Handwritten notes by Miss B about contact with Dr Roopra and hours worked
Statement of Miss B of 3 April 2009 adopting her statement of 17 February
Birth Certificate for Miss B
Statement of Miss D of 17 February 2009 taken by NSW Police
Statement of Miss E of 17 February 2009 taken by NSW Police
Statement of Miss F of 18 February 2009 taken by NSW Police
Statement of Ms C of 24 February 2009 taken by NSW Police attaching the
documents at Tabs 27 & 28
Sketch drawing by Miss C of the layout of 11 Higgins Street, Penrith
Dr Roopra’s business card, which he gave to Miss C, on the rear of the
card she wrote Dr Roopra’s home address
Statement of Job Placement Officer of 26 February 2009 taken by NSW Police
Statement of Employment Officer of 26 February 2009 taken by NSW Police
attaching the document at Tab 31
Miss C’s handwritten note of events
Criminal history of Dr Roopra as at 17 April 2009
Property Seizure/Exhibit Form for search warrant executed by NSW Police on
17 February 2009 at Dr Roopra’s surgery at 458 High
Street, Penrith
Job advertisement file notes from Max Employment concerning Ms C obtained
during execution of search warrant at 458 High Street, Penrith
by NSW Police on
17 February 2009
Trial day contract for Ms B of 12 February 2009 obtained during execution
of search warrant at 458 High Street, Penrith by NSW Police
on 17 February
Owner/Occupier’s consent to Crime Scene Examination at
[Respondent’s home address] on 17 February 2009
Photographs of the premises at [Respondent’s home address] taken by NSW
Police on 17 February 2009
Hand written document signed by Miss B obtained during execution of search
warrant at [Respondent’s home address] by NSW Police
on 17 February
Statement of Detective Senior Constable Rodney Lloyd of 17 June 2009 re
images from computer obtained during execution of search
[Respondent’s home address] by NSW Police on 17 February 2009 attached at
Tabs 40 to 44
Image of Miss A
Image of Miss A
Document containing Miss A’s telephone number
Character reference for Miss A
Letter of 6 October 2010 from Dr Roopra to the Dental Council of NSW informing
he had pleaded guilty to the charges against him
S40 letter of 5 November 2010 from the Commission to Dr Roopra
COURT DOCUMENTS
Transcript of Proceedings on Sentence dated 10 February 2011
Transcript of Remarks on Sentence dated 25 March 2011
Certificate of Conviction dated 7 April 2011
Court Attendance Notices
Submissions to the Dental Board in respect of a Hearing Conducted under s
72 of the Act
(a) Affidavit of Mrs Roopra 11 March 2009
(b) Affidavit of Mrs Roopra 19 March 2009
INDEX TO RESPONDENT’S DOCUMENTS
Lay Witness Statements
Statement of Dr Chaitan Roopra
(a) Statement of Mrs Dharini Roopra
(b) Email from ‘Fiona’ re eligibility of the Respondent for the
treatment program run by Rev. Dr Powell.
(c) Email from EO – Dental Council dated 6 March 2012 advising other
complaints had been closed.
Statement of Ms Prean Kheray
Court Documents
Indictment and Agreed Facts
Probation and Parole Services presentence report dated 11 November
Probation and Parole Services update report dated 10 February 2011
Forensic Psychology Services presentence consultation dated 7 February
Psychiatric Material
Medico-legal report of Dr Lennings, psychiatrist dated 5 November
Updated medico-legal report of Dr Lennings, psychiatrist dated 10 November
Counselling Material
Consent forms for Pastoral care Institute, executed by Dr Roopra in July
2011 dated 14 July 2011
Receipts from Anglicare counselling service over the period 2009 to
Character References
Dr Firoz Vellani - Colleague
Emergency Medicine & Anesthetics
Practitioner 26 October 2011
Dr Alex Erdstein - Colleague
Specialist Respiratory Consultant 24
October 2011
Dr S.L. Manickam - Professional Associate
General Medical Practitioner
& Anesthetist 31 October 2011
Rudy Concina - Professional Associate
Dental Prosthetist 31 October
Sabrina George - Employee
Dental Assistant 31 October 2011
Natasha Cass - Employee
Receptionist 25 October 2011
Rev David King - Patient
Uniting Church Minister 26 October 2011
Bernard Rowles JP – Patient 26 October 2011
Dr Claro Villon – Colleague
Dental Surgeon 26 October 2011
Gurmel Sidhu - Family Friend
Retired Senior Assistant Superintendant of
Corrective Services 23 October 2011
Professional Associates
Dr David Lee, Dental Surgeon25 October 2011
Dr Harminder Sian, Dental Surgeon 24 October 2011
Dr Mahes Wanigesekera, Dental Surgeon 24 October 2011
Dr Ashwini Badve, Dental Surgeon 25 October 2011
Dr Sangeeta Vellani, Dental Surgeon 31October 2011
Work Colleagues
Sukhpreet Kaur, Dental Assistant 2 November 2011
Ravi Singh Rai, Dental Assistant 1 November 2011
Mrs Carla Maripa-Campora, Long Term Patient 26 October 2011
Nina David, Orthodontic Patient 28 October 2011
Jennifer Sada, Orthodontic Patient 28 October 2011
Ross McGarrity, Long Term Patient 26 October 2011
John Singleton, Emergency Patient 31 October 2011
Miscellaneous
Dr Jasvinder Kheray; General Practitioner, Glenwood Medical Centre -
Treating Doctor 3 November 2011
Religious Bodies
Ramgarhia Sikh Welfare Association, Mrs Manmohan Kaur Sian -
3 November 2011
Sikh Association of Sydney, Ranbir Singh Bedi – President 30 October
Australian Sikh Association, Jasbir Singh Thind - General Secretary 4
November 2011
Giani Manmohan Singh Wasdave, Sikh Priest 3 November 2011
Giani Gurdev Singh; Head Priest, Turramurra Sikh Temple 27 October
Family Friends
Rajinder Singh Saini, Retired Public Servant 25 October 2011
Kuljit Bob Sahota, Funds Manager 3 November 2011
Tejinder Sian, National Sales Manager 3 November 2011
Dr Gurcharn S. Sidhu, Senior Principal Research Scientist CSIRO 24 October
Dr S.S. Rana, E.N.T. Surgeon 27 October 2011
Gurdeep Singh Bharaj 28 October 2011
Miscellaneous correspondence between Mr and Mrs Roopra and Dental Board
2010 to 2011
Bail Reporting Conditions Chaitian Roopra September 2009 to March
Dental Assistant Consent Forms
Index of registers of patients under 18 years of age
Lists of registers of patients under 18 years of age
April 2009–Sep 2010
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Register of Patients under 18 years of age
Statement of the Respondent
I, Chaitan Roopra, dentist, currently incarcerated in Long Bay correctional
facility, say as follows:
am the Respondent in these proceedings.
make this Statement in response to the Complaint made by the Health Care
Complaints Commission (‘HCCC’)
acknowledge and admit that I was convicted of the offences described at
Complaint 1 of that Complaint (‘the offences’).
I am still serving a
custodial sentence for those matters. I admit Complaint 1 pursuant to s149 of
the Health practitioner national
Law (NSW) and understand that in doing so I
enliven the disciplinary powers available to the Tribunal pursuant to that
subdivision.
was charged with offences that went beyond the charges I pleaded guilty to.
Aspects of those charges were withdrawn. After negotiations
with the DPP I
pleaded guilty to the offences on the basis of a set of Agreed Facts.
have a strong desire and commitment to resume practicing dentistry upon or after
my release from custody. I acknowledge that the
Tribunal and the Commission have
justifiable concerns about my fitness to be registered. I ask that consideration
be given to the
matters I address in this Statement.
was born in Nairobi, Kenya in 1967 and moved to live in Zambia as a young child.
I came to Australia with my family in 1975. My
parents were both born in India,
and members of the Sikh religion. My family observed Sikh culture despite living
in foreign countries.
attended Sydney Grammar School for my secondary school education, and attended
Sydney University where I completed a degree in dentistry
between 1988 and 1992.
The Offences
acknowledge my role in the offences to this Tribunal, as I did by my plea of
guilty to the District Court.
have made statements to the Court (see the transcript of the sentencing
proceeding in the HCCC’s bundle of documents); to
Probation and Parole
during the making of Pre-Sentence Reports for the sentencing hearing and to Dr
Lennings (both prior to sentencing
and again for the purposes of an updated
report in these proceedings). I confirm that those statements, individually and
collectively,
(a) my acknowledgement of my abhorrent conduct;
(b) some of the subjective circumstances affecting me at the time of my
(c) my insight into some of the factors which led to me offending at the
(d) my commitment to obtaining further treatment with a view to rehabilitating
myself and ensuring that I so not re-offend; and
(e) my genuine remorse at my conduct.
am prepared to adopt this statement on oath before the Tribunal and to be
cross-examined if necessary about the matters contained
in this statement, or
any of the statements I have made to Dr Lennings, Probation and Parole, or the
District Court.
Dentistry Practice
have practiced as a dentist continuously since 1992. My employment history is as
Royal Newcastle Hospital
Auburn Hospital
Private practice at Penrith
have therefore been in practice for 19 years. 14 of those years have been
invested in my solo practice at Penrith which was gradually
expanded over the
period between 1995 and 2009. I purchased the practice as a sole practice. I
gradually built that into a three
dentist practice which incorporated a second
surgery at Blacktown.
my 19 years of practice I estimate that I would have treated between 60 and
70,000 patients. Certainly, in my last 3 years of practice,
I was treating
approximately 5,000 patients each year. When I made that estimation, I am
referring to the number of consultations
that I performed each year. Obviously
some of those patients would have been repeat visits.
the course of my 14 years of practice I have been the subject of certain
professional complaints by patients. There have related
to quality of
professional services. They have all been complaints that were resolved by me
performing the work again to the patient’s
satisfaction, and in some cases
involving me providing a Medicare refund at the direction of the Dental Board.
am presently working, with my wife’s assistance, to address complaints
made by [omitted – names of five patients].
and marked ‘A’ is correspondence relation to the patient [another
patient], whose complaint related to dental
work that he was not satisfied with
and the manner in which it was resolved.
of these professional standards complaints arose in the period after I was
charged by police, and the publicity that followed.
I attribute this to two
(a) The factors which led to my offending behaviour in 2009 also had an adverse
effect on my professional performance in the corresponding
period, which was
probably then exacerbated by the additional family and personal pressures I
faced while going through the criminal
justice system processes; and
(b) The adverse publicity about the charges seemed to create a corresponding
increase in complaints about my professional work out
a proportion to the rest
of my career.
attitude to these complaints has always been to acknowledge any deficiencies in
my normal standard of practice, and as far as possible,
to attempt to remedy
those deficiencies by providing further work. Most or all of the complaints I
have received have been, or are
being, resolved in that manner (other than those
where I could not provide the services due to my incarceration).
have never been sued for professional negligence. I have never had action taken
against me for professional performance issues beyond
the scope of the matters
described about. I have never caused injury or disfigurement to any person.
have maintained and forged strong relationships and friendships with clients
throughout my career. As part of the documents I propose
to serve in the hearing
of this matter I have included numerous character references. One of the
categories of referee is former
patients of mine. Those referees are aware of
the criminal charges which I acknowledged and am serving this custodial
also have the support of my professional peers. Another category of referees
providing references to this Tribunal are work colleagues.
Those are also
supportive of my desire to continue practicing despite being aware of the
criminal charges.
April 2009- October 2010
continued to practice in the period after being charged for the offences, until
being suspended on 11 October 2010. I found that
the opportunity to concentrate
on my profession, and focus on my work for the brief period that I knew would be
available to me before
going to prison, confirmed my love and passion for my
vocation. It also allowed me to recover a degree of focus, self-confidence,
self-esteem, in conjunction with ongoing counseling.
dental practice was not sold. I would place an extremely high value on an
opportunity to repay my debt to the community, by providing
valuable dental
services; and to my wife and family, by repairing the financial loss and stigma
my conduct brought upon them.
kept the Dental Board advised and informed of the initial allegations, and the
subsequent developments, including my ultimate plea
of guilty. A bundle of
relevant correspondence is at Tab 46 of my bundle of documents.
was able to comply with strict conditions of practice imposed by the Dental
Board in the period from July 2009 –September
2010. I was equally able to
comply with strict, and varying, conditions imposed by the Courts as part of my
bail conditions. At Tabs
3 of the Applicant Bundle, and Tab 47 of my bundle
respectively are copies of the conditions imposed by the Dental Board, and my
various bail conditions, from time to time during that period.
did not breach any of those conditions. I also regularly updated the Dental
Board of any changes of address (Tab 46).
part of my conditions of practice I was required to maintain a register of
patients who attended my clinic who were under the age
of 18, and have that
register verified by a Dental Inspector from the Dental Board, Dr Patrick
copy of the register maintained for my practice between April 2009 and September
2010 is at Volume 2 of my documents in this matter.
did not breach my obligations in relation to the maintenance of this register
(or indeed any of the other conditions). An examination
of the register shows
that I treated a large number of patients under the age of 18 in the relevant
period. I did not receive any
complaint about my conduct, even of a minor
nature, from any of those patients, or their parent or guardian, in that time. I
not receive any complaint of inappropriate conduct after the charges had
Tab 48 are examples of contracts signed by employees who I engaged in compliance
with the conditions imposed on me.
have answered questions asked of me by the Dental Council in relations to these
conditions as set out in the transcripts included
in the HCCC’s documents,
at Tabs 4 and 7.
the conditions imposed on my practice were onerous, I demonstrated a capacity to
comply with those requirements. I undertake
to the Tribunal that, if I were to
be allowed to resume practice at some stage in the future, that I would
willingly comply with
similar or equivalent conditions or practice, for whatever
time the Tribunal deemed appropriate.
registration was suspended on 11 October 2010. I have not practiced dentistry in
have the complete support of my wife, who has made a statement to the Tribunal
as part of my case. Obviously, my capacity to comply
with the conditions of
practice was in large part due to her support on every level – and in
particularly administrative, emotional
and marital support. I ask the Tribunal
to also take into account her past assistance, and commitment to further assist
me, in considering
whether to allow me to practice in any form. She is prepared
to act as Practice Manager and liaise with the Dental Board and conduct
overseeing and reporting role. She has demonstrated her capacity to do so in the
have in the past also been supported by persons acting as chaperones, and as
practicing dental assistants. I am also willing to
abide by any condition the
Tribunal sees fit to impose.
refer to the recommendations by Dr Lennings for future treatment, in his updated
and original reports (Tabs 8 and 9). I would be
prepared to abide by any
condition that the Tribunal imposed on me to attend such treatment.
would be prepared to abide by any order to attend any educational courses,
training, medical treatment or other conditions. If necessary
the Tribunal could
make some or any of those orders or conditions being made as critical compliance
orders or conditions pursuant
to s149A(5).
have very little capacity to pay a fine. I have not worked since October 2010. I
had substantial legal expenses in relation to my
criminal trial. I had
previously suffered large trading losses on the share marked as I disclosed to
the Court and Dr Lennings. I
have been arranging for various refunds to Medicare
in relation to the professional complaints described above. I have also incurred
legal fees in relation to these proceedings. I was unable to secure sale of my
dentistry practice and therefore the asset could not
be liquidated. My wife has
been supporting our two children while I have been in custody and will continue
to do so. I ask the Tribunal
to take into account that any financial penalty
will affected them adversely.
accept that my conviction has appropriately resulted in the suspension of my
registration, on and from 11 October 2011.
ask the Tribunal not to cancel my registration permanently, but to impose a
finite period of suspension backdated from 11 October
2010, to a date the
Tribunal sees fit.
would have extremely strong incentives to comply with conditions. I am subject
to parole conditions for a further two years. Further
offending would result in
additional time in custody. Breach of conditions could result in further
referral to the Tribunal, or immediate
cancellation of registration if imposed
as critical compliance conditions or orders.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.64 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter