URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CLO v AAI Limited t/as GIO [2025] NSWPICMR 13; (26 March 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
CLO v AAI Limited t/as GIO
[2025] NSWPICMR 13
AAI Limited t/as GIO
MERIT REVIEWER:
Elizabeth Medland
DATE OF DECISION:
26 March 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; merit review
regarding a dispute as to whether the injured person is an “earner”
for the purposes of Schedule 1, clause
3; insurer denied payments of weekly
statutory benefits on the basis that evidence was not sufficient to establish
the claimant was
employed at the time of the accident; claimant alleges being
employed in his brother’s car business from two weeks prior to
accident; payslips and bank statements provided in addition to other evidence;
assessment conference took place however
the claimant (unrepresented) became
agitated and terminated his participation in the video conference;
– the original decision is confirmed; inconsistencies in documentary
evidence such that not sufficiently satisfied the claimant
was working and an
earner at the time of the motor accident.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries Act
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows:
reviewable decision is affirmed.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
(the claimant) was involved in a motor vehicle accident on
19 June 2024. He
made a claim for statutory benefits under
the Motor Accident Injuries Act
2017 (MAI Act) with AAI Limited trading as GIO (the insurer), the compulsory
third party insurer of the vehicle considered to be at
an initial liability notice dated 23 July 2024 the insurer declined payment of
weekly statutory benefits on the basis that the
claimant is not an
“earner” for the purposes of Schedule 1, cl 2 of the MAI Act.
an internal review decision of 20 September 2024, the insurer set aside that
decision and instead determined that the claimant
met the definition of
way of further notice dated 1 October 2024 the insurer declined payment of
weekly statutory benefits on the basis that the claimant
“earner” for the purposes of Schedule 1, cl 2 of the MAI Act.
internal review was requested, and the decision was affirmed by the insurer on
10 October 2024.
claimant subsequently lodged an application for merit review with the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission) on 17 October 2024.
The matter has been referred
to me as a merit reviewer of the motor accidents division of the Commission.
dispute is deemed a merit review matter pursuant to Schedule 2 cl 1(a) of the
claimant was initially legally represented but is now self-represented.
have held a number of teleconferences with the parties, allowing for further
information and documentation to be provided. Ultimately
the matter came to be
the subject of an assessment conference on 4 March 2025 via videolink. The
claimant’s alleged employer,
who is also his brother, Mr Fred Younan gave
evidence. The claimant also gave evidence, however, via telephone only. During
of the assessment hearing the claimant became agitated and hung up
before the conclusion of the hearing.
evidence has been received from the claimant’s treating general
practitioner (GP) who has reported that the claimant’s
psychological state
is such that the claimant should not participate in any further
hearings/teleconferences.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
noted above, the issue in dispute is whether the claimant is an
“earner” for the purposes of the MAI Act. If the claimant
“earner” there is no entitlement to payments of weekly statutory
benefits (see s3.6(1) and s3.7(1) of the MAI
is defined in Schedule 1 cl 2 of the MAI Act as follows:
person who is injured as a result of a motor accident is an ‘earner’
if the person is at least 15 years of age
a) was employed or self-employed: (whether or not full-time)
any time during the 8 weeks immediately preceding the motor accident, or
a period or periods equal to at least 13 weeks during the year immediately
preceding the motor accident, or
a period or periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the 2 years immediately
preceding the motor accident,
and, at the date of the motor accident, had not retired permanently from all
employment, or
b) before the motor accident, had entered into an arrangement (whether or not an
enforceable contract) –
an employer or other person to undertake employment, or
commence business as a self-employed person,
at a particular time and place, or
CHRONOLOGY and EVIDENCE
accident occurred on 19 June 2024.
application for personal injury benefits (claim form) is dated 18 June 2024. It
is noted that this date is actually the day before
the accident. The form was,
however, lodged with the insurer on 25 June 2024. In the form the claimant
declares that he was employed
as yard manager at City Car Galleries and was
earning $2,000 per week.
the accompanying certificate of capacity, the claimant’s GP, Dr Khalil
lists the claimant’s occupation as a car yardsman
at “City Car
Gallery Fred”.
some conversations were had with the insurer regarding the alleged employment.
It was revealed that the claimant had previously
worked at City Car Gallery in
the same capacity around two years prior. However, there was a period before the
accident where he
did not work there and allegedly started working there again
two weeks prior to the accident.
support his claim the claimant has provided copies of payslips from City Car
Gallery. Those detail payments as follows:
a) payment on 14 June 2024 in the amount of $1,885 (gross $2,631) for period 10
June 2024 to 14 June 2024, and
b) payment on 21 June 2024 in the amount of $1,131 (gross $1,466) for period 17
June 2024 to 19 June 2024.
payslips detail the claimant’s annual salary to be $140,462.00 with an
hourly rate of $71.08040.
claimant has also provided copies of his bank statements from ANZ that
correspond with the payslip amounts (insofar as the amounts
are concerned, but
the dates do not correspond). The bank statement is for the period 6 March 2024
6 September 2024 and the summary notes total deposits of $20,062.93 and
total withdrawals of $19,819.80.
the actual transactions have been redacted by the claimant, except for the two
subject deposits. They demonstrate a deposit
on 24 June 2024 in the amount of
$1,885.00 from City Car Gallery and a further deposit on 28 June 2024 in the
amount of $1,131.00.
the declinature by the insurer, a letter from Fred Younan (his brother) of City
Car Gallery was provided by the claimant
dated 24 July 2024. It states:
“this is to confirm [CLO] commenced employment 10
as a yardsman and body fitter. For further information please do not hesitate to
Subsequently,
the insurer engaged factual investigators, Quantumcorp, to contact the
claimant’s alleged employer to obtain further
information. The report of
Quantumcorp dated 8 September 2024 outlines numerous failed attempts to speak
with Mr Fred Younan.
Quantumcorp
also tried to interview the claimant, however, the interview was abandoned
allegedly due to the claimant’s behaviour.
insurer requested the claimant provide further information regarding his
employment in correspondence dated 9 September 2024.
The claimant responded in
an email stating “you have already asked me those questions n u got the
answers” (sic).
claimant had a subsequent accident on 10 September 2024 and lodged a claim for
statutory benefits with Allianz. In the claim form
dated 12 September 2024 the
claimant declared he was a self-employed Director of AAR Group Australian
earning $2,450 per week. The
subject motor accident was not disclosed in this
form, despite a direct question as to whether he had ever made a CTP claim for
material provided includes an income statement from the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) that includes confirmation of earnings
for the financial year
2023-2024 from City Car Gallery of $4097.00 with superannuation reported of
taxation returns are also provided. The taxation return for the 2018 financial
year details earnings from City Car Gallery
totalling $24,232. For the 2019
financial year the taxation return details earnings from City Car Gallery of
$18,099. The 2024 taxation
includes details of employment with City Car Gallery
with gross payment of $4,097. No other employment is detailed on the taxation
from “Aware Super” are provided. For the 12 months of the 2024
financial year no employer superannuation guarantee
payments were made.
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s initial submissions
insurer provided initial submissions dated 29 October 2024. The submissions
refer to a number of inconsistencies on the payslips
provided, including
incorrect calculation of superannuation. Further, it is noted that whilst the
payslips refer to payments on 10
June 2024 and 17 June 2024, the corresponding
payments were not made to the claimant’s bank (as per the bank statement)
24 June 2024 and
28 June 2024.
insurer also notes that the payslip for 10-14 June has a year to date that
indicates it is the first payslip, however, the year
to date for annual leave
indicates it is a second payslip.
addition, it is noted that the payslip for 17-19 June (shortened week presumably
due to the motor accident) has annual leave accrued
the same as for the prior
payslip which was a full working week.
insurer notes that the claimant has advised he is in New South Wales on an
interim basis with no fixed address and resides in
terms of treatment, the insurer notes that the claimant sought treatment with a
different GP (Dr Hanna) after the subsequent motor
accident whereas in respect
of the subject accident the claimant has attended upon Dr Khalil.
insurer also asserts that the claimant informed them that he had not engaged in
any form of paid employment, which is inconsistent
with evidence provided that
confirms the claimant established a business on or around 17 July 2024 and has
been operating since at
least 1 August 2024, and having declared to Allianz in
respect of the subsequent motor accident that he was a self-employed director
AAR Group Australian earning $2,450 per week.
Ultimately,
the insurer submits that the claimant has misled both insurers and has not acted
honestly, due to the failure to declare
the earlier accident to Allianz and
failing to inform the insurer of his self-employment for the purposes of
obtaining financial
Claimant’s submissions
claimant’s previous legal representative, Mr Peter Livers of Slattery
Thompson, provided very short submissions dated 2
November 2024. They simply
refer to the bank statement and the ATO taxation assessments without further
Claimant’s statement dated 29 November 2024
claimant confirms being involved in two motor accidents of 19 June 2024 and
10 September 2024.
states that on 19 June 2024 (the date of the subject accident) he was working
for City Car Gallery in Bankstown as a yardsman earning
states that he has not been able to work since 19 June 2024 “to date and
continuing”.
claimant states: “I obtained this employment with City Car Gallery as I
used to work with them some years ago. I rang them
for a job and because they
know I am a good worker they asked me to commence straight away on the
June 2024.”
terms of paperwork it is stated that no paperwork was received other than the
two pay slips.
terms of his business activities, the claimant confirms he is a director of AAR
Group Australia Pty Ltd since 17 July 2024 and
that he receives a dividend
payment as a director and shareholder. He denies receiving a salary and does not
perform any physical
work for the company.
claimant explains that he went to a different GP for the second accident because
Dr Khalil was not available on the day, he also
notes that he is on various
medications which makes him drowsy, forgetful and causes a loss of
concentration.
Email from claimant dated 20 January 2025
short email indicates that some confirmation had been received from his employer
that the superannuation
contributions made for both relevant pay periods were made at 11%, with the
11.5% shown being a software
error (given that the higher rate was not scheduled
to take effect until 1 July 2024).
Insurer submissions dated 21
January 2025
submissions confirm a number of steps taken to seek more
information/documentation verifying the claimant’s allegations
his employment. This includes things such as copies of any written communication
between the claimant and his employer.
insurer submits that the onus in establishing that the claimant is an earner is
on the claimant (see:
Yin v Allianz Insurance Australia Limited
NSWPICMR 5).
of credit are reiterated by the insurer and “GIO maintains its submission
that the payslips and letter relied upon by
the claimant are unreliable and it
remains the case that there is no objective contemporaneous evidence to verify
the alleged employment
with City Car Gallery.”
claimant to the insurer and the Commission dated 21 January 2025
claimant indicates that he is shocked and confused by the insurer’s
submissions. He notes that he has been open and transparent
to rebuild his life by seeking reemployment through family members in Sydney for
the purposes of relocation to
spend time with his children and repair his
relationship.
claimant declines to provide unredacted bank statements and notes he has
explained that he has explained the errors on his payslips.
Email from claimant to the insurer and the Commission dated 22
January 2025
claimant explains that the claim form lodged in respect of the subsequent
accident was filled out by his previous lawyer and it
was his duty to disclose
all relevant information truthfully that he told him.
claimant disputes that he has two different doctors for each motor accident,
pointing out that Mr Livers was also the same lawyer
for both accidents.
is asserted that his employer being a family member is not a basis for
discrimination, and that his evidence is backed by official
documentation from
federal agencies, demonstrating honesty and transparency.
claimant explains that there was no email communication with his employer and
WhatsApp was utilised for any necessary communication.
email states that it was drafted by a support person.
submissions dated 3 February 2025
insurer confirms having received a document entitled “concessional
contributions” that confirms a superannuation balance
and confirming an
amount of $450.67 was received, but with no evidence as to the date those
payments were made.
insurer confirms a request for unredacted bank statements and copies of any
WhatsApp messages relating to employment.
claimant indicated in advance of the merit review hearing that he would not be
attending via videoconference, on medical advice.
insurer indicated objection to this stance both before the hearing and during
same. The claimant became agitated at this, but
eventually calmed such that
some questioning could proceed.
the claimant was joined to the conference, Mr Fred Younan (Fred), the
claimant’s brother and alleged employer, attended
via videolink.
confirmed the claimant commenced employment with him on 10 June 2024 on a full
time basis as a yardsman with the claimant earning
“roughly two grand a
was confirmed that the claimant had worked for him in the past and he stated
that he was short of men and he asked the claimant
if he wanted to start work.
He confirmed that there was no employment contract or other documentation but
there was likely a tax
declaration form.
stated that his employees are usually paid on a weekly basis, and that he
himself processes the pays. He stated that he usually
processed the pays on a
Friday. However, he does not produce payslips and the accountant would do that.
respect of the payslips that have been provided in these proceedings, Fred
stated that they were not given to the claimant until
they were requested
because the insurer had requested same. He stated that he did not usually give
payslips unless they were requested.
was not able to explain why the payments in respect of the two payslips were not
made until sometime after the listed payment
date. He stated that he did not
know but it could be that the paperwork was not in order – that his
timesheets were not in.
was questioned about why he failed to cooperate with the insurer’s
investigator and he answered that he received multiple
telephone calls asking
the same questions over and over and he found it annoying.
the claimant left employment Fred stated that he advertised the position and
replaced him.
Communication
confirmed that all such messages are deleted
and are not available any longer.
Claimant’s oral evidence
noted above the claimant was quite agitated for parts of his evidence. Firstly,
when the fact the insurer objected to him not appearing
via video and later when
the claimant became agitated, loud and eventually terminated his participation
in the conference. Accordingly,
despite reassurance that staying at the
conference was in his best interests the claimant left without completing his
evidence. Since
that time medical evidence via the claimant’s GP has been
received that suggests the claimant is not medically fit to participate
dispute process any further and a request is made that the matter be determined
on the evidence given to date.
claimant confirmed that he began work at City Car Gallery on 10 June 2025 and
that he relocated to Sydney at the end of May, staying
at various family
member’s homes.
duties included detailing cars, changing body trays and tyres and the like.
Essentially, the claimant was required to get the
vehicles ready for sale.
stated that when he started work he signed a tax paper and nothing else.
stated that he would be paid weekly by his brother into his bank account.
Hill for the insurer questioned the claimant regarding his previous employment
with City Car Gallery. The claimant confirmed that
he had worked there in the
past but could not be certain for the total period of time that he worked there
but said that it was “definitely”
over a year in duration on a
continuous basis.
claimant also confirmed that his role back then, around 2018/2019, was the same
as it was at the time of the accident.
claimant was questioned on the claim form lodged with Allianz in respect of the
subsequent motor accident. He stated that his
lawyer filled it out and he just
signed it when asked. He also noted that he was heavily medicated at the time.
In addition, the
claimant stated that he cannot read and write properly and
explained that he is unhappy with his previous lawyers’ conduct
of his claim.
Ms Hill began to question the claimant regarding his injuries sustained in the
subsequent accident, the claimant became very
agitated to the point where I was
unable to interject to try and explain and calm the situation. The agitation of
the claimant escalated
to the point where he terminated the call. However, he
did state that he definitely was working, that he was an “earner”
and the documents demonstrate that.
gave the insurer the opportunity to make oral submissions where Ms Hill
confirmed that the issue of credit was pressed and the various
inconsistencies
in the evidence were canvassed.
is also the case that after the merit review hearing Fred Younan provided a copy
of a signed taxation declaration form.
FINDINGS AND
claimant’s credit has been put in issue by the insurer. Having considered
all the evidence as a whole, I accept that the
claimant’s evidence should
be approached with caution.
the tax declaration form that has only been provided post the assessment
conference, there is no objective evidence that
pre-dates the motor accident
that verifies the claimant was employed at the time of the accident.
are numerous inconsistencies in the evidence, that can be briefly summarised as
a) the claimant advised me during the assessment conference that he had asked
his brother for the job. However, Fred Younan advised
me that he had asked the
claimant to work for him;
b) the payslips provided have been confirmed as only being created after the
motor accident and only after the insurer had requested
documentation. This is
despite the fact that it is unlawful to not provide employees with payslips at
each interval of salary payment;
c) the payslips include a number of errors that have been pointed out by the
insurer. Whilst there are explanations for the errors
provided, the errors
remain nonetheless;
d) perhaps most pertinently, the payslips set out payment dates of 14 and
June 2024, yet the corresponding bank statement inexplicably details payments in
July well after the pay period and the purported
payment date. This is even
though Fred Younan advised that he himself processes the pays and he does so on
a weekly basis at each
e) the taxation return does evidence the payments from City Car Gallery, but
that is not conclusive proof of income, it is merely
proof of what the claimant
has declared to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO);
f) the Aware Super statement does not detail any superannuation payments made
– although I note that this would not be entirely
unusual given that the
alleged earnings occurred at the end of the financial year that the statement is
relevant to;
g) the claimant’s provided payslips suggest a annual income of over
$140,000. This is despite the fact that when he previously
worked for the same
employer across the 2018/2019 financial years, the documented earnings in the
taxation returns would suggest
a significantly reduced income. This is despite
the fact that the claimant confirmed that his role was the same in both sets of
h) the claimant failed to disclose the subject motor accident in the claim form
submitted to Allianz in respect of the subsequent
accident. Whilst he explains
that he did not fill the form out at the end, I am not persuaded that the
claimant’s then legal
representative failed to advise the claimant of his
statutory obligations to provide correct information, before committing his
to the document;
claimant has repeatedly advised the insurer that he has not been in employment
since the motor accident, yet in his claim form
to Allianz he has declared
income over $2,000 per week from self employment, and
j) the bank statement provided is redacted and the claimant cites privacy
reasons for this. However, the information that can be
elicited confirms that
there were relatively significant credits to his account during the period in
addition to the payments from
City Car Gallery.
account of the abovementioned inconsistencies, I am not sufficiently satisfied
that on the balance of probabilities the claimant
was an earner for the purposes
of the MAI Act.
I acknowledge the recently provided tax declaration form, on a background of no
other contemporaneous document that predates
the motor accident that verifies
employment, I do not consider it sufficient evidence to satisfy me that the
claimant is an earner
for the purposes of the Act. This is particularly so when
I have viewed the claimant’s evidence with caution noting the various
inconsistencies highlighted above.
follows therefore that the reviewable decision is affirmed.
OutcomeDocumentSignee
OutcomeDocumentSignature
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (425 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter