URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BQ v BT [2020] NSWWCCPD 70 (1 December 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
[2020] NSWWCCPD 70
FIRST RESPONDENT:
SECOND RESPONDENT:
THIRD RESPONDENT:
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
FIFTH RESPONDENT:
icare Workers Insurance
FILE NUMBER:
SENIOR ARBITRATOR:
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
17 August 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
1 December 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Section 352(3)
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr S Grant, counsel
Kenny Spring Solicitors
First Respondent:
Mr S Harris, solicitor
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
(Submitting appearance)
Second Respondent:
Ms K Teague, solicitor
Kells Lawyers
Third Respondent:
Mr M Grady, solicitor
Everingham Solomons Solicitors
Fourth Respondent:
Mr D Pena, solicitor
Colin Daley Quinn
Fifth Respondent:
Ms E McDonald, solicitor
MCW Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
appeal cannot be brought as the requirements of
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
BR (the deceased) was tragically killed in an accident on 4 September 2019 in
the course of his employment with BT (the employer),
when a semi-trailer he was
driving came into collision with another heavy
A claim in respect of the
benefits pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act) was brought.
claim was made on behalf of Ms BQ (the widow of the deceased) together with C1,
C2, C3 and C4, the infant children of Ms BQ and
the deceased. The
employer’s relevant insurer ultimately accepted liability in respect of
the deceased’s death.
employer’s solicitors lodged the ARD instituting the current proceedings
on 17 June 2020. There was no dispute regarding
the entitlement of the dependent
children to weekly payments pursuant to s 25(b) of the 1987 Act, or of the
employer’s obligation
to pay funeral expenses pursuant to s 26 of the 1987
Act. The relevant benefit pursuant to s 25(a) at the date of death was $810,050.
The issues requiring determination were identification of persons who were
wholly or partially dependent, apportionment of the sum
of $810,050 between the
dependants, liability of the employer for interest, and orders in relation to
the payment of compensation.
matter was listed for a telephone conference before Ms Camp, a Delegate of the
Registrar, on 17 July 2020. Each of the potential
dependants identified in [1]
above was legally represented. The issues were identified and the Delegate made
orders for the lodgment
of further evidence and written
submissions.
matter was listed before Senior Arbitrator Capel for telephone conference on 17
August 2020. The parties were advised of the Senior
Arbitrator’s intention
to determine the matter without holding an arbitration
THE SENIOR ARBITRATOR’S DECISION
Commission issued a Certificate of Determination dated 17 August 2020
accompanied by the Reasons. The Senior Arbitrator identified
and summarised the
He summarised the
parties’ submissions.
Senior Arbitrator referred to
TNT Group 4 Pty Ltd v
Kaur v Thales
Underwater Systems Pty Ltd
Kirkpatrick
authorities
dealing with the identification and extent of dependency. He found that Ms BQ
(who was working full-time as at the date
of death) was partially dependent on
the deceased, and that each of the infant children was wholly dependent on the
deceased. He
found there were “no other persons wholly or partly dependent
on the deceased at the date of
The largest share
of the sum was apportioned to Ms BQ; the sums apportioned to the children were
of a lower order, but were substantial.
The Senior Arbitrator also made orders
for the payment of interest on the lump
Arbitrator’s orders relating to dependency, apportionment and interest are
not challenged on this appeal.
BQ, in her statement dated 23 June 2020, said that she planned to invest
“a portion of the monies that [she received] to
ensure that the children
and [her] will be comfortable into the future”. She said she had taken
advice “regarding the
investment of the funds payable to the
She said that
her education included tertiary qualifications in
“100. I am seeking that any monies payable to the
children from the apportionment of the lump sum death benefit be managed by
myself. I seek that the sums payable to the children are administered and
invested by me, with the benefit of financial advice, rather
than being paid and
managed by the Public Trustee.
will add to these investments any other amounts which are received by the
children from any superannuation or other benefits following
plan to keep the monies paid to the children invested and not make any
withdrawal from these funds until the children attain the
age of 18 years,
except in the case of any medical emergency or extraordinary educational
submissions lodged on behalf of the children were generally supportive of this
Senior Arbitrator dealt with the issue:
“68. The respondents
have submitted that the entitlements of the minor children should be paid to the
first respondent as trustee
so that she can invest the funds. Withdrawals would
only be made to cover unforeseen expenses. I have no reason to doubt the first
respondent’s evidence and her present intentions, but who knows what the
future holds.
my view, the payments for the children should be paid to the NSW Trustee and
Guardian to hold on trust until each of them turns
18 years of age. Whilst this
is contrary to the submissions made on behalf of the respondents, there is no
compelling reason for
departing from the usual practice. This ensures that the
funds are protected for the children’s
appeal in this matter was lodged by Ms BQ on 14 September 2020. An appeal was
also lodged on behalf of C3 on the same date. C3’s
appeal was subsequently
discontinued. The solicitors acting for the employer wrote to the Registrar on
22 September 2020 advising
that the employer did “not intend to take any
part in the appeal” and requesting that its appearance be treated as
submitting appearance”.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
BQ raises the following grounds of appeal:
(a) That the Senior
Arbitrator’s decision was affected by an error of discretion when he
stated at para [68] of his reasons
‘who knows what the future
holds’. (Ground No. 1)
(b) That the Senior Arbitrator’s decision was affected by an error [of]
discretion in that he stated that there was ‘no
compelling reason’
to depart from ‘the normal practice’ and this is an error in the
exercise of his discretion.
(Ground No. 2)
(c) That the use of the words ‘compelling reason’ was an
incorrect application of the requirements of s 85A [of the 1987
therefore the Senior Arbitrator’s decision was affected by both an error
of discretion and law. (Ground No. 3)
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are before me, and
the submissions by the parties that the appeal
can proceed to be determined on
the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information
to proceed ‘on
the papers’ without holding any conference or formal
hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
LEGISLATION
25(1)(a) of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
death results from an injury, the amount of compensation payable by the employer
under this Act shall be—
(a) the amount of $750,000 (the
lump sum death benefit
which is to be apportioned among any dependants who are wholly or partly
dependent for support on the worker or (if there are no
such dependants) paid to
the worker’s legal personal representative, and ...”.
85 of the 1987 Act provides:
Payments to NSW Trustee for
benefit of beneficiary
(cf former ss 15(3), 57, 58, 61)
(1) The following compensation shall be paid to the NSW Trustee in
trust for the benefit of the persons entitled to the compensation—
(a) compensation payable in respect of the death of a worker (unless
paid to a worker’s legal personal representative or a
particular person in
accordance with this Act or an award),
(b) compensation payable to a person who is mentally ill (unless the
Commission otherwise orders),
(c) compensation payable to a worker under the age of 18 years if the
worker agrees or the Commission directs that the compensation
be paid to the NSW
(d) a lump sum commutation payment which the worker agrees or the
Commission orders to be paid to the NSW Trustee.
(2) Any money so paid to the NSW Trustee may be invested, applied, paid
out or otherwise dealt with by the NSW Trustee in such manner
as the NSW Trustee
thinks fit for the benefit of the persons entitled to the money.
(3) If a surviving spouse (including widow or widower) (over 18 years
of age and not mentally ill) is the only person entitled to
compensation paid to
the NSW Trustee in respect of the death of a worker, the compensation shall be
paid out to the surviving spouse
in one or more lump sums determined by the NSW
(4) A reference in subsection (3) to the surviving spouse of a deceased
worker includes a reference to a dependant of the worker
who is the de facto
partner of the worker.
(5) In the case of a lump sum commutation payment, the NSW Trustee
shall exercise its powers under this section in accordance with
the agreement or
order under which it was paid to the NSW Trustee.
(6) The Commission may, for any sufficient cause, vary the manner in
which the NSW Trustee invests, applies, pays out or otherwise
deals with money
under this section.
(7) The NSW Trustee may apply for any such variation.
(8) The receipt of the NSW Trustee is sufficient discharge in respect
of any money paid to the NSW Trustee under this section.”
85A of the 1987 Act provides:
85A Payment of
benefits to beneficiaries
(1) Despite section 85, the Commission may authorise the payment of
compensation referred to in section 85 (1)—
(a) to the person who is entitled to the compensation, or
(b) to such other person, for the benefit of the person entitled to the
compensation, as the Commission thinks fit.
(2) Any such payment is to be made in the manner authorised by the
Commission.”
352(3) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(3) There is no appeal
under this section unless the amount of compensation at issue on the appeal is
(a) at least $5,000 (or such other amount as may be prescribed by the
regulations), and
(b) at least 20% of the amount awarded in the decision appealed
‘Compensation’
is defined in s 4 of the 1998 Act:
compensation
means compensation under the Workers Compensation Acts, and includes any
monetary benefit under those Acts.”
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to time
pursuant to s 352(4) of the 1998 Act have been
THE REQUIREMENTS OF SECTION 352(3) OF THE 1998 ACT
23 September 2020 the Presidential Unit of the Commission wrote to the
parties’ solicitors, noting the subject matter of
the appeal, and stating
that “[t]he issue of satisfying s 352(3) is not straightforward in
the circumstances. It is an issue
that should be fully addressed in the
parties’ submissions.”
Ms BQ’s submissions on the monetary threshold, in her Application to
Appeal, it was simply stated that the issues in the
appeal “concern the
payment of compensation in excess of $5,000”. “Further Submissions
of Appellant” were
lodged on Ms BQ’s behalf dated 29 September
2020. It was submitted that ‘compensation’ includes “any
benefit” under the Workers Compensation Acts. It was submitted
that “clearly the first hurdle is traversed”, leaving
the issue of
whether the amount of compensation at issue on the appeal is at least 20 per
cent of the amount awarded in the decision.
It is submitted the focus of this
appeal is the amount awarded to the children. The requirements are met, it is
submitted by the
amount of $810,050 plus interest, or alternatively the amount
of $534,633 plus interest which is the sum awarded to the children.
Consideration
was held in
Patrick Operations Pty Ltd v Watson
that the “monetary
threshold is a mandatory requirement which must be met before the Commission may
hear an appeal”.
consistent with the clear words of the section. It was observed in
International Flavours and Fragrances (Australia) Ltd
that the ‘amount
of compensation at issue on the appeal’ “may be different from the
amount of compensation at issue
in the dispute as a
The words of the
section clearly direct attention to the amount ‘at issue on the
Fletchers International Exports Pty Limited v
“While a decision of an Arbitrator may not concern an
‘award’ of compensation (as in
), the appeal must
nonetheless affect an ‘
amount of compensation at issue on the
to pass the threshold test in section 352(2)(b). Purely
procedural decisions, such as a decision to adjourn a telephone conference
Tagg v International Flavours and Fragrances (Australia) Ltd
, a decision in relation to costs only (
Grimson v Integral
[2003] NSWWCC PD 29)
, and a decision to schedule a further telephone
conference (
Falcon v Narellan Enterprises Pty Limited
[2003] NSW WCC PD
do not meet this threshold criterion. The decision must have a
capacity to put
the amount of compensation, determined by reference to the
decision or the claim
Sheridan v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty
[2003] NSWWCC PD 3)
in issue in the appeal
(as in the case
of the filing of a ‘Reply’ (
ADCO Constructions Pty Ltd v
[2003] NSWWCCPD 21)).
” (underlining added)
O’Callaghan
v Energy World Corporation
dealt with an
appeal in a matter where the worker sought to set aside consent orders for lump
sum compensation, so that she could
pursue a medical appeal pursuant to s
327(3)(a) of the 1998 Act, with a view to achieving the threshold for a
‘work injury
damages’ claim. Roche DP said:
Commission is concerned with the current claim and whether, in respect of that
claim, the amount of ‘compensation
at issue on the appeal’ is at
least $5,000.”
Deputy President concluded that the threshold was not satisfied, stating that
there was no compensation at issue on the
I followed this approach
Abu-Ali v Martin-Brower Australia Pty Ltd,
an application to set aside
a Certificate of Determination so as to permit a worker to seek assessment of
permanent impairment, to
be assessed on a different basis to that employed
originally.
has been regularly held that Presidential appeals against arbitral decisions in
‘Workplace Injury Management Disputes’
do not satisfy the monetary
threshold in s 352(3).
Arbitrator in the current proceedings was required to deal with dependency,
apportionment of the lump sum provided in s 25(1)(a)
of the 1987 Act between
those found to be dependant, interest on that lump sum and the way in which
payment of the lump sums apportioned
to the dependants under the age of eighteen
years was to be made. The only aspect of the Arbitrator’s decision
challenged on
this appeal goes to his orders for payment of the various sums
apportioned to dependants under the age of eighteen to the NSW Trustee.
appeal does not relate in any way to the quantum of the amounts to be paid, the
orders for apportionment are not challenged.
The issue on appeal relates to the
exercise of the Arbitrator’s discretion in respect of the orders for
first of the requirements in s 352(3) is that at subs (a), that the
“amount of compensation
at issue on the appeal
” be at least
$5,000. I cannot see that there is any amount of compensation at issue on the
appeal. The amount of compensation
awarded overall, and to each of the
dependants individually, will not be varied by the outcome of the appeal. If the
appeal were
to succeed, the only practical effect would be to the identity of
the trustee to which payment was to be made. The first of the requirements
352(3) is not satisfied.
there is no amount of compensation at issue on the appeal, it follows that the
requirements of subs (b) of s 352(3) similarly cannot
be satisfied.
appeal cannot be brought as the requirements of s 352(3) of the 1998 Act are not
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
1 December 2020
Police report, Application in
Respect of Death of Worker (ARD), pp
Letter, Kenny
Spring 4/10/19, ARD pp
(3376/20, 17/8/20), (Reasons), [4]–[5],
Direction, 17/7/20,
Reasons, [6]–[7].
Reasons, [9].
(1987) 8 NSWLR
3 NSWCCR 10.
NSWWCCPD 6.
[1996] NSWCC 2
(1996) 15 NSWCCR
BQ’s statement 23/6/20, [97],
statement 23/6/20, [16].
BQ’s statement 23/6/20,
[100]–[102].
NSWWCCPD 18
O’Callaghan
O’Callaghan
O’Callaghan
[2017] NSWWCCPD 25
Department of Education and Communities v Colefax
[2012] NSWWCCPD 63
[22]–[24] and the cases cited therein.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter