URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/120.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Owners Strata Plan no 73224 v Ikon Realty Pty Ltd t/as Ikon Strata [2025] NSWCATCD 120; (21 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
The Owners Strata Plan no 73224 v Ikon Realty Pty Ltd t/as Ikon
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 120
Hearing Date(s):
26 September 2024, 27 February, 14 May 2025
Date of Orders:
21 August 2025
Decision Date:
21 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
H Woods, Senior Member
(1) Application dismissed.
respect of costs:
(a) Any application for costs
including submissions and any evidence in support of the application for costs
are to be filed and
served within 14 days of the date of these
(b) Any submissions or evidence in response are
to be filed and served within a further 14 days.
Any submissions in respect of costs are to state whether the party
consents to the question of costs being determined on the
papers, and if not
(d) If there is no application for costs, then
there will be no order as to costs, which the intent that each party pay its own
Catchwords:
LAND LAW — Strata title —Termination of strata managing
agent— Resolution to commence proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Strata Schemes Management Act (2015) NSW
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Neat Holdings
Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 67 ALJR 170
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
The Owners – Strata Plan No 73224 v Ikon Realty Pty Ltd t/as Ikon
Representation:
Mr Lazarus, a lot owner, appeared provisionally (Applicant)
Martin Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00235875
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
proceedings primarily concern an application for an order pursuant to
Strata Schemes Management Act
(NSW) (SSMA) terminating a strata
management agreement in respect of a strata scheme development in Campsie, NSW
(the Strata Scheme)
between the named applicant, the Owners Strata Plan no 73224
(the Owners Corporation) and the responded, Ikon Realty Pty Ltd trading
Strata (Ikon Strata).
complicating feature is that, although Mr Verghese Lazarus (Mr Lazarus), a lot
owner in the Strata Scheme, was the person who filed
the application and
purported to conduct the proceedings on behalf of the Owners Corporation, there
was a dispute as to whether the
Owners Corporation had authorised the bringing
of the proceedings and whether Mr Lazarus had authority to appear for the Owners
Corporation.
position was further complicated, when between 26 September 2024 and 27 February
2024, the Owners Corporation filed a notice
of withdrawal of the proceedings,
but in circumstances where Mr Lazarus effectively contested the authority of the
owners who sought
to withdraw the application, and his claim that he represented
the owners corporation, the matter remained on foot.
complication of Mr Lazarus conducting the case, but arguably not having
authority of the Owners Corporation to do so, was resolved
by Mr. Lazarus
appearing provisionally for the Owners Corporation.
Powys, solicitor, appeared with leave for the respondent.
hearing / documents relied on by the parties
matter was heard on 26 September 2024, 27 February 2025 and 14 May 2025.
Lazarus relied on:
(1) Bundles of documents filed with the Tribunal on 22 July 2024 and 28 October
2024 which were marked
(2) A document headed Strata Roll of Owners for Strata Plan No 73224
“Insurance Details” which was marked
(3) Emails filed at the Registry on 11 July 2024 that included minutes of
general meetings and a strata committee meeting;
Realty relied on:
(1) A bundle of documents filed 9 July 2024 which was marked
and included:
(a) a letter / statement of Mr Sudarman, a lot owner in the Strata Scheme, dated
9 July 2004;
(b) a letter from other lot owners dated 1 July 2024 stating to the effect that
Mr Lazarus was not an office holder of the Owners
Corporation and requesting
that the application be dismissed;
(c) a copy of strata managing agency agreement between the Owners Corporation
and Ikon Realty dated 15 June 2024 and which was had
Corporation’s seal attached to it;
(d) The minutes of an Annual General meeting of the Owners Corporation held on
15 June 2024.
(2) An email from Mr Lazarus to the Tribunal on 12 November 2024 and the
attached affidavit of Mr Sudarman dated 19 September 2024
which was marked
(3) A further bundle of documents filed 24 February 2024 containing written
submissions and four affidavits, although, the only affidavit
read was the
affidavit of Mr Lui, the strata manager at Ikon Strata who manages the Strata
27 February 2025:
(1) Mr Lazarus gave some short supplementary evident in chief and was cross
(2) Mr Lazarus cross examined Mr Lui; and
(3) the matter stood over to a further date for Mr Sudarman to be cross
14 May 2025, Mr Suderman was cross examined by Mr Lazarus and both Mr Lazarus
and Mr Powys (for Ikon Strata) made oral submissions.
application and identification of the issues
application filed by Mr Lazarus on 26 June 2024 named the Owners Corporation as
the applicant and sought:
To terminate the strata managing agent or building manage agreement.
To transfer owners corporation funds to the treasurer, Sumanto
reasons for the orders sought were:
The managing agent has been stealing money and fabricating the books since the
funds were transferred unto their control 9 Aug 23.
Before the agency agreement
4 Sep 23 was signed $5,938.67 was spent by the agent.
(a) $721.55 was paid to an owner and the opening balance of the admin. fund
adjusted to hide the transaction.
(b) $726 + $191 was withdrawn by the agent before the Agency agreement was
(c) $5,021.67 was paid for insurance that was already shown as paid in the
strata role on 1 May 2023. The insurance company and broker
are different
from that shown in the strata role.
(d) The monthly financial reports to the strata committee members was disabled
in the online system. The SC when I have given their
online logins. SC got the
reports from other owners.
(e) The Income and Expenditure report was boosted by $7,500 for levies that were
not levied or collected.
(f) The admin cash had a deficit of $1,842.21 in the Cash Management and Balance
Sheet. The I & E had a deficit of $4.75. The
I & E reports have shown a
cash difference for every month since reaching a maximum of $7,439.00 in Dec
(g) No electricity bill has been paid since Aug 2023.
(h) The overdue water bill for Apr 2024 was paid by a strata committee.
(i) The Council of Fire Safety Inspection due to Apr 2024 was not done.
(j) There is no insurance currently.
above claims were repeated in the bundle of documents filed on 28 October
application for the termination of a building manager agreement was not pressed
at the hearing.
circumstances where:
(1) the application sought to terminate a strata managing agency agreement
between the Owners Corporation and Ikon Strata dated “4
which agreement was for 12 months (the 2023 Agreement), but
(2) the evidence included:
(a) minutes of an annual general meeting of the Owners Corporation held on 15
June 2024 (15 June 2024 AGM) in which it was resolved
by ordinary resolution
that Ikon Strata be appointed as the managing agent for the Strata Scheme; and
(b) a strata managing agency agreement between the Owners Corporation and Ikon
Strata dated 15 June 2024 but commencing 5 September
2024 for a further 12
months, which was signed by two committee members of the Owners Corporation and
had the Owners Corporation’s
common seal affixed to it (2024 Agreement),
Mr Lazarus was asked to clarify the strata managing agency that he contended
ought to be terminated.
Lazarus informed the Tribunal to the effect that:
(1) the 2023 Agreement was not validly entered and was invalid, but that in any
(2) the strata managing agent agreement that ought to be set aside was the 2023
Agreement in respect of which he had issued a notice
of termination to Ikon
Strata purportedly on behalf of the Owners Corporation in about May 2023.
that light, Mr Lazarus, in summary, contends that:
(1) He was the authorised representative of the Owners Corporation and entitled
to conduct the application on its behalf.
(2) The 2023 Agreement was not valid.
(3) That the 2023 Agreement was in any event terminated by a notice sent by
email by Mr Lazarus, purporting to be on behalf of the
Owners Corporation, on
(4) Otherwise, that the 2023 Agreement should be terminated pursuant to s 72 of
the SSMA because of the alleged conduct of Ikon Strata
in the management of the
Strata Scheme and its books and records, and an order made for the return of the
Owners Corporation’s
property to it.
(5) The 15 June 2024 AGM was not validly held, and the 2024 Agreement should
effectively be ignored.
closing submission, Mr Lazarus also sought to refer to the power of the Tribunal
to also make orders for compensation under s 72
was made clear to Mr Lazarus, that the matter had been run and conducted and was
being determined on the basis that the application
was for the termination of a
strata managing agency agreement, not a claim for compensation.
summary, Ikon Strata contends that:
(1) Mr Lazarus is not a member of the present strata committee of the Owners
Corporation, is not authorised to bring the proceedings
or act for the Owners
Corporation and the commencement and conduct of the proceedings, contrary to s
103 of the SSMA, have not been
approved at a general meeting of the Owners
Corporation.
(2) Mr Lazarus does not have standing to bring the application.
(3) The majority of the Owners Corporation have sought to withdraw the
proceedings.
(4) The claimed defaults relied on my Mr Lazarus all pre date the 2024 Agreement
which was executed in June 2024 pursuant to a resolution
passed at an annual
general meeting of the Owners Corporation and did not commence until September
(5) The claims made by Mr Lazarus in respect of Ikon Strata, which it points out
are serious in nature, are not supported by reliable
and cogent evidence.
(6) None of the matters under s 72(3) of the SSMA, which the Tribunal is to be
satisfied of, have been made out.
issues for consideration therefore concern:
(1) Whether the Owners Corporation had authorised the bringing of the proceeding
and whether Mr Lazarus had authority to conduct
the proceedings for the owners
Corporation.
(2) Otherwise, whether Mr Lazarus has standing.
(3) Subject to (1) and (2):
(a) whether any of the grounds under s 72 of the SSMA for the termination of a
strata managing agency agreement have been made out,
and if so whether the
Tribunal should exercise its discretion to terminate the 2023 Agreement.
(b) Given the fact of the 2024 Agreement:
(i) whether it had been approved and entered by the Owners Corporation; and
(ii) notwithstanding Mr Lazarus indicated that it was the 2023 Agreement that
ought to be terminated, whether the 2024 Agreement
ought to be terminated.
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW) & jurisdiction
that there is a real issue as to whether the applicant has authorised the
proceedings and whether Mr Lazarus has authority
to conduct the proceedings for
the Owners Corporation,
of the SSMA relevantly provides (emphasis
Legal services to be approved by general meeting
(1) An owners corporation or strata committee of an owners corporation
must not obtain legal services for which any payment may
be required unless a
resolution approving the obtaining of those services is passed at a general
meeting of the owners corporation.
(2) An owners corporation or strata committee may obtain legal services
without obtaining approval under this section if—
(a) it is of the opinion that urgent action is necessary to protect the
interests of the owners corporation, and
(b) the cost of the legal services does not exceed $10,000 or another
amount prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
subsection.
(3) Approval under this section is not required for the
(a) to obtain legal advice before commencing legal action,
(b) to take legal action to recover unpaid contributions, interest on
unpaid contributions or related expenses,
(c) to obtain legal services prescribed by the regulations.
(4) A failure by an owners corporation or the strata committee of an
owners corporation to obtain an approval under this section
does not affect the
validity of any proceedings or other legal action taken by the owners
corporation.
(5) In this Division—
legal services
includes obtaining legal advice and taking
legal action.
that the application is for an order terminating a strata managing agency
of the SSMA relevantly provides that the Tribunal may, on
application by an Owners Corporation in respect of an agreement for the
appointment of a strata managing agent, make orders terminating the agreement,
requiring the payment of compensation to a party to
the agreement, or dismissing
the application, with the grounds on which the Tribunal may make an order under
being set out at
section relevantly states:
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by an owners corporation for a strata
scheme, make any of the following orders in respect of
an agreement for the
appointment of a strata managing agent or building manager for the
(a) an order terminating the agreement,
(2) If the Tribunal makes an order terminating the agreement, the Tribunal
may also order the strata managing agent or building
manager to return to the
owners corporation, within the period specified in the order, any documents or
other records relating to
the strata scheme that are in the possession of the
agent or manager.
(3) The Tribunal may make an order under this section on any of the
following grounds—
(a) that the strata managing agent or building manager has refused or
failed to perform the agreement or has performed it unsatisfactorily,
(b) that charges payable by the owners corporation under the
agreement are unfair,
(c) that the strata managing agent has contravened
section 57(2)
(d) that the strata managing agent has failed to disclose commissions
or training services (including estimated commissions or value
of training
services or variations and explanations for variations) in accordance with
or has failed to make the disclosures in good faith,
(e) that the strata managing agent or building manager has failed to
disclose an interest under
(f) that the agreement is, in the circumstances of the case,
otherwise harsh, oppressive, unconscionable or unreasonable.
follows from the above that:
(1) Only an owners corporation has standing to bring an application under
to terminate a strata managing agents agreement.
(2) Before doing so, a resolution approving the taking of the legal action must
be passed at a general meeting of an owners corporation.
(3) Before terminating a strata managing agency agreement, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that one or other of the grounds identified
(3) of the SSMA
have been made out.
(4) Even if the Tribunal is satisfied that any of the grounds at
SSMA have been made out, it is still a matter of discretion as to whether the
agreement should be terminated.
to one side the question of authority, whether the Owners corporation has
resolved to bring the proceedings and standing,
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
hear and determinate an application brought by an owners corporation for the
termination of a strata
managing agency
Determination
Strata Scheme comprises six lots.
Lazarus owns lot 3 in in the Strata Scheme.
a general meeting of the Owners Corporation on 20 May 2023, which Mr Lazarus,
the Owners Corporation resolved unanimously (by 4
votes) that:
(1) Ikon Strata be authorised to take over from V.J. Ray as managing agents of
the Strata Scheme; and that
(2) Ikon Strata is authorised to:
(a) get the Strata Schemes records from V. J. Ray Pty Ltd and
(b) to initiate repairs and recovery of money from lot owners A strata managing
agency agreement commenced on 4 September 2023 between
the owner’s
corporation and Ikon Realty.
Exhibit ML1 to the affidavit of Max Lui
new strata management agreement between the owners Corporation and Ikon Strata,
being the 2023 Agreement, commenced on 4 September
2023 Agreement was for a term on 1 year.
April 2024, Mr Lazarus, purported to issue a notice of termination to Ikon
Strata on behalf of the Owners Corporation.
Mr Lazarus’ bundle filed 28
October 2023
Lazarus contends that an extraordinary general meeting was held on 28 May 2024
(May 2024 Meeting).
not clear to me who it is that Mr Lazarus says attended, Mr Lazarus contends
that it was resolved unanimously that:
(1) Ikon Strata’s strata managing agency agreement (that is, the 2023
Agreement) be terminated
(2) Ikon Strata provide the books and records of the Strata Scheme to the
treasure; and
(3) if Ikon Strata fails to hand over the property of the Strata Scheme within 7
days, the strata committee is authorised to take
the matter to the Tribunal and
Debt collection.
Strata contends that Mr Lazarus was not financial as at the date of the meeting.
regard to the Owners Corporations records provided by Ikon Strata (
), I am satisfied that Mr Lazarus was in arrears in respect of the payment
of strata fees at the time of the meeting and ordinarily
would have not been
able to vote.
any event, and putting to one side whether the May 2024 Meeting was validly
convened and whether Mr Lazarus was entitled to vote
at the meeting:
(1) I was not taken to a notice of termination having been issued to Ikon Strata
following the meeting.
(2) The fact that Mr Lazarus is seeking to in some way terminate a strata
managing agency agreement with Ikon Strata, contrary to
Mr Lazarus’
contention that the 2024 Agreement is invalid and of no effect, is consistent
with the 2023 Agreement being validly
(3) I am not satisfied that the minutes, in any event establish that the Owners
Corporation resolved to commence these proceedings.
(4) As noted below, the Owners Corporation, in any event, resolved at the 15
June 2024 AGM that was attended by the owners of lots
1, 2 and 4, that [Ikon
Strata] be appointed as the strata managing agent for the Owners Corporation.
the 15 June 2024 AGM, the Owner’s Corporation resolved, amongst other
matters, that:
(1) that [Ikon Strata] be appointed as the strata managing agent and that the
owners delegate to the agent all of its functions (other
than those listed in
section 52 (2) of the [SSMA]) and all the functions of its chairperson,
secretary, treasurer and executive committee;
(2) the owners corporation execute a written agreement to give effect to the
appointment
(3) authority is given for the common seal of the owner’s corporation to
be affixed to the agreement; and
(4) that two members of the strata committee be authorised to sign the agency
Exhibit 1 p 3 to 25
minutes of the June 2024 AGM also identify that a new strata committee was
elected which did not include Mr Lazarus.
application has been made to set aside the resolutions identifying the new
strata committee or that Ikon Strata be appointed as
the strata manager.
Mr Lazarus contended to the effect that that the 15 June AGM did not occur, that
the minutes are a fraud and the strata management
agreement made pursuant to the
resolution to appoint Ikon Strata, no application was made to set aside the
resolution and I am satisfied
having regard to the minutes of the meeting that
the meeting was validly held and that the Owners Corporation resolved on 15
2024 to appoint Ikon Strata as the strata manager for the Strata
Application was then filed on 26 June 2024 naming Mr Lazarus as the applicant
seeking orders for the termination of the “4Sep23”
strata management
1 July 2024, the owners of three other lots wrote to the Tribunal stating to the
effect that they did not support the application
to terminate Ikon Strata and
asking for it to be dismissed and attaching a copy of:
(1) the 2024 Agreement which had been executed but was yet to commence; and
(2) the minutes of the 15 June 2024 AGM.
12 July 2024, the Tribunal made directions that included:
(1) That Mr Lazarus be removed as the applicant and the Owners Strata Plan No
73224 be joined as the applicant;
(2) Granting leave to Ikon Strata to file an application for miscellaneous
matters to have the matter dismissed pursuant to s 55
(1) (b) of the
and Administrative Tribunal Act
2023 (NSW) (CAT Act)
application for miscellaneous matters seeking that the application be dismissed
was never filed.
2 August 2024, the Owners Corporation convened an extraordinary general meeting,
which was conducted electronically, at which the
owners of lots 1, 2, 4 and 5
(1) to confirm the minutes of the June 2024 AGM; and
(2) for the Application to be withdrawn
4 November, the Tribunal made orders dismissing the Application because the
Owners Corporation filed a notice that it was withdrawing
the Application.
noted above, that order effectively set aside in circumstances where the issue
of Mr Lazarus’ authority and the validity
of these proceedings was still
to be considered, and thereafter, the matter continued to be heard on 27
February and 14 May 2025.
regard to my consideration of the evidence, I am satisfied and find
(1) Mr Lazarus is not currently a member of the strata committee.
(2) On 15 June 2024, the Owners Corporation resolved to appoint Ikon Strata as
its strata manager for a further 12 months with the
new agreement (being the
2024 Agreement) to commence in September 2024.
(3) No application had been made to set side that resolution.
(4) The 2024 Agreement was properly executed on behalf of the Owners
Corporation, commenced in September 2024 and remains in force.
(5) The Owners Corporation did not resolve to commence these proceedings and, to
the extent it is the applicant, it has in fact resolved
to withdraw the
application.
(6) Mindful that the 2024 Agreement commenced in September 2024, and there is no
application to terminate the 2024 Agreement, if
it might otherwise have been
open to the Tribunal to terminate the 2023 Agreement, there could be no utility
in doing so.
(7) Mr Lazarus does not otherwise have standing to bring the Application.
therefore follows that the application must be dismissed.
completeness, I will however also deal with the allegations made Mr. Lazarus in
the context of s 72 of the SSMA, mindful that
the operative strata managing
agency agreement is the 2024 Agreement.
alleged conduct that Mr Lazarus relies on was set out at (a) to (j) in the
reasons for the orders ought in the Application and
applicant would have the onus of establishing the matters alleged on the balance
of probabilities.
that in the Application and the bundles filed with the Tribunal on 22 July 2024
and 28 October, Mr Lazarus refers to some
of the alleged conduct of Ikon Strata
as involving the “stealing of money”, “fraud”, and a
criminal offence”:
(1) I regard such allegations as a serious matter.
(2) Given the gravity of the allegations, the applicant would bear the burden of
proving the matters asserted.
(3) Dixon J. in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, relevantly stated (emphasis added):
‘The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the
tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence
or existence before it
can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently
of any belief in its reality.... Except upon
criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the
affirmative of
an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that
is attained or
established independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to
be proved. The seriousness of an allegation
made, the inherent unlikelihood of
an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular
finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction
tribunal. In such matters “reasonable satisfaction” should not be
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony,
or indirect inferences’
(4) In my view, the “seriousness of an allegation made” and
the “gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular
finding”, which include that any such finding would remain on the person
against whom the allegations are made, are considerations
which must affect the
answer to the question “whether the issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal”,
and inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences’ will not be sufficient.
(5) A finding of fraudulent conduct is not lightly to be made:
Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
(1992) 67 ALJR 170
110 ALR 449
so far as the allegations of “fraud”, “stealing” and
“criminal conduct” are concerned, the
evidence relied on, being the
statements and records included in the bundles filed by Mr Lazarus of 22 July
and 28 October is difficult
to follow and unclear, and having regard to the
affidavit of Mr Lui including the attached financial records, I am not satisfied
(1) The amount of $721.55 was improperly paid to the owner of lot 6;
(2) The amounts of $726.00 and $191.00 were improperly withdrawn from the Owners
Corporation’s account by Ikon Strata;
(3) Ikon Strata paid an insurance premium of $5,021.67 for a second time;
(4) There are any overdue electricity or water bills or that the Owners is
uninsured; or
(5) There are otherwise any improper irregularities in the financial statements
maintained or created by Ikon Strata for Owners Corporation.
any event, the complaints made by Mr Lazarus concern events in or around May
2023, December 2023, August 2023, April 2024 and possibly
up to June 2024 when
the Application was filed.
the complaints relate to matters that are alleged to have occurred before the
commencement of the 2024 Agreement on 4 September
and having regard to the matters identified at s 72 (3) (a), (b) and (f) of the
SSMA which concern “ the agreement”
which is sought to be
terminated, none of the allegations can be in respect of the 2024 Agreement, and
it is not otherwise claimed
that Ikon Strata has contravened s 57(2), failed to
disclose commissions or training services in accordance with s 60 of the SSMA
an interest under s 71 of the SSMA.
even if the proceedings were authorised by the Owners Corporation and the
allegations made by Mr Lazarus could be made
out, they are not capable of
satisfying me that
(a) Ikon Strata has refused or failed to perform the [2024 Agreement] or has
performed it unsatisfactorily;
(b) that charges payable by the owners corporation under the [2024 Agreement]
are unfair;
(c) that Ikon Strata has contravened section 57(2) of the SSMA;
(d) that Ikon Strata has failed to disclose commissions or training
services (including estimated commissions or value of training
services or
variations and explanations for variations) in accordance with section 60 or has
failed to make the disclosures in good
(e) that Ikon Strata has failed to disclose an interest under section 71;
(f) that the [2024 Agreement] is, in the circumstances of the case, otherwise
harsh, oppressive, unconscionable or unreasonable.
the above reasons, the application is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (297 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter