URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Leuzzi v Primo Concrete Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 62; (4 September 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Leuzzi v Primo Concrete Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPICPD 62
Giuseppe Leuzzi
RESPONDENT:
Primo Concrete Pty Ltd
Employers Mutual NSW Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W27704/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
4 September 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 10 January 2025 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION –
Section 352(5)
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
– approach to be taken on
appeal in respect of alleged errors of fact –
State of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCA 157
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
[1979] HCA 9
considered and applied – failure to refer to
evidence may not always be indicative of error –
Lu v Heinrich
[2014] NSWCA 349
applied – failing to consider a point not raised does
not constitute error of law –
Brambles Industries Limited v Bell
[2010] NSWCA 162
applied – where a party fails to provide appropriate
assistance to the decision-maker in relation to the evidence –
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
Caruana v Darouti
[2014] NSWCA
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr E McMahon, counsel
Turner Freeman Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr D Stiles, counsel
Hicksons Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Leuzzi v Primo Concrete Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 9
Ms K Garner
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
10 January 2025
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Giuseppe Leuzzi (the appellant) was employed by Primo Constructions Pty Ltd (the
respondent) as a concreter. The respondent employed
one other employee, and the
appellant and his wife held positions as the respondent’s directors. In
2022, the appellant was
diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome but continued to
work until approximately December 2022 when he was lifting timber onto a truck
and injured his right shoulder, causing him to take time off work. For a period
of time during 2023 the appellant worked for one
day per week in a managerial
capacity for the respondent and then from January 2024 he returned to work on a
full-time basis as a
manager performing light physical duties.
21 June 2023, the respondent advised the appellant that payments of weekly
compensation were to cease on the basis that he was
fit for full-time suitable
work earning $1,840 per week as a residential site supervisor, which weekly
amount was greater than his
pre-injury average weekly earnings of $1,450. The
appellant commenced proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission (the
Commission),
claiming weekly payments from 4 October 2023 to 25 January 2024,
alleging injury to the right shoulder and neck, with a date of injury
18 November 2022. The appellant also claimed lump sum compensation pursuant to s
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act) in respect of 13%
whole person impairment resulting from injuries to the cervical spine, right
upper extremity and
left upper extremity.
dispute proceeded to conciliation and arbitration before a Member of the
Commission. The Member issued a Certificate of Determination
on 10 January 2025,
in which she:
(a) entered an award in favour of the respondent in respect of the claimed
injury to the cervical spine;
(b) declined to remit the claim pursuant to s 66 to the President of the
Commission for referral to a Medical Assessor;
(c) determined that during the period of the claim for weekly payments, the
appellant had “current work capacity” and
worked for less than 15
hours per week;
(d) calculated the appellant’s current weekly earnings, and
(e) ordered the respondent to pay the appellant $961.35 per week for the period
from 2 November 2023 to 30 November 2023.
appellant appeals only the Member’s findings and orders in respect of the
weekly payments of compensation referred to in
[3(e)] above.
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties indicate that they are content for the appeal to be determined on the
basis of their submissions and the documents available.
appeal involves a factual determination as to the appellant’s capacity for
work. After this appeal was lodged, the NSW
Court of Appeal (Bell CJ, Leeming
JA, Kirk JA, McHugh JA and Free JA) issued a decision in
State of New South
Wales v Culhana
in which prior
authorities dealing with the function of a Presidential Member in determining
errors of fact pursuant to s 352(5)
Workplace Injury Management
and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) were considered. The
Court determined that the approach taken in those previous authorities (such as
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v
Northern New South
Wales Local Health Network v
and particularly
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
order to provide procedural fairness to the parties, on 31 July 2025 I issued a
Direction to both parties in which I directed that
they were to lodge any
further submissions they wished to make in respect of the application of
to this appeal. Both parties provided written submissions.
have had regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are
before me, and the written submissions by the parties,
as well as the
submissions that the appeal can proceed to be determined on the basis of those
documents. I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any conference or formal hearing and
that this is the
appropriate course in the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE EVIDENCE
The appellant’s statement evidence
appellant provided a statement dated 15 July
He advised that he had been
working as a concreter for approximately 35 years, and for the respondent since
the respondent employed one other worker, and the
appellant and his wife were the respondent’s directors. He indicated that
towards the latter part of 2022 he began to experience pins and needles in his
left hand and was diagnosed as suffering from carpal
tunnel syndrome. He said
that his general practitioner, Dr Mazin Amir of Myhealth Edensor Park, referred
him to a physiotherapist,
he was provided with night splints and was referred to
Dr Chris Scott, hand surgeon, who recommended non-operative treatment.
appellant advised that the symptoms in his left hand improved with physiotherapy
to the extent that he was able to manage his
appellant described an incident in December 2022 when he was removing a concrete
pour frame and loading timber onto his truck.
He said he lifted a piece of
timber weighing about 30 kilograms, which caused pain in the right shoulder. He
said that he stopped
work in about January 2023 because the pain in his right
shoulder worsened and began to radiate into the right side of his neck.
appellant stated that Dr Amir referred him for an ultrasound which disclosed a
tear in his right rotator cuff. He said that his
shoulder showed improvement
following physiotherapy and rest, but he continued with pain and restrictions,
so from November 2022
until January 2023, he performed only light work. He said
that he then went off work in January 2023 and did not return until October
appellant advised that he underwent an MRI scan of the right shoulder on 19
August 2023 which disclosed a partial thickness tear
in the right shoulder and
Dr Amir referred him to Dr Chandra (sic, Jay) Davé, orthopaedic surgeon,
who prescribed a cortisone
injection and advised the appellant to perform no
physical work and to commence physiotherapy exercises at home.
appellant indicated that between October 2023 and January 2024, he worked only
He added that by about
November 2023, after he received a cortisone injection, his shoulder improved
and in about January 2024 he
returned to full-time work for the respondent in a
managerial role, performing light physical work. He said that he was no longer
able to perform concreting work, and that Dr Davé recommended that he
limit lifting to no more than 7 kilograms and avoid
lifting above shoulder
appellant stated that he had not returned to heavy work, and he continued to
experience right shoulder pain, had difficulty lifting
above shoulder height and
the base of his neck was often stiff and sore. He described difficulties with
sleeping, driving with his
right arm, performing household maintenance, cleaning
and gardening. He said that he took Nurofen Plus for pain management when
appellant provided a supplementary statement dated 4 December
He described his family
history and his limited schooling, which took place in Italy. He said that he
commenced his trade as a concreter
in Italy but moved to Australia when he was
that he started
his own concreting business in 1999. He described the heavy
nature of concreting work and referred to muscle aches and pain and discomfort
after work, which would usually resolve with rest. He said that pain in the left
wrist was common, particularly after prolonged heavy
lifting or gripping. He
repeated the history of the worsening of the left wrist in about mid November
2022, the treatment provided
and the additional diagnosis of right carpal tunnel
appellant said that he continued to work, using his right arm more frequently
when lifting. He advised that he began to feel discomfort
in his right shoulder,
which he said probably occurred about one or two months after the onset of left
wrist symptoms. He repeated
the history of treatment for the right
appellant indicated that his weekly compensation payments ceased in October
2023. The appellant said that he would struggle with
the jobs of a building
associate, a residential site supervisor and a delivery driver, which were
suggested by the respondent, because
of his shoulder pain and physical
restrictions and because those roles required handling of heavy equipment and
materials, including
suitcases and boxes. He denied having good computer skills
and said that his daughter performed most of the computer work for the
respondent. He added that his only work experience was in the concreting
appellant referred to his evidence that for a period between October 2023 and
January 2024, he worked in a managerial capacity
for about one day per week. He
explained that his work at that time was limited to handling paperwork and
taking important client
calls for about six hours of those days. He confirmed
that, following his return to work in full-time managerial duties only, he
longer performed heavy work and focussed on light tasks such as estimating and
quoting jobs, supervising on-site work and providing
instructions.
appellant advised that he continued to experience flare-ups of pain in his left
wrist, particularly with frequent use, and he
continued to wear night splints on
some nights of the week. He indicated that his right shoulder was improved but
he experienced
occasional pain and stiffness so that he tried to avoid
aggravating activities such as lifting weights above shoulder height and
of the right arm.
The relevant medical evidence
The clinical notes of Myhealth Edensor Park
clinical notes of Myhealth Edensor Park were in
16 November 2022, the appellant complained to Dr Evelyn Banares, general
practitioner, of pins and needles at night. Dr Banares
arranged for the
appellant to undergo an ultrasound of the left
21 December 2022, the appellant consulted Dr Mazin Amir, general practitioner,
who took a history of the appellant’s manual
work and noted wrist pain and
numbness, mostly at night worse in the left wrist than in the right. Dr Amir
recorded that the ultrasound
of the left wrist confirmed the diagnosis of carpal
tunnel syndrome and considered that bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome was the
likely diagnosis.
A subsequent
ultrasound of the right wrist arranged by Dr Amir and dated 29 December 2022
confirmed that the results suggested right
carpal tunnel
11 January 2023, Dr Amir recorded that the appellant was also complaining of
right shoulder symptoms which were likely
work-related.
Dr Amir referred
the appellant for a right shoulder ultrasound. On 18 January 2023, Dr Amir noted
that the ultrasound disclosed a
partial thickness tear of the supraspinatus
tendon with mild subacromial-subdeltoid bursitis with
impingement.
8 February 2023, 15 February 2023, 8 June 2023, 17 August 2023 and 5 October
2023 Dr Amir participated in case conferences with
the respondent’s
rehabilitation provider and issued Certificates of Capacity accordingly. On 2
November 2023, Dr Amir downgraded
the appellant’s work capacity, with the
notation that Dr Davé had recommended that the appellant had “no
The WorkCover Certificates of Capacity
bundle of Certificates of Capacity issued between 21 December 2022 and 30
November 2023 were annexed to the
Certificates issued between
21 December 2022 and 17 April 2023 certified the appellant as having
capacity to work 8 hours per day
for 5 days per week with restrictions on
lifting, carrying, pushing and pulling limited to 2
Certificates covering
the period from 17 April 2023 to 11 June 2023 indicated that the appellant could
work 8 hours per day, 5 days
per week but his ability to lift, carry, push and
pull was increased to 7
and that ability was
increased to 7.5 kilograms in certificates covering the period from 11 June 2023
to 5 November 2023.
a certificate dated 2 November 2023, the appellant was certified as having no
capacity for work from 2 November 2023 to 30 November
On 30 November 2023, the
appellant was certified as having capacity to work 3 hours per day 3 days per
week with lifting restrictions
from 30 November 2023 to 23 December
certificates were annexed to the ARD, some of which were duplicates of the
certificates referred to above.
Relevantly, a certificate dated 18 April 2024 certified that the appellant was
fit for work 8 hours per day 5 days per week with
restrictions on lifting,
carrying, pushing and pulling of 7 kilograms for the period 23 December 2024 to
2 May 2024. Given the date
the certificate was issued and the end date of 2 May
2024, the date of 23 December 2024 must have been a typographical error and
was intended to be 23 December
Dr Chris Scott, hand surgeon
Scott, the specialist to whom the appellant was referred in respect of his
diagnosed carpal tunnel syndrome, reported to the respondent
on 7 March 2023. In
respect of the question of the appellant’s incapacity, Dr Scott referred
to his letter to the appellant’s
general practitioner dated 18 January
2023 (which is not in evidence) and relevantly advised that he had cleared the
appellant for
full pre-injury duties on 18 January
Dr James Bodel, orthopaedic surgeon
Bodel examined the appellant on 14 December 2023 at the request of the
appellant’s legal representatives and provided a report
dated 20 February
In respect of the issue of
the appellant’s capacity for work, Dr Bodel noted that the respondent
ceased payments on the basis
of the medical assessment conducted by Dr Richard
Powell, who was of the view that the appellant had capacity for work but could
not to return to his full pre-injury duties. Dr Bodel referred to an
assessment conducted by Pinnacle Rehab, which identified suitable
alternate work
duties as a building associate (residential site supervisor), personal transport
driver or delivery driver. He commented
that the appellant had worked for most
of his life as a concreter and wanted to return to his normal duties rather than
the proposed
alternate duties. He observed that the appellant’s prospects
of being successfully retrained were unlikely.
Bodel advised that the appellant was not, and would never be, fit for his
pre-injury employment and had no capacity for work that
was appropriate, given
his physical limitations and his education, training and experience. He noted
the current restrictions certified
by the general practitioner of limited use of
the right arm, especially overhead, and minimising pushing and pulling. He
that the appellant did not have the capacity to work as a concreter
and while the recommendations made by Pinnacle Rehab were appropriate,
would require retraining and there would be a risk of aggravation to the
shoulder. He concluded that:
“There is a possibility for him
to work in some capacity but he would have to be retrained. He would struggle to
work more than
20 to 25 hours a week. He would need to begin four hours a day,
three days a week and slowly upgrade, but I think it unlikely he
will ever get
past 20 or 25 hours a
“The training alternatives offered by Pinnacle Rehab include
residential site supervisor and I believe that would be a possible
alternative.
He would struggle to do more than 20 to 25 hours per week. Personal transport
service may be unsuitable in the longer
term because he cannot work any
significant hours to earn an income without aggravating his shoulder. Similarly,
the delivery van
driver might be tolerable, but there would have to be short
driving periods and light delivery
Bodel provided a separate report in which he assessed the appellant’s
whole person impairment, and a further report dated
14 September 2024 in
response to questions posed by the appellant’s legal representatives. The
matters addressed by Dr Bodel
did not pertain to the appellant’s capacity
Dr Jay Davé, orthopaedic surgeon
Amir referred the appellant to Dr Davé in respect of the
appellant’s right shoulder symptoms. Dr Davé, together
Richard Allom, orthopaedic surgeon, examined the appellant on 26 October 2023
and reported to Dr Amir on that
They diagnosed the
appellant as having a partial thickness tear of the supraspinatus with
tendinopathy in the supraspinatus and biceps,
a tear of the subscapularis and
acromioclavicular joint arthritis. Dr Davé and Dr Allom recommended
the appellant undergo
a steroid injection into the acromioclavicular joint and a
rotator cuff stretching and strengthening program through his physiotherapist.
They considered that the appellant should refrain from any physical work for the
time being and should not undertake any lifting,
carrying or overloading the
shoulder but said that he could continue performing a management role. Dr
Davé indicated that
he would review the appellant in the New Year.
Davé provided a report dated 6 November 2023 at the request of the
respondent.
With respect to the
appellant’s capacity for work, Dr Davé advised that the appellant
could continue in his management
role, as well as perform office-based duties
until he was to be reviewed on 16 January 2024. He said that, at the time of the
appellant’s
last visit, he was fit for normal hours on selected duties,
with no lifting greater than 5 kilograms, and no lifting above shoulder
18 January 2024, Dr Davé wrote to Dr Amir, informing Dr Amir that the
appellant felt that he was ready to return to a managerial
position with a
restriction on lifting no greater than
7 kilograms.
Davé provided a report dated 29 February 2024 directed to the
appellant’s legal
representatives.
history of the appellant’s shoulder injury and of the treatment provided.
He advised that the appellant underwent
an acromioclavicular joint injection on
10 November 2023 with very good results. Dr Davé confirmed that the
appellant attended
for review on 18 January 2024 and reported that the pain
relief had been maintained, he had full range of motion of the shoulder
minimum pain and only mild weakness. He advised there was no indication for
surgical intervention at that stage. He reported
that the appellant wished to
he was found fit to undertake.
Dr Davé observed that the appellant was
not fit to undertake concreting work or any overhead work such as loading or
Davé confirmed that the appellant was fit to return to work as a manger
on a full-time basis, avoiding lifting greater than
7 kilograms and avoiding
overhead work. He advised that the appellant “has already returned back to
work as a manager within
his concreting company and he is ideally suited to
this. This is also at his own volition as he feels quite capable to do this type
He added that he
did not consider it relevant for the appellant to look for alternate work such
as a building associate, personal
transport service or delivery driver when the
appellant was happy to return to work in his own business in a full-time
Mr Anjel Alias, physiotherapist, High Performance Health
Alias assessed the appellant on 12 December 2023 and 15 December 2023 and
provided a functional and vocational assessment report
directed to the
appellant’s legal
representatives.
He recorded a
history of the appellant’s injury and treatment regime. He observed that
the appellant ceased work on 26 October
2023 because of pain and inability to
function, as recommended by Davé. He noted that the appellant received a
cortisone injection
into the shoulder in November 2023, resulting in a reduction
of the pain and improved range of motion as well as overall function.
Alias assessed the appellant’s physical capacity. He assessed the
appellant as being unfit for his previous work as a concreter.
He considered
that the appellant had the capacity to perform sedentary work or physical work
at a low level, such as a director and
manager of his own company.
Dr Alan Skapinker, general practitioner and injury
management consultant
Skapinker reported to the respondent on 13 December
He noted that a work
capacity decision was issued in October 2023, indicating that the appellant
could perform work for 40 hours
per week, and that Dr Amir had approved the
duties of a building associate/site supervisor, in personal transport service
a delivery driver. He further noted that Dr Amir had downgraded the
appellant’s capacity to nil hours per week from 2 November
the basis of advice from Dr Davé. Dr Skapinker observed that Dr Amir had
misunderstood Dr Davé’s opinion
recorded in reports dated 26
October 2023 and 6 November 2023, which was that the appellant could
continue his managerial role and
office duties and was fit for normal hours
performing those duties with no lifting greater than 5 kilograms.
Skapinker expressed the view that he did not agree with the Certificate of
Capacity which certified the appellant as having no
capacity and agreed with Dr
Davé that the appellant had the capacity to work in office-based work and
supervisory roles for
8 hours per day, 5 days per week, with lifting limited to
5 kilograms and no above shoulder work. He was of the opinion that work
building associate or site supervisor was suitable, but not the two other roles
identified.
Skapinker reported again to the respondent on 23 January 2024. The opinions
expressed by him in that report do not touch upon the
issues relevant to this
Dr Richard Powell, orthopaedic surgeon
Powell examined the appellant and provided a report dated 18 July 2023 at the
request of the respondent.
provided a consistent history of the appellant’s work history and the
injuries to the appellant’s left wrist and right
shoulder and recorded the
appellant’s current symptoms and treatment. He performed a physical
examination of the left wrist
and the right shoulder. He expressed the view that
the right shoulder condition was work-related and likely to be suggestive of
cuff pathology, but the left wrist was idiopathic.
Powell indicated that he would not recommend that the appellant return to his
pre-injury duties but said the appellant could perform
full-time work avoiding
repetitive use of the right arm, in particular using his arm away from the body
or overhead, with a lifting
restriction of 2 to 3 kilograms. He recommended
the appellant undergo an MRI scan in order to determine the exact pathology
Powell provided a further report dated 26 September 2023, in which he reviewed
the results of the MRI scan.
confirmed that the scan disclosed rotator cuff pathology, bicipital pathology
and subacromial bursitis and expressed the view
that the nature and conditions
of the appellant’s employment as a concreter over a period of time
aggravated the underlying
degenerative process. He noted the appellant’s
treatment to date and recommended further specialist review. He advised that
MRI scan did not lead him to change his opinion expressed in his earlier report
as to the appellant’s capacity for work.
26 April 2024, Dr Powell again examined the appellant and reported to the
respondent on 24 July 2024.
noted that the appellant had enjoyed left wrist and right shoulder improvement
through conservative treatment measures. Dr Powell
described the symptoms in
both as “intermittent” and mildly symptomatic. He believed that the
appellant’s injuries
had reached maximum medical improvement and proceeded
to assess the appellant’s whole person impairment.
Pinnacle Rehab documents and reports
work capacity assessments, return to work plans and reports commencing from
February 2023 were generated by Pinnacle Rehab
rehabilitation
In a Comprehensive
Progress Report dated 24 October 2023, the agreed return to work goal identified
the proposed vocational options
as that of a building associate (residential
site supervisor), personal transport service or delivery
The report noted the
appellant’s restrictions in place for the period from 5 October 2023 to 5
November 2023, as certified
by Dr Amir. The rehabilitation services ceased at
that time as the appellant did not want to pursue job seeking with a different
LEGISLATION
8 of Sch 3 to the 1987 Act defines “current weekly earnings”
Meaning of ‘current weekly
Current weekly earnings
, of an injured worker in relation to a
week, means whichever of the following is the greater amount—
(a) the worker’s actual gross earnings in respect of that
(b) the weekly amount that the worker is able to earn in suitable
employment.”
9 of Sch 3 to the 1987 Act defines “current work capacity” and
“no current work capacity” as
Meaning of ‘current work
capacity’ and ‘no current work capacity’
(1) An injured worker has
current work capacity
worker has a present inability arising from the injury such that the worker is
able to return to the worker’s pre-injury
employment, or is able to return
to work in suitable employment, but the weekly amount that the worker has the
capacity to earn in
any such employment is less than the weekly amount that the
worker had the capacity to earn in that employment immediately before
(2) An injured worker has
no current work capacity
worker has a present inability arising from an injury such that the worker is
not able to return to work, either in the worker’s
pre-injury employment
or in suitable employment.”
32A of the 1987 Act defines suitable employment
suitable employment
, in relation to a
worker, means employment in work for which the worker is currently
(a) having regard to—
(i) the nature of the worker’s incapacity and the details
provided in medical information including, but not limited to, any
certificate
of capacity supplied by the worker (under section 44B), and
(ii) the worker’s age, education, skills and work experience,
(iii) any plan or document prepared as part of the return to work
planning process, including an injury management plan under Chapter
1998 Act, and
(iv) any occupational rehabilitation services that are being, or have
been, provided to or for the worker, and
(v) such other matters as the Workers Compensation Guidelines may specify, and
(b) regardless of—
(i) whether the work or the employment is available, and
(ii) whether the work or the employment is of a type or nature that is
generally available in the employment market, and
(iii) the nature of the worker’s pre-injury employment, and
(iv) the worker’s place of residence.”
THE MEMBER’S REASONS
Member provided a detailed background and summary of the issues in dispute. As
the only issue in this appeal is the appellant’s
entitlement to weekly
compensation from 4 October 2023 to 25 January 2024, it is not necessary to
summarise the whole of the Member’s
a review of the medical and medico-legal opinions, the Member proceeded to
determine whether the appellant had suffered
a cervical injury and concluded
that she was not satisfied that the appellant suffered a work-related injury to
his cervical spine.
She further determined that there was no basis upon which to
refer the claim for a lump sum in respect of the left wrist injury for
assessment by a Medical Assessor because there was no evidence of an assessment
of the appellant’s whole person impairment
of that injury pursuant to
s 66(1) of the 1987 Act.
Member summarised the appellant’s statement evidence, together with the
available rehabilitation and medical evidence.
Member reviewed the Certificates of Capacity from 5 October 2023 to 2 May 2024,
but did not include the Certificate of Capacity
issued on 30 November 2023. She
noted that the appellant was certified as having no capacity for work from 2
November 2023 to 30
November 2023, and in the certificate issued on 18
April 2024, the appellant was certified as having capacity for employment for
hours per day 5 days per week with lifting restrictions from 23 December 2023 to
2 May 2024 in a management role performing office
Member turned to the question of the appellant’s degree of incapacity and
his entitlement to weekly compensation. She summarised
the submissions of the
parties and reproduced s 33, s 37(3) and s 32A of the 1987 Act. She noted the
definition of “current
weekly earnings” defined in cl 8 of Sch 3 to
the 1987 Act. The Member referred to the appellant’s wages schedule and
the respondent’s list of payments. She observed that the respondent made
payments to the appellant pursuant to s 36 and for
a further 27.9 weeks pursuant
to s 37. She noted that the appellant sought a further 16 weeks of compensation
pursuant to s 37(3)
of the 1987 Act for the period from 4 October 2023 to 25
January 2024. She said that the respondent did not dispute that s 37(3)
in this case and that there was no dispute that the appellant returned to
full-time work in a managerial role for the respondent
immediately after the
expiration of the period claimed.
Member referred to the evidence that the appellant actually worked 6 hours per
week earning $222.65 per week in a management role
throughout the period
claimed, including the period when he was certified by Dr Amir as having no
Member observed that there was a considerable body of evidence supporting the
assertion that the appellant could work in a managerial
role during the period
claimed. The Member referred to the joint evidence of Dr Davé and Dr
Allom in their report dated 26
October 2023 that the appellant could
continue in a managerial role, and the opinion of Dr Davé in his
report dated 6 November
2023 that the appellant could continue work in a
managerial role, together with office-based duties until 16 January 2024. The
indicated that Dr Alan Skapinker also expressed the opinion in his report
dated 13 December 2023 that the appellant was fit for managerial
office-based work until January 2024, and that on 9 January 2024 Mr Alias,
physiotherapist from High Performance Health, also
considered that the appellant
could work as a director and in supervisory roles, such as that of a general
manager for the respondent.
She noted that Dr Davé in January 2024 and
February 2024, as well as Dr Skapinker in January 2024 were also of the view
the appellant could perform managerial work such as he was performing for
the respondent on a full-time basis. The Member observed
Davé’s opinion expressed in February 2024 was after the period of
the claim but said that the opinion was consistent
with the appellant having
similar capacity during the period of the claim.
Member referred to the evidence of Dr Bodel that it was unlikely that the
appellant would only ever be able to work more than
20 to 25 hours per week,
which she said was inconsistent with the fact that the appellant did actually
day after the examination. She indicated that she
did not find Dr Bodel’s opinion persuasive.
Member said that having considered the whole of the evidence, that evidence
strongly supported the conclusion that the appellant
had capacity to perform
managerial work on a full-time basis, apart from the period between 2 November
2023 and 30 November 2023.
She concluded that during the period from 2 November
2023 to 30 November 2023, the appellant actually performed managerial work for
hours per week, which reflected his true capacity for work during that time,
despite the fact that it was inconsistent with the
Certificate of Capacity
certifying him as having no capacity.
Member considered that the managerial work performed by the appellant during the
period of the claim was consistent with the appellant’s
age, education,
skills and limited work experience. She observed that the appellant returned to
full-time work, and that he did not
deny that he could perform that work on a
full-time basis. She concluded that the appellant did have the capacity to work
in a managerial
role for the respondent without performing physical work. She
noted that the appellant did not dispute that if he had been performing
full-time managerial work for the respondent, his earnings would have been
$1,960 per week.
Member referred to the matters set out in s 32A of the 1987 Act and determined
(a) the appellant’s current weekly earnings for the period from 4 October
2023 to 1 November 2023 and from 1 December 2023
to 25 January 2023 were
$1,960 per week, which was the amount the appellant was able to earn in suitable
employment on a full-time
basis with the respondent, and
(b) the current weekly earnings for the period from 2 November 2023 to
30 November 2023 were $222.65 for 6 hours per week.
Member determined the appellant’s weekly entitlement to compensation for
the period from 2 November 2023 to 30 November
2023 to be $961.35, and nil per
week for the remaining periods claimed.
Certificate of Determination issued on 10 January 2025
“The Commission determines:
for the respondent in relation to the claimed injury to the cervical spine
pursuant to ss 4(b)(i) and 4(b)(ii) of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(1987 Act);
is no basis to remit any part of the matter to the President for referral to a
Medical Assessor for determination of whole
person impairment;
the claim period, the [appellant] had current work capacity and returned to work
for less than 15 hours per week, and
‘current weekly earnings’ that should be applied in this case for
calculation of the [appellant’s] entitlement
to weekly benefits
compensation pursuant to s 37(3) of the 1987 Act:
(a) for the
periods from 4 October 2023 to 1 November 2023 and from 1 December 2023 to
25 January 2024, is $1,960 per week, being
the weekly amount that the
[appellant] would be able to earn during the claim period in ‘suitable
employment’, specifically
managerial work with the respondent on a
full-time basis, and
(b) for the period from 2 November 2023 to 30 November 2023, is $222.65 per
week, being the weekly amount that the [appellant] would
be able to earn during
the claim period in ‘suitable employment’, specifically managerial
work with the respondent on
the basis of six hours work per week.
The Commission orders:
respondent to pay the [appellant] weekly compensation pursuant to ss 33 and 37
of the 1987 Act as follows:
(a) $961.35 per week from 2 November 2023 to 30 November 2023.
to apply within 14 days in respect of calculation of the weekly compensation
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant asserts two grounds of appeal, expressed as follows:
(a) Ground One: “the determination relied on an erroneous reading of the
certificates of capacity”, and
(b) Ground Two: “the factual error concerned a matter that was material
within the process of reasoning adopted by the Member
in reaching the
determination appealed against, amounting to a legal error.”
SUBMISSIONS
As To Ground One
The appellant’s submissions
appellant asserts that the Member made a factual error in relation to the
certification of the appellant’s capacity for
the period 1 December 2023
to 23 December 2023 and submits that that error was material to the
Member’s reasoning process and
her ultimate determination. The appellant
points to the Member’s Certificate of Determination, in which the Member
“Having carefully considered the evidence as a
whole and counsel’s submissions, I do feel a sense of persuasion and I
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the [appellant] was able to earn
income, performing the work of manager of the
respondent for the periods from 4
October 2023 to 1 November 2023 and from 1 December 2023 to 25 January 2024 on a
full-time basis,
and for the period from 2 November 2023 to 30 November
2023 on the basis of six hours per week because:
(a) during the entire of the claim period, the [appellant] was certified to have
capacity to work full-time hours of eight hours
per day, five days per week,
subject to physical work restrictions, with the exception of the period from 2
November 2023 to 30 November
2023 when the [appellant] was certified to have no
current work capacity for any employment;
appellant submits that the factual error lies within sub-paragraph (a). The
appellant indicates that for the period from 1 December
2023 to 23 December
2023, the Certificates of Capacity certified him as having a capacity to work
for 3 hours per day, 3 days per
week, and not the capacity to work 8 hours per
day, 5 days per week. The appellant submits that:
misapprehension of the certification of capacity across part of the claim period
affects the entire determination, because
it changes the Member’s
characterisation of the appellant’s capacity across the entire claim
period as being full-time,
subject to a four week
exemption.”
appellant asserts that in fact, he did not have the capacity to work full-time
for almost half of the period of the claim. The
appellant says that the
importance of that Certificate of Capacity to the Member’s ultimate
determination is evident from the
fact that the Member dealt with the
certificates at the beginning of her reasons.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that a review of the Certificates of Capacity shows that
there are some inconsistencies within some of those
certificates which are
difficult to reconcile. The respondent points to:
(a) the certificates in respect of the period from 15 September 2023 and 5
November 2023, which indicate that the appellant was fit
for work in suitable
duties for 8 hours per day, 5 days per week;
(b) the certificate for the period from 2 November 2023 to 30 November 2023,
certifying that the appellant had no capacity for work;
(c) the certificate for the period 30 November 2023 to 23 December 2023, which
the respondent submits could be read as certifying
either nil capacity or
capacity for some work 3 hours per day, 3 days per week, and
(d) the certificate bearing date 23 December 2024, which the respondent says
should be read to be 23 December 2023, and which certified
the appellant as
having either no capacity or capacity for suitable employment for 8 hours, 5
days per week from 23 December 2023
to 2 May 2024.
respondent asserts that it is unclear whether the certificates from 30 November
2023 were intended to indicate that the appellant
had no capacity for work or
had capacity to work in suitable employment. The respondent points out, however,
that the certificates
were just part of the evidence the Member considered when
dealing with the question of whether the appellant had capacity for suitable
employment.
respondent refers to the Member’s reasons from paragraph [92] of her
Certificate of Determination, in which she noted that
during the period of the
claim, the appellant was performing work for six hours per week in a management
role for the respondent.
The respondent indicates that the Member concluded that
the appellant had current work capacity and had returned to work for less
15 hours per week, which enlivened the operation of s 37(3) of the 1987 Act. The
respondent says that s 37(3) prescribed the
method of calculation of the
appellant’s weekly compensation. The respondent says that, in accordance
with s 37(3)(a), the
Member calculated 80% of the pre-injury earnings to be
$1,184.00 and proceeded to consider the evidence in relation to the
appellant’s
ability to earn in suitable employment.
respondent submits that the Member concluded that the appellant was able to work
full-time as a manager for the respondent for
the period excepting the period
from 2 November 2023 to 30 November 2023. The respondent asserts that the Member
did not only take
into account the Certificates of Capacity, but also gave
regard to the other medical evidence, which supported the conclusion that
appellant had capacity to work on a full-time basis in suitable employment. The
respondent points out that there was also no
direct evidence from the appellant
in the form of an explanation as to why he could not work full-time for the
respondent, particularly
when the appellant did in fact return to full-time
suitable employment on 25 January 2024.
respondent submits that, while there was some discrepancy in the Member’s
analysis of the Certificates of Capacity, the
discrepancy was not sufficient to
disturb her finding that the appellant had the capacity for full-time suitable
work during the
relevant periods. The respondent reiterates that the
Certificates of Capacity were far from clear and were not the only evidence
relied upon by the Member in reaching her conclusion.
respondent asserts that the Member’s conclusions should stand and that
there ought to be no alteration to the award entered
by the Member.
As to Ground Two
The appellant’s submissions
appellant refers to the Member’s further reasoning that the Member
considered that:
“... the performance of such managerial work
for the respondent on a full-time basis for the whole claim period, with the
of the period from 2 November 2023 to 30 November 2023, is
substantially consistent with the [appellant’s] incapacity as certified
for those periods”.
appellant asserts that the certification of his capacity was influential and
underpinned the Member’s ultimate determination.
The appellant contends
that the Member’s finding that there was a “substantial
consistency” between the certificates
was undermined by her factual error
as to the Certificate of Capacity indicating that the appellant’s capacity
for work was
limited to 3 hours per day, 3 days per week and not full-time as
found by the Member. The appellant submits that the compensable
period should
have been extended to 23 December 2023.
appellant refers to the Member’s reasoning that the appellant’s
ability to earn during the period 2 November 2023
to 30 November 2023 was
“substantially consistent with what actually occurred and the
[appellant’s] actual capacity during
The appellant
asserts that this passage again shows that the Member placed importance on the
Certificates of Capacity, in that the
Member did not “disavow” that
Certificate of Capacity but adjusted it to reflect what had actually happened.
appellant submits that the Member did not find the opinion of Dr Bodel
persuasive in respect of the appellant’s work capacity,
that is, that the
appellant would need a graduated return to work and would be unlikely to return
to more than 20 or 25 hours per
week. The appellant says that the opinion that
he would require a graded return to work was somewhat consistent with the
incapacity for the period from 2 November 2023 to 25 January 2024. The
appellant submits that that consistency would not have been
obvious to the
Member because of her factual error. The appellant says that a gradual return to
work was consistent with the certification
of his capacity over the period from
2 November 2023 to 25 January 2024 and contradicts the Member’s
finding of work capacity
over the entire period of the claim.
appellant refers to the Member using a common-sense approach to draw the
inference that the appellant had the capacity to work
in a managerial role over
the period of the claim. The appellant observes that while it is permissible to
draw an inference from
established facts, those facts must be proved. The
appellant says that the fact relied upon by the Member was erroneous, so the
“entire inferential reasoning process is
invalidated.”
appellant asserts that if the inference drawn is that he had the capacity for
full-time work prior to 25 January 2024, then that
inference is invalidated
because of the Member’s reliance on factual error.
appellant submits that the Certificates of Capacity were influential in the
Member’s reasoning process but were not determinative.
The appellant
asserts that: “It follows that the entire process of reasoning as to the
appellant’s capacity for work
throughout the claim period is invalidated
by the factual error, and the determination reached must be
appellant refers to the Member’s observation that there was a considerable
body of evidence that the appellant could perform
managerial work over the
period of the claim. The appellant asserts that that finding only goes to the
kind of work the appellant
could undertake and not the extent of his capacity,
such as how many hours and how many days he could work. The appellant further
asserts that the contemporaneous evidence of capacity during the period of the
claim leads to the inevitable inference that that
evidence was consistent with
what actually occurred.
appellant concludes that a new determination should be made that the
appellant’s current weekly earnings throughout the
entire claim period
should reflect the appellant’s actual capacity and what work he actually
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the appellant is seeking to have the Member’s
entire determination as to the appellant’s capacity
revoked on the basis
of a discrepancy between the Member’s reasoning and one Certificate of
Capacity. The respondent asserts
that the appellant’s approach ignores the
Member’s extensive analysis of the evidence as to the appellant’s
and the identification of suitable employment set out in the
Member’s reasons at paragraph [104]. The respondent says that
explained her findings in relation to the appellant’s ability to work
full-time, and that the suitable employment
was as a manager in the employ of
the respondent. The respondent submits that the Member did not simply focus on
an analysis of the
Certificates of Capacity. The respondent points to the
Member’s reasoning that:
(a) Dr Bodel’s opinion was unpersuasive because it was inconsistent with
the fact that the appellant worked throughout the
entire period, even when he
was certified as having no capacity, and
(b) the appellant provided no direct evidence as to why he would be unable to
perform full-time work in a managerial capacity.
respondent asserts that the totality of the Member’s reasons should be
considered, particularly in respect of the inconsistencies
in the evidence. The
respondent says that the Certificates of Capacity were only a part of the
Member’s reasoning process.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the Member ought to
have afforded weight to what had actually happened,
instead of making an
assessment of the appellant’s capacity. The respondent submits that the
approach suggested by the appellant
falls contrary to the requirements of s 32A
of the 1987 Act, which requires a consideration of suitable employment,
regardless of
whether that work is generally available in the open labour
respondent submits that the Member found that the appellant had current work
capacity to perform full-time work in suitable employment
as a manager for the
respondent for the periods identified in determination 4 of her Certificate of
Determination and that that determination
was supported by the evidence, despite
the fact that the appellant was only working six hours per week in that suitable
employment.
The respondent asserts that, other than for the period when the
appellant had no capacity for work, the evidence suggested that the
had a greater capacity for work than six hours per week.
The appellant’s submissions in respect of the application
appellant submits that this appeal should be determined in accordance with the
principles set out in
. That is, a review of all of the evidence
is required, taking into account the advantages a primary decision-maker may
appellant says that, in this case, any advantage must be limited
because there was no oral evidence adduced, the submissions were
made orally and
were transcribed. The appellant asserts that exchanges between counsel and the
Member were not extensive. The appellant
asserts that the Presidential Member
who determines the appeal is not in a very different position to that of the
Member who determined
the dispute.
appellant submits that the Member’s reasoning that it was a matter of
commonsense to draw an inference that the appellant
had work capacity in a
managerial capacity during the requisite time was an inferential finding and was
erroneous. The appellant
asserts that the Member’s error has infected the
whole process of inferential reasoning and her inferences drawn. The appellant
adds that its submissions already made in respect of the distinction between
factual error and legal error are of less significance
. The appellant contends that, ultimately, this dispute is one
where a different conclusion on a question of fact is eminently justified
the Presidential Member “should not shrink from giving effect to
The respondent’s submissions in respect of the
application of Culhana
respondent submits that the application of
to this appeal
“creates no
controversy”
determination of this appeal. The respondent says that the Member made no
findings in relation to the credit or reliability
of witnesses, no oral evidence
was taken, and the matter was determined on the basis of the oral submissions of
the counsel who appeared
at the arbitration. The respondent submits that the
Presidential Member would be in as good a position to draw the proper inferences
from the undisputed facts, or, where the facts are disputed, the facts that were
found by the Member.
THE ORDERS SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have determination 4 of the Certificate of Determination
revoked and, in its place a new determination made
that his current weekly
earnings during the period 4 October 2023 to 25 January 2024 were $222.65,
which was the amount the appellant
was able to earn in suitable employment, that
is, in managerial work with the respondent for six hours per week. The appellant
seeks an amendment to paragraph [5(a)] to delete the order that the
respondent pay the appellant $961.35 per week from 2 November
30 November 2023 and to insert instead “$961.35 per week from 4
October 2023 to 25 January 2024.
respondent submits that the appeal should be dismissed.
CONSIDERATION
this appeal asserts error in the Member’s findings of fact, it is
important to consider the recent NSW Court of Appeal decision
the Court set out the proper approach to be taken by a
Presidential Member in the application of s 352(5) of the 1998 Act and the
identification of error in the fact-finding process. The Court determined that
the approach previously taken by following the authorities
Whiteley Muir
& Zwanenberg Ltd
Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
was too narrow a test and was wrong, and it was not sufficient
for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that it was “open”
Member to reach his or her conclusion. Leeming JA (with Bell CJ, Kirk, McHugh
and Free JJA agreeing) said:
“Future appeals under s 352
should apply the approach in
Appropriate deference
is to be given to members where their findings are based on evidence in respect
of which they have an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it is
not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was
‘open’ to the member, as if the member were a jury and there was
some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential member, after making
appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a
different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink from
giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
Fox v Percy
, the High Court observed:
“Appellate courts
are not excused from the task of ‘weighing conflicting evidence and
drawing [their] own inferences and
conclusions, though [they] should always bear
in mind that [they have] neither seen nor heard the witnesses, and should make
allowance in this respect’. In
Warren v Coombes
, the majority
of this Court reiterated the rule that:
‘[I]n general an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial
judge to decide on the proper inference to be drawn from
facts which are
undisputed or which, having been disputed, are established by the findings of
the trial judge. In deciding what is
the proper inference to be drawn, the
appellate court will give respect and weight to the conclusion of the trial
judge but, once
having reached its own conclusion, will not shrink from giving
effect to it.’”
where the relevant fact in issue on appeal is an inference to be drawn from the
established facts, a Presidential Member is
required to determine the correct
outcome in respect of the relevant issue, while giving due allowance for any
advantage the Member
at first instance may have experienced. The High Court in
Steven Moore (a pseudonym) v The
referred to this
approach as the “correctness standard.”
the present case, there was no oral evidence given and the dispute was decided
on the basis of the oral submissions of the parties
which did not develop into
any discourse between the Member and either party. Both parties concede that the
Member at first instance
had little if any advantage over a Presidential Member
in drawing inferences from the established facts. In those circumstances,
not consider that the Member had any advantage over a Presidential Member in
terms of evaluating the evidence of the witnesses
and reaching her factual
conclusions. I therefore need to determine whether the Member’s findings
were correct without having
to make any allowance for the Member having any
Ground One: The determination relied on an erroneous reading of
the Certificates of Capacity
appellant asserts factual error on the part of the Member in determining that,
apart from the Certificate of Capacity covering
the period from 2 November 2023
to 30 November 2023, the Certificates of Capacity covering the period of the
claim (from 4 October
2023 to 25 January 2024) certified that the appellant
had capacity for work on a full-time basis, eight hours per day, five days
week. The appellant points to the Certificate of Capacity dated 30 November 2023
in which the appellant was certified as having
capacity to work 3 hours per day
3 days per week with lifting restrictions until 23 December 2023.
Member did not refer to that certificate and appears to have overlooked it when
considering the content of the bundle of certificates.
decision-maker’s failure to refer to evidence may not always be indicative
Member was not taken to that certificate by either party and in fact the
transcript discloses that the only reference at all to
the Certificates of
Capacity was a submission by the respondent that none of those certificates
mentioned an injury to or symptoms
in the neck, which injury was alleged by the
appellant and contested by the respondent.
his submissions relating to capacity, the appellant referred to the
respondent’s work capacity decision, the report of Mr
physiotherapist, the vocational assessment, and the evidence of Dr Bodel and of
respondent referred to the evidence of Dr Davé, Dr Skapinker, Mr Alias,
Dr Bodel, and the assessment by Pinnacle
substance of the appellant’s submissions was that, on the basis of that
identified evidence:
(a) the appellant had only ever worked as a concreter;
(b) the appellant had no prospects of being retrained and had limited ability to
perform physical work such as reaching and lifting;
(c) the appellant’s role as a director and manager of his own company was
the only suitable role, which he took up immediately
following the closed
period, and
(d) basically, the appellant would not be suitable for retraining and had
physical limitations on his capacity.
appellant made no submissions in relation to the Certificates of Capacity. More
particularly, he did not refer to the Certificates
of Capacity issued on 2
November 2023 and 30 November 2023 and did not draw the Member’s attention
to either of those certificates,
which were ensconced within the last quarter of
414 pages of the ARD.
any event, the Member did not determine the appellant’s capacity solely on
the basis of the certificates. The Member described
the body of evidence that
supported the notion that the appellant could work in a management role during
the period claimed as “considerable.”
She referred to the opinions
of Dr Davé, Dr Skapinker, and Mr Alias. She noted that, during the period
from 2 November 2023
to 30 November 2023, despite the Certificate of Capacity
certifying the appellant as having no capacity, the appellant actually did
six hours per week. The Member also referred to the backdated certificate dated
18 April 2024 produced by Dr Amir, the appellant’s
general practitioner,
in which the appellant was said to have had capacity to work eight hours per day
five days per week, subject
to physical restrictions, from 23 December 2023. The
Member further noted that the appellant did not deny that he could work
in managerial work over the whole period and in fact he did return to
work in that capacity.
accordance with
, I am required to determine whether the
Member’s finding as to capacity was correct, which involves a
consideration by me of
the available evidence. It is relevant to take into
account, as did the Member, that the appellant himself did not challenge the
assertion that he could work full-time in his own company as a manager and
evidence relevant to the appellant’s capacity for work between October
2023 and 25 January 2024 is as follows:
(a) The Pinnacle Rehab report dated 24 October 2023 recorded that the agreed
(residential site
supervisor), personal transport service or delivery
with physical
restrictions in place as certified by Dr Amir.
(b) On 2 November 2023, Dr Amir downgraded the appellant’s work capacity
to “no work capacity” on the basis of
recommendation.
(c) In the Certificate of Capacity dated 2 November 2023, the appellant was
certified as having no capacity for work from 2 November
2023 to 30 November
and on 30 November 2023,
the appellant was certified as having capacity to work 3 hours per day, 3 days
per week with lifting restrictions
from 30 November 2023 to 23 December
(d) A certificate dated 18 April 2024 certified that the appellant was fit for
work 8 hours per day 5 days per week with restrictions
on lifting,
carrying, pushing and pulling of 7 kilograms for the period 23 December 202[3]
to 2 May 2024.
(e) Dr Scott, who treated the appellant in respect of his carpal tunnel
syndrome, cleared the appellant for full duties in respect
of that condition
from 18 January 2023.
(f) Dr Bodel, who examined the appellant opined that:
(i) the appellant had no capacity for work that was appropriate, given his
physical limitations and his education, training and experience;
(ii) there was a possibility of having some capacity, but he would require
retraining;
(iii) the recommendation that the appellant was fit for work as a site
supervisor was a possibility, but the other options were not
suitable, and
(iv) the appellant would struggle with more than 20 to 25 hours per week.
(g) Mr Alias, the appellant’s physiotherapist, recorded that the pain and
overall function in the appellant’s shoulder
had reduced following the
cortisone injection. He assessed the appellant as being unfit for his previous
work as a concreter. He
considered that the appellant had the capacity to
perform sedentary work or physical work at a low level, such as a director and
manager of his own company.
(h) Dr Powell, who had first seen the appellant in July 2023, was of the view
that he would not recommend that the appellant return
to his pre-injury duties,
but the appellant could perform full-time work avoiding repetitive use of the
right arm, should restrict
using his arm away from his body or overhead, and
should not lift more than 2 to 3
(i) Dr Davé, the appellant’s treating orthopaedic surgeon, advised
in a report dated 6 November 2023, that the appellant
could continue in his
management role, as well as perform office-based duties and that, at the time of
the appellant’s last
consultation, he was fit for normal hours on selected
duties, with no lifting greater than 5 kilograms, and no lifting above shoulder
In a subsequent report
dated 29 February 2024, Dr Davé advised that:
(i) the appellant had a very good result from the cortisone injection on
10 November 2023;
(ii) on review on 18 January 2024, the pain relief had been maintained and the
appellant had full range of motion of the shoulder
with minimum pain and only
mild weakness, and
(iii) the appellant “has already returned back to work as a manager within
his concreting company and he is ideally suited
(j) In his report dated 13 December 2023, Dr Skapinker agreed with Dr
Davé that the appellant had the capacity to perform
office-based work and
supervisory roles for 8 hours per day, 5 days per week, with lifting limited to
5 kilograms and no above shoulder
work. Dr Skapinker remarked that Dr Amir had
downgraded the appellant’s capacity to nil hours on the basis of advice
Davé. Dr Skapinker observed that Dr Amir had misunderstood
Dr Davé’s opinion expressed in reports dated 26 October
November 2023, which was that the appellant could continue in his managerial
role and in office duties and was fit for
normal hours performing those duties
with no lifting greater than
5 kilograms.
is clear from the above summary that the Certificate of Capacity issued by Dr
Amir certifying that the appellant’s capacity
for work for the period from
30 November to 23 December 2023 was limited to three hours per day, three
days per week was at odds
with the entire body of medical evidence. Apart from
Dr Bodel, all of the medical experts considered that the appellant could work
full-time in the role of a manager in his own business, with restrictions on
lifting and overhead work. Dr Bodel’s opinion
that the appellant would not
be able to work more than 20 to 25 hours was somewhat flawed by the reality that
the appellant did return
to full-time work at about the time of Dr Bodel’s
examination of the appellant.
addition, the observation by Dr Skapinker that Dr Amir, who relied on Dr
Davé’s advice as to the appellant’s
capacity, misunderstood
Dr Davé’s opinion expressed in Dr Davé’s reports dated
26 October 2023 and 6 November
2023 was an accurate observation. That also
weighs against acceptance of the Certificate of Capacity dated 30 November 2023.
Considering
the whole of the medical evidence, I am of the view that the Certificate of
Capacity dated 30 November 2023, certifying
the appellant as having capacity for
work limited to three hours per day, three days per week is of no probative
value, is against
the weight of the evidence, and should not be accepted.
appellant asserts that the Member’s error in failing to consider the
certificate dated 30 November 2023 was a material error
in the process of
her reasoning and determination. Section 352(5) of the 1998 Act requires that an
appeal pursuant to s 352 of the
1998 Act is limited to a determination of
whether the Member’s determination was or was not affected by error of
or discretion. The failure to refer to evidence may not always be
indicative of error.
light of the lack of probative value of the certificate, the failure by the
Member to consider that evidence cannot have affected
her findings and ultimate
determination. The appellant has failed to identify such error. It follows that
the Member’s findings
and determination were correct, and this ground of
appeal fails.
Ground Two: the factual error concerned a matter that was
material within the process of reasoning adopted by the Member in reaching
determination appealed against, amounting to a legal error
appellant raises the same argument as raised in the first ground of appeal, that
is, that the Member erred by failing to consider
the Certificate of Capacity
dated 30 November 2023, which was a material error. This ground of appeal
asserts that the error amounts
to an error of law. I have dealt with the
allegation of error of fact set out in the first ground of appeal and determined
Member’s failure to consider the certificate was not material to
the outcome and there was thus no error on the Member’s
appellant says that the Member placed importance on the Certificates of
Capacity, such as when she “adjusted” the
previous certification
dated 2 November 2023 to reflect what had actually occurred. The appellant
submits that the importance placed
on the Certificates of Capacity was evident
from the fact that that evidence was the starting point for her reasons.
I do not accept
that the order in which the Member dealt with the
certificates has any relevance to the weight she afforded to that evidence.
there was a proper basis upon which the Member found that the
certificate dated 2 November 2023 was inaccurate. That is, that it
that the appellant had no capacity for work, when he actually worked.
appellant further asserts that Dr Bodel’s opinion that a graded return to
work was appropriate was also consistent with
the certificates from 2 November
2023 to 25 January 2024. The only certificate in evidence as to the period
beyond 23 December 2023
was the backdated certificate dated 18 April 2024, in
which Dr Amir certified that the appellant was fit for work 8 hours per day
days per week with restrictions on lifting, carrying, pushing and pulling of 7
kilograms for the period 23 December 202[3] to 2
May 2024. It is not possible to
ascertain any consistency between that certificate and Dr Bodel’s view
that the appellant would
require a graded return to work, or any consistency
between Dr Bodel’s view and the extensive medical opinions, including that
of Dr Davé, that the appellant was fit for full-time work as a manager in
his own company. The submission is rejected.
appellant submits that the Member’s finding that there was a considerable
body of evidence that the appellant could perform
managerial work over the
period of the claim only went to the kind of the work for which the appellant
was fit and not the extent
of his capacity in terms of hours of work per week.
This submission suggests an error on the part of the Member by failing to
all issues, which is a different ground of appeal and which has not been
pleaded. In any event, the Member made no error. The Member
“Having carefully considered the evidence as a whole and
counsel’s submissions, I do feel a sense of persuasion and I
am satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the [appellant] was able to earn income,
performing the work of manager of the
respondent for the periods from 4 October
2023 to 1 November 2023 and from 1 December 2023 to 25 January 2024
full-time basis
(my emphasis).
the appellant asserts error of law, it is again relevant that the appellant did
not draw the Member’s attention to the
certificates issued on 2 November
2023 and 30 November 2023, or indeed the later relevant certificate dated 18
April 2024.
Rule 67D(2)
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
“The appropriate decision-maker for
proceedings is not required to have regard to a document not
specifically referred to in
submissions made by a party to the
proceedings.”
Additionally,
as McDougall J said (with Leeming JA agreeing) in
party who fails to provide a trial judge with appropriate assistance in relation
to evidence generally (and expert evidence
in particular) should expect to have
a difficult time in persuading an appellate court that some different approach
to the expert
evidence should be
Brambles Industries Limited v
Hodgson JA observed
that an inferior court does not commit an error of law by failing to consider a
point not raised before it.
follows that this ground of appeal, in which the appellant asserts error of law
on the part of the Member, is not made out and
Member’s reasons and findings disclose no error of fact or law and her
Certificate of Determination dated 10 January 2025
is confirmed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 10 January 2025 is confirmed.
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
4 September 2025
[2025] NSWCA 157
[2020] NSWCA
[2013] NSWCA
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
Application
to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), pp
Appellant’s
Application to Admit Late Documents (AALD) dated 4 December 2024, pp 1–3.
Bodel’s report dated 20 February 2024, p 6, [11], ARD, p 46.
Dr Bodel’s report
dated 20 February 2024, p 6, [12], ARD, p
Application to Resolve a Dispute (reply), pp
Primo Concrete Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWPIC 9
Appellant’s
submissions, [16].
Appellant’s
submissions, [21].
Appellant’s submissions,
Leeming JA, [91].
Respondent’s submissions 14 August 2025,
(1966) 39 ALJR
[2003] HCA 22
Fox v Percy
[2024] HCA 30
Lu v Heinrich
[2014] NSWCA 349.
of proceedings (T) 10 December 2024, T 14.25–T
T 24.25–27.8.
[2014] NSWCA
[2014] NSWCA 85
[2010] NSWCA 162.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.76 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter