URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2016/1898.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as "SkyMesh Pty Ltd") v IPSTAR AUSTRALIA PTY LTD [2016] NSWSC 1898 (22 December 2016)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as "SkyMesh Pty Ltd") v IPSTAR
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2016] NSWSC 1898
Hearing Date(s):
7-24 November 2016
Date of Orders:
22 December 2016
Decision Date:
22 December 2016
Catchwords:
TRADE PRACTICES- Statute-Plaintiff sought recovery from the Defendant
pursuant to s.74B, s.74D, and s.74H of the Trade Practices Act
and s.54, s.55
and s.274 of the Australian Consumer Law of the cost of service calls and
replacement parts for a satellite kit imported
by the defendant - equipment said
to be not reasonably fit for purpose, not of merchantable quality, not of
acceptable quality.
HELD: Plaintiff established that almost all of the
subject items were not functioning for reasons inherent with the equipment and
were therefore not fit for purpose, not of merchantable quality, not of
acceptable quality; issue of high failure rate of equipment
PRACTICES-Statute- Where Plaintiff claimed it was forced by reason of the
defective equipment imported by defendant to engage
additional support staff to
deal with the high number of complaints that resulted from the defective goods
resulting in a loss of
money spent on wages
HELD: The factual basis for the
claim not established; also the indemnity provided for by s.74H is for cost or
damage suffered by
the consumer for which the intermediate seller has
compensated the consumer and not the costs of the intermediate seller itself.
Plaintiff’s claim rejected.
TRADE PRACTICES- Statute -Unconscionable
conduct of supplier to internet service provider- Plaintiff claims that a price
imposed on it by defendant, a satellite service provider, involved
unconscionable conduct on the part of the defendant in breach
of s.21 and s.22
of the Australian Consumer Law
HELD: The Defendant had engaged in
unconscionable conduct principally by requiring the Plaintiff to pay to it an
amount equivalent
to the defendant’s assessment of what it would cost to
meet the statutory indemnity imposed by s.74H and s.274 ACL, as a result
claims made by the Plaintiff on the defendant for defective goods.
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (Schedule 2 to the Australian
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
Sale of Goods Act 1923
Australian Securities
and Investment Commission Act 2001 (Cth)
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act (no. 2) 2010
Cases Cited:
Ashford Shire Council v Dependable Motors Pty Ltd
[1960] UKPCHCA 1
(1960) 104 CLR 139
[1961] AC 336
Attorney-General (NSW) v World Best Holdings Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 261
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC) v ACN 117 372 915 Pty Ltd (in Liq) (formerly Advanced Medical Institute
[2015] FCA 368
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
v Simply No-Knead (Franchising) Pty Ltd
(2000) 104 FCR 253
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
(1774) 98 ER 969
Blomley v Ryan
[1956] HCA 81
(1956) 99 CLR 362
Bristol Tramways & Carriage Company Ltd v Fiat Motors
[1910] 2 KB 831
Canon Australia Pty Ltd v Patton
[2007] NSWCA
Christopher Hill Ltd v Ashington Piggeries Ltd
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
(1983) 151 CLR 447
Dare v Pulham
(1982) 148 CLR 658
[1982] HCA 70
Emery v Johns Period
[1989] SASC 1624
Fubilan Catering Services Ltd v Compass Group
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 1205
Grant v Australian Knitting Mills
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
[1936] AC 85
Hampton Court Ltd v Crooks
[1957] HCA 28
(1957) 97 CLR
Henville v Walker
(2001) 206 CLR 459
[2001] HCA 52
Lithgow City
Council v Jackson (2011) 244 CLR 352
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 130 FCR
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
(2011) 196 FCR
[2011] FCAFC 128
Paciocco v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(2015) 236 FCR 199
[2015] FCAFC 50
Paciocco v Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group Ltd
[2016] HCA 28
(2016) 333 ALR 569
Peterson v Merck Sharpe
& Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2010) 184 FCR 1
[2010] FCA 180
Pacific Pty Ltd v Steuler Services GmbH & Co KG
[2014] VSCA 338
Spuds Surf Chatswood Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 446
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
Rogers v Parish (Scarborough) Ltd
[1987] QB 933
Thomas v Foreshore
Marine Exhaust Systems Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 451
Tonto Home Loans Australia
Pty Ltd v Tavares; FirstMac Ltd v Di Benedetto; FirstMac Ltd v O'Donnell
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
Watts v Rake
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158
Texts Cited:
Benjamin’s Sale of Goods (9th edition 2014 Sweet and
Suttons’ Sales and Consumer Law, (4th ed 1995, LBC Information
Principal judgment
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as "SkyMesh Pty Ltd")
(Plaintiff)
IPSTAR AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (Defendant)
Representation:
D.L Williams SC, R.D Glover (Plaintiff)
S.R Donaldson SC, M.
Sealey (Defendant)
Solicitors:
Thomson Geer (Plaintiff)
Norton Rose
Fulbright (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2011/380786
Publication Restriction:
) for whom Mr D.L Williams SC and R.D Glover appear, is
an Australian owned licensed telecommunications carrier, which uses fibre,
satellite and wireless technologies to provide its customers with broadband
internet. A significant part of its business has, until
recently, been the sale
of internet services to customers in rural and regional areas of Australia using
the Ipstar satellite platform.
, is an Australian wholesaler of satellite broadband
services. Ipstar is a wholly owned subsidiary of a Thai company
.” Mr S.R Donaldson SC and Mr M. Sealey appear for
2007 SkyMesh and Ipstar entered into an agreement whereby Ipstar sold broadband
capacity to SkyMesh at a price per megabytes per
) per month.
The pricing basis changed over several periods. On 28 February 2011 there were
negotiations for a new price and in what
is described as the 2011 Addendum (or
the Second Addendum) the price fixed by Ipstar was $2,933 per Mbps.
has three claims against Ipstar arising out of their
relationship:
imported into Australia equipment that was intended to enable customers to
connect to the Ipstar satellite. That equipment
was sold by Ipstar to SkyBridge
”) which sold it to SkyMesh who then sold
it to consumers. Although there is a similarity in the style of names there is
suggestion that SkyMesh and SkyBridge are related companies. SkyMesh alleges
that the equipment was not of merchantable quality and
not fit for the purpose
for which customers required the equipment. SkyMesh contends that as the
“seller” to consumers
it (SkyMesh) is entitled, pursuant to s.74B
and s.74D of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
”), and alternatively pursuant to s.74H of the TPA to
recover from Ipstar the amounts paid to SkyBridge to replace the faulty
equipment including the cost of service calls. As importer of the equipment
Ipstar is deemed to be the manufacturer of the equipment
(see s.74A of TPA).
SkyMesh also relies on similar provisions of the
Australian Consumer Law
(Schedule 2 to the Australian
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
which became effective on 1 January 2011 and are
relevant to equipment sold after 1 January 2011: s.54 and s.55 Schedule 2 and s.
274 of the ACL. “
The defective goods claim
” has a value of
$2.2 million approximately but it is accepted that Ipstar would be entitled to a
credit of $400,000 already
paid by SkyBridge to SkyMesh, if SkyMesh were
otherwise successful. There is, as I shall explain, a linkage between “the
goods claim” and the third head of claim.
(2) The second
claim is consequential on the defective goods claim. SkyMesh claims that because
of the very high number of consumer
calls and complaints it was required to
increase its support staff at considerable expense. The quantum of this claim,
which I shall
refer to as “
the wages claim
” has been agreed,
without admissions other than as to amount, at $750,000.
(3) SkyMesh
contends that the $2,933 per Mbps was imposed upon it in circumstances that
constitute unconscionable conduct on the part
of Ipstar. It contends that it
should be required to pay no more than $2,500 per Mbps, which translates to an
overpayment to Ipstar,
on SkyMesh’s claim, of $3.4 million. SkyMesh claims
that it is entitled to this remedy by virtue of s.21 and s.22 of the ACL.
shall refer to this as “
the unconscionable conduct claim
SkyMesh claims $3.4 million under this head.
Legislative Framework Relevant to all Claims
following sections of the TPA are relevant (as in effect up to December
Actions in respect of unsuitable goods
(a) a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies
goods manufactured by the corporation to another person who acquires the
(b) a person (whether or not the person who acquired the goods from the
corporation) supplies the goods (otherwise than by way of
sale by auction)
to a consumer;
(c) the goods are acquired by the consumer for a particular purpose that
was, expressly or by implication, made known to the corporation,
directly, or through the person from whom the consumer acquired the goods or a
person by whom any antecedent negotiations
in connexion with the acquisition of
the goods were conducted;
(d) the goods are not reasonably fit for that purpose, whether or not
that is a purpose for which such goods are commonly supplied;
(e) the consumer or a person who acquires the goods from, or derives title
to the goods through or under, the consumer suffers loss
or damage by
reason that the goods are not reasonably fit for that purpose;
the corporation is liable to compensate the consumer or that other person
for the loss or damage and the consumer or that other person
may recover
the amount of the compensation by action against the corporation in a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply:
(a) if the goods are not reasonably fit for the
purpose referred to in that subsection by reason
(i) an act or default of any person (not
being the corporation or a servant or agent of the corporation);
(ii) a cause independent of human control;
occurring after the goods have left the control of the corporation;
(b) where the circumstances show that the consumer did
not rely, or that it was unreasonable for the consumer to rely, on the skill
judgment of the corporation.
74D Actions in respect of goods of unmerchantable quality
(a) a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies
goods manufactured by the corporation to another person who acquires the goods
for resupply;
(b) a person (whether or not the person who acquired the goods from the
corporation) supplies the goods (otherwise than by way of
by auction) to a consumer
(c) the goods are not of merchantable quality; and
(d) the consumer or a person who acquires the goods from, or
derives title to the goods through or under, the consumer suffers loss
or damage by reason that the goods are not of merchantable quality;
the corporation is liable to compensate the consumer or that other person
for the loss or damage and the consumer or that other person
may recover the
amount of the compensation by action against the corporation in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply:
(a) if the goods are not of merchantable quality
by reason of:
(i) an act or default of any person
(not being the corporation or a servant or agent of the corporation);
(ii) a cause independent of human
occurring after the goods have left the control of
the corporation;
(b) as regards defects specifically drawn to
the consumer’s attention before the making of the contract for the
supply of the
goods to the consumer; or
(c) if the consumer examines the goods before that contract is made, as
regards defects that the examination ought to reveal.
(3) Goods of any kind are of merchantable quality within the meaning of
this section if they are as fit for purpose or purposes
for which goods of
are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having
(a) any description applied to the goods by the
corporation;
(b) the price received by the corporation for the goods (if relevant);
(c) all the other relevant circumstances.
Right of seller to recover against manufacturer or
(a) a person (in this section referred to as
) is under a liability to another person (in this
referred to as the
) in respect
of loss or damage suffered by the consumer as a result of a breach of a
condition or warranty implied by a provision
of Division 2 in a
contract for the supply of goods (whether or not the goods are of a kind
ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic
or household use or consumption)
by the seller to the consumer; and
(b) a third person (in this section referred to as
manufacturer
(i) is liable to compensate the
consumer in respect of the same loss or damage by reason of a provision of this
Division; or
(ii) in a case where the goods referred to in paragraph (a) are not
of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or household
consumption—would, if the provisions of sections 74B,74C, 74D and 74E
applied in relation to those goods, be liable
to compensate the consumer in
respect of the same loss or damage by reason of any of those
the manufacturer is liable to indemnify the seller in
respect of the liability of the seller to the consumer and the seller may,
respect of the manufacturer’s liability to indemnify the seller,
institute an action against the manufacturer in a court of
obtained if the liability of the manufacturer
to indemnify the seller had arisen
under a contract of indemnity made between the manufacturer and the
following sections of the ACL (as in effect as at January 2011 are
21 Unconscionable conduct
(1) A person must not, in trade or commerce, in
connection with the supply or possible supply of goods or services to
another person,
engage in conduct that is, in all the circumstances,
unconscionable.
A pecuniary penalty may be imposed for a
contravention of this subsection.
(2) Without in any way limiting the matters to which the
court may have regard for the purpose of determining whether a person
) has contravened subsection (1) in connection
with the supply or possible supply of goods or services to another
person (the
), the court may have regard
(a) the relative strengths of the bargaining
positions of the supplier and the consumer; and
(b) whether, as a result of conduct engaged in by the person, the consumer
was required to comply with conditions that were not reasonably
for the protection of the legitimate interests of the supplier; and
(c) whether the consumer was able to understand any documents relating to
the supply or possible supply of the goods or services;
(d) whether any undue influence or pressure was exerted on, or any unfair
tactics were used against, the consumer or a person acting
on behalf of the
consumer by the supplier or a person acting on behalf of the supplier in
relation to the supply or possible supply
of the goods or services; and
(e) the amount for which, and the circumstances under which, the consumer
could have acquired identical or equivalent goods or services
from a person
other than the supplier.
(3) A person is not to be taken for the purposes of this
section to engage in unconscionable conduct in connection with the supply
or possible supply of goods or services to a person by reason only
that the person institutes legal proceedings in relation to that
or possible supply or refers a dispute or claim in relation to
that supply or possible supply to arbitration.
(4) For the purpose of determining whether a person has
contravened subsection (1) in connection with the supply or possible supply
of goods or services to another person:
(a) the court must not have regard to any
circumstances that were not reasonably foreseeable at the time of the
alleged contravention;
(b) the court may have regard to conduct engaged in, or circumstances
existing, before the commencement of
this section.
(5) A reference in this section to goods or services is
a reference to goods or services of a kind ordinarily acquired for
domestic or household use or consumption.
(6) A reference in this section to the supply or possible supply of goods
does not include a reference to the supply or possible
supply of goods for
the purpose of re-supply or for the purpose of using them up or
transforming them in trade or commerce.
applies for the purposes of this section in the same way as
it applies for the purposes of Division 1 of
22 Unconscionable conduct in business transactions
(1) A person must not, in trade or commerce, in
connection with:
(a) the supply or possible supply of
goods or services to another person (other than a listed public company);
(b) the acquisition or possible acquisition of goods or services from another
person (other than a listed public
engage in conduct that is, in all the
circumstances, unconscionable.
pecuniary penalty may be imposed for a contravention of this
subsection.
(2) Without in any way limiting the matters to which the
court may have regard for the purpose of determining whether a person
) has contravened subsection (1) in connection
with the supply or possible supply of goods or services to another
person (the
business consumer
), the court may have regard
(a) the relative strengths of the bargaining
positions of the supplier and the business consumer; and
(b) whether, as a result of conduct engaged in by the supplier, the
business consumer was required to comply with conditions that
reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the
supplier; and (c) whether the business consumer
was able to understand
any documents relating to the supply or possible supply of the goods
or services; and
(d) whether any undue influence or pressure was exerted on, or any unfair
tactics were used against, the business consumer or a person
behalf of the business consumer by the supplier or a person acting on
behalf of the supplier in relation to the supply
or possible supply of the
goods or services; and
(e) the amount for which, and the circumstances under which, the business
consumer could have acquired identical or equivalent goods
or services from
a person other than the supplier; and
(f) the extent to which the supplier’s conduct towards the business
consumer was consistent with the supplier’s conduct
transactions between the supplier and other like business consumers;
(g) the requirements of any applicable industry code; and
(h) the requirements of any other industry code, if the business consumer
acted on the reasonable belief that the supplier would
comply with that
(i) the extent to which the supplier unreasonably failed to disclose to the
business consumer:
(i) any intended conduct of the supplier that might affect the interests of
the business consumer; and
(ii) any risks to the business consumer arising from the supplier’s
intended conduct (being risks that the supplier should
have foreseen would
not be apparent to the business consumer); and
(j) if there is a contract between the
supplier and the business consumer for the supply of the goods or
(i) the extent to which the supplier was willing to negotiate the terms and
conditions of the contract with the business consumer;
(ii) the terms and conditions of the contract; and
(iii) the conduct of the supplier and the business consumer in complying
with the terms and conditions of the contract; and
(iv) any conduct that the supplier or the business consumer engaged in, in
connection with their commercial relationship, after they
entered into the
contract; and
(k) without limiting paragraph (j), whether
the supplier has a contractual right to vary unilaterally a term or
condition of a contract
between the supplier and the business consumer
for the supply of the goods or services; and
(l) the extent to which the supplier and the business consumer acted in
good faith.
(3) Without in any way limiting the matters to which the
court may have regard for the purpose of determining whether a person
) has contravened subsection (1) in connection
with the acquisition or possible acquisition of goods or services
from another person
small business supplier
), the court
may have regard to:
(a) the relative strengths of the bargaining
positions of the acquirer and the small business supplier; and
(b) whether, as a result of conduct engaged in by the acquirer, the small
business supplier was required to comply with conditions
that were not
reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the
acquirer; and
(c) whether the small business supplier was able to understand any
documents relating to the acquisition or possible acquisition
of the goods
or services; and
(d) whether any undue influence or pressure was exerted on, or any unfair
tactics were used against, the small business supplier
or a person acting
on behalf of the small business supplier by the acquirer or a person acting
on behalf of the acquirer in relation
to the acquisition or possible
acquisition of the goods or services; and
(e) the amount for which, and the circumstances in which, the small
business supplier could have supplied identical or equivalent
services to a person other than the acquirer; and
(f) the extent to which the acquirer’s conduct towards the
small business supplier was consistent with the acquirer’s
conduct in similar transactions between the acquirer and other
like small business suppliers; and
(g) the requirements of any applicable industry code; and
(h) the requirements of any other industry code, if the small business
supplier acted on the reasonable belief that the acquirer
would comply with
that code; and
(i) the extent to which the acquirer unreasonably failed to disclose to the
small business supplier:
(i) any intended conduct of the acquirer that might affect the interests of
the small business supplier; and
(ii) any risks to the small business supplier arising from
the acquirer’s intended conduct (being risks that the acquirer
have foreseen would not be apparent to the small business supplier);
(j) if there is a contract between the
acquirer and the small business supplier for the acquisition of the goods
or services:
(i) the extent to which the acquirer was willing to negotiate the terms and
conditions of the contract with the small business supplier;
(ii) the terms and conditions of the contract; and
(iii) the conduct of the acquirer and the small business supplier in
complying with the terms and conditions of the contract; and
(iv) any conduct that the acquirer or the small busines supplier engaged
in, in connection with their commercial relationship, after
they entered
into the contract; and
(k) without limiting paragraph (j), whether
the acquirer has contractual right to vary unilaterally a term or condition of
between the acquirer and the small business supplier for
the acquisition of the goods or services; and
(l) the extent to which the acquirer and the small business supplier acted
in good faith.
(4) A person is not to be taken
for the purposes of this section to engage in unconscionable conduct in
connection with:
(a) the supply or possible supply of goods
or services to another person; or
(b) the acquisition or possible acquisition of goods or services from
another person;
by reason only that the first-mentioned person institutes legal proceedings
in relation to that supply, possible supply, acquisition
possible acquisition or refers to arbitration a
dispute or claim in relation to that supply, possible supply, acquisition
or possible acquisition.
(5) For the purpose of determining whether a person has
contravened subsection (1):
(a) the court must not have regard to any
circumstances that were not reasonably foreseeable at the time of the
alleged contravention;
(b) the court may have regard to circumstances existing before the
commencement of this section but not to conduct engaged in before
commencement.
(6) A reference in this section to the supply or
possible supply of goods or services is a reference to the supply or
possible supply
of goods or services to a person whose acquisition or
possible acquisition of the goods or services is or would be for the
of trade or commerce.
(7) A reference in this section to the acquisition or possible
acquisition of goods or services is a reference to the acquisition
possible acquisition of goods or services by a person whose acquisition
or possible acquisition of the goods or services is or
would be for
the purpose of trade or commerce.
applies for the purposes of this section in the same way as
it applies for the purposes of Division 1 of
54 Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce,
goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by
there is a guarantee that the goods
are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of
acceptable quality
if they are
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods
of that kind are commonly supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the state and
condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the
would regard as acceptable having regard to the matters in
subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2)
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer
of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
(a) goods supplied to a consumer are not of
acceptable quality; and
(b) the only reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality were
specifically drawn to the consumer’s attention before
consumer agreed to the supply;
the goods are taken to be of acceptable
(a) goods are displayed for sale or hire;
(b) the goods would not be of acceptable quality if they were supplied to a
the reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality are taken, for
the purposes of subsection (4), to have been specifically
consumer’s attention if those reasons were disclosed on a written
notice that was displayed with the goods and that
was transparent.
(6) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality
(a) the consumer to whom they are supplied
causes them to become of unacceptable quality, or fails to take reasonable steps
them from becoming of
unacceptable quality; and
(b) they are damaged by abnormal use.
(7) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality
(a) the consumer acquiring the goods
examines them before the consumer agrees to the supply of the goods; and
(b) the examination ought reasonably to have revealed that the goods were not of
acceptable quality.
55 Guarantee as to fitness for any disclosed purpose etc.
(a) a person (the
supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are reasonably fit for
any disclosed purpose, and for any purpose for which the
supplier represents
that they are reasonably
disclosed purpose
particular purpose (whether or not that purpose is a purpose for which the
goods are commonly supplied) for which the goods are
being acquired by the
consumer and that:
(a) the consumer makes known, expressly or
by implication, to:
(i) the supplier; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation to
the acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
(b) the consumer makes known to the
manufacturer of the goods either directly or through the supplier or the
person referred to in
paragraph (a)(ii).
(3) This section does not apply if the circumstances
show that the consumer did not rely on, or that it was unreasonable for
the consumer
to rely on, the skill or judgment of the supplier, the
person referred to in subsection (2)(a)(ii) or the manufacturer, as the
274 Indemnification of suppliers by manufacturers
(1) A manufacturer of goods is liable to indemnify a
person (the
) who supplies the goods to a consumer
(a) the supplier is liable to pay damages
under section 259(4) to the consumer for loss or damage suffered by the
(b) the manufacturer is or would be liable under section 271 to pay damages
to the consumer for the same loss or
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), a manufacturer of
goods is liable to indemnify a person (the
supplies the goods to a consumer if:
(a) the supplier incurs costs because the
supplier is liable under this Part for a failure to comply with a guarantee
that applies
to the supply under Subdivision A of Division 1 of
(b) the failure is:
(i) a failure to comply with the guarantee under section 54;
(ii) a failure to comply with the guarantee under section 55 in relation to
a disclosed purpose that the consumer made known to the
manufacturer either
directly or through the supplier or the person referred to in section
55(2)(a)(ii); or
(iii) a failure to comply with the guarantee under section 56 in relation
to a description that was applied to the goods by or on
behalf of the
manufacturer of the goods, or with the express or implied consent of the
manufacturer.
(3) The supplier may, with respect to the
manufacturer’s liability to indemnify the supplier, commence an
action against the
manufacturer in a court of competent jurisdiction for
such legal or equitable relief as the supplier could have obtained if that
liability had arisen under a contract of indemnity made between them.
(4) The supplier may commence the action at any time within 3 years after
the earliest of the following days:
(a) the day, or the first day, as the case
may be, on which the supplier made a payment with respect to, or otherwise
discharged in
whole or in part, the
liability of the supplier to the consumer;
(b) the day on which a proceeding was commenced by the consumer against the
supplier with respect to that liability or, if more than
proceeding was commenced, the day on which the first such proceeding was
276 This Part not to be excluded etc. by contract
(1) A term of a contract (including a term that is not
set out in the contract but is incorporated in the contract by another term
the contract) is void to the extent that the term purports to exclude, restrict
or modify, or has the effect of excluding, restricting
(a) the application of all or any of the
provisions of this Part; or
(b) the exercise of a right a conferred by such a provision; or
(c) any liability of a person in relation to a failure to comply with a
guarantee that applies under Division 1 of
to a supply of goods or
(2) A term of a contract is not taken, for the purposes
of this section, to exclude, restrict or modify the application of a provision
of this Part unless the term does so expressly or is inconsistent with the
(3) This section does not apply to a term of a contract that is a term
referred to in section 276A(4).
background which I set out below is taken from the plaintiff’s closing
submissions (“
”), and with which Mr Donaldson took no
business activities in the relevant period were affected by the Australian
Broadband Guarantee Program (‘
’). The ABGP was an
Australian Government initiative, which subsidised the cost of provision of
internet services in rural and
regional areas of Australia. In return for
receiving various government subsidies, approved Internet Service Providers
”) such as SkyMesh entered into contractual
arrangements with the Commonwealth pursuant to which the terms of their
with their customers were regulated. This included a requirement to
provide customers for three years with a satellite service that
met specified
conditions: D10/6442 , 6455, 6491-6496.
entered into a series of funding agreements in relation to funding for the ABGP,
which ended on 30 June 2011.
a schedule to each of the funding agreements, there was a standard form service
agreement that SkyMesh was required to enter into
with each of its customers.
Those standard form agreements included warranties that SkyMesh was required to
provide to its customers.
and Ipstar entered into the following service provider agreements and
variations:
agreement dated 27 September 2007 “
the Bandwidth Agreement
Exhibit D1/652-694;
(2) An addendum
dated 1 August 2008 “
the First Addendum
” Exhibit D2/922-923;
(3) An addendum
dated 27 April 2011 “
the Second Addendum
D4/2669-2680.
express warranties contained in agreements between Ipstar and its purchasers
were initially limited to a period of 12 months only.
Ipstar eventually accepted
that it was bound to honour the manufacturer’s warranties set out in the
TPA and ACL. From about
February 2011 Ipstar began to provide a three year
warranty for defects in manufacturing and workmanship of the Ipstar products
Ipstar satellite and broadband equipment provides broadband internet services
via two Earth Stations (in large satellite dishes)
located in Kalgoorlie,
Western Australia and Broken Hill, New South Wales. These dishes send signals to
Thaicom’s satellite
Ipstar-1 in geostationary orbit above the earth, which
relays signals to and from smaller Ipstar satellite dishes located at the
premises of ISPs customers.
its peak Ipstar had 80,000 user terminals in operation in about 2010-2011. The
number has diminished as a result of the introduction
of the NBN and the
penetration of the Telstra 3G network into rural Australia.
and APN have been the two largest Ipstar ISPs. APN is the largest. As at 2011
when the new bandwidth pricing terms were being
imposed on SkyMesh, SkyMesh had
28,302 customers with active terminals and APN had 30,216 customers representing
38% and 41% respectively
of the total Ipstar terminals. The total fleet was
74,009 in 2011 and had declined to 27,290 in 2014. In 2014 SkyMesh had 36% of
that fleet and APN 47%: Exhibit D6/4060A. The significant decline in users is,
at least in part, a result of the introduction of
NBN network.
Ipstar broadband service is a proprietary service and all users must have a
proprietary User Terminal (‘
’) supplied by Ipstar.
Terminals supplied by any other service are not capable of accessing the Ipstar
broadband service. The
UT supplied by Ipstar does not function with any other
satellite service.
Ipstar UT consists of an Outdoor Unit (‘
’) interconnected
to an Indoor Unit (‘
’) by two coaxial cables. The ODU
contains a:
(1) Satellite
dish antenna and mounting frame of 84 cm diameter; and
(2) Satellite
RF (Radio Frequency) transceiver assembly consisting of:
(i) an antenna
feed horn which collects RF signals received by, and radiates transmitter RF
power to, the satellite dish antenna;
Noise Block (‘
) down converter which amplifies the
received RF signal in a Low Noise Amplifier (‘
converts it to a lower frequency suitable for processing by the IDU;
(iii) a Block
Up Converter (‘
) with an output power of either 1 or 2
watts which converts the transmit signal generated by the IDU to a higher
frequency and power
level suitable for transmission to the satellite; and
OrthoMode Transducer (‘
) and Transmit Reject Filter
) which connects the LNB and BUC to the feed horn
enabling both to share the same satellite dish antenna without interfering with
each other.
Although the ODU includes the
satellite dish it is the Satellite RF transceiver assembly which is the subject
of the defective goods
claim in this case and I shall use ODU to mean that
assembly, a photograph of which can be found at Exhibit D/1036.
IDU is essentially a modem which links to the customer’s computer.
high level block diagram of an Ipstar broadband UT is shown in Figure 2 on page
11 of Peter Burns’ report dated 8 November
2012 Exhibit D6/3504.
Ipstar satellite system known as the “VSAT system” operates in the
Ku and Ka-Band segments of the RF spectrum. These
spectrum bands are part of the
broader microwave frequency spectrum used by radio communications links
operating between two terrestrial
locations separated by a clear line of sight
path as well as between a satellite and an earth station.
ODUs are designed to receive and send signals to utilise the particular
spectrums available and are quite sophisticated pieces
of equipment.
or about 2008 Ipstar commenced supplying internet bandwidth to SkyMesh (as a
wholesale supplier of internet bandwidth) in accordance
with the Bandwidth
Agreement and began supplying SkyMesh with the products necessary (the UTs) for
SkyMesh customers to connect with
the Ipstar satellite. Within a few months
Ipstar ceased to supply these products directly to SkyMesh and referred SkyMesh
of its three distributors, SkyBridge, through which to purchase and
install its products. SkyMesh has not sought to make out a case
based on the
direct sale to it by Ipstar in the first four months.
was not only a distributor for Ipstar but authorised by Ipstar to install and
service Ipstar products. In formal contractual
terms Ipstar supplied UTs to
SkyBridge which in turn supplied them to SkyMesh. SkyMesh then supplied them to
its customers. SkyBridge
installed the Ipstar UTs on SkyMesh’s behalf for
SkyMesh’s customers and SkyMesh provided bandwidth to those customers
the Ipstar satellite. SkyBridge provided service calls when requested by SkyMesh
to respond to customer problems with their internet
satellite service, including
problems with Ipstar’s equipment.
entered into the following agreements with SkyBridge:
agreement dated 16 January 2008 for the calendar year 2008;
agreement dated 17 March 2009.
No further written
agreements were entered into and the agreement dated 17 March 2009 continued to
govern the relationship between
SkyMesh and SkyBridge.
March 2011, the provision of bandwidth to SkyMesh by Ipstar was governed by the
Bandwidth Agreement and the First Addendum.
In March 2011 the Second Addendum
took effect and it is the Second Addendum which is the subject of the
unconscionable conduct claim.
is no dispute that Ipstar, SkyBridge and SkyMesh had, by 2010, come to realise
that there were two significant problems in connection
with the Ipstar
equipment. The first was that an extensive number of ODUs had a water ingress
problem. Water ingress problems were
first noted in July 2007: see Exhibit
D3/1569. The ODUs are located on the satellite dish outdoors and were frequently
not adequately
sealed against the rain.
second major problem which revealed itself in the period 2008 to 2010 and beyond
related to the modem supplied by Ipstar as part
of its kit. Many of the modems
suffered what Ipstar described as a “drop out,”
“freezing” or “hang”
issue. There is agreement between
the parties that the drop out issue was a result of firmware issues. Firmware is
software embedded
in a product such as a modem which enables the product to
function and communicate with for example, a network or other devices.
modem ‘hangs’ or ‘freezes’ or drops out, it prevents the
consumer from using the product as it was intended
to be used since access
cannot be gained to the network. This problem was identified by Ipstar and it is
described as a known issue
in a document created by Ipstar in April 2010 Exhibit
“One of the known root causes that IPSTAR is currently targeting to
address with the upgrade of the UT [ User Terminal] firmware
is the UT software
hanging problem. In theory, UTs will not transmit on the same time slots when
they are in TDMA [Time Division
Multiplexity Algorithm]. However, they
demonstrate this behaviour when they hang or fail to response to the Gateway for
period. Under this circumstance, UTs will continue their transmission
on the old time slots if their data buffer is not empty. These
data packets then
collide with others (good) Uts data in the same time slots and result in high
CRC errors. Eventually, the connection
of GW [Gateway] and the good UT is reset
causing drop out experience.”
is no dispute that if either the ODU or modem were not functioning properly the
customer could not access the Ipstar satellite
system. The kit was installed by
SkyBridge and not by the customer: T207.21. The ODU and modem were not permitted
by Ipstar to be
opened by the customer or the service technician from
case is not limited to water ingress problems and modem dropouts but its ability
to rely on other equipment defects
in the ODUs and IDUs is contested by Ipstar
for reasons I shall later explain. Much of the focus of the case has been on the
ingress problem and the modem drop out problem, and I shall expand on
these topics below.
is extensive evidence concerning the help desk arrangements that SkyMesh,
SkyBridge and Ipstar had in place. There is no dispute
that customers of SkyMesh
who had service difficulties first contacted the SkyMesh help desk, and if
SkyMesh personnel could not
solve the customer’s problem the customer was
put through to the SkyBridge helpdesk. If the SkyBridge personnel could not
the problem (even with the assistance of Ipstar personnel if that was
thought appropriate: see T499-500) SkyBridge arranged to send
out a technician
to the premises of the customers.
SkyBridge technicians would attend at the customer’s premises with such
replacement equipment as they had been instructed
by their base to take with
them. They would follow a testing protocol designed to eliminate simple faults
such as incorrect cabling
or power faults outside of the Ipstar equipment. If
the SkyBridge technician, often in consultation with a more senior person at
SkyBridge’s base, determined that an item of Ipstar equipment should be
replaced he or she would do so. SkyBridge would invoice
SkyMesh for the service
call and the cost of replacement equipment.
was evidence from one of the SkyBridge technicians, a Mr Anthony Wonish (Mr
Wonish’s affidavit 2 July 2016) as to procedures
adopted and he was not
challenged on that evidence. Documentation was created by SkyBridge in relation
to the service calls in respect
of the 4000 claims which are the subject of
these proceedings. The experts retained by SkyMesh and Ipstar agreed that there
flaw in the help desk process Exhibit D7/ 4464-4465 and there was no
suggestion that SkyBridge did not proceed in accordance with
the guide issued by
Ipstar called the “Ipstar Level 1 Troubleshooting for Service
Providers” (Exhibit D13/1332). The
technicians’ notes which are part
of Exhibit O1-O3 have not been shown to be, or suggested to be, inconsistent
with Mr Wonish’s
more generally there were very few contested facts and there were no submissions
made that I should not accept the evidence
of any of the witnesses
The Defective Goods Claim
claims indemnity and/or damages in respect of Ipstar products’ claimed
unfitness for purpose and unmerchantable quality
for two distinct periods (to
deal with the introduction of the ACL in place of the TPA):
(1) Products
supplied in the period prior to 1 January 2011 in breach of the TPA;
(2) Products
supplied in the period subsequent to 1 January 2011 in breach of the
transitional provisions of the
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer
Law) Act (no. 2) 2010
(Cth) provide that the TPA continues to apply in
relation to acts or omissions that occurred before the commencement of the
negotiations between the parties in 2010, Ipstar, on 26 November 2010, confirmed
to Paul Rees, a director of SkyMesh, that
its legal advice was that a statutory
warranty did exist and that it was therefore prepared to pay for parts and
labour for three
years from the date the equipment was installed at the end-user
customer’s premises. The substance of the discussion is confirmed
email sent after the meeting on 28 November 2010 (see First Affidavit of Paul
Rees sworn 27 September 2010 [29]; Exhibit D3/1944).
Ipstar indicated its acceptance of obligations pursuant to the TPA there
followed correspondence, which I summarise as follows:
indicated that it would need to consider individually each of SkyMesh’s
(2) There was
discussion about the form in which information would be provided by SkyMesh to
(3) SkyMesh did
provide information to Ipstar about the claims in the form of schedules.
examined the schedules. Mr Leeflang, Ipstar’s Director of Operations,
considered that some of the claims met the
criteria for payment and many others
did not because the actual unit that had been replaced had not been returned to
Ipstar or other
information was incomplete. The requirement that allegedly
defective goods must be returned to Ipstar had been in place as between
and SkyBridge and APN. SkyMesh had not been a party to that agreement.
(5) Mr Supoj
Chinveeraphan, who was in charge of Ipstar’s operations in Australia,
instructed Mr Leeflang not to pay any of
SkyMesh’s claims
(6) None of the
claims were paid to SkyMesh by Ipstar until the commencement of these
proceedings, following which a relatively small
number were paid by Ipstar.
Those items for which payment of approximately $60,000 was made by Ipstar to
SkyMesh have been removed
from the SkyMesh claim.
(7) Some claims
relating to SkyMesh customers were paid by Ipstar to SkyBridge – those
claims have been the subject of payment
by SkyBridge to SkyMesh (also after
commencement of these proceedings). SkyMesh accepts that if it is successful on
all of its claim
an amount of $400,000 must be deducted, being the total amount
that it has received from SkyBridge relevant to the extant
SkyMesh had lodged its claims and at a time that SkyMesh was seeking a response
and payment by Ipstar the Bandwidth Agreement
fell due for renegotiation. Ipstar
in January 2011 informed SkyMesh of its new pricing for bandwidth. I shall deal
with the unconscionabilty
claim separately below.
should note that the Court Book consisted of some 38 volumes (D1-38) to which
were added some further volumes. It was agreed that
the Court had no need to pay
regard to any document not the subject of specific mention by Counsel for either
party, but in any event
much of the documentary material became superfluous when
agreement was reached in respect of a sampling process which I describe
defective goods claim is made up of 4000 individual claims for which there are
more than 20,000 documents. Thankfully
the parties agreed that it was not
appropriate for the Court to have to examine each one of those 4000 claims and a
sample of 102
claims was chosen. The parties agreed on a batching process and
asked me to select at random 99 cases from the different batches.
The parties
then agreed that a further three samples should be added to the 99 randomly
chosen by me. The documentation in respect
of those 102 claims was tendered and
became Exhibits O1, O2, and O3 and I shall refer to these as “
Representative Items
.” Later a schedule was prepared by
SkyMesh’s solicitors summarising the content of the documents (Exhibit U).
The parties
agreed that the Court was to apply to such of the 102 items as are
found not to be of merchantable quality or not fit for purpose
a dollar value as
“The parties agree that to the extent that the Court is required to
resolve the plaintiff's claims in respect of goods that
were not of merchantable
quality and/or not fit for purpose as set out in schedules AB and D to the Third
Further Amended Commercial
List Statement
(Product Claims)
assessment of individual claims, the Court shall adopt the following
1.The Court shall determine whether the defendant is liable to the plaintiff in
respect of each of the 102 claims comprising the
random sample selected by Rein
J from MFI 2
(Sample Claims).
2. The plaintiff's entitlement to damages/indemnity from the defendant in
respect if the whole of the plaintiff's Product Claims
is to be assessed by the
application of the following formula:
x PCV = PRC
PRC - Credit = Verdict
means the $400,000 Skybridge amount.
(Sample Claim Recovery) means the total value of the amounts awarded
by the Court to the plaintiff in respect of the Sample Claims.
(Sample Claim Value) means the total value of the Sample Claims.
(Product Claim Value) means the total value of the plaintiff's
Product Claims.
(Plaintiff's recovery on Product Claims) means the plaintiff's
recovery on the Product Claims before the application of the Credit.
means the verdict in relation to the Product
approach to the 102 Representative Items is the subject of dispute to which I
shall return. It is also not the only way in which
SkyMesh seeks to establish
that the Ipstar kit was neither of merchantable quality nor reasonably fit for
purpose. The three levels
of the SkyMesh case are:
(1) The Ipstar
kit was prone to failure and therefore not reasonably fit for purpose and not of
merchantable quality. This ‘prone
to failure’ case is limited to the
water ingress problem of the ODUs and the modem firmware issue causing drop
(2) The kits
which included the equipment the subject of the 102 Representative Items failed
and therefore were not reasonably fit
for purpose and or not of merchantable
quality (or acceptable quality).
(3) If SkyMesh
does not succeed on (1) or (2) it contends that it can establish on the balance
of probabilities that the kit was not
working and that it should be able to
recover for each item unless Ipstar can establish that the cause of failure was
not something
inherent in the ODUs or modems themselves when shipped: see
Ipstar’s Threshold Arguments
propose to consider at this stage what might be viewed as the threshold
arguments advanced by Ipstar. Ipstar contends that even
if it is established by
SkyMesh that the Ipstar kit (or parts of it, such as the modem and the ODU) was
(or were) not reasonably
fit for purpose within the meaning of the TPA/ACL or
not of merchantable quality (TPA) or not of acceptable quality (ACL), SkyMesh
cannot succeed in recovering from Ipstar under the TPA or the ACL
(1) s.74B and
s.74D of the TPA are not available to SkyMesh, as a matter of construction,
payments made by SkyMesh to SkyBridge were voluntary payments, and so s.74H
(TPA) and s.274 (ACL) do not apply.
first with [42] (1) Ipstar argues that even if the goods were not fit for
purpose or of merchantable quality s.74B and s.74D
are remedies for consumers
not intermediate sellers. There is agreement by Ipstar that the first three
subsections of s.74B (and
s.74D) are met because:
(1) Ipstar is a
corporation which in trade or commerce supplied goods manufactured by Ipstar to
another person (SkyBridge) who acquired
goods for resupply: (1)(a),
(2) SkyMesh
supplied the goods to consumers (1)(b),
(3) the goods
were acquired by the consumer for a particular purpose (i.e. to access the
Ipstar satellite broadband service) (1)(c),
assuming it is established that the goods were not reasonably fit for that
purpose (or not of merchantable quality) within
the meaning of s.74B(1)(d) and
s.74D(1)(d), s.74B and s.74D are not applicable because of the last part of
these sections.
contends that “that other person” in the last part of subs (1) is a
reference to “a person who acquires the
goods from, or derives title to
the goods through or under the consumer,” and not to the person referred
to in (1)(a) as “another
person who acquires the goods for
Ipstar contends, a corporation is liable to compensate the consumer and
“persons who acquired the goods from or derived
title to the goods from
the consumer” and has, by operation of s.74B or s.74D no obligation to
compensate the intermediate
my view the construction for which Ipstar contends is clearly correct. This view
is reinforced by two matters:
(a) S.74H is a
section specifically designed to enable intermediate sellers to sue the
manufacturer, and there is therefore no need
for s.74B and s.74D to deal with
sellers’ claims against manufacturers.
“that other person” meant the intermediate seller then persons who
acquired goods through the consumer would have
no remedy. The construction
advanced by Ipstar is far more in tune with the remedial aspect of the
follows that in my view SkyMesh has no claim against Ipstar under s.74B or 74D
of the TPA.
only section of the TPA which is relevant to the defective goods claim therefore
is s. 74H. S.274 is the equivalent provision
of the ACL.
now to the voluntary payment argument. Ipstar contends that if the goods were
not of merchantable quality or not reasonably
fit for purpose then SkyMesh
should not have paid SkyBridge any amount for the visit or the replacement
equipment since SkyBridge
was bound to meet its obligations under the TPA. Mr
Donaldson says that the situation is similar to SkyMesh paying SkyBridge $5000
for a service call and modem replacement that should have cost only $1000. He
submits that SkyMesh could not in those circumstances
claim pursuant to the
indemnity the additional $4000 from Ipstar. He also submitted that it is not a
question of whether SkyMesh
acted reasonably in endeavouring to deal with the
complaints of customers to whom, on this assumption, SkyMesh was liable because
it had sold them goods that were defective. If SkyMesh’s conduct was to be
determined by the yardstick of reasonable conduct
then in my view what it did
was entirely reasonable. It arranged, after SkyMesh and SkyBridge help desks
could not solve the customers’
difficulties, for SkyBridge to send a
technician to assess the problem and fix the problem by whatever means SkyBridge
could do so
including replacement of ODUs and modems where appropriate. SkyMesh
was under pressure from the industry Ombudsman and the department
responsible
for administering the ABGP to which SkyMesh customers were also directing their
complaints and it is hardly surprising
that SkyMesh sought to deal with its
customers’ lack of access to the internet without engaging in some
protracted legal dispute
with SkyBridge. There is no suggestion that the amount
charged by SkyBridge for the service call or the replacement parts was
think the answer to Ipstar’s contention is to be found in the words of
s.74H. S.74H has these components:
(1) SkyMesh was
liable to the consumer and is therefore the seller referred to in s.74H(a).
(2) Ipstar is
the manufacturer who was liable to the consumer in respect of the same loss or
damage i.e. the costs of replacing the
defective goods.
(3) Ipstar is
the manufacturer liable to indemnify SkyMesh “in respect of the liability
of the seller to the consumer.”
(4) The seller
is entitled to indemnify for its liability to the consumer as if there was a
contract of indemnity made between SkyMesh
and Ipstar.
liability of the seller to the consumer was the liability of SkyMesh to replace
the defective goods and it met that liability
by organising the service call and
the replacement of the goods, for which it then paid SkyBridge. It had paid
those monies to solve
the consumer’s problems and in my view it is not
relevant to the statutory inquiry for the purposes of s.74H to examine whether
SkyMesh might have had a right to claim against SkyBridge either under contract
or under statute. The statute, by its specific wording,
does not introduce any
qualification to the indemnity which the statute grants the seller. Even if
SkyMesh had a right to claim against
SkyBridge contractually or under statute
(which has not been demonstrated) it had a right to claim from Ipstar and was
entitled to
choose which of the two parties liable to it to pursue. It has
exercised that choice. If the voluntary assumption of a burden had
any role to
play it would be as between SkyMesh and the consumer but that is not what is
relation to s.274 ACL the position is the same save that s.274 requires that the
seller “incurs costs.” Mr Donaldson
submits that SkyMesh did not
‘incur’ costs because it was not liable to SkyBridge. In my view,
whilst SkyMesh may have
had a basis to seek to recover the costs of an invoice
from SkyBridge (a basis not established in this case) once it was confident
it could prove the sort of matters that it seeks to prove against Ipstar in this
case I do not think it is correct to say that
when it requested SkyBridge to
attend and implicitly to replace equipment found to be faulty with no prior
agreement that it would
be undertaken by SkyBridge under warranty, that it did
not incur a cost. Another way of looking at it is to say that had it been
on the invoices by SkyBridge it may have had a defence of set off- or cross
claim. I do not accept that the payment of SkyBridge’s
invoices was
voluntary in any relevant sense or that it did not incur a cost by virtue of
requesting SkyBridge to attend at the consumer’s
replace defective equipment.
The Defective Goods Claim: Beyond
the Threshold
is appropriate before returning to the detail of the claims to outline the
general considerations relating to the terms ‘reasonably
purpose,’ ‘merchantable quality,’ and ‘acceptable
liability imposed by s.74B arises where the goods are not reasonably fit for a
purpose made known to the seller and the liability
imposed by s.74D arises where
the goods are not of merchantable quality. These concepts are well known in
English and Australian
Law see s.19(1) and s.19(2) of the
Sale of Goods Act
(NSW), see Suttons’
Sales and Consumer Law,
1995, LBC Information Services), pp. 238-242, 274-292
Grant v Australian
Knitting Mills
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
(1935) 54 CLR 49
[1936] AC 85
Ashford Shire Council v
Dependable Motors Pty Ltd
[1960] UKPCHCA 1
(1960) 104 CLR 139
[1961] AC 336
Parish (Scarborough) Ltd
[1987] QB 933
Bristol Tramways &
Carriage Company Ltd v Fiat Motors Ltd
[1910] 2 KB 831
, p.837 in which it
was held that buses manufactured by the defendant which were too slightly built
for heavy city traffic were both
not fit for purpose and not of merchantable
provides that for goods to be of merchantable quality they must be as fit for
the purpose or purposes for which goods of that
kind are commonly bought as it
is reasonable to expect having regard to the description, price and all other
relevant circumstances.
This definition moves away from the restrictions of the
previous law surrounding
Sale of Goods Act 1923
(NSW) and its
Peterson v Merck Sharpe & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2010) 184 FCR 1
[2010] FCA 180
[962] –[968], Jessup J, in dealing with s.74B, held that
fitness for purpose of goods is to be measured against what it was
reasonable to
expect at the time of supply of the goods to the consumer. On appeal the Full
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
196 FCR 145
[2011] FCAFC 128
per Keane CJ Bennett and Gordon JJ described s.74B
as containing an objective test [174] of reasonable fitness.
Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
130 FCR 182
Branson J (with whom Jacobson J agreed) said that the test in s.74D requires the
goods in question to be measured against what is
objectively reasonable to
expect in terms of fitness for purpose.
far as the facts of this case are concerned there appears to be no real point of
practical difference between the liability imposed
by s.74B and 74D, and hence
what is sought to be passed on to the manufacturer by s.74H.
of the ACL does not use the term “merchantable quality” but rather
“acceptable quality.” For present purposes
of the ACL adds a
specific requirement that the goods were free from defects as well as not fit
for the purpose for which they were
commonly supplied.
my view it must follow that if the goods are not reasonably fit for purpose
under s.74B of the TPA they cannot be of acceptable
quality under
ACL, and are not reasonably fit for purpose under
of the ACL.
is no dispute that Ipstar knew the purpose of the ODUs and IDUs supplied to the
consumer. Ipstar did not dispute that an ODU
which had suffered water ingress
was not fit for purpose and not of merchantable quality or acceptable
real dispute in this case seemed to centre on whether SkyMesh had established
that the equipment the subject of the 4000 claims
was, when purchased, in fact
not fit for the purpose intended.
question of what it is in this case that is said to be unfit for purpose (or
unmerchantable) caused some controversy. Mr Williams
emphasised that the
equipment was sold as a kit and the failures occurred at the latest within a few
years of purchase, well within
the expected life of the equipment. If the ODU
was not working the kit was not working and was not fit for purpose. The same
if it was the modem that was not working. Mr Donaldson pointed out that
if the ODU was defective that did not mean the modem was
defective. If the ODU
is defective the kit is not fit for purpose but it does not follow that the
modem is defective. In none of
the claims was a customer seeking to return the
entire kit because the ODU or the modem or both were not functioning. What the
required was to be able to log into the internet. The point may have
some significance where the UT is not working and it is not
clear whether it is
the modem or the ODU which is the cause. The technician is required to ensure
that the UT is working not merely
a part of it.
scale of the problem of water damaged ODUs can be demonstrated by the fact
(1) Ipstar paid
out to SkyBridge a total of $2.9 million in claims for water ingress failures of
the ODUs: T295-T296. That amount
includes payment for some of the units that
ended up with SkyMesh customers. Ipstar paid in the order of $3 million to APN,
received its equipment directly from Ipstar, in respect of water damaged
ODUs: see T292.
(2) Ipstar had
a policy as between itself and SkyBridge and APN that all ODUs that were removed
from customers’ premises due
to a concern that they had been damaged by
the ingress of water had to be returned to Ipstar who would then forward the ODU
in Thailand for testing. Thaicom used a company called Antech to test
the ODUs. In the period of October 2009 and November 2012 Ipstar
received some
9485 ODUs thought to be water damaged. Mr Chinveeraphan told Mr Rees, that based
on the statistics he got from Thaicom
“for every 100 ODUs shipped back for
water ingress testing 72% confirmed leaking, 8% ODU failure, 18% no fault
see Exhibit D3/1962. The failure rate for water ingress represented
12% of the total numbers of ODUs deployed by Ipstar in Australia:
D3/1860. The
units which did not fail the leak test but did fail the other tests had defects
in the LNC and BUC components of the
ODU: see T413 and Exhibit D3/ 1873-1876,
1926, 1944, and 1196.
(3) There were
by 2010 some 65,000 Patriot ODUs in the fleet (T303.15-50). There were 27360
units deployed in 2008 of which 3772 had
failed due to water ingress (Exhibit
D3/1862). This equates to 12% of the total fleet but there were estimated to be
likely to be
failures totalling, for example, 36% of the 2008 stock:
T374.21-375.4. There was some dispute between the parties as to whether the
65,000 were all first generation Patriots or not. Exhibit D3/1562 does not give
any detail as to that. What is known is that new
Patriots were first introduced
in Australia in March 2009: Exhibit D3/1708 but Mr Leeflang accepted that old
style Patriots appear
to have been sold as late as January 2011:
T511.21-31.
(4) Ipstar also
set up a field audit to attempt to assess the problem: see Exhibit D3/1864.
According to that audit 29 out of 50 sites
had water ingress problems with
equipment Exhibit D3/1889.
arranged a forum of ISPs and SkyBridge to discuss the problem (in February
2010)- see Exhibit D3/1558-1605.
Wonish’s evidence was that Ipstar ODUs regularly suffered from water
ingress problems that would cause them to fail often
after heavy rain: para 21
Exhibit D10/6366; he estimated that 50% of the calls related to water damage in
the ODUs: T211.15-22.
Burns’ evidence at Exhibit D6/3510 is that the Patriot ODU was not of
acceptable quality because:
(a) the two
piece Patriot OMT had a design which, based on his experience, could allow water
and moisture to enter the RxTx (send
and transmit) feed assembly and,
original plastic feed horn cover appeared to deteriorate when exposed to the
elements to the point that it allows water to
enter the front of the feed
(8) Ipstar’s
own document records:
“Investigations by IPA [Ipstar] Thaicom and the
manufacturers, Patriot, found that it [water ingress problems] was due to the
OMT:” see Exhibit D6/3510
(9) Ipstar regarded the failure rate of the Patriot ODUs as unacceptable and Mr
Leeflang told Mr Chinveeraphan who was aware of the
problem: T285-T286,
T306.48-T307.17. The rate of failure was not acceptable to Ipstar: T359.39.
(10) It was the complaints by service providers that led to the February 2010
forum (see T302.29) and later Ipstar entered into a
memorandum of understanding
”) with APN and SkyBridge.
(11) Mr Leeflang accepted that low signal level, log offs and ‘hang’
were symptoms of ODU water ingress and would render
the equipment not fit for
purpose: T312-T313 and see T278-9.
(12) Even the second and third generation Patriots had water ingress: see
T315-317, T386 and T389-394.6 and see Exhibit G and Ravens
made by a different
manufacturer as the replacement for the Patriots also had problems: see T399,
and Exhibit L.
(13) Evidence of oxidation in the ODU was, contrary to the suggestion in some
Ipstar documentation, evidence of a water ingress problem:
(14) Even in 2015 Mr Kevin Johns an operational assistant was spending three to
four days a week between January 2015 and January
2016 testing the IDUs and ODUs
that were perceived to be faulty: T577. The ODUs included Ravens as well as
(15) Ipstar developed what is described as a proactive replacement program for
first generation Patriot ODUs although it was limited
to APN: T344.45. Under the
MOU with APN there was some 6000 ODUs to be made available as buffer stock:
(16) Ipstar terminated supply from the Patriots’ manufacturer and switched
Johns recorded the results of testing: T577 and Thaicom did an analysis of the
received Patriots T310.45. The test results for
the ODUs and IDUs were not put
in evidence by Ipstar. Tests performed by Thaicom on later generation ODUs were
not in evidence: see
have referred to testing of ODUs in Thailand by Antech. The experts retained by
SkyMesh and Ipstar respectively, Mr Burns and Dr
Hamilton, were agreed that the
testing performed by Antech was not adequate to detect all the water ingress
problems because the
tests would not detect water ingress through the feed horn
cover seal or the joint connecting the feed horn to the rest of the ODU
and because the focus was on the OMT and its interface with the BUC and the LNB
and not the ODU generally see Exhibit
at 25915.51 and see T657.21-658.12 and
scale of the modem problem can be demonstrated by:
(1) The fact
that Ipstar had put up to 10% of its customers as at February 2010 on a service
Special Class of Service (“SCOS”)
: see Exhibit
D3/1647-1649 and T363.40-43 (Mr Leeflang) SCOS is a very wide bandwidth which
when utilised is far easier to access
than the normal broadband service. It is
costly for Ipstar to use SCOS for that purpose.
February 2010 forum was arranged to discuss that problem as well.
(3) That even
to this day the problem has not been solved: Mr Cross the director of sales of
Ipstar: T542.10-25
Q. Without placing these customers on these
special class of service the modem firmware wouldn't operate in the manner in
which IPSTAR
expected it to; would it?
Q. The special class of service was seen to be an interim solution whilst
the problem was sought to be remedied; wasn't it?
Q. I hadn't been remedied by, at least, January 2011; had it?
Q. Indeed it still hasn't been remedied; has it?
A. To my awareness it has not.
(4) Ipstar, in its follow up to the February 2010 forum (dated 16 April 2010),
indicated interim responses to the problem but under
the heading Long Term
Implementation Plan said:
“The latest releases of UT firmware for both M2/M3
(image version SG029) and M4 (image version 075) versions aim to be the
fixes to the UT hanging problem.
The benefits
• To fix the root cause of UT Software hang
•To improve efficiency of satellite bandwidth
utilization by removing UT from SCOS pool
•To fix known operational constraints of the current UT
firmware in the field” (p.1638)
The document notes that amongst APN customers the percentage having more than
five per day drop outs decreased from 32% to 3% (see
(5) Mr Wonish’s evidence was that in his experience the Ipstar white
modems with external power supply failed regularly (Exhibit
(6) Ipstar organised 4000 modems to deal with the demand and which required
replenishment T349-T350 and T373.22-36; buffer stock
ran out very quickly with
customers being left without replacement terminals: T331-332.
(7) The following admissions in the cross-examination of Mr Leeflang
T278.29-T279.20:
“Q. The purpose of the user terminal was to enable the consumer to have
stable access to the internet, wasn't it?
A. The user terminal being the modem? Is that what you're asking?
Q. The product that you were providing
Q. that you described as the user terminal
A. Okay, so the complete kit?
Q. The complete kit?
Q. --had at its purpose to enable the consumer to have stable access to the
internet, didn't it?
A. That was the design, yes.
Q. That was its purpose?
Q. You would accept, wouldn't you, that a user terminal that didn't permit
stable access to the internet would not be a product which
you would wish to put
into the market?
A. That would be correct, yes.
Q. And you wouldn't wish to put into the market a kit that only enabled
intermittent access to the internet, would you?
A. That is correct, yes.
Q. You wouldn't want to put into the market a kit that permitted internet access
but with frequent dropouts?
A. That is correct, yes.
Q. Because you accept, don't you, that stable access to the internet doesn't
involve dropouts occurring?
A. That is right, yes.
Q. This product was designed and its purpose was to allow consumers to connect
to the internet without dropping out?
A. Yes, that is right.”
and see Dr Hamilton’s evidence at T657.8-18.
(8) Mr Burns said (see Exhibit D6/3514):
“My principal concern with the M4 series (iCON)
devices was the number of dropouts the IDU experiences. Reconfiguration of
worst affected customers to a Special Class of Service (SCOS) as an
interim "work around" measure as proposed by IPA is, in my view,
recognition by
IPA of the seriousness of the issue. In my experience, VSAT terminal
dropouts are rare and usually only occur during
extreme rain conditions or
when the satellite passes between the sun and the terminal or central
earth station. Furthermore, the
relatively high number of dropouts allegedly
experienced, the release of multiple firmware upgrades that were intended
this issue and comments in the exchange of emails between
Malai Perumal (IPA) and Kear Stephens (SkyMesh) suggests that the
problem is either not fully understood by IPA or difficult to
(9) The summary of modem problems annexed to Mr Burns’ affidavit as
Annexure C.
(10) The firmware was part of the problem of drop outs: T304.40,
T305.45-T306.15.
(11) Mr Burns’ evidence was that although the modem in other respects
appeared to be well made equipment he regarded the number
of drop outs as of
concern and regarded the SCOS interim work around implemented as recognition by
Ipstar of the seriousness of the
issue. In his experience VSAT terminal drop
outs are rare: Exhibit D6/3514. Mr Burns said that fundamental firmware
deficiencies
in a mass produced product should have been positively resolved
before release to the public or shortly thereafter. Given Mr Cross’s
evidence it would seem more likely that the problem is one which is difficult to
(12) The evidence of Mr Johns is relevant here too: T577.
shall now deal with the three levels of the SkyMesh case in connection with
s.74H of the TPA and s.254 of the ACL.
The Prone to Failure
“prone to failure case” is based on the ODU water ingress problem
and the modem drop out problem.
first way in which SkyMesh puts its case is based on
. A number of
patients who had the Medtel pacemaker fitted had found their pacemakers to be
defective. The defect was that yellow
solder had been used in the product which
had a tendency to develop dendritic connections which, when present, would cause
the pacemaker
to fail. The applicant, in what was a class action, had had his
Medtel pacemaker removed out of concern about the identified dendritic
but on removal his pacemaker was not found to have a dendritic condition and it
was functioning normally. The Trial Judge
held nevertheless that the pacemaker
supplied to Mr Courtney was not of merchantable quality by reason of the risk of
failure arising
from the presence of the yellow solder. An appeal to the Full
Court was unsuccessful.
Williams contends that the kit that was manufactured by Ipstar was not fit for
purpose because it was prone to failure- i.e. because
the ODU used by Ipstar had
an unacceptably high risk of failure due to water damage, and the modem had an
unacceptably high risk
of dropout.
Donaldson disputes that
has any relevance to the present
principle judgment in the Full Court was that of Branson J (with whom Jacobson J
agreed). SkyMesh relies on the following passages:
[58] Before turning to that question, it is important to note that the parties
accept that s74D(1) is concerned with the quality
of the particular goods, or
product, supplied to the consumer who seeks to recover compensation under the
section. That is, so far
as Mr Courtney's individual claim is concerned, the
quality of the particular pacemaker supplied to Mr Courtney. It follows, in my
view, that for the purposes of the subsection, it is not appropriate to
attribute to Mr Courtney's pacemaker any qualities derived
by statistical
analysis of the total population, or pool, of pacemakers from which Mr
Courtney's pacemaker came. So, for example,
while statistical analysis of the
total population of pacemakers from which Mr Courtney's pacemaker came might
show that pacemakers
of that type have a 2 per cent chance of premature failure,
that analysis would reveal nothing about the quality of Mr Courtney's
[59] So far as Mr Courtney's pacemaker is concerned it is not suggested that it
was known, or could have been known, at the time
that it was supplied to him
that it was unmerchantable. On the information then available there was no
reason for either the appellant
or Mr Courtney to suspect that it was other than
fit for its intended purpose, which was the purpose for which pacemakers are
bought. That purpose, as the primary judge found at [202], was the
purpose of being implanted into a patient on the advice of a medical
practitioner so as to restore and maintain a normal heart beat by providing an
electrical impulse carried through leads to the heart.
[74] I reject the argument that the mere fact that it was known at the time of
trial that Mr Courtney's pacemaker had not failed
prematurely meant that it
could not be demonstrated that Mr Courtney's pacemaker was not of merchantable
quality within the meaning
of s74D at the time of its supply to Mr Courtney.
[78] In my view, having regard to the evidence before the primary judge (see
[59] above), no error can be shown to have been involved
in his Honour's
conclusion that a pacemaker that has only the ordinary or usual risk of
premature failure is more fit for the purpose
of being used as a pacemaker than
a pacemaker that has, by reason of the method of its manufacture, an appreciably
higher risk of
premature failure. In this case it was reasonable to expect, at
the time of the supply to Mr Courtney of his pacemaker, that Mr Courtney's
pacemaker had been manufactured in a way which gave rise to only the ordinary or
usual risk of premature failure. However, the use
of yellow spool solder in the
manufacture of Mr Courtney's pacemaker meant that Mr Courtney's pacemaker had an
appreciably higher
risk of premature failure than the ordinary or usual risk of
premature failure to be expected in pacemakers.
[79] The above analysis has deliberately been undertaken without reference to
the existence or otherwise of dendritic growth in Mr
Courtney's pacemaker. What,
in my view, made Mr Courtney's pacemaker, at the time that it was supplied to
him, less fit for use as
a pacemaker than it was reasonable in the circumstances
to expect was its method of manufacture (ie that it was manufactured with
spool solder). It was that method of manufacture which created, because of the
white residue, the 'superadded' risk of dendritic
growth. While proof of actual
dendritic growth in Mr Courtney's pacemaker at the time of its supply to him
would have constituted
proof that the pacemaker was not of merchantable quality
within the meaning of s74D, absence of proof of actual dendritic growth
time did not logically lead to the contrary finding.
third member of the Court, Moore J had the same view and held too that the goods
were not fit for purpose saying:
[41] That question can, in the first instance, be addressed by reference to the
facts as found by the primary judge. The condition
of Mr Courtney's pacemaker at
the time of supply and acquisition had several features. It had been
manufactured using yellow spool
solder. It had been manufactured approximately
nine months earlier. Because it had been manufactured using yellow spool solder
contained a white residue which might have trapped (or possibly been a source
of) ionic contamination. It contained moisture and
an electrical bias. While no
finding was made that it then had dendritic growth, the conditions existed for
such growth to have by
then commenced. If dendritic growth had by then
commenced, premature failure by battery depletion would be likely to occur. Was
pacemaker in that condition fit for the purpose for which pacemakers were
bought? In my opinion it was not, essentially for the reasons
given by the
primary judge. Because of its physical condition having regard to how it was
manufactured, there was a real prospect
it would fail prematurely, and the risk
of it doing so was greater than might otherwise have been expected. That being
not fit for the purpose or purposes for which goods of that kind are
commonly bought.
was considered in
Protec Pacific Pty Ltd v Steuler Services GmbH & Co
[2014] VSCA 338.
Mr Donaldson pointed out, in
it was accepted that proving that
Product A has a statistically high rate of failure does not establish that any
particular example
of Product A is not fit for the purpose intended. There is no
question that a 12% or 20% failure rate in a product is a very high
unacceptable level of failure (Ipstar was hoping for less than 1% failure rate
and Mr Paul Burns thought anything above 5% was
unacceptable: see Exhibit
D6/3518) but the prospect of any particular item randomly selected from the
batch failing is not higher
than a 12% or 20%- thus without more one cannot
conclude on the balance of probabilities that the randomly selected item is
to fail. The reason that Mr Courtney’s pacemaker was not fit for
the purpose was because it had been made with yellow solder
and the yellow
solder was prone to create dendritic conditions which would cause the item to
fail. One of the possible causes of
failure of the Patriots identified by Mr
Burns was that the screws of the outer assembly of the ODU had been over
tightened. If an
ODU had such over tightened screws that would render it prone
to failure even if its defect was not recognised and water had not
yet entered
present is not a case where the ODUs were removed even without any failure
having occurred because there was a concern that they
might in the future cease
functioning- nor was there a general recall (although SkyMesh sought to have
Ipstar embark on such a recall).
On the other hand unlike
a case where the equipment was not working- that is why the SkyBridge
technicians went out to the premises of the equipment
is clear that sometime in 2009 Ipstar started to sell modified Patriots. An
example of a modified Patriot alongside an earlier
version can be seen at
Exhibit D3/1572 In some documents reference is made to first, second and third
generation Patriots although
Mr Leeflang raised doubt (see T389-390) as to the
precision of these terms. It appears that the third generation Patriots are
that commenced arriving in or after March 2009 and an example of which is
on the right in Exhibit D3/1572. I have mentioned the dispute
as to whether the
65,000 figure for the ODUs as at February 2010 was only for first generation
Patriots. There is sometimes clarity
as to which generation Patriot was removed
at a particular site but more generally it is not clear unless the removal
predates March
the Victorian Court of Appeal pointed out in
at [528] it must be
established that the product carries the inherent risk alleged .
claims that the second and third generation Patriots and the Ravens were also
prone to failure at an abnormally high rate
but it is not possible to determine
what that rate was. SkyMesh also draws attention to the fact that whilst it
appears that Ipstar
and its parent company conducted tests in respect of second
and third generation Patriots and on Ravens the Court should have regard
failure of Ipstar to adduce evidence that the rate of failure of these later
addition ODUs was not abnormally high relying
on the principles outlined in
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
(1774) 98 ER 969
, adopted by the High
Hampton Court Ltd v Crooks
[1957] HCA 28
(1957) 97 CLR 367
that Ipstar does not dispute that first generation Patriots did suffer from an
abnormally high rate of failure and that it accepts
that water damaged ODUs are
claimable (subject to the threshold arguments) the only work that the prone to
failure case needs to
do in the context of ODUs is provide a reason for removal
of ODUs that SkyMesh is unable to establish were water damaged. For reasons
which I shall explain below I do not think that SkyMesh has to establish the
reason why it was that ODUs that were not apparently
water damaged were not
functioning and therefore I do not think it is necessary to determine whether
SkyMesh can establish that all
of the ODUs sold were prone to failure in the
relation to modems I am satisfied on the evidence that Ipstar modems were prone
to the dropout problem due to firmware. In my view
it is more probable than not
that when SkyBridge technicians replaced modems that were not functioning but in
which no specific defect
had been identified they did so because they were aware
that Ipstar modems were prone to failure and that a new modem might solve
problem. This perception was demonstrated to be correct: see Mr Burns’
evidence at T656.4-34. I say shall more about this
Ipstar Kit Not Functioning
second level of the SkyMesh case is to rely on the fact that the Ipstar
equipment was not working in all of the 102 Items. SkyMesh
contends that it does
not have to establish why the ODU or modem was not working simply that it was
not functioning and was in fact
from six of the Representative Items, Ipstar does not dispute that the modem or
ODU or both were not functioning leading to
the call out of SkyBridge and
removal and replacement of the ODU, modem or both.
response to ‘the kit not working’ claims was that:
(a) the only
claims which SkyMesh can maintain were claims based on water ingress or modem
drop out. I shall refer to this as “
the pleading issue
(b) the mere
fact that a modem or ODU was not working did not establish that it was not fit
for purpose or not of merchantable quality.
I shall refer to this as
the sleeping cat issue
(c) in relation
to modems it ought not be inferred that the reason for replacement of modems was
firmware because a new modem with
the same firmware would not solve the problems
the same firmware point
(d) Ipstar put
many satellite subscribers including customers of SkyMesh on SCOS (“
”), and so far as the customers were concerned the modems
were working as expected.
is authority for the proposition that a purchaser is not required, for the
purpose of establishing unfitness for purpose, to
establish why it is that the
product is not functioning:
Emery v Johns Period Furniture
[1989] SASC
Bollen J and
Thomas v Foreshore Marine Exhaust Systems Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 451
and it has been said that the duty to supply
satisfactory goods is strict: see Benjamin’s
Sale of Goods
edition 2014 Sweet and Maxwell) at 11-043 and see
p.4. On the other
hand the mere fact that a modem, for example, was not working and was the
subject of a service call does not lead,
without more, to the conclusion that it
was not fit for purpose and not of merchantable quality. The reason that is so
is because:
equipment after purchase may have been damaged by some extraneous causes or not
used in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications,
equipment may not have been working because of a defect in other related
equipment not sold by the seller,
equipment may be the subject of a temporary minor fault which can be easily
rectified (by pressing a reset button for example),
(d) the period
of time after which failure may have occurred may be beyond the reasonable
service life expectation.
the ODU is a first generation Patriot the plaintiff must establish on the
balance of probabilities that the cause of the non-functioning
is a cause which
rendered the ODU or modem to be unfit for purpose and or not of merchantable
quality. If the cause identified is
water ingress in the ODU Ipstar accepts that
the product was not fit for purpose. Approximately half of the 102 samples
removal of the ODUs proven, or likely to be, water damaged and they are
claims which SkyMesh has made out.
The Pleading Issue
Donaldson submits that SkyMesh’s case was, on its pleadings, confined to
the water ingress allegation in respect of the ODUs
and the drop out problem in
respect of the modems. If the ODUs were replaced because the BUC or LNB was not
working or the modem
was replaced because the power supply unit had failed then,
he submits, it is not open to SkyMesh to advance the claim even if otherwise
goods can be characterised as not fit for purpose or not of merchantable
Williams contended that SkyMesh’s pleadings should not be read as so
set out the pleadings in para [9] of the Commercial List
9. Statutory claims: Fitness for purpose
9.1 Prior to 1 January 2011, IPSTAR supplied goods to SkyMesh (through its agent
Skybridge (Australia) Pty Ltd) which were resupplied
to consumers, and which
were not reasonably fit for the purpose of obtaining internet broadband services
by satellite within the
meaning of S.74B of the TPA.
PARTICULARS
The goods supplied prior to 1 January 2011 which were unfit for purpose are
particularized in Updated Consolidated Schedule AB
and Schedule D hereto.
The purpose of the goods (which incorporate an IDU and an ODU) is to enable
broadband satellite services in remote areas in Australia
which can withstand
fair wear and tear in the outdoors.
The ODUs were not fit for such purpose in that they were not watertight so that
water Ingress occurred, causing the ODUs to be damaged.
Water leaked past faulty
seals around the feed horn cap of the ODU causing the feed horn to be partially
filled with water degrading
the unit's performance. Water also leaked into the
Orthomode Transducer (OMT), a part of the ODU, causing severe degradation to the
performance of the ODU as well as complete failure. In some cases, the water
entering the ODU also leaked down the cables to the
IDU causing complete failure
of the IDU.
Modem firmware, the software which facilitates the modem operating and
communicating with the network, had,a bug, causing intermittent
loss of service
(dropouts), which was only partially resolved when consumers were placed onto a
Special Class of Service or SCOS
(an alternative system). Drop outs are still
being experienced till this day.
pleadings by themselves are broad enough to cover the claims for defective ODUs
that were not defective because of water ingress
and defective modems that were
not defective because of a firmware bug causing dropout. The addition of the
particulars identifying
water ingress and firmware does however narrow the scope
of the case.
Williams however pointed out the following further matters in reply to the
pleading point at PCS 213-227:
opened the case widely making it clear that SkyMesh was claiming that its claim
for defective goods was not limited to
water ingress or dropout.
(2) Ipstar by
the Statement of Real Issues for Determination put the issues in dispute
relevantly as:
“Whether the plaintiff has discharged its onus of
proving, on the balance of probabilities, that any of the items of equipment
identified, in the schedules to the Third Further Amended Commercial List
Statement, as having been replaced were either:
a. unfit for the purpose for which they were supplied within
the meaning of s.74B of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
b. not of merchantable quality within the meaning of section
74D the TPA; or
c. not in conformity with the guarantee as to acceptable
quality provided in
of Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer
(Australian Consumer Law) (
and if so which such items?”
There is no reference to water ingress or modem drop out
and the reference to the schedules is not limited.
(3) Ipstar, through Mr Leeflang, considered the claims in Schedule A,B and D to
the SkyMesh claim and sorted them into 25 different
categories (see Leeflang
Affidavit 4 March 2016 paras 12-13 and T280.27-282.32).
(4) Ipstar has admitted claims that related to ODUs that were not water ingress
claims and modems that were not drop out claims see
Exhibit K and Exhibit M
summarised at PCS 219-220 and including “dead modems” PCS 220.
(5) Ipstar admitted 18 claims for dead modems (see Exhibit K and M) and DLA
Piper on behalf of Ipstar admitted claims that were not
limited to water ingress
or drop out.
(6) The expert report of Mr Burns was not limited to water ingress and modem
(7) The experts when originally briefed to provide a report (Exhibit
asked by the parties a question which was not constrained by any pleading
limitation and which included for example questions
adequacy and defects: see Exhibit Q.
(8) The Amended Commercial Response of Ipstar responded to the Schedule A,B and
D: see Exhibit D1/9.
(9) SkyMesh’s Reply pleaded that it was not necessary to establish why the
goods were not working Exhibit D1/18.
Donaldson’s riposte to these points (see: T716.35-717.14) was to rely on
the fact that he had agreed to the sampling method,
and that what had gone
before did not matter because he had at the time of discussion of sampling (see
T173-174) made clear that
Ipstar did not accept claims for defects that went
beyond water ingress and modem drop out.
accept that by agreeing to the sample method Mr Donaldson did not give up his
contention that SkyMesh should be constrained by the
pleadings. What I am unable
to accept is that by agreeing to the sample method Ipstar’s position
improved. In other words the
issue of whether SkyMesh was precluded from
maintaining a case in respect of defects other than the water ingress or modem
applied equally to the 4000 claims as to the 102 samples. If SkyMesh
could not maintain claims for such defective goods they were
precluded whether
or not the Court was examining 4000 claims or 102 claims. If SkyMesh was not
precluded from running those claims
out of the 4000 that were not water ingress
ODUs or dropout affected modems then it was not precluded from running those of
samples which were allegedly defective for other reasons.
and particulars are important but as the High Court pointed out in
(1982) 148 CLR 658
[1982] HCA 70
the pleadings and particulars can
lag behind the evidence. If I thought that Ipstar had been caught by surprise by
the inclusion
of the claims for defective goods that were not water ingress or
drop out cases I would exclude from consideration any such claims
but by reason
of the matters set out at [92] I am satisfied that Ipstar was fully aware that
SkyMesh’s claims were not limited
to water ingress and modem drop out and
had been since at least 2013. SkyMesh is not precluded from maintaining claims
for ODUs and
modems that were not affected by water ingress or modem drop
The Sleeping Cat Issue
Donaldson draws attention to the evidence of Dr Hamilton that there are many
reasons why a modem may fail that do not mean that
there was any defect inherent
in the modem itself. A modem can be damaged for example by water or coffee being
spilt on it, by a
chair rolling over it, by a cat sleeping on it (and I assume
blocking the air vents and preventing proper ventilation). The Court,
submitted, cannot infer from the mere fact of failure sometime after
commissioning, that the product was inherently defective.
I have made reference
to this aspect in [86] above.
experts in their second joint report identified the probable causes of failure
as one or more of the following:
“Defects evident in the 102 claims in the sample set and their probable
cause are as follows:
1. Water entering the ODU due to ineffective
sealing of the waveguide assembly.
2. Lack of or poor quality received signals
output from the ODU due to failure of the LNB.
3. Erratic and/or fluctuations of ALOHA
signals transmitted from the ODU due to failure of the BUC.
4. No power available in the UT due to
failure of the Power Supply Unit (PSU).
5. Inability to process receive and/or
transmit signals due to a hardware failure in the modem.
6. Inability to process receive and/or
transmit signals due to a firmware/software failure in the modem.
7. Loss of Tx and Rx signals due to faulty
cabling and
connectors.”
Williams offered a number of responses to this line of argument:
experts, conscious of the possibility that there could be extraneous causes,
found no evidence of such other causes in the
technicians notes.
Burns’ evidence was that one would expect components of the type of ODU
and modem to last between five to seven years
for ODUs and seven to ten years
for modems see Exhibit D6/3508. There was no suggestion that any of the goods
were more than four
years old when they failed and no suggestion that age was
the factor in any event.
(3) Mr Wonish
the only SkyBridge technician to give evidence was not cross examined at
(4) There is no
evidence of any extraneous causes. Dr Hamilton in his schedule had not
identified as a cause of failure of the 102
Representative Items any of the
theoretical causes: T657. Dr Hamilton and Mr Burns agreed that categories 1-6
set out in [97] above
were Ipstar equipment defects: T640.14-27 and see
T644.15-T645.36. Only three items were associated with cabling or connectors-
43,45 and 46, and these were all admitted ODU failures- see Exhibit U and
(5) There is
much evidence, in the documentation, of known modem firmware and ODU problems
recognised by Ipstar itself.
(6) There is
evidence that Ipstar itself arranged for a significant quantity of ODU and modem
buffer stock, to deal with demand for
replacement modems and ODUs.
evidence of Mr Leeflang, Mr Johns and Mr Laosawatchai and Mr Nzeukeu who gave
evidence on behalf of Ipstar needs to be taken
into account in assessing whether
on the balance of probabilities, the modems were suffering from an inherent
defect and whether
ODUs were experiencing water ingress and other problems.
(8) The fact
that when the technicians replaced an ODU or modem with a new ODU or modem the
Ipstar equipment worked.
The Same Firmware
Donaldson contended that it did not make sense to replace a customer’s
modem with a new modem if the new modem had the same
firmware as the old modem.
There are several matters to be taken into account however and these
following exchange between myself and Mr Burns (who gave his evidence
concurrently with Dr Hamilton) T654.46-T655:
HIS HONOUR: Well the question is and I might be partly
responsible for this in the sense that I think I raised a question about this
some time ago with one of the other witnesses, if a modem has a firmware problem
assuming that there's been yet no upgrading firmware
to solve that firmware
problem what is the point of replacing one modem with a new modem that has the
same firmware?
WITNESS BURNS: If that is what is happening probably no point at all, your
HIS HONOUR: Yet the technicians were finding problems with modems or saying
they'd found problems and replacing the modem and when
they - in some instances
when they put in the new modem things worked.
WITNESS BURNS: I could also probably explain why that might happen. There is a -
all the UT units are not identical in performance
in a hardware sense. There's a
tolerance in variation between one user terminal and another and it's possible
that one user terminal
because of those variations in tolerance is in that
particular unit work better with the ODU that's in the particular site and it
works properly, whereas the other modem because of its adverse tolerance
component it doesn't work quite the same.
HIS HONOUR: You mean if there was no ODU problem it wouldn't matter?
WITNESS BURNS: It wouldn't - if the ODU was okay one modem might work with it
while another one may not.
HIS HONOUR: And if the ODU is not okay?
WITNESS BURNS: Well neither of them will—
HIS HONOUR: Neither are going to work. All right.
DONALDSON: In any event where you've formed the view that - and I think you've
expressed it in this way - the identified problem
was consistent with the
firmware dropout problem you've said so in your report, haven't you?
WITNESS BURNS: I said and I think it was consistent - there's only a small
number but I have said it.
(2) and at T655.46-T656.34:
WITNESS BURNS: This is a very difficult issue because
the firmware and the hardware once they get they interact together, they're
things you can separate out, they work together as a combined pair and each of
them if there's a problem in the hardware or the
hardware is a little different
the software may behave differently. So it's very, very difficult without doing
lots of testing to
actually work out whether it's a pure software problem, a
pure hardware problem or a problem involving the two of them, if that makes
HIS HONOUR: All right, well is that why a technician might think looks it's just
not worth trying to spend hours on this, I'm going
to replace both?
WITNESS BURNS: He might he's got a limited time I haven't got the tools to look
inside the modem to see what's actually going on
so I'll take it out and try a
new one. If that one works I'm happy and I'll leave the site. That's what I
sense is happening when
I read these job sheets.
HIS HONOUR: And when you hear that and you hear that he changed the modem and it
then worked does that make it less likely to be
a firmware problem or is it less
likely to be a firmware problem of the hanging type of which we've heard some
WITNESS BURNS: I would be unable to draw any real conclusion as to what the
actual fault would be until I got that unit back to the
lab and tested it
properly. It's very hard to do. It's a very intricate the two work together hand
in hand and separating out the
two is very, very difficult without the right
HIS HONOUR: And with the right tools in a laboratory can one precisely
WITNESS BURNS: You should be able to work out in the laboratory by going through
a systematic process where the potential issues
might be, yes.
HIS HONOUR: And could it be, for example, in the capacitor or something like
WITNESS BURNS: It could be that the receive signal isn't being amplified enough
there for the -the receiver isn't able to decode
the information correctly or it
might well be that there is actually a software resetting issue. It's very hard
to find, your Honour.
(3) There is no clear evidence that modems which were exchanged had exactly the
same firmware as the existing modems- there are several
iterations of the
firmware: see Attachment C to Mr Burns’ affidavit.
(4) The fact that the newly installed modem worked with the rest of the Ipstar
kit enabling the SkyBridge technician and the customer
to sign off is evidence
that whatever problem existed in the old modem was not a problem in the new. If
it was a firmware problem
the new modem, adopting Mr Burns’ explanation,
was operating within the required tolerances.
‘solution’ for some customers was to put them on SCOS which was
described by Mr Leeflang (the operations
director of Ipstar) as a work around
(see T339.4) and an expensive one at that for Ipstar: T336.16 and see T362.10-
T364 when he
agreed that the number of Ipstar users on SCOS was a very
significant proportion (T363.15), and see Exhibit D3/1648-1649.
do not accept that because Ipstar put some customers on SCOS that establishes
that the modems were fit for purpose- they did not
work with the equipment and
system as intended and had Ipstar sued the actual manufacturer of the modem the
actual manufacturer could
not have successfully contended the modems were fit
for purpose because Ipstar, at its cost, was permitting customers to use the
special bandwidth. Customers of SkyMesh were vulnerable to a change of mind by
Ipstar- i.e. to be removed from SCOS, whereupon the
modems would not function.
Recourse to SCOS was an implicit recognition that the modem could not do the
task for which it was intended.
Another problem with Ipstar’s argument is
that it would have to establish in which of the 4000 claims the customer was
SCOS- of the 102 samples only three were shown to be on SCOS and the fact
that the customer was still in need of a service call undermines
contention even further.
Conclusion on Defective Goods Claim
based on Non-Functioning
do not find
Henville v Walker
(2001) 206 CLR 459
[2001] HCA 52
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158
at p.159-160 per Dixon CJ, and
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
at p. 164 per Windeyer J, relied on by
SkyMesh, of any assistance here. Nor is
Christopher Hill Ltd
Ashington Piggeries Ltd
[1972] AC 441
relevant- that was a case in which the
toxic effect of a feed product was limited to the livestock for which the
plaintiff had purchased
the feed. The seller had the burden of establishing that
the toxic effect was due to something for which the purchaser was responsible:
per Lord Wilberforce at pp.492-493.
is clear that in a number of the 102 Representative Items the experts identified
(based on the technicians’ notes) a cause
for the equipment not working
which was neither water ingress in the ODU not modem failure due to the hanging
problem. There are,
for example, several cases where the modem had a power
supply problem. Because the power supply is supplied with the modem the
swapped the old modem and old power supply unit with a new modem and
new power supply unit.
my view the evidence provides a sufficient basis for the conclusion that it is
more likely than not that the modems which were
replaced were replaced because
the modem was not working due to an inherent defect in it or its power supply
rather than damage caused
by factors extraneous to the equipment supplied by
Ipstar. I frame it this way because a modem may have difficulty communicating
with a water damaged ODU and the view of the technician or his supervisor was,
on occasions, that both should be replaced to solve
the problem, which view
proved to have been justified. Ipstar itself when dealing with its own retail
customers regarded it as appropriate
to send out replacement modems when the
customer’s modem had a problem according to Mr Leeflang’s evidence:
T500.26-501.24.
relation to ODUs there is no dispute that ODUs with evidence of water ingress
were not fit for purpose/ not merchantable but there
were known problems with
the ODUs that did not arise from water ingress or, at least, may not have arisen
from water ingress. In
my view the evidence supports the conclusion that if the
ODU was not functioning it was more likely than not to be as a result of
ingress or some other inherent defect in the equipment.
matters addressed by Mr Williams and referred to in [98] above which I accept,
the evidence of the equipment not functioning,
together with the fact that the
customer had contacted the SkyMesh helpdesk with its attendant procedures and
then the SkyBridge
explanation, the fact that swapping out of the old equipment with new
solved the problem, the SkyBridge documentation and the extensive evidence of
problems with the ODUs and modems lead me
to conclude on the balance of
probabilities that in each case where equipment was supplied by Ipstar and found
to be not functioning
that was so because of an inherent fault in the equipment
supplied by Ipstar.
the equipment manufactured by Ipstar once installed did not permit the consumer
to contact Ipstar’s satellite for whatever
reason it was not fit for the
purpose of connecting with the satellite which is what it was designed to do. Mr
Leeflang agreed that
this was so: T286.41- T287.43, T312.4-T313.48. If the
problem could be fixed by a simple reset by the customer that would not of
itself indicate that the goods were not fit but it would become a question of
degree- how often was the failure and how quickly could
the equipment recover.
This is not a case which tests those sorts of boundaries because a simple reset
did not, and could not, cure
the problem and a technician had to be sent to the
consumer’s home or business premises. Water ingress in the ODU would
it from working properly. Even were it the case that an ODU could be
made to function again after the water had fully evaporated
(Mr Tudor thought it
could) an ODU into which water can penetrate is defective and not fit for
purpose since rain can disable it.
A kit with such an ODU is therefore defective
as well, and can only be rendered fit for purpose by replacement of the
defective ODU.
Similarly with the modems- a modem, the firmware of which causes
it to hang, freeze or drop out, is equally not fit for purpose until
firmware is upgraded to make it so. If the firmware upgrade needed is not
available the modem is not fit for purpose. A consumer
who has been provided
with a modem which drops out, hangs or freezes and which cannot be cured by a
procedure that can be utilised
by the consumer or by a technician with remote
access is not fit for purpose and a consumer is entitled to insist on its
replacement.
Even if remote fixes are available a recurrence of such problems
may well render the modem unfit for purpose but once again that
is not what
occurred here.
Mr Donaldson’s concession (see 3(d) of the submissions accompanying
Exhibit 2 responding to Exhibit U) in almost all of
the cases of items replaced
the functioning of those items was at the time of the service call
“impaired by defect” it
is not necessary to go into the detail of
the 102 Representative Items other than the six items identified by him
(paragraph 3(a)
of those submissions) and with which I deal below. It should be
noted however that almost half of the items were agreed by the experts
to probably be, claims arising out of the water ingress problems, one had
already been admitted as a modem firmware claim,
and a number of items 19,20,22,
37, 62, 63, 68, 70, 71, 77, 80, 83, 95,96,97,99 and 101 were not the subject of
comment in response
by Ipstar to Exhibit U. Further Ipstar admits that items 43,
45 and 46 are claimable even without proof of water damage.
I have noted there is agreement that the ODU or modem was not functioning due to
a defect and that “they were replaced in
the course of the relevant
service call” in all cases except item 1,11,17,24,69 and 75 (the six
anomalies). I therefore need
to deal with these items to determine whether
SkyMesh has established that the equipment replaced was not functioning due to
an inherent
defect in the Ipstar equipment. In considering this question, I have
regard not only to the experts’ views on the Representative
Items but also
the matters addressed in: [64], [66], [67], [97]-[101], [105]-[106] above. I do
not think it is necessary to say anymore
in relation to SkyMesh’s third
head of claim which is really an argument about onus of proof and which I have
addressed in
consideration of the first and second head of the
“Tech Support Call:1” document records:
“Water in ODU
Tech is changing ODU due to poor transmit results.” (Exhibit O1 Tab 1
The Tech notes (p.11685B) Tab1 Exhibit O1 record that no
fault was apparent on arrival to site but that the serviceman was instructed
Tech support to replace the ODUs, following the poor transmission result,
and that Ipstar ran a test for “Tx” (i.e.
transmit) on completion of
the replacement and advised that it was “ok”. I understand that Item
1 is one of the items
in which the precise cause of defect is disputed by Ipstar
but it does not appear to be an item in which the fact of a fault in the
in dispute. That comment also applies to Item 11, 17, 24 and 69.
Burns concluded that the ODU had water damage and that conclusion was at least
in part based on the note which I have set out above.
Dr Hamilton described the
fault as “potential ODU failure” and potential BUC issue and noted
that water ingress was suspected.
At T632 Dr Hamilton explained that he thought
it was an ODU failure and a BUC issue but was not prepared to say more than
potentially
so. Later he agreed in relation to his use of potential in respect
of the items he meant “it’s more probable than not”
not entirely certain: T636.34-44.1, T638.35-T639.13. Having regard to Mr
Burns’ explanation at T632-633 and Dr Hamilton
at T631-T632, I accept Mr
Burns’ view that the recording of “water in the ODU” is more
likely to have been a consequence
of the discussion between the technician on
site and Tech Support at the SkyBridge base. I do not think that the note is
as to what is recorded or that the note is affected by the further
considerations relevant in
Lithgow City Council v Jackson
(2011) 244 CLR
352 because unlike the ambulance officer’s query in relation to the cause
of the accident in that case, assessment
of the condition of the Ipstar
equipment was very much part of the role of the technician and the base
supervisor.
Burns noted that the ODU was faulty because both the LNB and BUC appeared to
have failed. Dr Hamilton thought it was an ODU problem-
potentially the BUC. Dr
Burns and Mr Hamilton thought both the ODU and modem had a problem but the ODU
problem was not established
as water damage and the modem was not established as
a firmware problem. Thus if water damage or firmware were required for recovery
this item would not be included but it is an item which has been shown on the
balance of probabilities to have been due to an inherent
was a first generation Patriot ODU with water ingress. There was a problem with
the modem too. It is appropriate to view the
problem as both ODU and modem
related (but not firmware), and SkyMesh are entitled to recover the costs
claimed because the ODU was
a first generation Patriot and prone to failure and
the modem was not functioning but the modem would not be recoverable if firmware
were required.
SkyBridge helpdesk advised that there was an “Rx issue No TOLL suspected
water ingress.” The decision was made to
replace the ODU but on site with
testing and the observation of “lots of drop outs” both modem and
ODU were replaced.
That does not exclude water ingress as a problem. Mr Burns
was not able to conclude that the problem with the ODU was water related
of the view that the modem problem was not firmware related. “No
TOLL” is a reference to the continuous signal
sent from the satellite hub
to all user terminals (T646). This item is recoverable because the ODU and modem
were not functioning
but would not be recoverable if water ingress or firmware
were required.
faulty ODU was suspected but Mr Burns thought it could be either the ODU or
modem as did Dr Hamilton. If it was the ODU there is
no evidence of water damage
and if it was the modem there is no evidence of a firmware problem. The item is
still claimable by SkyMesh
because it is defective, but it would not be
recoverable if water damage or firmware were required.
notes refer to a ‘F’ connector problem. What is charged for is the
service call and the replacement of the ODU and
the modem. The experts agreed
that there was a faulty Rx cable connector. There is no evidence of water
ingress or firmware issue.
I think Item 75 ( a total cost of $1341) should be
excluded from the claim as the experts did not agree that there was any problem
with the modem or the ODU and the technical notes do not assist to permit a
conclusion, on the balance of probabilities, that it
Conclusion on the Defective Goods Claim
has established an entitlement to an indemnity in respect of 101 of the 102
items. The amount of $ 1341.00 for item 75 should
be deducted. There will need
to be an adjustment for the amount already received from SkyBridge.
parties on 19 December 2016 sent up a note (which I have had marked as Exhibit
V) by which they agree that:
(1) the total
of SkyMesh’s claims is $2,292,819.63,
(2) the total
of the 102 Representative Claims is $56,130.85.
(3) $400,000 is
the agreed credit.
have found that the claim for Item 75 should be excluded i.e. an amount of
$1341. Thus the plaintiff on my calculation is entitled
in accordance with the
agreed formula to 97.6% of the amount of $2,292,819.63 i.e. $2, 237,792, less
$400,000 on the agreed credit
i.e. $1,837,792.
Donaldson pointed (Defendant’s Closing Submissions
”) 42-52) to a number of obstacles to the SkyMesh wages
claim which I shall briefly summarise:
(1) Insofar as
the help desk wages related to goods sold before 1 January 2011 (and most of
them would be he submitted) s.74H does
not give any right of indemnity to
SkyMesh because the cost of wages is not loss or damage suffered by the
(2) Insofar as
the wages related to goods sold after 1 January 2011 no attempt has been made by
SkyMesh to establish that calls after
1 January 2011 relate to sales of goods
after that date.
plaintiff has not established the assumptions upon which the plaintiff’s
expert report proceeded.
plaintiff has not established the manner of the operation of its helpdesk.
plaintiff has not adduced any evidence of its actual helpdesk
Williams proffered no reply to these points and I accept them.
has failed to make out its claim for helpdesk wages.
Unconscionable Conduct Claim
and s.22(1) provide that a supplier must not, in trade or commerce in connection
with the supply “or possible supply”
of goods or services, engage in
conduct that is, in all the circumstances, unconscionable. Both s.21 and s.22
set out matters to
which the Court may have regard in determining whether a
supplier has contravened subsection (1). Counsel drew to my attention to
fact that s.21 and s.22 as in effect at the relevant time were subsequently
transposed by a later amendment. They also took the
position that there was no
relevant distinction for the purposes of this case between the form of s.21(1)
and s.22(1) and attention
was therefore focused on s.22(1) and (2). S.22(2) (as
it was in 2011) does have a more extensive list of matters specifically
as matters to which the Court may have regard than s.21 of the
Williams submitted and Mr Donaldson agreed, that the most useful recent
exposition of what is intended by ‘unconscionable
conduct’ is to be
Paciocco v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(2015) 236 FCR 199
[2015] FCAFC 50
per Allsop CJ (with whom Besanko and
Middleton JJ agreed). That case concerned,
, s.12CB and s.12CC
Australian Securities and Investment Commission Act 2001
the ASIC Act’
) which is in similar terms to s.21 and 22 of
the ACL, and Counsel agreed that the reasoning of the Full Court is equally
to the ACL. The agreement that the meaning to be attributed to
“unconscionable conduct” in the ACL and the ASIC Act is
accords with the approach of Allsop P in
Tonto Home Loans Australia Pty Ltd v
Tavares; FirstMac Ltd v Di Benedetto; FirstMac Ltd v O'Donnell
[2011] NSWCA
. The Full Court’s decision in
was the subject
of an unsuccessful appeal (
Paciocco v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group
[2016] HCA 28
(2016) 333 ALR 569
) and nothing was said in the
High Court to cast doubt on Allsop J’s analysis at [259]- [306] and Keane
J cited one part of
it with apparent approval.
most important part of Allsop CJ’s analysis of the statutory provisions
relates to what is intended by Parliament by the
term ‘unconscionable
conduct’ to which I shall return but there are some other important
matters which I shall summarise:
provisions incorporate the established unwritten law of unconscionability
– that is the principles identified in the
High Court in
[1956] HCA 81
(1956) 99 CLR 362
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Amadio
(1983) 151 CLR 447
[1983] HCA 14
, and also the principles enunciated by
Brennan J in
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
[1988] HCA 7
and Mason J and Deane J.
(2) “Unconscionability”
is not constrained by the unwritten law (and see
Canon Australia Pty Ltd v
[2007] NSWCA 246
Fubilan Catering Services Ltd v Compass Group
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 1205
(3) The penal
character of the provision must be borne in mind.
(4) The conduct
which can be impugned is not only conduct between parties to an existing
contract or arrangement but includes conduct
in the bargaining
[260] Allsop CJ made reference to what had been said by Spigelman CJ in
Attorney-General (NSW) v World Best Holdings Ltd
(2005) 63 NSWLR 557
[2005] NSWCA 261
[121] i.e. that unconscionable conduct requires a “high
level of moral obliquy” and what Allsop CJ himself had said in
at [291] concerning ‘moral obliquy.’ In
Canon Australia
Campbell JA (with Harrison J concurring) adopted what Spigelman CJ had said
(see [41]-[43]) but Basten JA expressed a different view
at [4]. The views of
Basten JA obtained support in the more recent decision
PT Ltd v Spuds Surf
Chatswood Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 446
per Sackville
AJA with whom McColl
JA [1] and Leeming JA concurred [2], Sackville AJA said:
[104] Conduct involving dishonesty, sharp practice or conscious wrongdoing is no
doubt unconscionable and, equally, is clearly deserving
of discredit or
detraction. Other less heinous conduct may be more difficult to characterise.
For example, the refusal by a large
corporation to honour a public (but
non-binding) promise made in good faith to a local community by the
corporation's previous management
may not involve dishonesty or - 45 - conscious
wrongdoing, but might still be regarded as unconscionable or deserving of
or detraction. It is doubtful whether substituting a test of "a high
level of moral obloquy" for the standard of "unconscionability"
determining whether the statutory prohibition has been contravened.
[105] Perhaps for these reasons, in Tonto Home Loans Australia Pty Ltd v Tavares
[2011] NSWCA 389
15 BPR 29,699
, Allsop P (with whom Bathurst CJ and Campbell JA
agreed) suggested (at [293]) that Spigelman CJ in A-G v World Best Holdings may
have stated a "too stringent" test, although Allsop P left the issue open. His
Honour said that:
“What is required is some degree of moral tainting in
the transaction of a kind that permits the
opprobrium of unconscionability
to characterise the
conduct of the party.”
In a subsequent case, the Full Federal Court (Allsop CJ, Jacobson and Gordon JJ)
said that the word "unconscionability" means "something
not done in good
conscience" or "conduct against conscience by reference to the norms of [the]
society that is in question": Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission v
Lux Distributors Pty Ltd
[2013] FCAFC 90
, at [41]. The formulations in Tonto v
Tavares and Lux Distributors have the advantage of adhering closely to the
statutory language.
[106] The difficulty of imposing a definitive constraint on the meaning of
"unconscionability" is illustrated by other comments made
by Allsop P in Tonto v
Tavares, at [291]:
Aspects of the content of the word "unconscionable"
include the following: the conduct must demonstrate a high level of moral
on the part of the person said to have acted unconscionably:
Attorney-General (NSW) v World Best Holdings Ltd
(2005) 63 NSWLR 557
, at [121]; the conduct must be irreconcilable with what is right or
reasonable: Australian Securities and Investments Commission
v National Exchange
(2005) 148 FCR 132
[2005] FCAFC 226
, at [30]; Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Samton Holdings Pty Ltd (2002) 117 FCR 301;
, at [44]; - 46 - Qantas Airways Ltd v Cameron
[1996] FCA 1483
(1996) 66 FCR 246
factors similar to those that are relevant to the [Contracts Review Act 1980]
are relevant: Spina v Permanent Custodians
(2009) 14 BPR 26,923
, at [124]; the concept of unconscionable in this context is wider than
the general law and the provisions are intended to build on
constrained by cases at general law and equity: National Exchange at [30]; the
statutory provisions focus on the conduct
of the person said to have acted
unconscionably: National Exchange at [44]. It is neither possible nor desirable
to provide a comprehensive
definition. The range of conduct is wide and can
include bullying and thuggish behaviour, undue pressure and unfair tactics,
advantage of vulnerability or lack of understanding, trickery or
misleading conduct. A finding requires an examination of all the
circumstances.
(Emphasis added.)
(Tonto v Tavares involved ss 12CB and 12CC of
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth). The text of
was borrowed
from s 51AC of the TP Act.)
now to the content of what is intended by unconscionable conduct discussed in
to which I have added references to other decisions on
unconscionable conduct :
should be wary of attempting to substitute for the phrase used in the statute
“unconscionable conduct,” other
phrases such as ‘moral
obliquy’ and treat those phrases as if that is what the statute
(2) The Court
needs to consider all the circumstances of a case in order to reach a conclusion
on unconscionability. Thus obviously
it is not just a question of what is
contained in the contract.
statute, by referring to matters to which attention can be given, provides
guidance as to what the legislature regarded as
conduct which is or might be
regarded as unconscionable and see
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (ACCC) v Simply No-Knead (Franchising) Pty Ltd
(2000) 104 FCR
[2000] FCA 1365.
standard of conduct expected as a person in the commercial context is not that
of a fiduciary.
enumerated matters are not exhaustive and see:
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (ACCC) v ACN 117 372 915 Pty Ltd (in Liq) (formerly Advanced
Medical Institute Pty
[2015] FCA 368
contracting party is not required to subordinate its interests to those of the
other party.
(7) Unconscionable
conduct is not conduct which is unjust or even unfair, but it need not be
World Best Holdings
at [120]-[121] and see
Advanced Medical
(8) At [296]
Allsop CJ said:
“The working through of what a modern Australian
commercial, business or trade conscience contains and requires, in both consumer
and business contexts, will take its inspiration and formative direction from
the nation’s legal heritage in Equity and the
common law, and from modern
social and commercial legal values identified by Australian Parliaments and
courts. The evaluation of
conduct will be made by the judicial technique
referred to in Jenyns. It does not involve personal intuitive assertion. It is
evaluation which must be reasoned and enunciated by reference to the values
and norms recognised by the text, structure and context
of the legislation, and
made against an assessment of all connected circumstances. The evaluation
includes a recognition of the deep
and abiding requirement of honesty in
behaviour; a rejection of trickery or sharp practice; fairness when dealing with
the central importance of the faithful performance of bargains and
promises freely made; the protection of those whose vulnerability
protection of their own interests places them in a position that calls for a
just legal system to respond for their protection,
especially from those who
would victimise, predate or take advantage; a - 88 - recognition that inequality
of bargaining power can
(but not always) be used in a way that is contrary to
fair dealing or conscience; the importance of a reasonable degree of certainty
in commercial transactions; the reversibility of enrichments unjustly received;
the importance of behaviour in a business and consumer
context that exhibits
good faith and fair dealing; and the conduct of an equitable and certain
judicial system that is not a harbour
for idiosyncratic or personal moral
judgment and exercise of power and discretion based
(9) At [347] Allsop CJ said:
“In all the circumstances, in particular, the lack
of any proven predation on the weak or poor, the lack of real vulnerability
requiring protection, the lack of financial or personal compulsion or pressure
to enter or maintain accounts, the clarity of disclosure,
the lack of secrecy,
trickery or dishonesty, and the ability of people to avoid the fees or terminate
the accounts, I do not consider
the conduct of ANZ to have been unconscionable.
To do so would require the court to be a price regulator in banking business in
with otherwise honestly carried on business in which high fees were
extracted from customers.”
(10) In relation to good faith this requires an obligation on the parties to
cooperate in achieving the contractual objects, compliance
with honest standards
of conduct, and standards of conduct that are reasonable having regard to the
interests of the parties and
conduct which unreasonable, unfair, harsh,
oppressive and wanting good faith may constitute, having regard to the
relationship between
the parties, unconscionable conduct: see
ACCC v Simply
[44] – [47].
(11) The Court must “assess and characterize the conduct of the impugned
party in trade or commerce against the standard of
business conscience,
reflecting the values and norms recognised by parliament” to which his
Honour referred.
(12) Inequality in bargaining position alone is insufficient and Keane J
remarked in
“the existence of a disparity in power which is an
all pervading feature of a capitalist economy does not establish that the
which enjoys the superior power acts unconscionably by exercising
relation to 127(10) I should interpolate that whilst absence of good faith is a
matter to which regard can be had by reason of
s.22(l) failure to act in good
faith, without more, does not amount to unconscionable conduct within the
meaning of s.22 of the ACL.
Williams identified as relevant to SkyMesh’s claim the following
subsections of s.22: (a)(b)(d) (but limited to pressure),
(e) (f) (j) and
Bandwidth Agreement was due for renegotiation in March 2011. On 4 February 2011
Mr Cross of Ipstar wrote to Mr Rees at SkyMesh
attaching an addendum to the
contract part dated 7 February 2011 with a new bandwidth price of $3,060 per
Mbps per month plus GST.
The draft Addendum also included warranty terms and
reference to an ‘RMA’ process (Return Merchandise Authorisation).
The covering email stated:
“We trust you understand that the new pricing is [a] a reflection of the
substantial increase in cost of doing business with
SkyMesh” (Exhibit
followed correspondence whereby Mr Rees sought clarification if what was meant
by the words ‘increase in cost of doing
business with SkyMesh’.
Ipstar advised that its final offer for bandwidth was $2,933/Mbps per month.
Although Ipstar did not advise SkyMesh of
this at the time or indeed at any time
prior to commencement of these proceedings, the figure of $2,933 was calculated
by Mr Cross
and was arrived at by determining what would be, based on a broad
brush approach, the anticipated cost to Ipstar of meeting its statutory
warranties for equipment purchased by SkyMesh from SkyBridge: see Exhibit
D4/2627-2628 and paragraphs 65 and 66 of Mr Cross’s
affidavit of 4 April
2014. That figure was assessed at $1,005,840 and Mr Cross then calculated how
that amount could be recovered
through an increase of bandwidth charges- i.e. an
additional $433 per Mbps per month. Mr Cross accepted in cross-examination that
he was calculating the cost of warranty claims in respect of equipment already
received by SkyMesh customers: T552.20-42.
the time of receipt of Ipstar’s final offer Mr Rees indicated that he
objected to the increase and that as SkyMesh had no
choice he would be signing
an addendum ‘under protest:’ Mr Rees had become aware that no other
ISP (large or small) was
the subject of a price increase, and he did not regard
the declining number of users as relevant since the downturn applied to all
Proceedings
were commenced by SkyMesh in 2011 in relation to the unconscionability claim and
the defective goods claim.
summarise the factual matters upon which SkyMesh relies to assert that Ipstar
acted unconscionably:
sought to impose, as a price increase, an amount that it calculated would be the
likely cost to it of meeting the statutory
warranty claims of SkyMesh. That was
not designed to protect a legitimate interest of Ipstar.
(2) It did not
disclose to SkyMesh the true basis of the price increase calculation but
asserted that the price increase was as a
result of a higher cost of doing
business with SkyMesh based not only on SkyMesh exercising its statutory
warranty rights but also
on its failure to comply with Ipstar’s RMA policy
and a high number of service calls from SkyMesh since 2010.
continued to provide untruthful answers to questions posed by SkyMesh concerning
the price increase. I set out a portion of
the cross-examination of Mr Cross
relied on, at T563.1-T564.9:
Q. You say, "We have already seen a huge increase in the
number of service calls from SkyMesh since December which is disproportionate
other providers, then you say (and I do not mean your statutory warrant retro
Q. You were intending to suggest, weren't you, that the reason for the price
increase was not to do with the statutory warranty claims?
A. No, I'm just saying there's a huge increase in the number of service calls
since December.
Q. Come on, Mr Cross, have a look at this. "We've seen a huge increase in the
number of service calls from SkyMesh since December
which is disproportionate to
other providers" and then you specifically state, "And I do not mean your
statutory warranty retro claims",
Q. In other words you're talking about issues other than the statutory warranty
Q. You're seeking to justify the price increase on the basis of matters other
than the statutory warranty claims; aren't you?
Q. That's not a true reflection of the reasons for your price increase; was
Q. You accept, don't you, that this third time that you've dealt with this
concept didn't involve a frank and honest response from
you? You accept that;
A. Partially, yes.
Q. Insofar as you were purporting to give an explanation for the increased cost
of doing business it was a false explanation; wasn't
Q. The reason you gave a false explanation is because you did not want to reveal
the true reason for the price increase, that's right;
Q. Can we go then to the first time you deal with this issue, it's at 2386. You
don't in that email reveal the true reason for the
price increase; do you?
Q. You tried to keep secret from SkyMesh the true reason for the price increase;
didn't you?
Q. Really? Is that really your evidence?
A. We didn't reveal the reason for the price increase.
Q. We know that, you tried to keep it secret; didn't you?
A. Not intentionally.
Q. Mr Cross, you intentionally kept secret from SkyMesh, from the time that you
were asked questions about it, what the real reason
was for the price increase;
didn't you?
and see T552.15-50, T553.42-47, T558.37-39, T560.41-47, T560.31-T561.26
(4) It imposed a price increase on SkyMesh and on no other internet service
provider and SkyMesh had a similar number of customers
using Ipstar as APN whose
bandwidth price was lower than that of SkyMesh even without the price
(5) It was aware that SkyMesh could not move its customers away from Ipstar
(a) SkyMesh
would have had to purchase approximately $60 million worth of new hardware since
none of the Ipstar hardware would work
with other systems: see
T567.35-568.9,T570.39-46,
(b) no other
provider was available for the amount of bandwidth SkyMesh required: see
T570.40-T571.40,
(6) Ipstar had not paid any of the claims for statutory warranty as at the date
of the price increase notwithstanding that it had
been determined by Mr Leeflang
that some of the claims were valid.
(7) It introduced as part of the addendum an RMA policy even though SkyMesh was
not purchasing equipment from Ipstar.
(8) It introduced as part of the Second Addendum warranty terms.
(9) Ipstar asserted that the cost of doing business with SkyMesh was higher than
other providers but no review was ever undertaken
by Ipstar in support of that
contention see: T561.2-40.
Donaldson made the following points:
(1) Much of
SkyMesh’s ‘unconscionability’ case was not pleaded.
SkyMesh’s case is that it had no choice but to accept the price increase
required by Ipstar there is an illogicality
to SkyMesh’s case on a number
of points. SkyMesh was not tricked or misled into signing the addendum or
because Ipstar applied
any pressure.
(3) Ipstar does
not accept that it was dishonest in its dealing with SkyMesh but even if it was
that dishonesty does not go anywhere.
Had Ipstar said: “We have calculated
the average rate of claims on defective products to be $x million per year and
that requires
us to increase the bandwidth price to $y extra per million Mbps
per month, the situation would have been no different.
Donaldson accepted that there was little prospect of bandwidth being obtained
from any other supplier and that the cost of
equipment for an alternative
network even if available, was prohibitive, but contended that if SkyMesh found
itself in a weak bargaining
position as at January 2011 because it had 35,000
customers who had purchased Ipstar equipment and could not transfer to another
network that arose because it had not arranged for a fixed price for all of the
period that it was contractually bound to its customers.
It had created its own
vulnerability. It was in no different position to a café owner who had
established the café
in rented premises, and had to renegotiate a new
rental at the end of the lease period or a commodity trader who had bought up a
substantial quantity of a product the demand for which has suddenly increased
dramatically. If commodities or services have become
rare there is nothing
unfair or unjust, let alone unconscionable, in one party seeking to obtain a
higher price than the other party
had previously paid. This is supported by
Keane J’s observation in
which I have set out at [127]
(12) above.
increase was effectively a 15% increase and not unduly harsh and relevantly the
price of $2999 per Mbps was actually less
than the price that SkyMesh had paid
for an earlier period.
(6) With all
the talk of SkyMesh’s predicament when it agreed (albeit under protest) to
a 15% price increase it sold its business
a few months ago for $8.6 Million
dollars (T669).
(7) The Court
is not a price regulatory authority: see [347] of
recoupment of statutory warranties was a matter specifically raised in opening
by Mr Williams at T27.14-T28.35. I shall refer
to this as “
door recovery point
.” When Mr Donaldson responded on this topic by way
of opening see T272-T274.44 he put forward various arguments which are picked
in the DCS but he did not at that point allege that the back door recovery point
was not open on the pleadings. That contention
is mentioned at DCS 64 and became
amplified in the final oral submissions: T748.19-749.4. Mr Donaldson claimed
that it was a matter
on which Ipstar could have addressed evidence. Mr Williams
responded to these pleading points: T784-787. In my view it is open to
to advance the back door recovery point for a number of reasons:
(1) SkyMesh
pleaded at para 14 of the Commercial List Statement (Exhibit D1/45) that the
price increase was not reasonably necessary
for the protection of the legitimate
interests of Ipstar,
requires consideration of all circumstances (“a wide ranging
enquiry” per North J in
Advanced Medical
) and that is a relevant
circumstance- indeed this links to the third point,
sought to justify the price increase in its evidence- and relied on various
matters which SkyMesh challenged- “the
substantial increase in the cost of
doing business” was clearly put as an important circumstance by
Donaldson’s failure to protest against the back door recovery point after
Mr Williams had opened, whilst not decisive,
is relevant.
on the subject of pleading points in relation to unconscionability Mr Donaldson
also claimed that SkyMesh had never articulated
(a) that Ipstar
had acted unconscionably because it was refusing to pay the warranty
(b) Ipstar was
not paying warranty claims for the purpose of applying commercial pressure,
(c) Ipstar’s
introduction of the RMA terms and the terms of future warranties was together
with the price increase part of a
“three pronged
relation to the matters in [138] (a)-(c) even if they could be relied on they do
not really advance SkyMesh’s unconscionability
claim because its case is
that it had to agree to the price increase because without such agreement it
could not provide the service
to its customers for which they had contracted not
because Ipstar had not paid the warranty claims or required compliance with the
RMA. I do not base my decision on any of these matters.
that SkyMesh received $8.6 million for the totality of its business it is not
possible to assess what it received for the satellite
component. It does not in
any event appear to me to have any relevance to the unconscionability claim. Nor
for that matter is it
relevant that APN had negotiated terms that, if they had
been offered to SkyMesh, would have reduced the amount payable by SkyMesh
$8.4 million rather than the $3.4 million claimed, or the fact that SkyMesh had
for one earlier period been paying more than $2,933
per Mbps per month.
far as a lack of honest dealing on the part of Mr Cross in responses to SkyMesh
is concerned even though such conduct is the type
of conduct within the purview
of the ACL there is no evidence from Mr Rees that he was misled or did anything
(or did not do something)
because of what Mr Cross or anyone else from Ipstar
told him. Mr Cross’s admission that he gave a false explanation to Mr Rees
for the price increases and intentionally held back the true reason is however
indicative of a recognition that recovery of the statutory
warranty for past
sales would not be an appropriate or permissible course of action.
Ipstar simply wished to increase the price for bandwidth by 15% because it was
in its commercial interest to do so to maintain
its profit margin
notwithstanding the burden of meeting warranty claims or potential product
failure in the future and because it
believed that SkyMesh would be willing to
pay that increased price and because not to do so would have been commercially
the part of SkyMesh I very much doubt that its conduct could be
characterised as unconscionable, and I say that even recognising
that SkyMesh
was in a predicament because it had purchased Ipstar equipment and agreed to
abide by the ABGP terms and conditions,
and Ipstar well knew that. I also am
inclined to think that a seller who chooses to seek a higher amount from one
purchaser as compared
to another, or indeed all others, is free to do so. There
can be no expectation by a purchaser that the price that he or she is paying
equal to the price that any other customer is paying (absent any express
representation to that effect).
I regard of paramount importance the fact that what Ipstar decided to do,
through Mr Chinveeraphan and Mr Cross, was to calculate
in a broad fashion what
the statutory warranty would be likely to cost Ipstar for UTs supplied to
consumers by SkyMesh and to impose
that cost on SkyMesh. S.74K of the TPA
renders any term of a contract (even if incorporated into another term) which
purports to
exclude, restrict or modify or has the effect of excluding,
restricting, or modifying any liability of a person to compensate or
another person, void. I think the legislature was thereby making clear that a
person such as a seller or importer who is
required to meet a liability for
defective goods imported into Australia and sold by it, must carry the burden of
indemnifying the
consumer, or an intermediate seller who has compensated the
am of the view that it must be inferred that the legislature did not regard it
as in the legitimate interests of Ipstar to require
SkyMesh to pay to it an
amount calculated as the cost to Ipstar of meeting its statutory
warranties.
Ipstar has done, in effect, is to require SkyMesh to indemnify it for the
statutory liability Ipstar had to SkyMesh, which was
not in protection of its
legitimate interests. In imposing that requirement Ipstar did do so in an
environment where SkyMesh had
no real practical alternative but to accept the
price increase because the requisite bandwidth was only available from Ipstar
the cost of new equipment required if SkyMesh changed service provider was
prohibitive. Mr Cross accepted in cross examination that
Ipstar “held all
the cards” see T571.38. I therefore find that Ipstar has engaged in
conduct that is in all the circumstances
unconscionable.
addition, Ipstar did not seek to recover the cost of statutory warranties from
other service providers, did not advise SkyMesh
that the true basis of the
calculated increase was solely Ipstar’s assessment of what it would have
to pay for statutory warranties
for claims already made and gave what Mr Cross
admitted were not frank and honest answers to the questions asked by Mr Rees:
falling within s.22 (a)(b)(e)(f) and (i). These matters of themselves
would not be sufficient but when added to the matters referred
to in [134]-[135]
they reinforce the unconscionability of Ipstar’s conduct.
therefore conclude that Ipstar acted unconscionably in requiring SkyMesh to meet
an obligation that Ipstar was required by statute
to meet itself. It should be
required to refund to SkyMesh the amount so extracted being an amount of $3.4
follows that SkyMesh is entitled to judgment on its claim for indemnity in
respect of the defective goods claim (excluding the
wages claim) and on its
unconscionability claim of $3,482,367 million. In relation to the precise amount
for which judgment on the
defective goods claim should be entered I have
referred to the amount as $1,837,792 but this should be calculated by the
to ensure that the correct figure is ascertained. It was agreed by
Counsel that the question of interest should be deferred.
will hear the parties on the precise form of orders and the issue of interest
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (554 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter