URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/280.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SD Portfolio Holdings Pty Ltd v Todd [2025] NSWCATAP 280; (5 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
SD Portfolio Holdings Pty Ltd v Todd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 280
Hearing Date(s):
20 October 2025
Date of Orders:
05 November 2025
Decision Date:
5 November 2025
Appeal Panel
R C Titterton OAM, Senior Member
M Tyson, Senior Member
(1) The appeal is allowed.
(2) The orders of the Consumer and
Commercial Division of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of 23 June 2025 in
matter 2024/00127036
are set aside.
(3) The matter is remitted to
the Consumer and Commercial Division of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(differently constituted)
for redetermination.
appellants seek their costs of the appeal, they are to file and serve any
submissions (and if necessary, evidence) as to
costs on or before 21 November
2025, 14 days from publication.
(5) The respondents may respond on
or before 11 December 2025, 28 days from publication.
appellants may reply on or before 22 December 2025, 35 days from
publication.
(7) The stay of the orders of the Tribunal of 23 June
2025 in proceedings 2025/00275632
ordered by the Appeal Panel on 30 July 2025
Catchwords:
APPEALS – question of law – whether error on a question of law
– adequacy of reasons
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW), r 25(4)(c)
Cases Cited:
Alexandra Landfill Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Della Bruna v
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2025] NSWCA 105
Kratochvil v Cutting
Choice Carpentry Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCATAP 157
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
NSW Land and Housing Corporation v
[2019] NSWCA 231
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
Tiglin Constructions Pty Ltd v Warhurst
NSWCATAP 251
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP
Westerweller v The Owners Strata Plan No 18482
[2023] NSWCATAP
Whipps v Caravan & RV Central Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 163
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
SD Portfolio Holdings Pty Ltd, First Appellant
BH Australia
Constructions Pty Ltd, Second Appellant
David Todd, First
Taejin Lee, Second Respondent
Representation:
J Widjaja (Appellants)
J Sukkar (Respondents)
File Number(s):
2025/00275632
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
23 June 2025
K Ross, Senior Member
File Number(s):
2024/00127036
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an appeal from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division of the
) in matter 2024/0063633 of 23 June 2025 (
the Primary Decision, the Tribunal relevantly ordered the first appellant to pay
the respondents the sum of $40,820.95 in respect
of completion and rectification
costs in relation to a timber deck (
). The Tribunal also ordered
the appellants jointly and severally to pay the respondents $2,662.00 in
relation to electrical wiring
amounts were to be paid on or before 18 July 2025.
timetable was set for submissions on costs. As at the date of the appeal
hearing, no costs decision had been made by the Tribunal.
two orders of the Tribunal were stayed on 30 July 2025 by order of the Appeal
Panel, pending the outcome of this appeal.
the following reasons, Orders (1) and (2) are set aside set aside. The appeal is
otherwise dismissed.
matter is remitted to the Tribunal for redetermination.
our orders, we have set a timetable for the filing of submissions as to the
costs of the appeal.
The appellants’ documents
Notice of Appeal
Notice of Appeal was filed on 18 July 2025, which is within the time provided by
r 25(4)(c) of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
grounds of appeal were filed on 17 September 2025. The amended grounds of appeal
state nine grounds of appeal. In summary,
these were as follow:
(1) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to provide adequate reasons for
its decision in accepting the respondent's expert
evidence over the expert
evidence advanced by the appellant (
(2) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to provide adequate reasons for
its decision in relation as to the quantum of the
compensation ordered
(3) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to give proper, genuine and
realistic consideration to the appellant's arguments
and evidence as to the
quantum of damages for the respondents' claim (
Ground Three
(4) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to consider the appellant's
argument that the respondents had benefited from their
own breach (
(5) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to consider the appellant's
submission that the respondents had benefited from their
own breach (
(6) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to give genuine consideration
to a matter arising on the material, which is that
the respondent's failed to
mitigate their own loss (
(7) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to give proper, genuine and
realistic consideration to the appellant's submission
that the parties had
resolved the matter by agreement (
Ground Seven
(8) whether the Tribunal's finding, that there was no evidence that the
electrical cable ran across common property, was legally
unreasonable (
(9) whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to consider the only material
evidence on the issue of electrical cable servicing
more than one lot (
the course of these reasons, we will set out the Particulars to the amended
grounds of appeal where necessary.
Respondents’
respondents filed a Reply to Amended Grounds of Appeal on 13 August 2025.
summary, the respondents submit that the grounds of appeal are without merit,
mischaracterise the Tribunal’s reasoning, and
are written without any
regard to expert evidence and statutory obligations, which the Tribunal took
into consideration in determining
their claims.
the first instance, the respondents say the appellants have failed to identify
any questions of law supporting their appeal, here
relying in particular on
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
) at [25]-[40].
note that at the appeal hearing the respondents’ counsel conceded that
Ground Eight did raise a question of law.
respondents also filed a copy of the joint tender bundle (
before the Tribunal.
Nature of an appeal
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
sets out the basis upon which appeals from decisions of
the Tribunal may be brought. That section states that an appeal may be made
of right on any question of law or with leave of the Appeal Panel on any other
(s 80(2)(b)).
A question of law
Prendergast
v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
, the Appeal
Panel set out a non-exhaustive list of possible questions of law giving
rise to an appeal as of right:
(1) whether there has been a failure to provide proper reasons;
(2) whether the Tribunal identified the wrong issue or asked the
wrong question;
(3) whether a wrong principle of law had been applied;
(4) whether there was a failure to afford procedural fairness;
(5) whether the Tribunal failed to take into account relevant (that
is, mandatory) considerations;
(6) whether the Tribunal took into account an
irrelevant consideration;
(7) whether there was no evidence to support a finding of fact;
(8) whether the decision was so unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker
would make it.
matters were clarified and expanded by the Appeal Panel in
where the Appeal Panel. Relevantly, the Appeal Panel stated at
[32] (references omitted):
32 To the above list [referring to the list
Prendergast
extracted above] might be added the
following (some of which are nuanced aspects of the
categories in
Prendergast
(4) Whether the Tribunal failed to respond to
substantial, clearly articulated arguments based on established
facts which may constitute
a failure to accord natural justice,
that is, procedural unfairness. Alternatively, it may also
constitute a constructive failure
to exercise jurisdiction:
(8) Whether the Tribunal made a jurisdictional error will often
raise a question of law. However, as jurisdictional error may stem
from myriad
reasons, care must be taken to ensure the particular basis is raising
a question of law. ...
Leave to appeal
will not set out the requirements for establishing a grant of leave to appeal.
That is because the appellants have not sought a
grant of leave in respect of
any of the grounds of appeal.
Consideration of Appeal Grounds
Introduction
will commence with a consideration of Ground One, which in relation to Order (1)
is the appellants’ fundamental ground of
appellants’ submit that the reasons given for that order were
inadequate.
relevant principles relating to adequacy of reasons of the Tribunal were stated
by the Court of Appeal in
NSW Land and Housing Corporation v
[2019] NSWCA 231
, by Bell P (as the Chief Justice of NSW then was),
with whom Ward JA (as the President of the Court of Appeal then was) agreed.
, the Court of Appeal stated at [71] that:
... there are certain minimum characteristics that a Tribunal’s reasons
must possess. These are really supplied, in relation
to the Tribunal, by
of the [Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013 (NSW)] which ... requires
there to be set out in reasons (when requested by a
(a) the findings on material
questions of fact, referring to the evidence or other material on which those
findings were based,
(b) the Tribunal's understanding of the
applicable law, and
(c) the reasoning processes that lead
the Tribunal to the conclusions it made.
(emphasis added)
principles have been followed and applied many times by the Appeal Panel,
including most recently on 10 October 2025 in
Tiglin Constructions Pty Ltd v
[2025] NSWCATAP 251
Appeal Panel stated at [72] that the reasoning need not be unduly long or
elaborate, but needs to be sufficient to explain why
a decision was made.
another way, as a majority of the Court of Appeal (Bell CJ and Kirk JA) stated
Della Bruna v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2025] NSWCA 105
it was certainly a legal error by failure to give adequate,
intelligible or logical reasons ... It was also a constructive
to exercise jurisdiction insofar as it involved a failure to grapple
with a substantial and clearly articulated aspect of the appellant’s
case ... That type of error can also be expressed in terms of procedural
fairness (as raised by ground 5(b)):
Dranichnikov v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
(2003) 77 ALJR
was a dispute between the respondents (
) who had purchased the
property from the first appellant (
). A special condition of the
sale of the property was that the Vendor would have a timber deck constructed at
the property before
the end of February 2023 but not before settlement. The
expert report. His report was dated 23 September 2025,
and was 89 pages in
length. The issue of the deck was dealt with at pp 19 to 36 of his report. Mr
Kyle concluded that the cost of
completion of the decking and rectification of
defects was $45,038.86.
Vendor retained Mr Peter Shepherd of Pink Slip Building Reports. His report was
dated 7 November 2024 and was 39 pages in length.
The issue of the deck was
dealt with at pp 7 to 13 of his report. Mr Shepherd concluded that the cost of
completion of the decking
and rectification of defects was $7,313.38.
two experts prepared a Conclave Joint Report dated 26 February 2025. Relevantly,
Mr Kyle lowered his figure for the cost of completion
and rectification to
$40,820.95, while Mr Shepherd increased his to $8,357.00.
the Primary Decision, the Tribunal relevantly stated:
16 The experts engaged in a conclave and produced a joint
report. They both agree that the deck is incomplete and agree on certain
defects but differ in respect of the scope of work for rectification. Mr
Shepherd is satisfied that the deck can be completed
whilst Mr Kyle says that it
needs to be removed and rebuilt.
17 I prefer the evidence of Mr Kyle for a number of reasons:
(1) The deck has not been built in accordance with the
specifications [and the Tribunal then set out eight examples of failures
build in accordance with the specifications].
(2) The deck has been sitting in an incomplete stage of
construction for 2 years. I accept that this will necessarily have caused
(3) The deck as constructed has not been approved by the Owners
Corporation. The By-law requires consent to be sought before construction.
18 I accept Mr Kyle's amended costings and allow the sum of
$40,820.95.
The Vendor’s submissions
Vendor submits that the Tribunal's reasons are inadequate because:
(1) they simply state facts, and do not establish why there is a "preference"
for Mr Kyle, nor disclose the reasons why Mr Shepherd's
evidence should be
discounted or put to the side;
(2) they do not adequately address how the Tribunal arrived at preferring Mr
Kyle's opinion over Mr Shepherd's;
(3) they do not reach a resolution of the experts' differences as to what is
defective and the applicable scope of works.
the Vendor submits that:
(1) it is left trying to understand how the Tribunal decided to impose a
$40,825.95 when its expert, Mr Shepherd, advised that the
costs to rectify were
(2) the Tribunal’s fact-finding miscarried;
(3) the Tribunal's reasons in that regard are far from doing justice between the
parties; and
(4) the appeal should be allowed.
The Homeowner’s submissions
summary, the Homeowners make the following submissions.
they submit, for the reasons set out at pars [10]-[17] of its Reply to Amended
Grounds of Appeal filed 13 August 2025, that
the appellants have failed to
identify any question of law.
(1) the appellants have not raised any "pure questions of law"; rather, they
have attacked the merits of the Primary Decision;
(2) there is a distinction between an error of law and a question of law. The
appellants have simply attempted to raise errors of
law which do not constitute
a question of law; and
(3) the appellants' grounds of appeal raise part questions of fact, “which
does not meet the necessary threshold of a ‘pure
question of
Vendor relies in particular on [37]-[38] of
where the Appeal Panel
37 What constitutes a question of law is vexed and context
dependent in the sense that the distinction between matters of fact
may turn on the circumstances in which the question arises:
Property Investments Pty Ltd v Look Up Technologies Pty Ltd (No
[2023] NSWSC 416
[2023] NSWCA 40
Da Costa v The
[1968] HCA 51
(1968) 118 CLR 186
[1968] HCA 51.
38 For instance, a ground of appeal that raises the question
whether there were adequate reasons may constitute an attack on the
merits which
would not raise a pure question of law. On the other hand, it may be a
contention that the decision is unreasonable
in the requisite sense or that the
Tribunal failed to exercise the jurisdiction, which would likely raise a
question of law: see
the exposition of this issue
Wollondilly
at [28]–[32]. Care must in any event be
taken. As has been clarified by amendment to the NCAT Act
Prendergast
was decided, the Tribunal is not required to
give reasons for all decisions it makes: NCAT Act, s 62(2A; see
New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation v Orr
–[54], [109]–[114].
[38], the Appeal Panel referred to “the exposition of this issue
Wollondilly
”. That is a reference to the Appeal
Panel’s decision in
Wollondilly Shire Council v Styles
[2024] NSWCATAP
104 (Wollondilly).
In the passages identified, the Appeal Panel
28 Simply alleging that the Tribunal’s reasons are
inadequate may not be sufficient to identify the particular or
question of law that arises where the alleged
inadequacy does not “breach a statutory condition of validity of the
itself, so as to render the decision invalid”:
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2022] NSWCA 209
29 Whilst it is true that simply alleging
that reasons are inadequate “raises” a question of law,
and that may be sufficient
where the parties and the Appeal Panel correctly
understand what that allegation entails (
STAR Training Academy Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Police (No 2)
[2022] NSWCATAP
to [22]), it is preferable that the actual and
specific question of law that it raises is identified with
precision. That position
is reinforced where the appellant
is legally represented:
Theophilas v Chief Commissioner of State
[2016] NSWCATAP 111
Thomas and Naaz
above, at [72].
30 In the absence of leave to appeal,
the particular questions of law identified by the
appellant are the subject matter of the
Family Co Pty Ltd v Capitol Carpets Pty Ltd,
above, at [13] and
the cases referred to there. Succinctly identifying the
question the alleged inadequacy raises will also better
parties’ attention to what question the Appeal
Panel is actually answering, as an allegation that reasons are
is all too often simply a challenge to the merits of the
Tribunal’s decision, for which leave to appeal is required.
31 The allegation of error here is so closely
related to the Tribunal’s determination of the facts
of the case that any alleged
inadequacy of reasons does not
amount to a question of law alone:
JP v Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW)
[2015] NSWSC 1669
(2015) 256 A Crim R
PQR v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2020] NSWSC
Unlike the case of
Newcastle City Council v Newcastle East
Residents Action Group Inc
[2018] NSWCATAP 254
, the Council did not
provide detailed evidence to support its reliance on various public interest
considerations against disclosure.
Nor did the Council provide detailed
evidence, other than the emails themselves, to support its reliance on legal
professional privilege.
32 As to some of the related questions of law,
being whether the Tribunal’s reasons were “sufficient in
(as that phrase was used in
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd
v Transport for NSW
[2020] NSWCA 165
by Basten JA at [23]) or
met the Tribunal’s obligation in respect of what the Tribunal was required
to address under s 62 of
the NCAT Act, the decision of the
Tribunal at [37]-[70] clearly articulates the evidence before it and
its findings, the law to be
applied, and the reasoning process that led to
its conclusions. Had those questions been identified as questions of
law, no error
would be established. It is also not possible to
discern, from examining the reasons and the evidence lodged in the appeal,
some identified inadequacy or deficiency in the reasons shows
that the Tribunal has constructively failed to exercise its jurisdiction
failing to deal with “a substantial, clearly articulated
argument relying upon established facts”:
Dranichnikov v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(2003) 197 ALR 389
[2003] HCA 26
. The reasons also meet the required level
of transparency to facilitate the appellant exercising its
qualified right to appeal.
(emphasis added)
Consideration
One is whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to provide adequate reasons
for its decision in accepting the respondents’
expert evidence over the
expert evidence advanced by the appellant.
Particulars of Ground One are:
(a) The Tribunal received expert reports from both
appellant[s] and [the] respondent provided evidence on rectification of the
(b) The Tribunal’s reasons for preferring the
respondents’ expert are bare and appear to recite findings of fact made
the Tribunal about the issue more broadly rather than articulated consideration
of the respondents’ report
(c) The Tribunal did not give any reasons why the evidence of
Mr Shepherd was rejected or suitable.
the Appeal Panel stated recently in
Kratochvil v Cutting Choice Carpentry Pty
[2025] NSWCATAP 157:
111 An appeal is against orders and not reasons (
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2023] HCA 26
) although reasons that are
not adequately expressed to expose the basis for the finding on a dispositive
issue may ultimately raise
questions of law. The adequacy of reasons in the
context of determining questions of law raised on appeal was considered at
by the Court of Appeal in
Alexandra Landfill
Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165]
, where two of the
principal issues in the appeal were whether the primary
judge constructively failed to exercise his jurisdiction
and whether the reasons for his findings were inadequate.
112 Basten JA observed at [22] and [23]:
22. In a case where a court has set out the
competing material (thus engaging with an issue) and decides in favour of a
result, without explaining why, the reasons will fail to meet the
criterion of transparency required of judicial decision-makers.
reasons are given, expressly or implicitly the element of transparency may well
be met, even if an appellate court considering
an appeal by way of rehearing
would find the reasons flawed.
23. To the extent that the appellant is not
able to demonstrate that the trial judge failed to consider any essential
of the claim for compensation, a separate question will arise as to
whether the reasons given for the outcome were sufficient in
113 And further at [29]:
29. Where the process of fact finding is
unreviewable except to the extent that it reveals an error of law, the reasons
must be sufficient to demonstrate that the legal limits of the process
have not been contravened. Having regard to the purpose of
giving reasons, the
standard is properly identified negatively: it must be shown that the decision
has not been reached capriciously
or arbitrarily, but rationally. The reasons
must thus reveal that all material factors have been identified and addressed,
no prohibited considerations have been operative. If there is an
available process of reasoning from the evidence to the outcome
which has been
adopted, either expressly or by implication, the appellate court should be slow
to reach the conclusion that the function
of the trial court has not been
exercised according to law.
the Appeal Panel stated in
Wollondilly
, alleging that reasons are
inadequate “raises” a question of law, and that may be
sufficient where the parties and the
Appeal Panel correctly understand what
that allegation entails.
our view, the Particulars of Ground One make it clear what the allegation
involves, namely the Tribunal’s reasons for preferring
Mr Kyle are bare
(and appear to recite findings of fact made by the Tribunal about the issue more
broadly rather than set out an
articulated consideration of the experts’
reports), and that the Tribunal did not give any reasons why the evidence of Mr
was rejected or suitable.
our view, it is self-evident that the reasons of the Tribunal on why it
preferred the evidence of Mr Kyle over that of Mr Shepherd
failed to meet the
minimum standard required by
. To use the language of
there appears to be no attempt at all to explain
the reasoning
processes that lead the Tribunal to the conclusions it made. There is simply the
statement that the Tribunal prefers
the evidence of Mr Kyle and accepts his
costings. The Tribunal did not explain “why” (
Alexandra Landfill
Pty Ltd v Transport for
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
[22] per Basten JA) one expert’s opinion was accepted by the Tribunal in
preference to an alternative opinion on a question
in dispute.
accept that reasons can be brief, but to paraphrase the language of the Supreme
Nu-Stone Building Pty Ltd v McInerney
[2023] NSWSC 940
, the Tribunal’s reasons in this instance failed to provide any,
or any adequate, statement of the reasoning processes that
led it to its
conclusions. No attempt whatsoever has been made to engage with the reasoning of
each expert and their conclusions.
addition, in his oral submissions, Mr Widjaja referred us to
Whipps v Caravan
& RV Central Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 163.
In that decision, the Appeal
Panel noted that the Tribunal’s “summary dismissal” of
evidence relied on by Mr Whipps
(being the evidence of his two experts), was a
failure to give a proper, genuine and realistic consideration to the issue.
our view, the Tribunal failed to give proper, genuine and realistic
consideration to Mr Shepherd’s expert evidence.
relation to this part of the appeal, the appeal is allowed, and order (1) of the
Tribunal’s orders of 23 June 2025 is set
this conclusion, is not necessary to consider any other ground of appeal in so
far as those grounds relate to Order (1).
Appeal Grounds Eight
next turn to the grounds which relate to Order Two, being Grounds Eight and
Nine. These grounds both relate to the issue of electrical
wiring. Both
parties’ experts agreed that the wiring was faulty. However, the
appellants alleged that the electrical cable
was common property and the
Tribunal rejected this submission as “[t]here is no evidence that the
cabling in question services more than one lot. I
do not accept that the cabling
is common property”: Primary Decision at [24].
Eight and Nine are:
(8) Whether the Tribunal's finding, that there was no evidence
that the electrical cable ran across common property, was legally
unreasonable;
(9) Whether the Tribunal erred in law by failing to consider
the only material evidence on the issue of electrical cable servicing
Particulars to both Grounds are:
(a) The appellants submitted that the electrical cable was
common property, and thus the respondents’ did not have standing
the application
(b) The Tribunal did not accept it was common property on the
basis that there was “no evidence that the cabling in question
more than one lot”.
(c) There was evidence from the appellants’ expert that
the conduit extends from under the dividing fence.
Appellants’ submissions
appellants’ submission is simple. They submit that Mr Shepherd stated in
his expert report in reply at 7.5.2.1.1 that the
electrical wiring did cross the
boundary and
service more than one lot.
they submit that the Tribunal erred in finding that there was no evidence on
this point, and that the Tribunal’s
conclusion was legally unreasonable,
as it lacks an evident and intelligible justification or whereby a court or
tribunal cannot
comprehend how the decision was arrived at:
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
appellants submit that that the “no evidence” conclusion of the
Tribunal was “completely contrary” to
the evidence that was
available (and which was not rejected).
appellants put Ground Nine alternatively, on the basis that the Tribunal failed
to consider the evidence, with limited evidence
being produced on this point.
They submit that there is no indication from the reasons that the Tribunal had
regards to Mr Shepherd’s
evidence on this point.
Respondents’ submissions
respondents accept that Ground Eight raises a question of law. The question of
whether there is no evidence to support a finding
raises a question of law:
at [25](9)(b)].
say that Ground Nine does not.
respondents relevantly submit that:
(1) it is clear that the appellants did not provide any evidence to support this
contention at hearing, as found and expressed by
the Tribunal;
(2) the cabling is located in the courtyard of Unit 14, which under the
registered strata plan is not common property. The appellants
have provided no
evidence to the contrary;
(3) photographic evidence was tendered showing the cabling's location within the
courtyard of Unit 14. This visual evidence was consistent
with the strata plan
and supported the Tribunal's finding that the cabling did not service more than
one lot and was not common property;
(4) the appellants were also issued a summons for the building contracts -
documents which typically contain electrical and plumbing
plans that would
identify the scope and servicing of the cabling. They failed to comply with that
summons, despite having the opportunity
to produce evidence in support of their
is to be noted that the respondents do not address the appellants’
submission that Mr Shepherd addressed this issue at 7.5.2.1.1
Consideration
Shepherd relevantly stated in his report that:
7.5.2. RESPONSE TO DEFECT AS CLAIMED
7.5.2.1 I observed the cable referred to by Mr Kyle.
5.5.2.2.1 The conduit extends from under the dividing fence and
may be considered common property, this may also be the case for
all wiring and
7.5.2.2 These cables are not required to be in a conduit as
they are in an inaccessible areas as defined by AS3000.
7.5.2.3 I agree the cable should be terminated in a junction
box and the cables clipped to the underside of the deck, this appears
of what is allowed for in the electricians quote.
7.5.2.4 The electrician identified the orange conduit is not
buried sufficiently below the ground.
7.5.2.5 What has not been investigated is whether or not the
conduit contains electrical cables, let alone being live cables.
7.5.2.6 There has been no investigation as to the actual depth
of the conduit, only that part of can be seen.
7.5.2.7 Should it v [sic – be?] found that it is
electrical cable, then for the extent that it is less than 500mm can have
trench re dug and the conduit placed deeper.
report then goes on to calculate the rectification costs.
our view, Mr Shpherd’s language is equivocal. Nevertheless, the statement
of the Tribunal that there is “no evidence”
appears not to be
correct. Accordingly, we accept the appellant’s submission that the
Tribunal erred in finding that there
was no evidence on this point, and that the
Tribunal’s conclusion was legally unreasonable, as it lacks an evident and
intelligible
justification or a court or tribunal cannot comprehend how the
decision was arrived at.
relation to this part of the appeal, the appeal is allowed, and order (12) of
the Tribunal’s orders of 23 June 2025 is set
this conclusion, is not necessary to consider Ground Nine.
our findings above in relation to Orders (1) and (2), it has not been necessary
to deal with the other grounds of appeal.
The next steps
determined that Order (1) and Order (2) should be set aside, the question arises
whether the issues should be remitted to the
Tribunal, which was the
appellants’ position, or reconsidered by us, which was the
respondents’ position.
the central issue is the persuasiveness of the opinions of the two experts, we
do not consider it a practical, or indeed fair,
solution that we reconsider the
matter without the benefit of seeing the experts’ cross-examined and
without receiving the
benefit of submissions from the parties.
Regrettably,
we consider that the proper course is to remit the matter to the Tribunal for
reconsideration.
note that at the appeal hearing an attempt was made by the parties to reach a
consensual resolution of the appeal. We encourage
the parties to continue those
Costs of the Appeal
appellant has been successful.
have included in our orders a timetable for the filing of submissions on
propose to deal with costs on the papers and without a
Westerweller v The Owners Strata Plan No 18482
NSWCATAP 113
. Any party opposing that approach must address
that issue in their submissions.
Submissions
are to be limited to five pages.
Costs at first instance
were told at the appeal hearing that submissions had been directed and filed in
the Tribunal proceedings.
costs should be pursued with the Tribunal.
Appeal Panel orders:
(1) The appeal is allowed.
(2) The orders of the Consumer and Commercial Division of the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal of 23 June 2025 in matter 2024/00127036
(3) The matter is remitted to the Consumer and Commercial Division of the Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (differently constituted)
for redetermination.
(4) If the appellants seek their costs of the appeal, they are to file and serve
any submissions (and if necessary evidence) as to
costs on or before 21 November
2025, 14 days from publication.
(5) The respondents may respond on or before 11 December 2025, 28 days from
publication.
(6) The appellants may reply on or before 22 December 2025, 35 days from
publication.
(7) The stay of the orders of the Tribunal of 23 June 2025 in proceedings
2025/00275632 ordered by the Appeal Panel on 30 July 2025
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter