URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v MAHER [2013] NSWCHT 1 (4 March 2013)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
CHIROPRACTIC TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
DENNIS MAHER
MATTER NUMBER: CH04/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
CH10001331350
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr C O’Donnell of Counsel instructed by Ms R Lewis,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Dennis Maher
(Respondent) represented by Mr M Windsor of Senior
Counsel instructed by Mr A Saxton, Solicitor, (Ms K Gair instructing) of
DibbsBaker.
FILE NUMBER: CH04/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Rosemary Giuriato (Chiropractic
Dr John Thompson (Chiropractic Member)
Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 7, 8, 9 February, 3, 4 April and 23 and 24 July 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 4 March 2013
FINDINGS (in summary): Particulars 1 (e), 1(f), 1(g)(i), 1(g)(ii), 2(e),
2(f), 2(g)(i), 2(g)(ii), and 2(h) established to the requisite
standard and
found to be unsatisfactory professional conduct. Considered together conduct
found to be professional misconduct. The
Tribunal reprimanded the Respondent and
ordered his registration be subject to conditions including mentoring for a
minimum period
of 18 months. A Costs Order was also made.
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
by male patient re inappropriate comments, touching, lack of draping –
failure to keep appropriate records or provide
adequate information.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – s149C,
Chiropractors Act
- s139B(1), 139E, schedule 5D – clause 7.
CASES CITED:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
41 NSWLR 630,
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported).
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Chiropractic Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional
Councils Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney
on 7 to 9 February and
3, 4 April and 23 and 24 July 2012 to conduct an Inquiry into a Complaint made
by Health Care Complaints Commission
(the HCCC) dated 4 July 2011 in relation to
a registered chiropractor, Dennis Maher (the Respondent).
party submitted that the Inquiry should be held in ‘two phases’.
Rather, the parties submitted that the matter
should be dealt with as a single
stage process whereby the Tribunal heard all evidence relevant to the
determination of the Particulars
and the Complaints as well as evidence relevant
to Orders (should any Complaint be established).
Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a registered chiropractor under the
National Law:
COMPLAINT ONE
has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B (1) of the
National Law
conduct demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the practice of chiropractic is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or
has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractic.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all material times when consulting with Patient A, on or about 26 February
2010 the Respondent conducted chiropractic practice
at rooms located in the
Dymocks Building, 8 Floor, 428 George Street, Sydney.
Patient A consulted the Respondent on or about 26 February 2010 and on or
or about 26 February 2010 when consulting with Patient A, the Respondent failed
to act in accordance with appropriate therapeutic
or professional practice
down and taking off Patient A’s underpants;
to provide Patient A with an adequate or appropriate covering to cover himself
Patient A’s penis whilst massaging Patient A’s lower buttocks and
upper thigh;
to Patient A “you have a nice cock” or words to the
to provide adequate information or explanation to Patient A in relation to his
assessment or treatment;
Failing to obtain informed consent from Patient A for
to make and keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition and /or treatment
in that the notes:
not recorded in English;
not adequately record details of examinations conducted or chiropractic
adjustments performed.
or about 3 March 2010, when consulting with Patient A, the Respondent failed to
act in accordance with appropriate therapeutic
or professional practice
down and taking off Patient A’s underpants;
to provide Patient A with an adequate or appropriate covering to cover himself
Patient A’s penis whilst massaging Patient A’s lower buttocks and
upper thigh;
to Patient A when touching Patient A’s penis “wake up” or
words to the effect;
to provide adequate information or explanation to Patient A in relation to his
assessment or treatment;
to obtain informed consent from Patient A for treatment;
to make and keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition and /or treatment
in that the notes:
not recorded in English;
not adequately record details of examinations conducted or chiropractic
adjustments performed.
to assess Patient A’s response to chiropractic treatment provided at the
previous consultation;
to conduct an examination or perform any chiropractic adjustment on Patient
COMPLAINT TWO
has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
National Law
conduct demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the practice of chiropractic is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or
has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
chiropractic.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint One.
Appearances
parties were represented as per the headnotes. The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent was represented at the Directions Hearing
by Mr Clarke, Senior Legal
Officer, Marsden’s Lawyers. DibbsBarker appear to have represented the
Respondent from around December
trust placed in chiropractors is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the patient to
come into close
physical contact with the practitioner and frequently to disclose highly
personal information to the chiropractor
in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their doctors may
vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
the doctor. Even in
regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a patient places in a
doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present seems to be an
example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost absolute. The
power in regard to the patient in such cases is also very great.
I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of fact;
the extent of
the power will vary according to the temperament of the patient, but the doctor
with some patients and for limited
periods, because of the relationship in which
they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do whatever the doctor wants
the body of the patient. This is one of the reasons why doctors are
subject to correspondingly great obligations and are expected
to maintain high
standards; all this being very much in the public interest.
Suppression Orders
the Inquiry the Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in
accordance with Schedule 5D Clause 7 of the Act in
relation to the name of
Patient A and others associated with Patient A as indicated in the schedule
annexed hereto and marked ‘C’.
Any information beyond that contained
in this Reasons document which may identify them is also not to be published.
Annexure C will
only be attached to the original Reasons for Decision held by
the Registry and must not be reproduced.
temporary Suppression Order made with respect to the name of the Respondent on
the first day of the Inquiry is lifted in accordance
with the terms of that
Order (i.e. that it expired upon the publication of this Reasons for Decision
documents received into evidence from the HCCC were marked as exhibits 1 - 19.
Those provided by the Respondent were marked as
exhibits R1 - R27 as set out in
annexure A hereto.
A, Patient B, Ms Amanda McEacharn, Dr John Kelly, Dr Rachael Weeks and the
Respondent were all called before the Tribunal.
Background of
the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1951. In 1975 the Respondent completed his Diploma of
Chiropractic at the Sydney College of Chiropractic
and Diploma of Osteopathy at
the Sydney College of Osteopathy. Thereafter he took over a chiropractic clinic
in the CBD of Sydney.
He was first registered on 16 July 1980 and has maintained
his registration. He established another clinic in Lindfield in 1978.
clinic has now closed.
1983 the Respondent moved to Japan and worked part-time as a chiropractor at the
Salesian Polytechnic College in Tokyo while studying
Japanese language.
Thereafter the Respondent worked in a number of locations in Japan before
returning to Australia in late 1992.
Thereafter he has worked out of a clinic
located at his home and one in the CBD.
Evidence before the
Tribunal received documents into evidence from both parties as recorded in the
Indexes annexed hererto (annexure A).
Evidence of Patient A
A made a written complaint to the HCCC dated 29 March 2010 (exhibit 2). Patient
A refers to the Respondent as ‘Dr Dennis
Maher’ and commences by
‘I’ve visited to DOCTOR on Friday 26/03/2010
. The Tribunal notes two matters at this point. Firstly, in his
oral evidence Patient A corrected this date to read ‘
rather than ‘26/3/2010’. The second matter to note is the fact
that the legislative provisions in place in NSW until 1
July 2010 prevented
chiropractors from using the title ‘Dr’ unless they had specific
permission from the Board. Under
the National Law (that took effect from 1 July
2010) registered chiropractors may use the title ‘Dr’ (just as they
been able to in every other state and territory of Australia prior to the
introduction of the National Law). There was nothing in
the evidence before the
Tribunal to indicate that the Respondent had applied to the NSW Board (as it
then was) to be entitled to
use the term ‘Dr’.
the written complaint Patient A stated (as written):
He ask me to get undressed. So I was only wearing underware
on bed to get some massage first. When he massaged around my back and butt he
took my underware off which means I was fully
naked while I’m on bed.
the heading on the form
‘Where did things go wrong?’
Respondent wrote (as written):
Then he asked me to face up.
Obviously I was lieing on bed then fully naked. He didn’t provide anything
to cover. Then he said
to me “you have nice cock” and he touched my
his oral evidence he clarified that this statement was not entirely correct as
the Respondent had given him a small
‘hankerchief’
size of a man’s handkerchief to cover his penis after he had asked for a
written complaint continued:
I visited second time on Tuesday
3/3/2010 again. Again I was fully naked, this time he tried to rub my penis,
so I told him to stop treatment
. He gave me referral to X-Ray. I never go
back again.
[Emphasis added by Tribunal]
answer to the question as to why he was making the complaint Patient A stated
that he was
‘very shocked and very uncomfortable’.
he had told a subsequent treating chiropractor, that chiropractor
suggested that he refer the matter to a
‘Board member’
complaint also indicated that Patient A had kept an SMS exchange he had with the
Respondent if it was needed and that he would
provide more information to
explain what happened as he was not
‘good at writting
Subsequently,
Patient A provided the HCCC with a more detailed statement dated 12 April 2010
(exhibit 3). This statement is not in
a pro forma format where specific
questions are printed and limited space provided for the response. Patient A
confirmed that he
had completed the initial Complaint Form on 29 March 2010.
A stated that for the purpose of making the statement to the HCCC on 12 April
2010 he had refreshed his memory from the receipts
he held from the
consultations with the Respondent. This had allowed him to make a correction to
the initial complaint form to correct
the date on which he first consulted the
Respondent to 26 February 2010 and the second consultation to 3 March 2010.
A stated that he had received chiropractic treatment for his neck problem prior
to consulting the Respondent. He sought treatment
from the Respondent as he had
heard that he spoke fluent Japanese and although fluent in English Patient A
felt comfortable being
able to speak about his sore neck in Japanese.
A stated that he had not met the Respondent prior to the first consultation on
26 February 2010. During his oral evidence
Patient A stated that he located the
Respondent’s practice as a result of reading an advertisement in a locally
published Japanese
language newspaper in addition to referrals from a friend and
a work associate who had been patients of the Respondent.
A gave an account of each consultation in both his statement to the HCCC and in
his oral evidence. Some of the details of
these consultations recorded in the
statement to the HCCC were corrected by Patient A when he gave evidence before
the Tribunal.
his written statement Patient A stated that the first consultation lasted less
than half an hour. However, when he gave oral evidence
before the Tribunal he
conceded that it may have been half an hour or even 45 minutes. Patient A
recorded that he informed the Respondent
that he was having trouble sleeping due
to his neck pain. The Respondent then asked him to stand up while he checked his
neck, shoulders
and spine while he was fully clothed.
A stated that the Respondent then asked him to get undressed and lie on the bed.
Patient A stated that he removed his clothes
‘underwear’
(meaning underpants) and placed his clothes on a
hanger. In his oral evidence Patient A stated that the record of the placement
the clothes was incorrect as he actually placed his clothes on some
located on the side of the room where the
Respondent’s desk was located. At this point the Tribunal notes that it
was not until
later in the hearing that the Respondent provided photos of his
consulting room that showed there was a cabinet running along the
wall behind
his desk. Although Patient A was shown a number of photos of the consulting room
produced by the Respondent, the photo
depicting this cabinet was not shown to
Patient A (or the Tribunal) while he was giving evidence. This photo was
provided to the
Tribunal when the Respondent was giving evidence later on in the
8 to 11 of Patient A’s statement read:
8. I remember that I
was lying facing down. I could feel his hands checking my neck and back going
down my spine. I remember that
he started to do some massage. I remember that it
felt like quite a hard massage. I think he did this for about ten minutes. I
that he was talking to me during this. They were general questions like
what I did for a living. Most of the time we communicated
in English.
9. When he started to massage my lower back he pulled my underwear
half-way down my buttocks so they were showing half. He did this
without telling
me he was going to do this, but I am used to this because when I went to the
Thai massage they often pull your underwear
halfway down to massage properly. Mr
Maher started massaging my upper buttocks.
10. I was still facing down and my hands were under my head and face. Then
Mr Maher pulled my underpants all the way down and took
them off. I remember he
put my underwear on the side table. I remember that he did this because of where
my hands were at the time
and I couldn’t reach them. I don’t
remember Mr Maher said anything to me before he did this.
11. Then he started doing some massage on my lower buttocks and upper
thigh and also he tried to rub between my legs at the top of
the thigh. Because
he was the chiropractor I didn’t think anything of it. I remember that my
penis was lying between my legs.
I know this because when he was massaging me
and lifting the muscle up in my thigh I could feel his hand briefly touching my
I think this happened between about five or ten times in the space of
was doing this. I
remember that when he massaged me here it was harder and it hurt a bit, it felt
like a deep massage.
A stated in oral evidence that while the Respondent was massaging his thigh he
touched his penis a few times.
12 to 14 of Patient A’s statement read (as written):
Then after that he moved to my lower legs. I remember that he massaged my calfs.
I think he spent about three to five minutes.
I remember that the actual massage
was quite good because it was quite strong.
13. After this he asked me to roll over onto my back. I was naked. I
rolled over. I did not have a towel or sheet over me. I remember
that because
the massage felt quite good my penis was a bit erect, but I was not sexually
14. Then he said something to me in English like “You have a nice
cock”. I think he used the word cock, but he may have
used the word dick.
But I remember that he was referring to my penis during this conversation. I
remember that he was looking at
my penis when he said this. At about the same
time I remember that he touched my penis. I remember that he touched my penis
the palm of his hand sort of brushed against my penis so it only lasted for
a few seconds. I saw him do this and I remember that
it looked like he did it on
purpose, it didn’t look accidental and he didn’t look like he was
reaching for something
else. I think he was standing on my right side but I
don’t remember which hand he used to touch my penis. I remember that this
suddenly happened.
oral evidence Patient A conceded that the Respondent could also have used the
words ‘Oh nice’. Patient A also stated
that it was the back of the
Respondent’s hand that had touched his penis.
15 and 16 of Patient A’s statement read:
15. After that I
asked him “Is there anything to cover my important parts”. I was
meaning my penis. And I remember that
when I have gone to the Thai massage, when
you roll over onto your back that they normally have a towel for you and that
over you ready even before you flip over onto your back. So I was a bit
surprised by this when he didn’t have a towel for me
and he touched my
16. I remember that Mr Maher gave me something like a handkerchief to
cover myself with. It wasn’t a towel because I remember
that it was a very
thing (sic) material. I think that it may have been about the size of a piece of
having a reasonable command of the English language Patient A was unable, when
asked specifically by the Tribunal, to find
the error in paragraph 16 (where the
word ‘thing’ should read ‘thin’ in the context of the
evidence given
by Patient A and the grammatical construction of the sentence not
commented upon).
17 of Patient A’s statement reads:
17. I put the
handkerchief over my penis. I remember that after this he massaged the front of
my thighs. I remember that as he was
massaging the front of my things (sic) he
was pulling my legs apart and the handkerchief kept falling off my crotch and
my penis, so it was like I didn’t have anything covering me.
his oral evidence Patient A added that the Respondent did retrieve the
handkerchief a couple of times and replace it over his crotch
area. When it
continued to fall off the Respondent did not replace it.
18 to 23 of Patient A’s statement reads:
18. After that he
clicked the neck, shoulder and back. I remember I was still naked while he was
doing this. When he clicked my neck
I was lying face up and he stood behind my
head and clicked my neck. When he clicked my back I was lying on my left side,
still naked,
with legs tucked up towards my chest and my arms crossed. I
can’t remember if he was standing behind me or beside me. I remember
he tried to twist my pelvis.
19. After that he told me I could get dressed. He stayed in the room while
I got dressed. I remember that he was also in the room
when I got undressed.
That was the end of that consultation. I remember that my clothes were to the
right of the bed and I had to
stand up and walk about two metres past his desk
to get my clothes and get dressed.
20. I remember that after I got dressed and sat down in front of this
table he told me I needed to come back and see him. He said
that he wasn’t
sure what the problem was with my neck unless he has a look at my x-rays. I
remember that he did the payment
and he booked me in for the next appointment
with was on 3 March 2010.
21. After this I spent about ten minutes with him because he was speaking
to me about where I came from and he was telling me about
how he lived in Japan
for ten years. I remember that he told me that he was an off-shore judge in
Japan for chrysanthemum shows.
This is a very important flower in Japan.
22. I remember during this second consultation on 3 March 2010 he asked me
to get undressed and I was just in my underwear again lying
face down on the
bed. He did the massage, in exactly the same procedure as the first time, the
shoulder, neck and back.
23. Then he took my underwear off again, but he didn’t pull the
underwear half-way, he just took it straight off completely.
Then he did the
massage on my thigh, just like he did the first time and touching my penis while
he was massaging me.
his oral evidence Patient A clarified that by thigh in paragraph 23 he meant
both sides of his thigh.
24 of the Patient A’s statement reads:
24. Then he asked me
to rollover just like in the first time. Then he tried to rub my penis. I
remember that I saw him try to touch
my penis. I was watching him and after what
happened the first time and I definitely saw him touch my penis and he said
up” as he touched it. He touched it with his hands.
Tribunal observed that Patient A gave evidence in a very forthright and adamant
manner with respect to his recollection of the
Respondent saying the words
‘wake up’ in reference to his penis.
paragraph 25 Patient A recounts that he reacted to the Respondent by asking him
‘What are you doing?’
. In his oral evidence Patient A added
some hand gestures when he made this comment. Patient A stated that the
Respondent did not
make any verbal response to his question but was just
paragraph 26 of his statement Patient A records that he was not covered with
anything during this latter part of the treatment
and the session ended in the
same manner as the first. In paragraph 27 Patient A records that at the end of
the consultation the
Respondent gave him a referral for an x-ray and that a
further appointment was made. Patient A stated that he did not keep the next
appointment, rather he sent the Respondent an SMS telling the Respondent that he
was quite uncomfortable about what had happened,
that he was shocked and that he
would not be returning. Patient A’s statement records the Respondent
replying via an SMS stating
that he did not know why Patient A was
uncomfortable, that he would try to focus professionally on his neck and that he
to provide further treatment to him. Although the SMS message was in
Patient A’s phone at the time he made the initial complaint
he discovered
the SMS was not in his phone at the time he made his statement to the HCCC as it
had been automatically deleted.
paragraphs 28 to 31 Patient A stated that he had not raised the matter with the
Respondent directly. He thought the Respondent
was a doctor and so trusted him.
On the first occasion of touching he thought it may have not been on purpose but
after it happened
a second time and he spoke to his friend (Patient B) about a
week after the second consultation he realised that it had been
. Patient B told Patient A that he had not had the same
experience as him with the Respondent.
A stated that the first person he spoke to about the conduct of the Respondent
during the consultations was one of his employees
who had also received
treatment from the Respondent. She had informed Patient A that when she had been
treated by the Respondent
that she had never been asked to remove her clothes.
next person he spoke to about the Respondent’s conduct was his hairdresser
(Patient B) who had also received treatment from
the Respondent. The Respondent
then told his wife who suggested that he find another chiropractor as she was of
the view that he
should not return to the Respondent. The Tribunal did not
receive any evidence from Patient A’s wife nor any explanation as
such evidence was not provided.
Oral evidence of Patient A
A gave evidence under oath over a number of days commencing on 7 February 2012.
He continued his evidence on 8 and 9 February
2012. He had the assistance of an
Interpreter although he was reasonably proficient in the English language. This
made the process
somewhat more difficult than the situation where a witness has
no knowledge of English and therefore must wait until a question is
and is unable to provide any responses in English (rather the response must
always come via the Interpreter). The Tribunal
tried a number of strategies to
take the evidence from Patient A more efficiently in the circumstances where he
was able to answer
some questions in English without there being a translation
of the question and being able to respond in English to some questions
translated into Japanese.
A gave evidence that he had been working as a business man for 20 years. He was
working at the management level of nightclubs.
Patient A agreed that he had
dealt with customers and suppliers, government authorities such as local
council, (not security companies)
and that he is regularly required to speak the
English language for this purpose.
cross-examination Patient A confirmed that the first occasion on which he
recorded the details of the consultation with the
Respondent was when he made
his initial statement (the Complaint Form - exhibit 2). Patient A confirmed that
he completed the statement
on the Form himself and checked the information on
the form prior to sending it to the HCCC (T35&36). Late in his evidence
A stated that he would not have been able to produce a document such as
his statement to the HCCC without assistance (T196/7).
A confirmed that he had the text message from the Respondent when he wrote
exhibit 2. He had shown the messages to his wife
but he had not downloaded the
message. He had not been asked by anyone to download the message (T37) at that
oral evidence Patient A was asked to consider whether or not the Respondent
provided anything for him to cover himself with while
he was laying down on the
table and agreed that his statement that
‘he didn’t provide
anything to cover’
was not correct (T41). Patient A clarified that he
expected to be covered by something like a bath towel but he was provided with
something that was just big enough to cover his genital area and it fell off
during the massage process (T40). Patient A indicated
that the size of the
covering was a 30 cm square, off white in colour and it was
(T44). During the second
visit Patient A stated that there was no covering provided at all.
A was asked to draw a copy of the Respondent’s treatment room during an
adjournment. Later in his cross-examination
he described the furniture in the
A confirmed that at the end of the second consultation the Respondent arranged
for him to attend for a third consultation
and referred him for an x-ray
A was unable to be certain as to how he sent the initial Complaint Form (exhibit
2) to the HCCC but accepted under cross-examination
that he may have faxed it
from his home facsimile machine. Patient A could not recall where the original
of the document was. At
this point the Tribunal notes that in any case it
appears this form was initially sent to the NSW Board.
A stated that he had rung the Respondent to make the first appointment and that
the appointments were likely to be in the
afternoon. Patient A confirmed that he
was running late for the first appointment and so he rang the Respondent to
reschedule.
this point the Tribunal notes that Patient A was cross-examined about the
content of part of paragraph 6 of his statement dated
12 April 2010 (exhibit 3).
The relevant part reads as follows:
I went there on 26 February 2010 for the first visit. I had never met Mr
Maher before this. I had only heard of him and seen his advertisements
Japanese newspapers.
T48.1-25 Patient A gave the following evidence:
Q. How many newspapers have you seen reference to Mr Maher?
A. WITNESS: Only one newspaper, one company.
Q. One newspaper?
A. WITNESS: One company, yep.
Q. So when you say in paragraph 6 that you had seen his
advertisements in Japanese newspapers that's wrong, isn't it?
A. WITNESS: Why is that?
Q. I beg your pardon?
A. WITNESS: Yes, okay.
MR WINDSOR: Excuse me, the interpreter must interpret what Patient A
CHAIRPERSON: If he says it in Japanese.
MR WINDSOR: Yes.
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I'm sorry, if I can clarify that with you, Madam
Interpreter. I think an answer like that where the answer was
WITNESS: Yeah, are you saying that because I've written here newspapers
with ad; is that what you're saying?
Q. Yes, that's wrong, isn't it?
A. WITNESS: Could be, yes. Yes.
Q. Well it is, isn't it, because you only saw it in one newspaper, didn't
you? Do you agree with that?
A. WITNESS: I agree.
Tribunal notes that later in the Inquiry a copy of an advertisement from a
Japanese language newspaper was provided to the Tribunal
and that evidence was
given in this regard as set out below.
A was taken to another part of paragraph 6 of his statement in cross-examination
(‘This visit lasted less than half an hour’
cross-examination Patient A agreed that it could have been longer. The following
evidence was given (T48.36 – 49.5):
Q. You then say, "This visit lasted less than half an hour"?
A. WITNESS: Yes, I believe so.
Q. Why do you believe so, Patient A?
A. WITNESS: It could be 30 to 45 minutes, less than hour. I didn't
actually time it.
Q. So you're now saying that it wasn't less than half an hour, but it was
something from half an hour to 45 minutes?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. So that sentence is also wrong, isn't it, that is the sentence, "This
visit lasted less than half an hour"?
A. WITNESS: Yes, right.
Q. You agree with me?
A. WITNESS: You are right, yes.
A was cross-examined in detail about the information supplied on the
‘Application for Chiropractic Treatment’
form held by the
Respondent (see around T52-3) with respect to medical history, past treatment,
residency status, marital status,
social smoking habits of Patient
A did not agree that he made mention of any pain or discomfort in his low back
during the time that Mr Maher initially examined
him whilst he was standing up
in the first consultation.
A accepted that he was trying his best to recall the sequence of the initial
examination procedure when he gave his evidence.
A stated that he removed his clothes at Mr Maher’s request and that these
were placed on a shelf near the desk and had
not hung them on the clothes hanger
as indicated in his statement.
subsequent examination of Patient A was undertaken after disrobing whilst he was
standing. Patient A recalled he then sat on the
bed facing the desk and his
neck was examined from behind.
cross examination Patient A acknowledged that his drawings of the room may not
be completely accurate.
A stated he then laid down on his stomach undressed to his
underpants.
A was cross-examined about the sequence the Respondent performed the motion
palpation tests to his thoracic and lumbar spine
while he was lying face down on
the bed. It was put to Patient A that the Respondent said to him at this time
‘don’t resist it just let it happen’
(T61.38). The
Tribunal notes that in the Respondent’s evidence (R1) the only time that
the Respondent states that he said to
Patient A not to
was while he was examining Patient A while he was
sitting up. Later in the cross-examination Patient A was asked about this issue
once again (T66) but this time it was put to Patient A that the comment made by
the Respondent requesting him not to ‘resist’
was made while Patient
A was in the seated position. Patient A responded as follows (T66.34 –
Q. Just before we go back to the subject matters that I have been asking
you questions about I want to return to one other matter,
which I may have
confused you about, Patient A. I want to suggest that when you were sitting up
on the bed, that is before you lay
down on the bed, Mr Maher told you that
he was going to push against your back and that you should relax and not push
against him
or resist it. Do you recall that?
A. WITNESS: No, I don't remember. I don't remember that. It's quite
CHAIRPERSON: So he says, "I don't remember but it's quite
WITNESS: Yeah. He must be right, yeah.
CHAIRPERSON: And "he must be right," meaning you must be right,
Mr Windsor.
Q. Patient A, you should understand that I must not necessarily be right.
The Tribunal will decide that at the end of the day. Patient
A, I now want to
I want to suggest that when you
were lying on your stomach that Mr Maher
told you to relax while he felt your neck and your back?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
A firmly denied that he had any covering placed over him whilst he was lying
prone and was adamant the ‘handkerchief’
was only provided to him
after he asked about covering himself when he turned over to lay on his back.
Patient A stated that the
Respondent obtained the ‘handkerchief’
from somewhere close to the bed.
A was shown a ‘sarong’ during cross-examination. After being shown
the ‘sarong Patient A gave the following
WITNESS: Okay, all right. There is no sarong or if that's
called what is called sarong there is no sarong. If there is I
wouldn't be here today. That's the point.
was put to Patient A that during the first consultation with the Respondent that
he was covered with a piece of material such as
the ‘sarong’ he had
been shown (which measured 1m x 1.2m when folder in half). Patient A replied
‘I don’t think so’
(T64) and when pressed said
. Patient A agreed that there was a ‘lowboy’
in the Respondent’s treatment room but was unable to say whether the
contents therein were the same or similar as the photo of the contents he was
shown (exhibit R14).
A gave the following evidence regarding the initial treatment he received
(T67.10-24):
Q. Whilst you were lying on the bed he used his hands and his fingers to
feel your neck and the middle of your back?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. He then, as part of this exercise, he was telling you what he was
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. Or what he was going to do each step of the way in the
A. WITNESS: Each step? Yes.
Q. Whilst you were still lying on your back he went down
to I'm sorry, lying on your stomach he massaged your lower
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. He told you that he was going to lower your underpants a little
A. WITNESS: Yes.
further questioned Patient A did not agree that the covering material was moved
down when his underpants were lowered on the
basis that there was no material
covering him at any time.
A agreed in his evidence that he permitted the Respondent to touch his hamstring
muscles and in order to do this had removed
the cloth that was covering him.
However the balance of Patient A’s responses all indicated that there was
no cloth covering
him nor was he wearing any underwear.
Considerable
cross-examination was undertaken of Patient A regarding where his arms were
placed while he was lying prone on the treatment
the second day Patient A gave evidence he was asked to identify various photos
of the Respondent’s treatment room. This was
followed by significant
cross-examination regarding the manner in which he says the Respondent removed
his underpants. Patient A
agreed that he moved at some time during the process
of the underpants being removed by the Respondent, the inference being that
movement was to facilitate the removal of his underwear.
of the cross-examination regarding the removal of the underwear included the
following (T83.11 – 84.10):
Q. Patient A, you were attempting to indicate, when answering my
previous question, that Mr Maher was pulling down your underpants
A. WITNESS: I think so. I think he used both hands.
Q. Are you telling the Tribunal you're now not sure whether he did use
both hands?
A. WITNESS: I can't say if there was one or two because I'm facing
Q. In other words, you didn't see him place his hands on your underpants,
the answer to that question is yes or no?
A. WITNESS: There are only two persons present in room so if I don't do
it, he's the one do it.
Q. Would you please just address my questions. You didn't see him remove
your underpants?
A. WITNESS: Well, I didn't see that.
Q. You don't know whether he used one hand or two hands to remove your
underpants?
A. WITNESS: I'm not sure.
Q. You say your underpants were pulled down by Mr Maher?
A. WITNESS: I agree. Definitely agree.
Q. You say they were pulled down from your buttocks right down over your
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. You say that they were pulled down whilst your body including your
legs, were flat on the treatment bed?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. When I say your body, you were lying on your stomach at the time and
your legs were laying flat on the treatment bed?
A. WITNESS: Yes.
Q. You say you didn't move your legs at all during the time that
Mr Maher was allegedly pulling your underpants off?
A. WITNESS: Yes I did.
MR O'DONNELL: There was something in Japanese and then something in
INTERPRETER: Yes, I moved, yes I did.
WITNESS: Yes I slowly raised my legs because he was pulling.
in his evidence Patient A said (T88.1-22):
Q. Could you put that statement aside for the moment. A few minutes ago,
I asked you some questions about the removal of your underpants
course of the first consultation. You tell the Tribunal that when your
underpants were being removed, you lifted your
legs off the treatment
A. INTERPRETER: I had to lift my legs.
Q. How high did you move your legs off the treatment table?
A. INTERPRETER: Just small amount above table for the just
enough for the underpants to get removed.
CHAIRPERSON: And wholly for the transcript, I think I should indicate
that the witness was using his right hand, his thumb and his
index finger, and
holding them a small distance apart.
MR WINDSOR: He was also using his left hand.
CHAIRPERSON: I didn't say that either; I didn't see that part,
Mr Windsor, I'm sorry. I just saw the right hand and the thumb and
index finger coming close together.
A. INTERPRETER: May I tell the Tribunal, it was not a large distance,
was just enough for the underpants to I felt I had to lift
A was cross-examined about whether the Respondent used the word
. Patient A was unable to
recall which word was used but was adamant that there was an expression to the
used by the Respondent
A agreed that he did not ask the Respondent to return his underwear, that he did
not prevent the Respondent from removing
his underwear, that he did not suggest
to the Respondent that he should not refer to his penis and that he did not tell
the Respondent
that he wished to cease the treatment
immediately.
A stated that the Respondent did touch his penis during the first consultation.
T90.46 – 91 Patient A stated:
Q. Patient A, do you say that this happened very quickly?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes. It was fast. It was it didn't seem to
be more like indecently touching, it was more like just brushing off
movement. So I understood that was an accident, that he wasn't intentional but
just accidentally touching my penis.
Q. You say that this took less than one second, this accidental touching
of your penis?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes, about one second.
Q. So where you say in paragraph 14 of your statement on the sixth
last line, that it lasted for a few seconds, on the fifth last
it lasted for a few seconds, that is wrong isn't it?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes, it says a few seconds. Yes, probably one second
because it just very quick.
Q. But what you've written in your statement is wrong. What you've
written in your statement on that issue, is wrong isn't it?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes. It wasn't important. It was one second, two
seconds, or three seconds, for me.
Q. What you tell the Tribunal is that it appeared to you to be
accidental. Is that what you say?
A. INTERPRETER: That's what I thought, was just an accident at
A was then taken to paragraph 14 of his statement wherein he said that the
touching of his penis while he was lying on his
back didn’t look
accidental.
Ultimately,
after a number of translation difficulties Patient A gave the following evidence
(T96.34-39):
Q. Patient A, you thought at the time that is when you were lying
there and after you say Mr Maher touched your penis, it was accidental
that correct?
A. INTERPRETER: I thought it was like an accident. I wanted it to be
like an accident. I wanted to think it was an accident, but
it probably
just as I said in there before he has made a comment about my penis
before that action so that's why it was on purpose.
A gave evidence that he was embarrassed to explain to the Tribunal why the
‘handkerchief’ covering had fallen
off when he rolled over onto his
back as the reason was that he had an erection (T98.) Although Mr Windsor asked
for the initial
comment made by Patient A to be struck out he did not renew that
application after Patient A was allowed to complete his answer.
Patient A gave
the following evidence at T98.36-47:
But after that I went I lied face up next and then I was on the
treatment table. But as in paragraph 14 as I said before I can't
exactly the actual statement but I don't have a nice dick or you know, but it
was something along the line of "nice one".
Then I asked when I
faced up, that's when I asked for the first time for cover. But as you would
imagine even if you've got a
handkerchief, it's not obviously putting a
handkerchief over a flat part, but while I was being massaged, it obviously fall
but I think Mr Maher probably picked it up and put it back again but
I wasn't covered properly. It fell off again. But following
after that, the
handkerchief I was facing upwards and I couldn't see. I think it was
probably on the floor. But there was no,
of course, no sarong or anything like
A was extensively cross-examined as to how many times he says the
‘handkerchief’ covering fell off and was replaced
by the Respondent.
Patient A stated that he thought it had occurred ‘twice’ and later
‘maybe twice’ and that
the Respondent did not replace it thereafter.
A was taken to paragraph 11 of his statement (exhibit 3) and he gave the
following evidence (T100.39.45):
Q. I want to put it to you that whilst you were laying on your stomach on
the treatment table during your first consultation, Mr
Maher did not touch
your penis. Do you agree with that?
A. INTERPRETER: I know it wasn't I know for sure it wasn't
intentional, touching, but I was on the bed in the side was massaged
my obviously my penis is right in the middle. So, of course, it was
touched. And that's what I said there in the statement.
A was cross-examined extensively as to whether or not he received a massage on
the front of his thighs. Although the expressions
used by Patient A were not
definitive or direct, ultimately Patient A’s evidence was that he did
receive such treatment.
T 132.1 – 23 Patient A stated:
Q. You said that he massaged your neck and when he massaged your neck, or
before he massaged your neck, he told you what he was going
to do, didn't
A. INTERPRETER: I can't remember. Perhaps not for not
explaining for each step by step or for each parts of the session.
Q. Did he tell you that he was going to do some work, or some
chiropractic work, on your neck?
A. INTERPRETER: I don't remember, sorry, to be honest.
Q. He told you he was going to massage your neck?
A. INTERPRETER: I don't remember clearly.
Q. Do you recall that your neck was massaged whilst your head was facing
towards the ceiling of his consulting room?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes.
Q. Then do you recall him telling you that he was going to adjust your
A. INTERPRETER: Maybe that's what he said or maybe he didn't say that.
I'm not 100% sure.
Q. Do you recall that he did adjust your neck?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes, I think so. Like this side, that way.
A. WITNESS: Clicking.
A was asked whether the Respondent had given explanations when he moved to
adjustments of his back. Patient A recalled being
asked to move from side to
side for adjustments but could not recall being provided with explanations of
the treatment or being covered
with anything as the treatment continued.
A gave evidence that he did not recall whether the Respondent provided him with
any instructions prior to performing a sitting
wing lift on him as he had had
this type of adjustment frequently.
A acknowledged without hesitation that his recollection of where he placed his
clothes after he removed them was now different
to what he recalled when he
provided his statement (exhibit 3).
A then gave evidence that the ‘flow’ of the second consultation was
much the same of the first consultation.
A was cross-examined extensively about paragraph 22 and 23 of his statement (see
T148.14 – 150 he gave the following evidence:
Q. Patient A, what you've said in the last sentence of
paragraph 22 is that the massage was undertaken to your shoulder, neck and
back; is that right?
A. INTERPRETER: In that order?
Q. Is that what you're saying there?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes.
Q. During that time as he's doing the massage on your shoulder, neck and
back, your underpants are on; is that correct?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes.
Q. What you're then saying is that the underpants were not taken
off or is this what you're saying: that the underpants were not
taken off until after he had completed the massage of your back?
A. INTERPRETER: No, that's not true.
Q. What's not true, Patient A?
A. INTERPRETER: Neck, shoulder and upper back, the underpants was taken
off before the from the time when I was getting the massage
the lower back, that's when the underpants were taken off.
Q. That's not what you had said in the statement, is it?
A. INTERPRETER: I think what's there is correct, because massage I was
just only merely talking about the flow of the massage.
It went from
neck head to toe. That sort of direction.
Q. Are you saying that when you're referring to back, your last word in
paragraph 22, you're not referring to your buttocks. Is
that what you're
A. INTERPRETER: I just merely mean the back the back of my
Q. Are you including in that your buttocks?
A. INTERPRETER: No. Not including.
Q. Would you agree then with me that on a plain reading of
paragraph 22 and paragraph 23 of your statement, on your evidence
did not massage your buttocks?
A. INTERPRETER: He did massage the buttocks.
Q. Why didn't you say that in your statement, Patient A?
A. INTERPRETER: It was the same procedure, so I just didn't mention
Q. Do you have any other explanation, Patient A?
A. INTERPRETER: No, I don't.
Q. Patient A, I take you to paragraph 23 again. You've reread
A. INTERPRETER: Yes.
Q. I want to suggest to you that when you say in that paragraph "when he
did the massage on my thigh" first of all which thigh are
you referring to, the
left thigh or your right thigh?
A. INTERPRETER: That I don't remember. At least both sides.
Q. Well, when you say you don't remember, what is it that you don't
remember Patient A?
A. INTERPRETER: I don't remember it was the left first or right
Q. But what you're saying is that he did a massage on my thighs, that's
plural, did he not?
CHAIRPERSON: Sorry, where's the plural?
MR WINDSOR: No. That's what the witness is now telling us.
CHAIRPERSON: I'm sorry.
MR WINDSOR: It's not there.
INTERPRETER: Yeah, in here it's not. It's not in plural form but I meant
both thighs.
Q. Patient A, I want to suggest to you that during the course of the
second consultation Mr Maher did not massage either the left
or the right
or both thighs. That is the truth, isn't it?
A. INTERPRETER: No, I think I was given a massage there
because I don't know what to say but it was touched, my penis. My
was touched.
Q. Patient A, do you say that your thighs were touched or massaged
whilst you were lying on your stomach or lying on your back during
this second
consultation?
A. INTERPRETER: Initially facing down but after the back side is
finished I went facing up.
Q. You say that he massaged your thigh or thighs when you were facing up
as well as facing down. Is that what you say to the Tribunal?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes, around that area.
Q. What area are you referring to, Patient A?
A. INTERPRETER: Inside of my thighs or thighs all around, the entire
part of thighs.
Q. When you say the entire part of your thighs, you're saying the back of
the thighs?
A. INTERPRETER: Yes, when I was facing down the back side of both my
Q. What about when you were facing up, which part of the thighs do you
A. INTERPRETER: From knees up.
CHAIRPERSON: I have a clear view of the witness' hand when he was doing
that movement, and he had his whole hand around his thigh
on the front of his
thigh, going from down near the knee up very close to the groin area.
Q. I want to suggest that during the second consultation, there was no
massaging of either the back or the sides or the front of
the thighs, that's
correct isn't it Patient A?
A. INTERPRETER: No my recollection is I was given massage there.
Tribunal notes that on the numerous occasions Patient A was asked to confirm
that he had a sarong covering him during the treatments
he did not accept that
this was so.
Tribunal also notes that on the numerous occasions during cross-examination
Patient A was asked to confirm that the Respondent
had not touched his penis
during the consultations that Patient A gave evidence that he did touch his
T155 Patient A was again asked about the second consultation with the
Respondent. He agreed that when the Respondent asked him
to turn over from his
stomach onto his back, whilst he was laying on the treatment table that he
already had a
‘half erection’
T157 Patient A explained that when he was lying on his stomach that his penis
was touched by the Respondent during the procedure
of massaging his posterior
thigh muscles as his penis lay between his legs.
A confirmed that this occurred when he was lying face down on the treatment
Cross-examination
continued and at T159 Patient A again confirmed that when he turned over he had
an erection, although he clarified
that it was not a ‘full
erection’. Patient A disagreed with the statement
underpants were still on when he rolled over onto his back’
‘that he had a cloth over his underpants’
A stated that he remembers the Respondent saying
after he rolled over with an already
A stated that he thought he told Patient B about his erection. He further stated
that he told the truth to Patient B. Patient
A agreed that he did not
specifically tell Patient B that he had a
‘half erection’
When it was put to Patient A that the Respondent did not say the words
he clearly replied
‘no, he said that, he
said those things’
. Patient A claims that he motioned to the
Respondent to stop touching his penis with the use of his hand gestures and
‘what are you doing?’
A agreed during cross-examination that he did not say
‘Stop touching my
to the Respondent. He further agreed that he did not say
‘take your hands away from my penis’
A cannot recall if the Respondent informed him that the neck adjustments were
going to take place after the Respondent examined
his neck and back after he
took his clothes off. Similarly, Patient A could not remember if he was told
that his low back would be
adjusted. Patient A did recall being asked to turn on
his side during the treatment (T161).
A stated he could not remember the treatment provided by the Respondent
‘one by one’. Patient A did not remember
being asked to place his
hands behind his neck and the Respondent placing his arms through his arms and
doing an adjustment to the
middle part of his back as the last part of the first
and second consultations but accepted that ‘perhaps’ it had
Patient A denied that during any of the above treatment he had his
underpants on or that he had a sarong around the middle part of
his abdomen
was suggested to Patient A during cross-examination that at no time did the
Respondent massage Patient A’s thighs. Patient
been done, I have been given massage’
A was asked whether he agreed that the order of the treatment he received from
the Respondent was:
‘examination, adjustment massage to neck,
adjustment of lower back and then adjustment of middle back’
A stated that he did not remember clearly but thought it was in the order of
head to toe, starting from neck, shoulder,
middle of back and then lower back
working towards the feet.
A agreed that the Respondent asked him to put his clothes on at the end of the
treatment. Patient A thinks that after he got
dressed he sat down on a chair at
the desk with the Respondent on the other side of the desk. Patient A thinks he
had a discussion
with him regarding ‘what should happen’ in terms of
treatment. Patient A thinks he can recall that the Respondent stated
had not been any change to his condition and that he had suggested that an x-ray
be taken of Patient A’s neck and
back. Patient A stated he remembers that
a referral for x-rays was provided to him. Patient A recalls that he paid for
the treatment
and that he received a receipt from a machine sitting on the
A agreed that he organised another appointment with the Respondent for 10 March.
Patient A stated that he did not intend to
get the x-ray as he did not intend to
the x-ray).
He did not tell the Respondent of his intention not to return when
he left the appointment. He also did not tell him that he was
dissatisfied with
the treatment or that his conduct was unsatisfactory. Under cross-examination
Patient A was not able to recall
what time his appointment
first contact Patient A had with the Respondent after the second consultation
was an SMS message written in English on March 10.
Patient A recalls that he
cancelled his appointment via this SMS and commented that he was uncomfortable,
disappointed, and shocked
with what had happened in the
A stated that the Respondent apologised in his SMS reply which included a
comment that
‘he didn’t know that I was feeling that
‘from now on, if you are willing to come back,
I will try to focus on professionally’
A did not recall whether there was any mention of his penis, or the fact that
the Respondent had pulled down his underpants
or that a handkerchief was placed
on his penis during the first or second consultation in the SMS he sent to the
Respondent. Patient
A stated that this would have made the message very long and
he really wanted to convey that he was not going to return to see the
Respondent.
A stated under cross-examination that he now did not agree with his statement
that he only realised that the Respondent had
touched his penis on purpose until
after he spoke to Patient B.
A stated that he thought that his penis may have been accidentally touched at
the time of the first consultation but at the
time of the second consultation,
when the Respondent clearly said ‘wake up’ his thoughts that this
may not be the case
were confirmed.
A agreed under cross-examination that the Respondent was trying to work out what
was wrong with his neck and back and that
he understood this from what he was
told during the first and second visit (T167).
T168 the re-examination of Patient A commenced. Patient A confirmed that when he
wrote the document in exhibit 2 (the initial Complaint
Form), he still had the
SMS messages in his phone and that he did not write the content of the SMS
messages down, keep a record of
them or deliberately delete them and suggested
that the phone company may have a record of the messages.
A confirmed that there was an error in the date of the first consultation he had
written in exhibit 2 as mentioned in his
statement (exhibit 3).
A agreed that he was asked to prepare a diagram during the cross-examination and
that he had not initially stated which end
of the bed his head was. Patient A
stated that he had only been in the room twice and that he had been to other
chiropractors and
so was confused and didn’t clearly remember this matter
and he may have been confused with another treatment room
A recalled that he was lying face down on the bed during each of the
consultations as per the diagram in the photo.
A confirmed that he was unsure as to whether the Respondent used the term
. After some clarification
with the assistance of the interpreter some handwritten notes made by Patient A
on a copy of his statement
indicated that he had written near paragraph 14
‘you have a nice cock’
quotation marks. Patient A stated that the use of the quotation marks indicated
to himself and anybody that is reading the document
that his recollection was
that the Respondent said
answer to a question from the Tribunal Patient A stated that he did not remember
whether the Respondent said to him
‘nice dick’
‘nice cock’
but that what he has written was ‘oh
nice’. Patient A stated that at the time that he was writing his statement
would be his best recollection. Later in his evidence, in answer to
questions from the Tribunal, Patient A added that the comment
was made by the
Respondent while the Respondent was looking towards his
and was said with a particular intonation indicating it was a
form of praise.
A’s recollection of the underpants he wore at the time of the consultation
with the Respondent was that they were trunks
of the boxer short type with
elastic at the waist and not around the legs.
A does not have any recollection of whether the Respondent used any lotion or
cream at the time of the consultations.
A thinks there was a discussion with the Respondent regarding the time of onset
of his symptoms and the reason for the symptoms
and whether these symptoms were
as a result of a car accident or trauma. Patient A cannot recall if the
Respondent asked about any
change in the symptoms since initial onset. Patient A
thinks that the Respondent would have asked about frequency of symptoms but
cannot remember for sure. Patient A cannot recall if he was asked about
aggravating or relieving factors of his symptoms. Patient
A thinks he was asked
recollection that he was asked if
his symptoms were aggravated by cough or
sneezing as he has never been asked this question from any of the chiropractors
has seen before. Patient A does not remember being asked if he suffered
any pins and needles. This is the first time that he has
heard this question
posed. Patient A thinks that he may have been asked if he experienced any pain
in his arms or legs as it is a
general question. Patient A does not clearly
remember if he was asked about weight loss. Patient A does not remember if he
if the pain woke him at night as this question may have been asked by
other chiropractors that he has seen. Patient A does not remember
asked about night sweats. Patient A remembers being asked about operations and
comments that
‘naturally he would have asked about medications’
although this response was not as positive as other answers. He provided
similar evidence regarding questions pertaining to other
conditions such as
heart conditions, asthma and diabetes. Patient A gave evidence that he thought
he would have been asked about
previous x-rays.
A stated that he had been to another chiropractor before the one that he
attended 18-24 months prior to seeing the Respondent.
After consulting the
Respondent he saw another chiropractor for about a year and was currently
receiving treatment from a physiotherapist.
A states that whilst seeing the subsequent chiropractor that he was asked to
disrobe to his underpants and that he did not
find a problem with
A stated that he mentioned to the Respondent that he had problems with his neck
and shoulder and did not report problems anywhere
else. Patient A had no
recollection as to whether the Respondent gave him any reasons as to why he was
directing his treatment to
Patient A’s legs and lower
A stated he had no recollection of seeing a laundry basket in the treatment room
containing sarongs or towels (T183).
A gave evidence that he provided an account of his treatment with the Respondent
to the next chiropractor he consulted. This
chiropractor told him that the
Respondent’s conduct was unacceptable and that it should be reported.
Patient A does not recollect
if this chiropractor gave him the Complaint Form to
A was asked whether he thought the Respondent was a doctor as stated in one of
his documents. Patient A answered that this
was what was stated in the
Respondent’s advertisement in the Konichiwa Press. He thought that
chiropractors were like ‘doctors’
and it was the impression he had
from his staff in his workplace who had consulted the Respondent.
A confirmed that he wrote ‘denunciation and impeach’ in his own
handwriting on the Complaint Form in answer to
the question as to what he wanted
as the outcome of the complaint. Patient A confirmed that he did not know how to
say this in English
and had to look it up in the ‘electric
dictionary’ – a form of electronic translator. Although he had
studied English
in high school he considered the standard of education to be
quite poor.
A confirmed that he had x-rays taken of his neck and shoulder region in the past
when receiving treatment from another chiropractor
prior to consulting the
Respondent. Patient A recalls that the Respondent did not ask him to see these
x-rays on either the first
or second consultation. Patient A stated that the
reason why he did not take the x-rays with him was most likely because it was
mentioned at the time of booking his appointment.
A does not remember signing a consent form to treatment at either the first or
second consultation time. Patient A
he recalls the
Respondent telling him that he would adjust his neck, but he does not remember
this happening for sure. Patient A
does not recall the Respondent explaining
that there might be complications as a result of the treatment he would receive,
a stroke. Patient A stated that the Respondent did not hold his neck in
a position prior to delivering the adjustment to his neck
and asking him if he
felt ‘dizzy’ or if he was experiencing any blurry vision or even how
it felt being held in that
position. Later in his evidence Patient A stated that
the Respondent may have told him not to worry if his neck made a sound during
the treatment. Patient A does not recall being offered any alternatives to the
treatment proposed by the Respondent.
T 191 Patient A gave evidence that the Respondent had a discussion with him
after the treatment
whilst sitting at the desk. Patient A recalls that the Respondent stated that
the treatment would take time.
A stated he could not remember if there was a covering on the bed at the time of
the treatment. He also could not remember
if there was paper towel at the head
of the treatment bed, though he stated that he knows that normally there is
A was asked if he had anything else he would like to tell the Tribunal. His
reply (through the Interpreter) at T192 was:
....he felt that when you go to places like this to get treatment, that
you undress only the top half or depending on the treatment,
clothing” and that normally the person in the clinic would leave the room
or there would be a partition, like
a wall” ensuring privacy for both men
and women when they are getting changed. Patient A stated that there was no such
present in this treatment room and that Mr Maher did not leave the
treatment room when he was getting undressed and that at the time
of the first
consultation, that he had to walk from the treatment table around to where he
had left his clothes “all completely
naked and Mr Maher was somewhere
around here.
[Patient A was pointing to the desk area in the photo when
describing ‘around here’].
A gave evidence that the reason he made a complaint was to prevent others from
suffering similar experiences. Patient A explained
claim this time’
and there is ‘
no merit for me because I have
to be here for three days, I am not trying to claim money back from
‘I understand, think it is important for me to be
here and it is important I feel, that’s why I am here for three
Interpreter also provided the Tribunal with a translation of the advertisement
(T195-196). Part of the advertisement can be interpreted
from the Japanese as
‘master of doctor’, ‘head doctor’ or
‘principal’ in English. Patient A confirmed
that at the time he made
the appointment with the Respondent he knew that he was a chiropractor and not a
physiotherapist or a medical
doctor but then gave evidence that he still does
not know if there is a difference between a medical doctor and a chiropractor.
had not been the reason why he had attended the Respondent, the reason that
Patient A went to see the Respondent was that he could
speak Japanese and that
one of his staff had recommended him to go. Later in his evidence Patient A
stated that he had seen an advertisement
(which he accepted could possibly the
one shown to him while he was in the witness box) and it had some reference to
A stated that he was aware that he would be compensated for any expenses that he
incurred in attending the Tribunal to give
evidence (T205/206). Patient A
confirmed that he had been working every night from 6pm until about 3am each day
that he had been
attending the Tribunal.
Evidence of Patient
B is a friend of Patient A’s. He made a statement to the HCCC dated 16
July 2010 (exhibit 4). The Tribunal notes that
Patient B is also Patient
A’s hairdresser. Patient B is originally from Japan and he has been in
Australia since 1994.
file note from the HCCC records that after providing his statement Patient B
later checked his appointment book and found that Patient
A’s hairdressing
appointment prior to 21 May 2010 was in fact 13 March 2010.
B saw the Respondent for the neck or shoulder injury and for treatment for lower
back pain in 2002, 2003 and 2010. He was
satisfied with the treatment he
B stated that he has known Patient A for about 10 years and described him as a
very close friend. He stated Patient A attended
his hairdressing salon and
during an appointment on about 21 May 2010 he spoke to him about the
Respondent.
B recounted events that occurred when Patient A attended the hairdressing salon
he owned in the middle of Sydney. He had owned
this salon for seven years.
B’s evidence was that Patient A told him that one of his waitresses went
to the Respondent for treatment. Patient B
stated that Patient A then asked him
whether he was dressed or undressed during treatments. Patient B told Patient A
that he had
never been undressed.
B declared he believed that Patient A told him he had seen the Respondent for a
neck injury twice. On those occasions, for
the treatment, he undressed to his
underwear. He also stated that his pants (meaning underpants) were pulled down
by the Respondent.
Patient B told the Tribunal that he understood the difference
between pants and underpants.
B gave evidence that he had asked Patient A whether he was suspicious about
being asked to undress. Patient A replied ‘
professional’.
Patient B stated that he remembered Patient A said to
him that ‘Denis’ pulled his pants down and ‘
massaged my
legs and then I got an erect penis. Then he asked me to turn over onto my back.
Obviously he saw my penis, Denis just
touched my penis, not sexually, just
touched it’
B stated that Patient A reported he was embarrassed and asked the Respondent for
. Patient A then said
‘Denis put a
little handkerchief on my penis’
‘was embarrassed by
this as well’
B said that Patient A had told him that the Respondent had placed a covering
over his penis during the first consultation
and that he had described the
covering to him.
B included in his statement that Patient A said that the same thing happened
during the second consultation, although Patient
B was not sure if the
Respondent had asked Patient A to return for the second session. In
cross-examination Patient B stated that
he was not really sure whether Patient A
had spoken to him about this matter.
B said that Patient A had stated
‘Denis grabbed my penis as if he was
trying to masturbate me or something like that’
and that he told the
Respondent to stop. Under cross-examination Patient B was certain that Patient A
had recounted this to him.
Patient B stated that he could tell by the way
Patient A was talking about the incident that he was very embarrassed and upset
the Respondent’s actions.
B stated that Patient A showed him an SMS he sent to the Respondent very soon
after the second session. He could not remember
exactly what it said but he did
remember it was polite. He did not think it contained any complaint about the
treatment he had received.
A then showed him the Respondent’s SMS reply. Though he said he could not
remember exactly what it said he remembered
the Respondent apologized in the
message and said that if he had not recovered to please come
B further stated that Patient A had told him that he was too upset after the
first session to speak to his wife but that he
had spoken to her about it after
the second session.
B gave evidence that he was surprised to receive a phone call from the HCCC
investigator because he did not know that Patient
A had made a complaint. He
said he had not spoken to Patient A about the incidents since the conversation
they had in his salon in
B was asked during cross-examination ‘
is it the case that when Patient
A asks for your assistance, you’ll do what you can to give him
assistance?’
. Patient B replied
‘no, not quite’
and went on to say it was
‘because the Tribunal contacted me, I was
asked to give a statement, then I made the statement’
. Patient B said
that Patient A spoke to him ‘about this’ on 21 May 2010 and that the
investigator typed out his statement
and that it was signed on the day it was
speak ‘ok’ and read English.
B told the Tribunal he did not know whether Patient A went to the Respondent for
a neck injury or for some other injury.
B was questioned about why a sentence in paragraph 12 of his statement,
attributed to Patient A regarding the Respondent pulling
down his pants which
was not placed in quotation marks. Despite assistance from the Interpreter
Patient B was not able to understand
the questions relating to this
re-examination Patient B answered ‘yes’ to the question
the time you made the Statement did you do your best to recall the events that
are described in the Statement?’.
B answered a question from the Chairperson which confirmed that he had received
treatment from the Respondent but he had never
been asked to remove any
clothing. In further cross examination Patient B said he had in fact taken off
his shirt when being treated
by the Respondent.
Evidence of
Ms McEacharn
McEacharn is the current Executive Officer of the Chiropractic Council of NSW.
Substantially, Ms McEacharn gave evidence regarding
the first page of a document
(Patient A’s initial Complaint Form) that appeared to have been sent by
way of a facsimile to
the Chiropractic Board of NSW (Board) which was part of
the Health Professional Registration Boards (HPRB as it then was –
the precursor of the Chiropractic Council within the Health Professional
Councils Authority).
McEacharn was not the relevant officer at the time this facsimile was received
by the Board, however, upon reviewing the business
records she gave evidence
that the first page of this document had not been retained. Further, Ms
McEacharn gave evidence that it
was the practice to discard the cover sheet of
such documents.
Telephone Records
Tribunal was provided with a number of records regarding the mobile telephones
of both Patient A and the Respondent. These records
indicate that there was some
communication between the two mobile telephones on the afternoon of 10 March
Clinical Records
in evidence were several versions of an ‘Application for Chiropractic
Treatment’ for Patient A. This was a document
that had been prepared by
the Respondent for his patients to complete. The document is printed up with
some fields identified only
in Japanese and others in both English and Japanese.
The Tribunal had three versions of this document in evidence. One was the
completed by the Respondent and Patient A at the time of the
consultations, another is a translation and explanation of the form
provided by
the Respondent and the third is an official translation provided by the
Community Relations Commission.
records indicate that Patient A had appointments to see the Respondent on 26
February 2010 and 3 March 2010 and cancelled a
further appointment for 10 March
2010 by way of a SMS message.
treatment part of the records reads as follows:
26-2-10 (Fri) C7 especially right side RP
Gen OT esp C7, L5/S1
Thighs and feet
mm, joining, Adj C TL
3-3-10 (Wed) X-Ray ref CAD/LAT, OBL
Palp, C1 RL
C6-7 swollen
10-3-10 (Wed) DKA SMS rec’d
today cancelled appt
The Respondent’s evidence
Respondent provided the HCCC with a response to its letter dated 3 August 2010
(exhibit 14) by way of a statement dated 19 August
2010 (exhibit 15)
The Statement dated 19 August 2010 provided an introduction to the manner in
which Patient A had made his appointment, attended the
practice, completed the
information sheet and provided information regarding the presenting complaint
and then included the following
description of the progress of the first
consultation:
I then commenced a physical examination of the patient. I asked Patient A
to stand up. After he stood up I told him I was moving the
chair which I did and
placed it next to the wall under the clothes hooks.
I walked behind Patient A and observed his posture which appeared to be
within normal limits. I then palpated his neck and thoracic
spine. It was at
this stage that Patient A mentioned he had a lower back ache and pointed to his
lower lumbar area.
I then asked him to remove his shirt, trousers and shoes which he did and
placed them on the clothes hangers on the wall. I asked
him to stand naturally
and I observed his posture both from the side and the back. I continued my
palpation down the thoracic spine
including the lumbar spine.
I then performed some orthopaedic tests. I stood behind Patient A and
carried out the Adams test and Trendelenburg Test, both of which
negative. These were performed to check if the spine moves freely when bending
forward at all vertebral levels and any weakness
in the medial gluteal muscles.
Patient A was then asked to sit on the treatment table. I stood behind him
and palpated his cervical spine; this was to determine
the condition of his neck
in the seated position. I noticed that C7 was rotated posterior on the right, in
chiropractic terms it
was listed as C7 RP. This was mentioned to Patient A and
he said his right side felt worse that (sic) his left.
I then performed Cervical Compression and Distraction Tests and the
Soto-Hall Test in sitting position, all proved negative. This
was done to check
for cervical nerve compression and spine space occupying lesion.
I told him I was going to push against his back and to relax and not
resist. I then performed the Motion Palpation Test to his thoracic
spine. This was to determine any fixations apparent in the spine. A fixation was
detected at the L5/S1 level.
This was completed by about 2:30pm.
Patient A was then asked to lie face down on the treatment table. When
Patient A was in the prone position a large cotton sheet measuring
1.27m by 1m
was placed over his lower back and legs.
I told him to relax while I felt his neck and back. I then palpated his
neck and thoracic areas. Patient A’s right paraspinal
muscles of the
cervical spine and right Trapezius muscle across to the shoulder joint were
tight. I massaged the cervical and thoracic
paraspinal and trapezius muscles,
but spent the majority of time on his right side of his neck and right trapezius
muscle as this
was his main complaint.
I then went to massage his lumbar spine and said I was going to just lower
his underpants a bit, which I did to the level of the third
sacral segment along
with the covering sheet which was folded back. This was done as the elastic band
of the underpants was over
the lumbo-sacral joint. I then massaged the lumbar
spine concentrating on the lumbo-sacral. When the massage was finished I
his underpants to the original position.
I then told him I was going to look at his feet and legs. I moved the
covering sheet up to cover his torso and pelvic areas. I firstly
palpated his
hamstring muscles. This was done to see if there was any tightness in his thigh
muscles as if present can cause lower
back discomfort.
Next I examined his feet. I palpated the plantar surface of his feet for
any muscular spasm and checked all of his toes for freedom
of movement. This
showed no abnormality. It is done as sometimes patients have a problem in their
feet without realizing it and it
can cause low back discomfort.
It was now about 2:40pm. Patient A was asked to turn face up. The covering
sheet was applied again. This time I sat on a chair at
the top of Patient
A’s head. From there I reached around and massaged his neck some more for
I then told him I was going to adjust his neck. I said this both in
English and Japanese so he understood exactly what I was going
to do. I stood up
and removed my chair. I checked the integrity of the cervical arteries and on
finding no apparent problem, adjusted
C7 with the patient in the supine
I then told him I was going to adjust his lower back and asked him to turn
onto his side. Again the covering sheet was adjusted that
it covered him while
he was turned onto his side. I adjusted L5 right side first and placed him in
the lumbar roll position. He was
then asked to turn onto the other side. The
same procedure was used again. During all of these movements the patient had the
sheet over him.
Patient A was then asked to sit on the table with his legs over the left
side. This time the covering sheet was over his lap and legs.
I was standing
behind him on the right side of the table.
I said I was going to adjust his upper back. He was asked to put his hands
behind his neck, interlocking his fingers. I then explained
I was going to put
my arms through his and hold onto his forearms. I used a rolled up towel for
this adjustment, placing it between
Patient A’s upper thoracic spine and
my chest. I then ran through the adjustment explaining what I was going to do. I
him through a ‘dry run’ of the adjustment showing and
explaining what I was doing and that the actual adjustment would
be performed
faster. I asked him after the ‘dry run’ if it was okay to proceed
and he agreed. I do this adjustment for
the initial treatment with every patient
it is performed upon. All adjustments were completed by about 2:45pm.
I then asked Patient A to get dressed. He turned to his right and took one
step to where his belongings were placed.
I turned to the left and walked around the table to sit at my desk. After
getting dressed Patient A pulled the chair up to the front
of my desk and sat
down. I then talked to him about his neck condition and that I felt a problem in
his lower right side of his neck.
I said I would possibly like to have some
x-rays of his neck done but firstly I like to see how he responds to
today’s treatment.
I then booked the next appointment for Patient A for Wednesday,
March 2010, at 3pm. Patient A then paid his account and a receipt
was issued to him. We then talked about Japan, just general things.
I said that
I had lived in Japan and he asked me what I did over there to which I replied
that I worked as a chiropractor. Questions
and answers went back and forth and
we talked for about 5 or so minutes.
Patient A left my clinic just before 3pm.
Respondent provided an equally detailed account of the consultation that
occurred on 3 March 2010. The Respondent stated that
he had asked Patient A how
he felt and Patient A indicated there had been no change. Once again the
Respondent asked Patient A to
undress and Patient A did so, placing his clothes
on the hanger and chair provided.
Respondent asked Patient A to sit on the table and while he stood behind him the
Respondent palpated Patient A’s neck and
‘C1 was right
lateral (C1RL) and that the area over C6/7 was swollen slightly’.
motion palpation to the lumbar spine indicated there was no change to the lower
back from the previous consultation.
statement continues with the description of the balance of the consultation as
Patient A was asked to lie face down on the treatment table where again
the covering sheet was placed over his lower back and legs
then I massaged his
cervical, thoracic and lumbar muscles, the same procedure was used in the
previous treatment. He was asked to
turn face up and a covering sheet was used
to cover his torso and legs.
I massaged his neck in the supine position for another 5 minutes.
Adjustments were performed the same as in the previous treatment.
After the treatment Patient A got dressed and pulled the chair up to my
desk. I explained that as there was no response to my treatment
that I would
like to get an x-ray done. I then wrote out a referral for plain film x-ray to
his cervical and thoracic spine.
is clear from his statement that the Respondent had regard to both his clinical
records and to the HICAPS records for these consultations.
Respondent noted that Patient A had made an appointment for 10 March 2010 at the
end of the 3 March 2010 consultation but had
cancelled this appointment by way
of an SMS message to the Respondent’s mobile telephone. The Respondent
stated that he did
not recall Patient A indicating in the SMS that he was
‘uncomfortable’ following the treatment he received.
the 19 August 2010 statement the Respondent then addresses some specific
allegations raised by the HCCC. Some of these matters
are not the subject of
Particulars of Complaint and therefore are not considered by this Tribunal.
of the specific allegations addressed by the Respondent is the allegation that
he requested Patient A to completely undress on
26 February 2010 (cross refer to
paragraph 7 of Patient A’s statement). The Respondent stated that he asked
Patient A to remove
his clothes but to leave his underwear on. The clothes were
hung on the hangers near the doorway of the treatment room. When addressing
contents of paragraph 22 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent (in his
19 August 2010) statement reiterates that he did
not ask Patient A to remove all
of his clothing.
respect to the contents of Patient A’s statement at paragraph 9 the
Respondent stated that he only lowered Patient A’s
underwear to the level
of the third sacral segment (being the top of the tailbone). Further, although
he does not have a distinct
recollection of what he said to Patient A it was his
practice to inform patients what he was doing, especially in relation to
respect to paragraphs 10 and 23 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent
denied pulling off Patient A’s underwear
and putting them on the side
respect to paragraph 11 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent denied
that the statement detailing massage of the lower
buttocks and thighs, in
particular he denies touching Patient A between his legs or on his penis. The
Respondent stated that he was
palpating the muscles to see if there was any
respect to paragraph 13, 15 and 17 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent
denied that Patient A was naked at any stage.
The Respondent states that Patient
A had his underpants on and he was provided with a sarong (approximately 1.27m x
1m in dimension)
during treatment to provide coverage
. With respect to paragraph 26 of Patient A’s
statement the Respondent stated that he used the sarong for coverage during the
second treatment session.
respect to paragraph 14 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent denied he
said the words attributed to him by Patient A
or that he touched Patient
A’s penis. The Respondent further stated that he was not even working in
the area so there was no
‘even inadvertent
respect to paragraph 18 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent agreed
that he did click Patient A’s neck, shoulder
and back and that treatment
occurred in the other position described by Patient A but states that Patient A
was not naked.
respect to the part of paragraph 23 of Patient A’s statement dealing with
the massaging of the thighs during the second
consultation and the comment
‘wake up’ the Respondent denied that he touched Patient A’s
thighs or penis at any
stage during the second consultation. The Respondent also
denied saying the words ‘wake up’ to Patient A in any context.
respect to paragraph 24 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent denied
that he made any attempt to touch Patient A’s
penis. With respect to
paragraph 25 of Patient A’s statement the Respondent denied the alleged
conversation took place.
Respondent provided a statement dated 30 November 2011 (exhibit R1) as part of
the evidence filed on his behalf.
statement repeats much of the information provided by the Respondent in his
earlier statement and was also explored with the
Respondent in oral evidence.
Tribunal notes some points from exhibit R1. The Respondent stated that when he
began his physical examination of Patient A, Patient
A mentioned that he had
lower back pain, indicating his lumbar spine. The Tribunal observes that the
notation of
appears in the right-sided column. The
Respondent gave evidence that this is the column in which he usually records the
he provides. At this point the Tribunal notes that Patient A’s
evidence was that he did not recall mentioning lower back pain
Respondent. The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent stated (see paragraph
162 above) that he massaged Patient A’s
lumbar and lumbo-sacral areas.
Respondent stated that he made an assessment of the Respondent’s lower
back at the commencement of the second consultation
by utilising the Motion
Palpation Test and found that there was no change from the first consultation.
The Tribunal notes that the
evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the
Respondent did not alter his treatment of Patient A as a result of this clinical
finding; rather, he just repeated the adjustments undertaken during the first
consultation.
Tribunal notes that the time recorded by the Respondent in both his statement
dates 19 August 2010 (exhibit 15) and exhibit R1
(dated 30 November 2011) as
being the time Patient A was provided with the receipt and the consultation
concluded was 3.23pm whereas
the copy of the HICAPs receipt provided at exhibit
R10 records the time as 3.32pm.
Respondent also addressed in exhibit R1 (dated 30 November 2011) specific
matters, some of which are not the subject of Particulars
and are not relevant
in any way to this Complaint (e.g. comments regarding treatment plans) and
therefore they have not been considered
by the Tribunal.
matters addressed in the balance of the contents of exhibit R1 are addressed in
an identical manner to which they were in exhibit
15, including the repeating of
a typographical error (in the section dealing with Patient A’s paragraph
24) and the statement
regarding the number of years the Respondent has been
practising as a chiropractor (i.e. it had not been adjusted to take account
the fact that it was written some 15 months later in time).
Oral evidence of the Respondent
Respondent gave evidence under oath before the Tribunal. The Respondent adopted
his statement (R1) and made an amendment to that
document after refreshing his
memory from the HICAPS transaction printouts (also in evidence – exhibit
R10) altering the time
that the consultation concluded from 3.23pm to 3.32pm.
Respondent was then shown two additional photos (additional in that they had not
been shown to Patient A) and identified these
as being photos depicting the
inside of two cupboards in his consulting room. One with a ‘dirty
linen’ basket visible
inside the cupboard and the other with various items
including linen, ‘sarongs’ and towels arranged on shelves.
Respondent gave evidence that since he had produced the ‘sarongs’ to
the Tribunal in February he had been using towels
and gowns as coverings for
Respondent gave evidence that he had used the sarongs folded in half and when he
considered they required cleaning he would place
them into the laundry bag in
the cupboard (T235).
respect to the first consultation, the Respondent denied removing Patient
A’s underpants and stated that he had covered
him with a sarong. The
Respondent denied touching Patient A’s penis while massaging his lower
buttocks or upper thighs. He
also denied stating to Patient A
a nice cock/dick’
during the consultation (T236). The Respondent
repeated denials regarding the removal of underpants during the second
consultation
and stated that on this occasion he once again covered Patient A
with an unfolded sarong (T237-8). He denied touching Patient A’s
while massaging his upper thigh or saying
touch Patient A’s penis.
Respondent gave evidence that he had taken a history from Patient A while they
were sitting at his desk. He recalled taking a
history of Patient A having
received about one and a half years of treatment from another chiropractor about
two years earlier. After
taking the history the Respondent informed Patient A
that he thought he would
‘possibly look at his neck to adjust
(T237.28). He also asked Patient A if he understood about
chiropractic treatment, informed him of the possibility of
and the possibility of the condition
slightly worse or not improving’
Respondent stated that he recalled that Patient A had his arms resting on the
armrests of the treatment table when he was lying
on his stomach.
cross-examination the Respondent agreed he had seen many patients in his rooms
over the 37 years he had been in practice and
his specific recollection
regarding the patient and the treatments provided depended on the patient
(T240-241). It was unusual for
patients to cancel appointments outright rather
than just postponing them (T249).
Respondent gave evidence that it was only in the clinical notes of patients who
spoke Japanese that he may write some entries
in Japanese (T244). When taken to
the clinical records for Patient A the Respondent described them as
‘brief but sufficient’
. The Respondent further gave evidence
that the notes were sufficient for him to continue with treatment of Patient A
Respondent stated that the notes allowed him to ‘see’ what he had
done during the consultations (T248). He stated
that he was unable to estimate
how many patients he had seen between 3 March 2010 and 30 November 2011 although
it was less than
500. He was able to say that he saw 40 to 50 patients per week
and that he would only have taken two weeks holiday during this period.
cross-examination the Respondent gave an account of the consultations with
Patient A. He had palpated Patient A’s neck
and shoulders while Patient A
had his shirt on and then once again after he removed his shirt. The Respondent
stated that it was
while Patient A was being examined with his clothes on that
Patient A mentioned lower back pain. The Respondent performed two tests
Patient A removed his clothes and these tests indicated that Patient A
didn’t have
‘lower back pain’
(T266). The Tribunal
notes that such findings are consistent with Patient A’s evidence that he
did not recall making complaint
of low back pain.
Respondent was unable to recall whether or not he and Patient A were speaking in
Japanese (T265).
completing his examination of Patient A the Respondent determined that Patient A
‘needed massage to the neck and upper thoracic areas and lower lumber
areas followed by spinal manipulation’
(T268). The Respondent
described the lower lumbar area as being around the normal belt line of a
person’s trousers. The Tribunal
did not gain a clear understanding of the
reason why the massage to the lower lumbar area was required in the event that
the Respondent stated he performed had returned a negative result for
low back pain.
Respondent agreed that it would not have been unusual for him to speak socially
to a patient while he was providing treatment
(but not while undertaking the
assessment). He could not recall whether he was talking to Patient A during the
treatment provided
in the first consultation (T270).
cross-examination the Respondent denied he was sexually attracted to Patient A.
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the adjustment of Patient
A’s underwear during the treatment of his lower
lumbar area (T273 -
Q. You, I suggest, when you got to the lower back region in the process
of massaging Patient A pulled his underwear halfway down
his buttocks?
A. I pulled them down to the level of the third sacral segment.
Q. Which is how far down the buttock region?
A. About onethird of the way down.
Q. Because it's fair to say, is it not, the spine extends down at least
partially through the buttock region of an individual; is
that fair to
A. The spine?
A. The lumbar spine you're talking about?
A. The lumbar spine proceeds until the top of the sacrum.
Q. So you pulled the underpants down so that the buttocks were about a
third exposed?
A. Exactly.
Q. You didn't inform Patient A that you were going to do that
beforehand, did you?
A. I did inform him.
Q. What did you say to him?
A. I said that I was going to lower his underpants a bit so that I could
get to the lower lumbar area easier.
Q. Sir, I suggest that you did not say that to him before moving the
underpants?
A. I did say that to him.
Q. He was still face down on the bed at this point, wasn't he?
A. That's correct.
Q. You then started massaging, did you, the upper buttock region of
A. No, I did not.
Q. What did you do?
A. I was massaging the lower lumbar area.
Q. Was that above the buttock region?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. On Patient A?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. See, it's the case, isn't it, you began at that point massaging his
upper buttocks?
A. Sorry, can you repeat the question?
Q. I put it to you at this point the massage procedure that you began
massaging the upper buttocks of Patient A?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Then at this point I put it to you that you pulled Patient A's
underpants all the way down and took them off Patient A completely?
A. I did not.
Q. You put his underpants on the side table?
A. I did not.
Q. There was a side table, was there, near the bed?
A. No, there is not.
Respondent was later taken to two additional photos that were not shown to
Patient A – being exhibits R21 and R22. The Respondent
confirmed that
there was a fixture/fitting in the treatment room in the area identified by
Patient A as being the location of the
‘drawers’ on which he placed
his clothing. The Respondent identified that the diagram drawn by Patient A was
not correct
as it in fact it was not a set of drawers rather it ran the whole
length of the wall (T283).
in the cross-examination the Respondent stated that although he had moved
Patient A’s underpants about a third of the
way down his buttocks he did
not massage Patient A’s buttocks (T287). Rather he massaged the lumbar
sacral region (T287).
Respondent gave evidence that he was now unable to remember every word of any
conversation that he had with Patient A. The Respondent
gave the following
evidence (parts of T291-4):
Q. Do you recall saying the words, "Oh, nice" to him?
A. I don't recall exactly saying the words "oh, nice", but I do use
interrogatives like this.
Q. It's possible then you may have said the words "oh nice," to Patient
A. Sorry, say would you repeat
Q. Is it possible you may have said when Patient A was lying on his back
in that first treatment session the words "oh nice"?
A. The words "oh nice," it's very possible.
Q. Why would you have said that?
A. I say that at the end of quite often at any movement that a
patient is doing to reassure them they're in the correct position
or what I did
was what I was aiming to do.
Q. Isn't it really the case that Patient A being naked rolled over
partially erect, you observed his penis and said the words, "Oh,
you have a nice
A. That is not correct.
Q. Isn't it the case at about that time, you touched his penis?
A. No, I did not.
Q. I need to put this to you, sir with the palm of your hand and the tips
of your fingers?
A. No, I did not.
Q. You did that for a few seconds?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Do you remember Patient A asking you about coverings during the first
treatment session?
A. No, he did not.
Q. Didn't Patient A say, "Is there anything to cover my important
A. No, he did not.
Q. Didn't he say that to you after you'd commented about his penis, as
I've put to you, and touched it?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Didn't you, after he asked that, give him, in effect, a serviette or
handkerchief sized piece of material which was about 30 centimetres
A. No, I did not.
Q. Didn't Patient A place that over his penis?
A. No, he did not.
Q. You massaged his thighs while he was lying face up on the bed, didn't
A. Lying face up?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Did you massage them while he was lying face down on the bed?
A. I palpated the hamstring muscles, yes.
Q. The hamstrings are the muscles at the back of the thigh?
A. That's correct.
Q. They obviously extend up, do they, to the lower buttocks?
A. They extend up to the lower buttocks, yes.
Q. In massaging those while he was lying face down, did you massage up to
the lower buttock region?
A. I didn't massage; I was palpating. That's palpating up to that
region, yes.
Q. Do you mind just telling me what the distinction between palpating and
massaging is in this context?
A. Yes. Massaging is trying to get a muscle to relax in usually hand
motions; a palpating is just a testing form to see if there
is any muscle spasm
or tightness in those muscles.
Q. So, it's a softer touch, as it were?
A. It's a softer touch and a lot shorter time, only testing; we're
not or palpating; we're not treating.
Q. I imagine palpating the hamstrings would take some time to do it
Q. How long would it take?
A. About 15 seconds.
Q. You agree then that you touched the upper thigh region on each thigh,
do you, of Patient A while he was lying face down on the
bed in the first
treatment session?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. You agree you did that for at least 15 seconds?
A. Fifteen seconds on each thigh, yes.
Q. You did each thigh individually?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. With both hands, I assume?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. I assume that in palpating to the upper thigh region, clearly, at
least, part of your hands would be at the very least going close,
not, to the penis of Patient A?
A. Nowhere near. I'm on the back of the thigh.
Q. See, isn't it the case that when you were doing that, you touched his
A. No, I did not.
Q. Why was it necessary for you while he was lying face down to palpate
his thighs?
A. Quite often, tight hamstring muscles can cause lower back
Q. Did you determine that it was necessary to massage the thighs?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Isn't it the case that you really were massaging his lower buttocks
and upper thighs for about five minutes?
A. No, it is not.
Q. I need to put this to you, you actually moved, I'd suggest, from
palpation to massage his hamstring area?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Again, I need to suggest this to you that Patient A placed the
handkerchief over his groin region, over his penis, and that it
fell off in that
first treatment session while he was lying on his back?
A. No, it did not.
Q. That it fell off a number of times?
A. No, it did not.
Q. Given that you treated the back of his legs while he was face down,
you then treated the front of his legs while he was face up?
A. No, I did not.
Q. Why not?
A. I have never found very seldom found that the anterior
thigh muscles affect the pelvis in the lower back area.
Respondent gave evidence that he used two hands to palpate Patient A’s
hamstring (thigh) including the upper thigh. However,
it was the back of the
thigh and not the inner thigh so it was nowhere near the penis (T293). This
palpation was not followed by
any massaging of the thighs.
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the conversation he had with
Patient A at the end of the first consultation (T296-7):
Q. You had some social discussion with Patient A, did you, at the
end of that first treatment sessions?
A. That is correct.
Q. Would it be fair to describe that as him telling you where he was from
and about living in Japan for ten years?
A. That is correct.
Q. Did you mention to Patient A that you'd been an off shore judge
in Japan for chrysanthemum shows?
A. I told him that I grew chrysanthemums, yes.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. That you, sorry, I missed that last word?
A. I told him that I grew chrysanthemum flowers, yes.
Q. I'm not sure what your answer then is to the question that was
MR O'DONNELL: I'd better rephrase that.
CHAIRPERSON: No I think if I could ask the witness to answer
the question that you asked?
MR O'DONNELL
A. I told we talked about chrysanthemum; whether I told him I
was actually a judge or not, I'm not quite sure, but he mentions
yes, I am a judge and I grow chrysanthemums.
Q. Is it possible you actually did tell him that you were a judge of
those shows?
A. There were many things spoken about during that time and that could
possibly have come up.
cross-examination the Respondent gave a detailed account of the second
consultation with Patient A (commencing at T 297). This
evidence was consistent
with the earlier statements provided by the Respondent. The Respondent denied
that he had palpated the thigh
region during this second consultation.
Respondent was then asked about the words written in Japanese that translated to
that were written in the treatment column of
Patient A’s clinical notes. The Respondent gave evidence that the
notation only referred to certain parts of the
entries for the previous consultation. It did refer to the last line of the
from the same column for the previous consultation but did not include a
reference to feet and thighs and general orthopaedic tests.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent gave evidence that during the first
consultation he had undertaken a palpation (examination)
of Patient A’s
feet and had not found any problems (T303). The Tribunal also notes that the
‘thighs and feet’
was recorded in the ride-side
column of the clinical notes. The notation does not indicate which aspect(s) of
the thighs and feet
was examined (T302/3). The Respondent stated that he had
palpated Patient A’s lower back in the second consultation as Patient
was still indicating pain in that region. The Tribunal notes that there is no
record of the lower back being tested by way of a
motion palpation in the
clinical records (T306.12-17). The Respondent gave evidence that he massaged the
L5 area during the second
consultation, just as he had during the first
(T306.33). The Respondent stated he did not massage any part of the thighs
second consultation (T306). The Respondent stated that he did not
have to palpate the thighs or feet during the second consultation
abnormalities had been detected during the first consultation (T307). Once again
the Tribunal notes that there was not clear
evidence as to why this was
necessary in the circumstances of the negative tests for low back pain. When the
Respondent was asked
written in the right-sided column for the second consultation he gave evidence
that this comment only referred to the last
line of the entry above (being the
entry relating to the first consultation) not the entirety of the entry (T307).
The Respondent
then gave evidence that a reference to C7 palpation was meant to
be repeated in the entry for the second consultation but the general
orthopaedic
testing was not intended to be repeated (T308). The Respondent justified his
answer by reference to the entry in the
left-sided column
‘Palpation,
C1, RL C67 swollen’
this evidence the Respondent did not agree that his notes were not an adequate
record of the details of the examinations he
conducted although he accepted that
they did not contain all of the details of the examinations
in response to questions from the Tribunal clarifying the Respondent’s
evidence in this regard the Respondent gave the
following evidence
Q. You've indicated that you've written thighs and feet, or on the side
of the page that you generally use for treatment, but that's
not a hard and fast
A. That's right.
Q. Because you've indicated that you've written on the right hand side
for the first consultation, thighs and feet?
A. That's right.
Q. Your evidence was that you wrote that there because that's not
something you always do, and so you wrote it down because it's
something you
don't always do, is that
A. That's right, yes.
Q. It is, using your recordkeeping method, is that the right place for it
to have been put?
A. Yes because I wrote on the line above it the other examinations that I
Q. So do I take it the entries for the 26th of the second, the left hand
side relates to symptoms and examination, and the first
two lines of the right
hand side relate to symptoms and examination?
Q. The third line on the right hand side relates to things that you
Cross-examination
on this issue concluded as follows (T309-310):
Q. Sir, you've been a bit selective, aren't you, about what those two
words apply to, aren't you?
A. No I'm not. I'm telling you as I the way I write it, as to
what it means to me. And that is why I wrote it that way.
Q. Isn't, "as above", supposed to indicate that palpation of the thighs
also occurred on 3 March 2010?
A. No it doesn't. As I said, on the 26 February when I palpated the
thighs and the feet I did not find anything wrong with those
areas, therefore
there was no need to go back to these areas.
Q. Well I suggest that you did go back to the thighs on
A. No I did not.
Q. I suggest that you meant to convey with the Japanese words, "as
above", translated into English, in part that that's what you'd
A. No I did not.
asked about his clinical records during cross-examination the Respondent gave
the following evidence (T303-305):
Q. You would agree with respect to the notes that appear on the first
three lines right across the page at page 59 of exhibit 10,
are partially in Japanese?
A. That's right.
Q. Therefore they cannot be understood by a person who does not read
Japanese without the assistance of a translator?
A. That is correct.
Q. Would you also agree that they do not adequately record details of the
examinations that you conducted?
A. No, I do not agree.
Q. They don't record all the detail that you have described of your
examination of Patient A in that first session, do they?
A. They don't describe it in detail, no.
Q. They don't enable another practitioner to, firstly if he doesn't read
Japanese, read them in their entirety at all, do they?
A. That is correct.
Q. Secondly, even if they could read Japanese I would suggest to you, or
if they have them translated, they would not be able to
tell, would they, what
you'd done by way of examination in its entirety in that first treatment
A. As I said previously, if another chiropractor needed to see these, a
report would be written out for them.
Q. What if you weren't available to write the report?
A. Then they wouldn't have access to the patient card.
Q. They simply couldn't know, could they, what occurred in that treatment
A. If they couldn't get access to the patient, no, they wouldn't
Q. Assume they could get access to the patient report but couldn't get a
report from you, they couldn't tell, could they, what had
occurred in that
treatment session?
A. They could tell what I was that I had done treatment. That
I had done tests and that I had treated these areas. I have chiropractic
listings there which should help in their diagnosis of the patient's
Q. Yes, but they're really just not complete, are they?
A. They are complete.
Q. They are not thorough, are they?
A. They are thorough.
Q. That are inadequate, aren't they?
A. No, they are not.
Q. What chiropractic adjustments are detailed in there?
A. The adjustments to the when I write to adjustment to each
[as transcribed]
I am talking about the ones that I have
found. C7, the upper right thoracic and the L5.
Q. But this part of your note in Japanese, part of your note that relates
to adjustments in Japanese?
A. Part of it is in Japanese but also in English afterwards.
Q. Is it the case that the notes for 3 March 2010 are also partly in
A. That is correct.
Q. Which part is in Japanese?
A. The section on the righthand side.
Q. Which says, "as above"?
A. That is correct.
Q. So a non Japanese reader would not be able to know at all, would they,
reading that without the assistance of a translator or
you, what had occurred in
that treatment session?
A. That is correct.
Q. So again I put it to you that it is not thorough?
A. That is not correct. As I said, if the patient ..(fault in recording
equipment). they are given a report.
Q. I put it to you that it is inadequate?
A. No, it's not.
Q. It's incomplete, I suggest that to you as well?
A. No, it's not.
Q. If you are not available to ..(fault in recording
equipment)..?
A. Then they wouldn't have access to the patient file.
Q. They would not be able to know, do you agree with me what
A. The parts about adjusting and that are written in English.
Q. But what tells them "as above" is in Japanese?
A. That's correct.
Q. Yes, so they wouldn't be able to know, would they, without the
assistance of a Japanese translator?
A. That's correct, yes.
cross-examination the Respondent made numerous firm denials of removing Patient
A’s underpants, touching his penis and
not providing adequate covering to
Patient A during treatment.
re-examination the Respondent stated that if he referred a patient for x-rays he
would ask a patient to bring in any earlier x-rays
so that he could compare
them. His practice was to do this when the patient first rang to make an
appointment. He could not recall
whether or not he had asked Patient A if he had
any previous x-rays (T315). Later, in answer to a question from the Tribunal
Respondent stated that he did not ask Patient A if he had recent x-rays when
he provided him with the referral at the end of the
second consultation. The
Respondent added that Patient A had also not mentioned anything about having
previous x-rays when he was
provided with the referral (T326). The Tribunal
notes that the clinical records for the second consultation have the entry
‘x-ray referral’
as the very first entry in the left-handed
column. Further the x-rays requested would not capture an image of C1 or the
lumbar spine.
It was Patient A’s evidence that the x-ray referral was not
provided until the end of the consultation.
response to answers from the Tribunal the Respondent provided a considerable
amount of information regarding the complaints made
by Patient A, the
Respondent’s findings on examination and the treatment provided by the
Respondent. These details went well
beyond the information recorded in the
clinical notes.
example of how the information went beyond the face of the record is the
Respondent’s elaboration of the notation ‘shoulder’
made in Japanese in Patient A’s clinical record to which he attributed the
following meaning (T323):
Q. So you've written "shoulder", but can you describe what you mean by
A. Shoulder normally for this type of thing
I'm because this is the way the Japanese speak it's from
the nape of the neck across
to the shoulder joint then across the trapezius
respect to one aspect of the Respondent’s evidence regarding a constant
ache that the Respondent stated Patient A had reported
to have suffered in his
trapezius area the Respondent stated he was not relying upon his notes, rather
he was relying upon the fact
that it was not an unusual problem for Japanese
people to suffer from and so he easily understood his notation to make reference
to all these additional details (T323). The Respondent stated that he had not
written down in the records the frequency of the pain
suffered by Patient A.
Tribunal’s questions continued on this topic as follows
(T323-324):
Q......Did you ask the patient, or do you have a recollection of a
previous presenting history of the pain as in the initial onset
and the causes
of the initial onset of pain?
A. No, I don't did not write it down but he gave me a history
of having it constantly over a period of two years or more. Normally
Q. Do you remember how it commenced?
A. No I don't.
Q. Were there any associated symptoms recorded?
A. No there were not.
Q. Did he have any neurological referral?
A. No there were not.
Q. Was there presence of pins and needles or paresthesia?
A. No there were not.
Q. Did you record those results?
A. No, not written down there, no. I did not.
Q. But you remember them?
A. Yes I do.
Q. Was there a presence of any red flags?
A. No there were not.
Q. What questions did you ask with respect to the red flags?
A. Questions or as far as any psychological what do
you mean by red flags?
Q. Well red flags are meaning more medical causes for the pain that are
not chiropractic.
A. Well I asked him if he was taking any medication and it's written on
the form that he replied he was not.
Q. Presence of red flags would be things that yellow
A. Sorry, I'm not
Q. You're not familiar with that?
A. familiar with these terms.
Q. Biopsychosocial issues.
Q. Biopsychosocial issues that may affect a person's perception of their
pain or their tolerance.
A. There seemed to be none when I was talking to him; did not present
Respondent’s evidence in response to the Tribunal’s questions
regarding his clinical records continued as follows
Q. Dr Maher, did you question the patient with respect to systems
review? Cardiovascular system gastrointestinal system
A. No I did not.
Q. Do you take vitals?
A. No I did not.
Q. With respect to the explanation that you gave, you mentioned that you
explained to the patient what you would be undertaking,
what you would be
Q. Did you explain also what physical examination you would be
undertaking?
A. At the particular time, no I just I tell him that just
before I'm going to do it.
Q. That's fine, so you did mention that?
A. I do mention it did mention it before I actually did each
examination, yes.
Q. Do you describe what a chiropractic adjustment is?
A. Well when I saw him the first time, when he was sitting at the
Q. On the first instance, yes.
A. Yes. He had seen a chiropractor before and at that time I did ask
him, "Do you know what chiropractic treatment involves" of
acknowledged, "Yes" and then I did explain that of course with chiropractic his
own with the spine and the muscles and
that I would be doing manipulation,
spinal manipulation.
Q. Did you explain what spinal manipulation means?
A. Well I just I think I I can't remember now if I
spoke to him with Japanese to him but if the patient ever gives any
that they aren't quite sure of what the word is in English I then say it
in Japanese to them. I can't remember exactly this time
if I did or not
Q. Did you describe to the patient the risks versus the benefits of the
treatment that you would deliver?
A. The risks insofar as there is a possibility of him not getting better
which he experienced before or possibly getting worse, but
it was my effort to
improve his condition.
Q. Did you outline the risks associated with cervical adjustments or
manipulations?
No I did not.
(Emphasis added by Tribunal)
Q. Did you suggest to the patient that he had the choice of doing nothing
with the presenting complaint and what the likely progression
would be if he
chose to do nothing?
A. Well he had been doing nothing before so I didn't continue on with
Q. Did you ask the patient whether he had any questions that he wanted to
ask of you prior to the treatment?
A. I'm sorry, I can't remember.
Q. Did you get the patient to sign or date any sort of consent
A. No I did not.
Q. Dr Maher did you record the advice that you gave to the
A. Did did I
Q. The things that you've just stated now, do you document that by some
notation or
A. No I did not.
evidence of the Respondent to further questions from the Tribunal regarding
Patient A’s clinical records were as follows
(T326-330):
Q. From the notes that you have written here, did you perform any other
screen tests for spinal regions?
A. The the tests that I performed that were written in my
Q. Well in your statement you've written well no actually, in
your statement, yes. In the first section you've written that you
did Adams and
Trendelenburgs. Was that documented in your notes?
A. No it's not.
Q. Did you undertake any other orthopaedic or general screen
A. Yes I did, when he was sitting on the treatment table.
Q. Can you explain what they were?
A. Yes I did the cervical compression test, cervical distraction test and
I did the sotohall test in the sitting position.
Q. Could you spell the soto
A. SOTO hyphen HALL.
Q. Did you do any other tests?
Q. To the thoracic spine?
A. To the thoracic spine I did motion palpation.
A. When he was sitting on the treatment table. When
Q. The lumbar spine?
A. Again, when he was sitting on the treatment table, motion
Q. Motion palpation. Did you do any other orthopaedic tests to the
thoracics and lumbar spine?
A. No I did not.
Q. Do you recall the restriction findings from the motion palpation
A. There were no restrictions. Sorry, motion palpation?
A. Sorry, yes at L5 S1, there was a restriction at the L5 S1
Q. What about the thoracic spine?
A. No I did not find any restriction there.
Q. Did you adjust the thoracic spine?
A. I did adjust the thoracic spine because when the patient was lying on
the treatment table, I found there was a muscle spasm, muscle
tightness around
the right thoracic area and I felt that a a thoracic wing lift
adjustment would be beneficial to that.
Q. What level did you deliver that adjustment to?
A. Level T3.
Q. Dr Maher, where is that recorded on your notes that it was
A. I didn't record T3, I just wrote "T".
Q. Dr Maher going back to the motion palpation findings.
A. On the top line, I wrote "L5S1". Now, that, to me, would mean a
restriction because that was the test that I did on that area.
Q. That was for the lumbar spine?
Q. There's no notation for the thoracic spine?
A. A a muscle spasm, there is on the lefthand column, I've got
"right Ts". So the right thoracic area, up the top. I knew the
area that I was
looking at because it was in relation to the the thoracic area that I
was examining.
Q. So, Dr Maher, with respect to your page 2 of your notes,
"the delineation of the centre line", can you explain why certain things
written on one side of the page and others are written on the other
A. Generally speaking, I write what
I'm treatment the actual treatment is on the righthand
side and the examination's on the left,
or symptoms, as I'm progressing through.
I I don't always stick to that.
Q. Dr Maher, you mentioned that you undertook the Trendelenburg
Q. Could I ask you why you chose that test?
A. Just to see if the if you see, quite often the
pain in the lower back will come from a gluteal problem and of which you can
detect in the Trendelenburg test. I did the Trendelenburg test. There was no
problems there, so there was no need for me to continue
further investigating in that direction.
Q. Did you palpate any other muscles of the lower back or the hip
A. No, I did not, only the lumbar spine.
Q. So you didn't palpate the muscles of the leg?
A. Yes, but that's not the hip region.
Q. Did you palpate any other muscle?
Q. Those muscles were?
A. The hamstring muscles in both thighs.
Q. Apart from palpation of those
A. And the feet too.
Q. Which muscles in the feet?
A. I just did the sole of the feet just to see if there was any muscle
tightness in there, because that will affect how the person
Q. Did you test the length or strength of these muscles?
A. No, I did not.
Q. What did you find on palpation?
A. Of the hamstring muscles?
Q. The hamstring muscles?
A. Yep, there was no no problem there at all, and in the feet
Q. Did you document that?
A. I don't document something when I find there's nothing there. If I
find something, then I can it put it into the document.
Q. But you've documented thighs and feet?
A. Because it's something that I don't always examine but to remind me
that I have done it, in this particular case, yes.
Q. So, in this particular case, you would know that by looking at the
words "thighs and feet" written on your notes that it wasn't
that you found
something; it was that you did them?
A. Yes, because it's not in the treatment section. The treatment section
is the next line down.
Q. The treatment is in the next line down?
A. So the first two lines on the righthand side are
to concerned with my examination, not with my actual procedure into
Q. So if I ask you about that next line
A. The third line?
Q. The third line on the right side?
A. Muscle manipulation.
A. Of the areas that I was concerned with, which is the cervical and the
right thoracic and L5S1 area.
Q. "ADJ" is?
A. Adjustment.
A. Of the cervical, thoracic in this case, the upper
thoracic and the lumbar spine.
Q. How do you know by that line that it was the upper thoracic?
A. Because that's the area that I was looking at. That's the area that
the patient was complaining of the problem. I know that
at his problem that he said up here, the shoulder area, right
shoulder area that he had pointed to. So this is I that's
write it in after that.
Q. If we have a look at the second visit dated the third of the
Q. You mentioned there was no change?
A. That's right.
Q. Have you documented that?
A. No, I have not documented that.
Q. How did you know there was no change?
A. I asked the patient and he told me.
Q. What did you ask the patient?
A. "How do you feel?" and then he said, I have there is no
change, I feel the same.
clarification of the clinical notes for Patient A was sought by the Tribunal as
follows (T332):
Q. Dr Maher, I'm a little bit confused, still, about your records
here. You've got a line down the middle. Can you explain to me,
the righthand
side are your examinations?
A. Examinations and treatment for most of the time, yes.
Q. The righthand side is for
A. Sorry, sorry, the lefthand side. The lefthand side will be
examinations, yes.
Q. So "thighs and feet" should have been, theoretically, on the lefthand
side if we make it that way?
A. Well, cause I've got "general OT", general orthopaedic tests on the
righthand side, this indicates that I was still doing testing
on the righthand
side of the page. That's why I said, it's not necessarily done like
Q. On the third line down, after tab 9, the second page in, you've
got "MM". That is muscular manipulation, not massage, is it?
A. No, muscle manipulation.
Q. Then you've got "articulation"?
Q. What does that mean?
A. It means motion palpation, in this case.
clarification of the clinical notes was sought by the Tribunal as follows
(T345-346):
Q If I can take you back to the white folder under tab 8, going back
to your treatment notes. Can you clarify the adjustments that
were given on the
26th of the 2nd treatment date?
A. Yes. To the cervical spine.
Q. To all of them?
A. Yes. The cervical spine was an adjustment to C7 and the thoracic was
a wing lift to the T3 or the upper thoracic area and the
lower lumbar was a
lumbar roll adjustment to L5.
Q. In which direction was that lumbar roll adjustment?
A. I did on the right hand side first then followed on the left.
Q. In which direction was the adjustment done?
A. The adjustment was to you mean the listing
adjustment?
Q. Well we have a number of different ways of doing lumbar rolls that can
be different directions.
A. Okay. I did on the right hand side I did it to superior;
on the left hand I side I did it to the inferior.
Q. How do you know that now?
A. Because of the listing. Sorry well because of when I
was well I did a adjustment that way because of the pain on the right
hand side, so I did the right hand side in the superior way.
Q. You did that one first?
Q. The left side in an
A. Inferior.
Q. Have you documented that somewhere?
A. No I haven't.
Q. If you can take me to the second treatment on the 3rd of the
Q. Can you explain to me what adjustments you delivered at that
A. Okay, I would have I did do the same adjustments except I
also did an adjustment to C1 on the right.
Q. So you did exactly the same as you did the first time?
A. The adjustments yes, plus C1. As in my palpation on the left hand
side, I've got C1, RL, right lateral. I did an adjustment
Q. How do you know that?
A. When I write the the listing here that means I follow
through with the adjustment.
Q. You haven't recorded anything on the right hand side underneath, but
A. As above adjusting, no I didn't but I know I did do that; that's
why part of the reason writing the listings, so I know that
through. The same as in my adjustments, I just write "Adjustments C" but I know
I adjusted C7 on the right to start with
because that's the listing that I've
Q. Dr Maher, do you recall whether the patient would have known what
you were doing the time of that second treatment was different
to what you had
done the first treatment?
A. Most patients don't realise. For example if you're adjusting the
lower lumbar in different directions they don't realise that
you're applying the
force in a different or the adjustment in a different direction.
Whether he would realise that I was doing
a different adjustment, I'm explaining
that I'm adjusting the neck but normally I don't explain which vertebrae I've
Q. Did you undertake your safety screen of the cervical spine at the time
of the second treatment?
A. Yes. Always. Every treatment for adjusting the cervical spine I
check the integrity of the cervical arteries.
Q. How do you do that?
A. Placing the patient supine, extending and flexing the neck and placing
pressure in there and holding it for a short time
Q. Sorry, extending and
A. Taking the neck back like that and putting pressure in there and
holding it in that position to see if the and asking the patient
they feel any ill effects or anything like that and then doing the same on the
other side.
Q. Were there any ill effects at that
A. No there were none.
Q. How do you know that?
A. I ask the patient.
Q. Do you record that?
A. No I don't.
questions from the Tribunal continued regarding the Respondent’s clinical
records as follows (T347-348):
Q. Just following on from the last questions, on the second visit you've
noted that C6 and C7 were swollen and I asked you was it
swollen on the first
visit and you said no.
Q. So you continued to adjust exactly the same C6 and C7 even though
there was a negative response to your first visit, am I right
by assuming
A. I wouldn't say a negative response, a
Q. There's swelling?
A. Swelling, yes. But the symptoms stayed the same. I felt that this
was still advantageous to go in and adjust.
Q. In your statement behind tab 1 at page 1, at the bottom
paragraph, "I walked behind Patient A and I observed his posture", this
with his clothes on, "and his posture appeared to be within normal limits", what
do you mean by that?
A. That there was no great scoliosis or hunching of his back; that
his stood fairly erect.
Q. So no great scoliosis?
A. That's right.
Q. But he had his clothes on so you really couldn't tell?
A. Exactly.
Q. Turning over the page then, you asked him to remove his shirt,
trousers and shoes which he did "And I asked him to stand naturally
and observed
his posture both from the side and the back". Now you haven't told us, was
there a different observation there than
the first time?
A. Well with his clothes on it's very hard to tell, as you realise.
Taking the shirt off I can see more but I didn't observe anything
I would have
thought was causing his symptoms so I concluded that was within his still normal
range of posture, normal posture.
Q. So even though you noted that there was normal limits with his clothes
on, you don't note that he was normal limits with his clothes
off, which is
where you would be much more accurate.
A. Well that's
Q. I would think.
Q. You did these orthopaedic tests. Do you have a range of orthopaedic
tests that you do and then you just select various ones for
various people
depending on upon what your criteria is, or are these the standard orthopaedic
tests you do for everyone?
A. No, depending on the problems the patient presents with as to which
orthopaedic tests I use. I do have a a range that I normally
with each particular problem.
Q. So he didn't have any scoliosis or you've said he was within normal
limits. So does that mean he had no scoliosis or
A. No scoliosis that I was concerned about, but I didn't note it.
Q. So am I to understand he had no scoliosis or no scoliosis that you
were concerned about?
A. No scoliosis that I was concerned about.
Q. So he had a scoliosis?
A. I can't remember completely. But I will presume that he did not have
a scoliosis. He did have a scoliosis but not that I was
concerned about in
Q. So he did have a scoliosis and we don't know where it's not
A. It's not noted, no.
Q. So then you proceeded to do a couple of tests on him. You did the
Adam's test?
Q. The Trendelenburg, both proved negative?
A. That's right.
Q. So what did you come to the conclusion when it proved negative? What
kind of scoliosis did he have?
A. Through the Adam's test you mean?
A. He had a structural scoliosis.
Respondent stated that he was giving this evidence from his memory rather than
the clinical records (T349). The Respondent could
not remember where the
structural scoliosis was located.
Respondent also gave evidence regarding the swelling he noted during the second
consultation and the nature of the adjustments
provided. The Respondent stated
he had found that his patients did experience some swelling after an adjustment
and with some massage
and a gentler adjustment on the next occasion that the
swelling settled down
‘very well’
Respondent stated that he did inform Patient A about the clinical finding of
swelling and had asked Patient A if he had done ‘anything’.
Respondent did not record Patient A’s negative response to this question.
The Respondent stated he had not asked Patient
A if he had swelling anywhere
else and he did not observe any swelling anywhere else while treating him
(T352). The Tribunal notes
that this observation was also not recorded by the
Respondent.
Respondent confirmed that he had attended continuing education since he returned
to Australia in 1992 and this had included a
risk management module. He could
not recall if there was anything regarding record keeping in these modules or if
Dr Kelly had delivered
the course.
Respondent was asked to look at one of the photos of the treatment room he had
provided to the Tribunal. He was asked to identify
a product in the lowboy
cupboard. He identified these as ‘kimmywipes’ which were a hard
paper tissue about 15cm x 15cm
in size. The Respondent also identified rolls of
paper towel of the type that are used in domestic kitchens and that are
so that they can be torn into individual sheets
Respondent gave evidence that he used sarongs to cover patients. He estimated
that he would change these about three to four times
a day. The used sarongs
were placed into a laundry basket located in a cupboard. The Respondent stated
that he attended to the washing
of these items twice a week. The Respondent had
a total of five sarongs. Two were acquired as presents. Upon receiving them he
the view that they could be used in his practice. He then asked the
person who had gifted these to him to send him more. These arrived
Indonesia about six months later. The sarongs had been used about a year or a
year and a half prior to 26 February 2010 (although
later in his evidence the
Respondent stated that he could not remember whether the whole five were in
circulation by February 2010
– T353). The Respondent stated that he
considered that the sarongs were of very high quality material as they had been
and came out looking like they did (as exhibited to the Tribunal).
Respondent also stated that he had restitched them when needed. Originally the
ends of the material had been joined however he
took them apart. The Respondent
was not able to say how many times they had been washed since they were
restitched. Later in his
evidence the Respondent was able to identify one seam
that he had restitched and he could not remember if he had repaired any others
Respondent later added that he only used the sarongs during the warmer months as
he used more towels in the colder months. The
Respondent gave evidence that the
sarongs exhibited to the Tribunal had been washed (T352).
Statement of Agnes Canning Campbell dated 23 July
Campbell provided a statement dated 23 July 2012 (exhibit R27). Dr Campbell is a
chiropractor and she commenced practicing from
the same location as the
Respondent in June 2005. Her practice is financially independent of the
Respondent’s practice and
she has no social contact with the Respondent.
They share the payment of the rent for the rooms. Dr Campbell stated that she
first seeing the sarongs in the Respondent’s treatment room
sometime before July 2008 and has continued to see them since that
Character evidence
Respondent provided a number of character references to the Tribunal.
Gordon Wing-Lun provided a reference dated 25 November 2011 (exhibit R3) and
states his wife is also willing to provide a supportive
character reference. In
this reference Mr Wing-Lun states he has been a friend of the Respondent since
their school days as well
as being his chiropractic patient for 30 years (other
than for the period the Respondent resided in Japan). Mr Wing-Lun expresses
view that their regular contact allows them to discuss
‘many of the
important matters in our lives so that we continue to grow our knowledge of each
. As a friend he finds the Respondent
‘courteous,
considerate and socially aware’.
He also considers the Respondent to
be smart and
‘is aware of the importance of managing his relationships
with respect’
. Mr Wing-Lun has observed that the Respondent
‘is always stretching his availability to meet patients’ urgent
appointment needs’.
Mr Wing-Lun states
‘I am pleased to be
able to identify Dennis as my close friend and the chiropractor who “fixes
my back” from time
Toshinori Miyagawa provided a reference dated 5 November 2011 (exhibit R4) and
states that the reference is provided ‘
in full knowledge of the charges
’ against the Respondent. In the reference Mr Miyagawa states that
he has received numerous chiropractic treatments from the
Respondent since 2001
and that he and his wife have, over the years, become ‘
’ with the Respondent and that he has ‘
met friends of
his on social occasions
’. Mr Miyagawa states that during treatments
the Respondent is ‘
very professional, taking me through what he works
on before proceeding’
appropriate coverings are
always provided for modesty’
. Mr Miyagawa expresses his view that the
Respondent ‘
cares about patients
’ and states that he trusts
the Respondent ‘
completely for his professionalism and skills and
greatly respects his commitment to his work’
. Mr Miyagawa notes the
Respondent’s ‘
good command of both spoken and written
in helping Mr Miyagawa ‘
to communicate with him
correctly to tackle with my conditions and recover from them quickly
Mr Miyagawa expresses his view that the “
completely uncharacteristic
’ of the Respondent and would not
hesitate to ‘
recommend him as a good chiropractor to any of my friends
and family members
Rhonda Mangan provided a reference dated 8 December 2011 (exhibit R5) and states
that the reference is made in ‘
full knowledge
of the charges
’ against the Respondent. In this reference Ms Mangan states
she has known the Respondent for 16 years as both a patient and
a friend. Ms
Mangan expresses her view that the respondent is ‘
a man of integrity
and honesty
’ and that as her chiropractor ‘
he has always been
courteous and professional
’. Ms Mangan states that
treatment the Respondent ‘
always explained what he intended to do and
obtained my verbal approval before proceedings
At all times appropriate
coverings were provided for modesty
’. Ms Mangan expresses her view of
the Respondent as a person who ‘
puts the welfare of his patients
’ and considers his treatment of her outside his normal working
a testament to his placement of the health of others over his
own free time
’. Ms Mangan states that she trusts the Respondent as a
competent chiropractor
’ and states that he is a
hard working, honest and reliable man who is a credit to his
Yuki Miyagawa provided a reference dated 5 December 2011 (exhibit R6) and states
that the reference is made ‘
in full knowledge of the charges
’ against the Respondent. In this reference Ms Miyagawa states
that she has received treatments from the Respondent for more
than a few times a
year since 2001. Ms Miyagawa states that she and her husband have, over the
years, become ‘
good friends
’ with the Respondent and have met
his friends and family members on social occasions
Miyagawa states that, upon first meeting the Respondent, she was
impressed that he was professional and skilled while being
compassionate’
and that her impression of the Respondent has not
changed in the 10 years she has known him since. Ms Miyagawa states that during
treatment the Respondent is ‘
always professional and explains his
treatment plans or procedure thoroughly
Appropriate coverings are always provided for modesty and personal
boundaries are respected’.
Ms Miyagawa states that she
comfortable
’ being treated
by the Respondent and as a friend she has observed him to be ‘
kind and respectful of people’
. Ms Miyagawa considers the alleged
conduct of the Respondent as being ‘
completely uncharacteristic of him
and his way of treating patients
Neil Macpherson provided a reference dated 9 December 2011 (exhibit R7) and
states that
‘the reference is provided in full knowledge of the
allegations’
made against the Respondent. Mr Macpherson states that he
has known the Respondent since his first consultation with him in 2003 and
continued to consult with the Respondent on a regular basis since that time. Mr
Macpherson also states that the Respondent has
attended Mr Macpherson’s
behaviour has given him
any concern for himself or his family, to whom he has
recommended the Respondent’s services, and states that the Respondent
always conducted himself in a totally professional and appropriate
’. Mr Macpherson expresses his ‘
great difficulty
reconciling the behaviour alleged
the way in which I
have been treated
’ by the Respondent. Mr Macpherson states that the
Respondent has ‘
always been a caring and compassionate practitioner to
and considers him to be ‘
a gentleman, a man of integrity
and sophistication who is a wonderful chiropractor
Peer Review evidence – Dr Weeks and Dr
HCCC obtained a peer review report from Dr Rachel Weeks (exhibit 12). The
Respondent obtained a peer review report from Dr John
Kelly. The oral evidence
of these two witnesses was taken concurrently.
her written report Dr Weeks provided comments on two bases. The first part of
her report provides her opinion accepting Patient
A’s version of events.
The second part of the report is based on an acceptance of the
Respondent’s version of events
but limited to her view regarding the
assessment and treatment of Patient A during the two consultations (not directly
the Particulars). The Tribunal has attempted to summarise the
evidence only as it relates to the Particulars.
Kelly provided a report on behalf of the Respondent. The report dated 13
December 2011 became exhibit R12. Dr Kelly records that
he noted the significant
differences between the Respondent’s version of events and Patient
A’s. Dr Kelly provides his
opinion based on the Respondent’s version
of events. Dr Kelly recounts the Respondent’s version of how the first and
second consultations proceeded. Dr Kelly records the discussion regarding x-rays
occurred at the end of the consultation and a referral
respect to the allegation regarding a failure of the Respondent to provide
adequate information or explanation regarding assessment
and treatment Dr Kelly
opined that, based on the Respondent’s statement, the Respondent appeared
to have provided a ‘quite
adequate’ verbal description to Patient A.
respect to the allegation that the Respondent failed to obtain informed consent
from Patient A Dr Kelly notes that there was
no written consent form. Dr Kelly
noted that the Respondent alleged that descriptions were given and verbal
consent was obtained
prior to the application of adjustment procedures. Dr Kelly
opined that whilst this was not ideal that the procedures were not devoid
consent but the use of a consent form would be have been far more appropriate.
respect to the allegation that the Respondent failed to make and keep clinical
records regarding Patient A’s treatment
and condition, specifically that
they were not recorded in English and did not adequately record details of
examination conducted
or chiropractic adjustments performed. After noting the
change in the Code of Conduct that occurred on 1 July 2010, Dr Kelly
English would certainly be preferred (in an Australian context of
practice) but I am unaware of any specific regulation that they
be language
Kelly stated that he would be of the opinion that the second part of this
allegation (did not adequately record details of examination
conducted or
chiropractic adjustments performed) would be substantiated as a breach of clause
9.4(a) had the Code of Conduct introduced
by the Chiropractic Board of Australia
been in place. However, the Code of Conduct in place in February and March 2010
did not contain
this ‘wording’. Dr Kelly opined that the notation
that indicated generalised testing procedures (gen OT) would be insufficient
another practitioner to interpret the tests that were performed. Dr Kelly then
noted that the Respondent had been able to indicate
which tests that were
performed at the time. Dr Kelly’s report continued:
There is always room for improvement in relation to the details contained
within clinical records and this case is no exception. Abbreviations
certainly appropriate and all clinicians use them. More detail in relation to
the specific tests performed and results obtained
should appear within the
clinical records. The same is true for each adjustment performed on each
oral evidence of the peer reviewers is noted under the heading of Findings re
Particulars below.
Particular 1(a)
Weeks was asked to comment upon the Respondent requesting Patient A to remove
his underwear and notes that the documents she was
provided with do not appear
to support a proposition that the Respondent asked Patient A to remove his
underwear. Rather, she notes
that the statement of Patient A dated 12 April 2010
records the Respondent pulling Patient A’s underwear half way down his
buttock without telling him he was going to do so. Patient A indicated he was
used to this occurring. Dr Weeks expressed the view
that although the actions
seemed appropriate for the treatment described the Respondent should have
communicated with Patient A about
what was going to happen.
Weeks noted that Patient A recorded in his 12 April 2010 statement that the
Respondent took his underwear off completely during
the visit on 3 March 2010.
Dr Weeks made the following comments regarding this conduct:
I can see no reason for Mr Maher to need to remove Patient A’s
underwear in this situation. Chiropractors are trained to be
able to access
muscles and joints while the patient is wearing underwear by moving the
underwear and employing draping to maintain
the patients modesty and comfort.
It is my opinion that, in this instance, Mr Maher’s conduct fell
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor
equivalent level of training and expertise however it does not invite my strong
peer reviewers gave oral evidence regarding the difficulties involved in the
removal of underwear from a prone patient as noted
Particular 1(b)
Weeks notes Patient A stated that during his visit on 26 February 2010 he was
not provided with any covering (even though he was
naked) until he asked at
which time the Respondent provided him with an inadequate covering. Patient A
stated that during the consultation
on 3 March 2010 no covering was provided. Dr
Weeks expressed the following opinion:
Generally, it would be my opinion that inadequate covering of a patient is
below the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor
of Mr Maher’s
training and expertise. However, as Patient A was naked it is my opinion that
lack of appropriate covering is
a more serious matter.
Therefore, it is my opinion that the lack of appropriate covering provided
to Patient A by Mr Maher is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected
of a chiropractor of Mr Maher’s training and expertise although it does
not invite my strong criticism.
Particular 1(c)
respect to the touching of Patient A’s penis whilst massaging his lower
buttocks and thighs Dr Weeks notes Patient A’s
statement. Dr Weeks
expresses the following view regarding this conduct:
There is no situation where it is appropriate for Mr Maher to be touching
Patient A’s penis while massaging his lower buttocks
and upper thigh.
Appropriate underwear, draping Patient A and attention to what he was
doing should have enabled Mr Maher to treat Patient A without
touching his penis
at any time during this aspect of treatment.
It is my opinion that Mr Maher’s touching of Patient A’s penis
in this matter is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a
chiropractor of Mr Maher’s training and expertise and it invites my strong
Particular 1(d)
Weeks notes Patient A’s statement regarding this comment made by the
Respondent and the touching of his penis at about the
same time and expresses
the following view:
This comment, or a comment like it, is unprofessional in any situation
between a chiropractor and patient. It is substantially more
inappropriate to
make such a comment while touching a patient’s penis.
There is no situation that I am aware of in which it is appropriate or
acceptable for a chiropractor to touch a patient’s penis.
Therefore, it is my opinion that Mr Maher’s comment and penis
chiropractor of his training and expertise and invites my strong criticism.
This opinion extends to the comments and touching of the penis that
Patient A describes as happening in the visit on 3 March 2010.
Particular 1(e)
Weeks notes on page 5 of her report (Page 68 of the HCCC bundle) that Patient A
cannot recall the Respondent explaining his actions
prior to undertaking them.
Dr Weeks expresses the following view:
Adequate communication with the patient is important and so any instances
of poor communication are a concern however they don’t
necessarily
constitute behaviour below what is reasonable to expect.
Patient A’s statement only mentions his neck however it is
completely appropriate for a chiropractor to access the whole body
in order to
make an accurate diagnosis of contributing factors and underlying issues.
Weeks provides the opinion that on the basis of the Respondent’s
description of the consultation he provided Patient A with
an explanation in
advance of what he was doing in both English and Japanese. The Respondent also
describes discussing Patient A’s
condition with him, describing the
problem and the plan to move forward. Dr Weeks expressed the view that the
assessment and treatment
was consistent with what was reasonably expected of a
practitioner with the same training and experience as the
Respondent.
Particular 1(f)
Weeks notes on page 5 of her report (Page 68 of the HCCC bundle) that the
description provided by Patient A of the consultation
does not describe any sort
of informed consent being sort before treatment.
1(g)(i) and 1(g)(ii)
Weeks added a comment regarding the standard of Patient A’s patient file.
She expressed the view that patient notes should
be kept in sufficient detail to
allow another chiropractor to pick up the file and continue with the
patient’s care. Dr Weeks
observes that Patient A’s file do not
contain any of the examination findings described by the Respondent in his
the HCCC (except for a C7 listing). There is almost no further
history recorded apart from that Patient A completed in the initial
Further, the Respondent does not record all of the adjustments he described as
having provided in his response to the HCCC.
Tribunal also notes at this point the evidence of the Respondent that Dr
Kelly’s assumption that massage of Patient A’s
legs and feet
occurred (see R12 – page 2) was not correct. Rather, it was the
Respondent’s evidence that he would use
the words ‘examine’ or
‘palpate’ (T339) to describe his actions regarding the
patient’s thighs and
feet. The Respondent further clarified that the
palpation was only to Patient A’s thighs and feet. At this point the
notes the evidence given by the Respondent on this matter was as
follows (T339.29 -340.25):
Q. If I can take you to tab 12, to Mr Kelly's report,
page 2, is the white folder, tab 12, page 2. The fifth paragraph
on the bottom.
Can you see there that Dr Kelly has written: "Massage was
then taken of Patient A's legs and feet." I just wondering
A. After I examined the hamstring muscles, then I went down and examined
the feet, yes.
Q. Dr Kelly uses the word "massage", is that in any way recorded in
the notes that you took?
A. Well, I used the word "examine", "palpate" the feet. I examined, I
palpated the muscles in the sole of the feet and then I also
went through and
tested the toes as well.
Q. That was on both legs?
Q. All I can see in your notes and I know that we've got a translation
and there may be some chiropractic terms there that I'm just
not getting the
meaning of but there's thighs and feet written there for 26 February and
your evidence is that that was part of your
testing examination phase?
Q. And not a treatment item?
A. That's right.
Q. Then I'm just trying to see, Dr Kelly has written "massage was
then undertaken to Patient A's legs and feet." Would Dr Kelly
be incorrect
in saying that massage occurred to the legs and feet of Patient A?
A. I can only I don't know what he means by writing this. I
can only presume that he's meaning palpation as in massage. Or massage
means he means what I said by palpation, he is taking it as the word
Q. So if he substituted the word 'palpation" and what about the legs, I
mean is legs not the whole legs and not just the thigh?
A. Well, I did say thigh.
Q. So if Dr Kelly wrote "palpation was then undertaken to Patient
A's thighs and feet", that would be an accurate interpretation
A. As I see it, yes.
Q. If he means massage as in massage for treatment purposes rather than
your examination findings, your observation. If he was being
massaged in terms
of treatment, then that would be incorrect, is that the case?
A. That is correct.
Particular 2 (a)
Particular relates to conduct that is alleged to have occurred during the second
consultation of a similar nature to Particular
Particular 2(b)
Particular relates to conduct that is alleged to have occurred during the second
consultation of a similar nature to Particular
Particular 2(c)
Weeks provided her opinion regarding this conduct in her comment regarding
Particular 1 (d).
Particular 2(d)
Weeks provided her opinion regarding this conduct in her comment regarding
Particular 1 (d).
Particular 2(e)
Particular relates to conduct that is alleged to have occurred during the second
consultation of a similar nature to Particular
Particular relates to conduct that is alleged to have occurred during the second
consultation of a similar nature to Particular
2(g)(i) and 2(g)(ii)
Particular relates to conduct that is alleged to have occurred during the second
consultation of a similar nature to Particular
1(g)(i) and 1(g)(ii).
Particular 2(h)
Weeks provided the following comment regarding the lack of assessment reported
by Patient A as follows (at page 6 of her report):
Patient A did not describe any examination on the second visit, simply
massage and no further adjustments. This is unusual and does
not, in my opinion,
constitute an acceptable visit. Mr Maher should have asked questions regarding
Patient A’s response to
treatment and performed further examinations.
Weeks noted that the Respondent described asking Patient A how he responded to
the treatment and provided him with a further examination
and subsequent
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
written submissions of the HCCC are annexed hereto and marked with the letter
‘B’. The HCCC supplemented these written
submissions orally.
HCCC submitted that all of the Particulars should be established and that the
conduct should be found to be professional misconduct.
The HCCC submitted that
the appropriate Orders should be one of deregistration, a prohibition order and
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent handed up a written outline of submissions dated 23 July 2012. A copy
of these submissions is attached hereto and marked
C. These were supplemented by
oral submissions.
Tribunal notes the Respondent submitted that as the phrase ‘significantly
below’ (see s139B(1)) was not defined in
the National Law but that some
assistance could be provided from the second reading speech of the Medical
Practice Act. Whilst the
Tribunal accepts that this does provide some
assistance, the term ‘significantly below’ has been applied on
occasions in tribunals (both the Medical Tribunal that was created by
the Medical Practice Act and the nine other tribunals exercising
similar, if not
identical, jurisdiction to the Medical Tribunal) since the time of the second
reading speech and as such provide
this Tribunal with further assistance as to
how ‘serious’ the conduct is required to be to meet the requisite
Respondent’s submissions reinforce the fact that the Respondent has been
consistent in his denials of the offending conduct
alleged by Patient A. It is
the view of this Tribunal that the consistent denials made by the Respondent are
not, in the circumstances,
a firm basis to conclude that conduct did not occur.
The Respondent has denied the alleged offending conduct in two documents. These
two documents are essentially identical. They were signed by the Respondent
approximately 15 months apart. Both documents contain
the same typographical
error. Both documents contain the same error as to the time the receipt was
issued to Patient A. The error
as to time the receipt was issued was repeated
despite the source document being available to the Respondent at all relevant
The second document also failed to amend the number of years the
Respondent had been in practice to reflect the effluxion of time
between the
signing of the first and second statement. Such matters are not in and of
themselves fatal to the credibility of the
documents. Rather, they add to the
factors to be weighed in the consideration of the evidence in this matter just
as the consistency
of the denials of the Respondent is a factor to be given
Tribunal accepts the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent as to the
applicable legislation and that it is uncontroversial
that the HCCC bears the
legal burden of proof. Further, the Tribunal accepts the application of the
comments in Briginshaw regarding
‘reasonable satisfaction’
not being proved by ‘
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect
inferences’
. With respect to the balance of the submissions made by
the Respondent regarding the standard of proof (see paragraphs 12, 13 and
the submission), the Tribunal is firmly of the view that there is no additional
standard created.
inconsistencies in the evidence of Patient A’s evidence highlighted in the
Respondent’s submissions are essentially
matters relating to peripheral
issues and do not greatly assist the Tribunal. The balance of the
Respondent’s submissions are
dealt with below.
Findings re Particulars
Tribunal makes an initial observation regarding some of the difficulties with
the evidence in this matter. One significant contributing
factor was the
difficulty of taking evidence where an Interpreter was partially utilised by the
witness (Patient A). By this the
Tribunal notes that on some occasions Patient A
answered questions without the benefit of having the question translated from
into Japanese and on other occasions he answered in English to a
question that was translated. With the agreement of the parties
procedures were trialled throughout the time Patient A gave evidence to attempt
to best accommodate the situation where the
witness had a working knowledge of
the English language and would respond directly to the question asked in English
at times when
he had been asked to wait until the question had been translated.
This is by no means a criticism of Patient A. However, it did create
some points
of confusion, which are amplified in the written transcript of the evidence
where the benefit of observing the witness
is not available. What was evident to
the Tribunal from the evidence of Patient A was his oral conversational English
skills were
superior to his written English skills.
A gave evidence in a very respectful, courteous and deferential manner. There
was no attempt on his part to embellish the
evidence; rather he appeared to the
Tribunal to make his best attempt to recall the evidence as best as he was able.
When considering
the evidence as a whole the Tribunal observes that Patient A
made more than appropriate concessions throughout his evidence. These
concessions were to a point where, had the Tribunal merely relied upon the
transcript, rather than having the benefit of observing
the evidence of Patient
A that an inference of unreliability may have been open. The flow of the
evidence, in particular the cross-examination
of the Respondent, was also
significantly disrupted by objections. By way of example see
the Tribunal has in no way disregarded the extensive submission made on behalf
of the Respondent regarding the numerous areas
where the evidence of Patient A
demonstrates unreliability, the Tribunal is not able to accept the submissions
so made. The Tribunal
has indicated that the issues raised on behalf of the
Respondent are matters that are addressed by the observations of the Tribunal
regarding the difficulties faced by Patient A in giving evidence and the
observations made by the Tribunal which went beyond the
mere words of the
transcript.
was nothing that would cause the Tribunal to find that Patient A did anything
other than give evidence as best as he was able
to. This is not to say that his
evidence is not without the difficulties of the effluxion of time in addition to
language and cultural
was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the inconsistencies between the
oral evidence and the written statements of Patient
A and Patient B was due to a
lack of candour, rather than some deficit in the area of English skills or
Tribunal is troubled by this submission. Certainly, upon a bare reading of the
transcript, there may be some questions about the
meaning of some of Patient
A’s evidence. However, with the benefit of having observed Patient A
giving his evidence, in particular,
having the benefit of having observed his
general demeanour, body language, the timing of his answers and vocal
intonations, the
Tribunal is satisfied that it has a greater understanding of
Patient A’s evidence than would be revealed by a bare reading
transcript. The difficulties with translation are evident to some extent from
the transcript. The Respondent submitted that
Patient A’s evidence was
‘inexact, lacks the requisite definition, inaccurate and seeks (by
reference to third parties) to raise indirect inferences’
these features were all ‘damning’ of Patient A’s evidence
The Tribunal does not accept this submission nor does it accept the
submission that there was any lack of candour on the part of Patient
Tribunal makes the following further comments with respect to the
Respondent’s submissions. First, the Tribunal has not
consideration any of the evidence containing comments regarding similar conduct
with respect to
‘third parties’
This material was
quite properly objected to and excluded from consideration of the issues in this
matter. In any case some context
for these matters is important. They were not
proffered by Patient A as corroboration of his evidence regarding the conduct of
Respondent, rather, it was part of the narrative given by Patient A
regarding his reaction to the conduct and putting the conduct
into some type of
general terms Patient A’s evidence was that he was concerned about the
conduct of the Respondent but it was not until the
discussion with Patient B
that he formed the view that the conduct was inappropriate. The involvement of
the third parties was a
matter that added context to the evidence of Patient A
regarding his reaction to the Respondent’s conduct rather than an attempt
to recruit it as similar fact type evidence. Second, the Tribunal has not formed
the view that there were significant inconsistencies
in the evidence of Patient
A. Rather, as detailed above Patient A presented as a witness that was
attempting to assist the Tribunal
and provide an accurate account of the subject
matter. He did so in circumstances where, for instance, he was working through
interpreter while giving a significant part of his evidence despite clearly
having a conversational level of English language skills.
An analysis of the
transcript reveals the difficulties that arise when a witness is able to
understand the general gist of a question
and provides an answer without the
benefit of an accurate translation of the question.
Patient A’s evidence was given over a few days whilst he continued working
well into the night. At this point the Tribunal
also notes that Patient A did
not have access to all of the photographs of the treatment room while giving his
evidence; in particular
he was not shown a photograph that depicted a bench in
the location that Patient A thought he recalled there being some
as being in the room.
Tribunal also notes there was nothing aggressive or inappropriate in Patient
A’s manner, he gave evidence in a sincere manner,
he did not interject
despite the additional difficulties created by the necessity for the assistance
of an Interpreter, he showed
no signs of personal animosity towards the
Respondent and made a significant time commitment to give evidence before the
16 of the Respondent’s written Submissions provides numerous examples of
discrepancies in the evidence of Patient
A. The Tribunal has considered each of
the matters submitted by the Respondent as relevant to the question of the
quality of Patient
A’s evidence. The Tribunal does not consider addressing
each issue point by point is required given the detailed general comments
by the Tribunal regarding Patient A’s evidence. Many of the issues raised
by the Respondent originate from Patient A’s
English language skills.
Others were an artefact of the first complaint coming in on a pro forma document
which had limited space
available to record details in response to the specific
questions. The effluxion of time also has a role. However, by way of example
paragraph 16(a) of the Respondent’s submissions raises the errors in
Patient A’s statement. In this regard the Tribunal
There were at
least two errors in the statement of the Respondent despite English being his
first language, having access to the source
document (with respect to the time
of the ending of the second consultation) and signing the statement on two
occasions (separated
by about a 15 month period).
Patient A was
unable to identify all of the ‘typographical’ errors in his
statement while giving evidence.
readily accepted errors that were pointed out to him while he was giving
evidence (see, for example, T38.27-28).
It was apparent
that Patient A did not appreciate the formality of the document or the process
until he actually appeared before the
Tribunal formed the view that overall Patient A gave evidence as best as he
could recall to the Tribunal. Specifically, the Tribunal
found Patient A was
consistent and emphatic with his denial that he was provided with a covering
such as a ‘sarong’ at
any time during the two consultations
Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should not accept the evidence of Patient
A where it was uncorroborated and provides assistance
to the Tribunal as to the
meaning of corroboration. The Respondent’s submissions then detail a
number of areas in which Patient
A’s evidence could have been corroborated
(a statement from the chiropractor to whom Patient A made complaint regarding
Respondent’s conduct, a statement from Patient A’s wife
regarding what she was told and a forensic examination of Patient
mobile telephone to attempt to retrieve the SMS message sent by the Respondent).
The Tribunal accepts that no explanation
was provided as to why such material
was not before the Tribunal.
Respondent’s submissions then detail reasons why the Tribunal would not
consider the evidence of Patient B as corroborative
of the evidence of Patient
A. While it is the case that Patient B could not recall the content of the text
message from the Respondent
to Patient A he certainly corroborates that the text
message was sent. In this regard the evidence of the Respondent is also
corroborative.
Patient B’s recollection of the content of the text message
is not in any way inconsistent with the evidence of Patient A.
Respondent’s submissions make much of the ‘confusion’
regarding the date on which Patient A spoke to Patient
B regarding the
Respondent. This ‘confusion’ was settled by Patient B consulting his
appointment diary and clarifying
the date on which Patient A had an appointment
with him for a haircut. Once this clarification was made the dates of the events
by Patient A and Patient B fall into place and accord with the records
of the Respondent regarding the dates on which Patient A had
appointments
scheduled with him. This is a matter that the Tribunal considers the evidence
has clarified beyond doubt. Once again
the Respondent’s submissions focus
on matters where English language skills have significance (noting that although
resided in Australia for 18 years English was also not Patient B’s
first language) and areas where the effluxion of time may
have significance
regarding recall.
Tribunal accepts that there were a number of occasions on which Patient B was
unable to recall matters detailed in his earlier
statement. The Tribunal notes
that Patient B made no attempt to guess or reconstruct evidence.
Tribunal notes that there is some corroboration of Patient A’s evidence in
the evidence of the Respondent. The Respondent
gave evidence that he told
Patient A that he grew chrysanthemums. The Tribunal notes that Patient A knew
that the Respondent was
not only interested in chrysanthemums but that he had
been a judge of these flowers in Japan. Patient A was not cross-examined
how he came to have this knowledge (i.e. apart from the Respondent
Particular 1
One alleges that on or about 26 February 2010 when consulting with Patient A,
the Respondent failed to act in accordance
with appropriate therapeutic or
professional practice as particularised (a) to
Particular 1(a) - Pulling down and taking off Patient
A’s underpants
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated in exhibit R1 that when he went to
massage Patient A’s lumbar spine he said to
Patient A that he was going to
just lower his underpants a bit. The Respondent stated that this was necessary
as the elastic band
of the underpants was over the lumbo-sacral joint. He then
lowered the underpants to the level of the third sacral segment along
covering sheet which was folded back. The Respondent also stated that he asked
Patient A to leave his underwear on when
he took his clothes off for treatment.
The Respondent specifically denies that he removed Patient A’s underpants.
Respondent maintained this denial in his oral evidence. Patient A’s
evidence that the Respondent had removed his underpants
part way through the
consultation was also maintained throughout his oral evidence.
Tribunal notes the evidence of the peer reviewers that the removal of underwear
while a patient is laying prone on a table is
not impossible but was not easy as
it required either the co-operation of the patient or the use of enough force
(T418-419). Patient
A gave evidence that he could have cooperated with the
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 1(b) - Failing to provide Patient A with
an adequate or appropriate covering to cover himself with
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated in his response (R1) that he covered
Patient A with a ‘large cotton sheet’
over his lower back and legs
as soon as he was face down on the treatment table. The Respondent stated that
Patient A was never naked.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient A relating to this Particular. Patient A
made a report of this conduct to Patient B shortly
after it occurred.
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 1(c) - Touching Patient A’s
penis whilst massaging Patient A’s lower buttocks and upper thigh
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated that he palpated Patient A’s
hamstring muscles and massages the lumbo-sacral area
while he was laying on the
table face down. By
‘palpating’
the Respondent clarified this
to mean that he was
‘pinching or feeling the muscle to see if
was any tension. The Respondent denied that he touched Patient
A’s penis at any time and that he was not even working in an
there was a chance of inadvertent touching.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Patient A relating to this Particular. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence given by Patient A that
he received a massage to
his thighs. The Tribunal also notes the evidence of Patient B that Patient A had
reported to him (shortly
after it occurred) that the Respondent had massaged his
thighs in a manner that had induced an erection during the treatment session.
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 1(d) - Saying to Patient A “you
have a nice cock” or words to the effect
Tribunal notes that the Respondent denies this Particular (R1 – page 7).
The Respondent gave evidence that he did use
terms such as
while he was undertaking adjustments when the desired outcome
was achieved.
A was not able to provide an exact recall of the words used by the Respondent.
However his evidence was unequivocal in that
the Respondent had made a comment
regarding his penis while he was lying naked on the treatment table.
the very least the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct of the
Respondent towards Patient A allowed Patient A to perceive
the Respondent to be
making a ‘complimentary’ comment regarding his partially erect
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 1(e) - Failing to provide adequate
information or explanation to Patient A in relation to his assessment or
Tribunal notes in the account provided by the Respondent of this consultation
that he recounts advising Patient A to remove his
shirt, trousers and shoes and
then to ‘stand naturally’. After asking Patient A to sit on the
treatment table and performing
some testing (which involved touching Patient A)
he told Patient A that he was going to push against his back and that he should
relax and not resist just before he performed that Motion Palpation Test to the
thoracic and lumbar spine. The next instruction recorded
Respondent’s statement is a request for Patient A to turn over to lie face
down on the treatment table. The Respondent
recounts that he told Patient A to
relax while he felt his neck and back. The Respondent states that he informed
Patient A that he
was just going to lower his underpants ‘a bit’.
The next time the Respondent recounts that he spoke to Patient A was
advised him that he was going to look at his feet and legs. After some further
treatment the Respondent recounts asking Patient
A to turn face up. The
Respondent then recounts informing Patient A that he was going to adjust his
neck and then his lower back
(for the later the Respondent asked Patient A to
turn onto one side and then the other). Further advice was given to Patient A by
the Respondent when he asked him to sit on the side of the treatment bed and
informed that an upper back adjustment was going to
be performed, and took him
through a ‘dry run’ of the adjustment. The Respondent then sought
Patient A’s consent
to proceed as he does
‘for the initial
treatment with every patient it is performed upon’
. The final
instruction recorded by the Respondent is the request for Patient A to get
Tribunal notes that the Respondent submitted that Particulars 1(e), (f) and (g)
could not be established based on several factors.
The Tribunal notes Dr Kelly
expressed the view that
‘quite adequate verbal description’
was provided to Patient A for the procedures undertaken. This could not be
accepted by the Tribunal if any of the evidence of Patient
A regarding not
having had various risk factors explained to him or alternatives posed was
accepted by the Tribunal, which it is.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 1(e)
occurred and that such conduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 1(f) - Failing to obtain informed consent from
Patient A for treatment
noted above the Respondent’s statement (R1) records seeking the
from Patient A to undertake an upper thoracic
adjustment.
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s submission that both Dr Weeks and Dr Kelly
expressed the view that procedures were not devoid
of consent because no written
consent is obtained (see page 15 of the Respondent’s
submissions).
Tribunal notes the evidence of Dr Kelly that it is preferable to obtain written
consent as it substantiates the comments that
have been made to the patient as
part of the informed consent process (T421). Further, Dr Kelly had been advising
people for the
last 15 years to obtain written consent and accepted that he was
a proponent of written consent (T422).
Respondent submitted that consent was obtained. The Tribunal cannot accept that
consent was obtained if the risk factors were
not explained to Patient A. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Patient A, particularly in response to
questions from the Tribunal,
regarding the Respondent not having explained
various matters such as the risks involved and alternate treatments (or no
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 1(f)
occurred and that such conduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 1(g)(i) & (ii) – Failing to make and
keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition and /or treatment in
notes: (i) Were not recorded in English; (ii) Did not adequately record details
of examinations conducted or chiropractic
adjustments performed
Tribunal notes that the records were substantially written in Japanese.
Tribunal is of the view that clinical notes must be kept in English. It was
incumbent upon the Respondent to make an appropriately
detailed record that
adequately records the details of examinations conducted and chiropractic
adjustments performed in English.
submission made on behalf of the Respondent that the
‘Tribunal members
ought to be very careful not to apply the standards of 2012 to the events of
early 2010’
(there being a new Code of Conduct adopted by the
Chiropractic Board of Australia (CBA) in mid-2010) is noted by the Tribunal. The
Tribunal also notes the submission made by the Respondent that it should accept
the view expressed by Dr Kelly that the 2010 Code
was seen by the Chiropractic
Board of Australia as
‘raising the bar’
. The Tribunal notes
the balance of the evidence of Dr Kelly wherein he stated that although he was
not familiar with every Code in
Australia prior to the introduction of the 2010
Code some of them would have addressed clinical records (T406).
Tribunal makes a number of observations regarding this submission. First, any
Code provides the minimum standards required. The
2001 Code required notes to be
kept securely. By inference there must be a requirement to keep notes, an issue
discussed by the Chiropractors
Tribunal of NSW in Reasons for Decisions in 2008.
Second, over time the standards expected in a profession may change as various
issues arise in the particular profession. Third, the Code ultimately adopted by
the CBA on 1 July 2010 was put out for consultation
earlier in 2010. The Code
was put out for public consultation and cannot be seen as anything other than
being reflective of the views
of the profession at that time. While the CBA may
well have considered that it was
‘raising the bar’
suggested by Dr Kelly (T405) what was in the minds of the members of the CBA is
not relevant. The Tribunal notes the evidence
of Dr Weeks that the Code
‘articulated the state of play in a far better form’
opinion of Dr Weeks accords with the Tribunal’s view of the 2010 Code. The
Tribunal finds support in this position from
the evidence of Dr Kelly that the
’previous code was a page and a bit of a lot of generalities,
and it was almost like a group of motherhood statements’.
‘If you were peer reviewed there was an expectation that probably would
have exceeded what the previous code had’
(T406). Dr Kelly gave
evidence that he had both Codes in mind when he gave his opinions.
in his evidence Dr Kelly gave evidence that he considered that clinical records
should be kept in English although there were
many practitioners that kept
records that were not easily understood due to
‘abbreviation,
illegibility or nomenclature’.
Dr Kelly accepted that just because
this happens frequently does not make it an acceptable practice but he was
reluctant to express
criticism of a standard that
lots of people do not
Dr Kelly also gave evidence that with respect to overseas
trained chiropractors who sought registration in Australia that he was aware
that the previous registration board (being the Chiropractors Registration Board
‘used to have some major procedures so they could keep records
appropriately in the Australian clinical setting’
Kelly also agreed that another practitioner should be able to pick up the
clinical notes of another practitioner and be
able to identify the
patient’s name, history, complaints, segments of the spine that had been
worked on and 80% of the treatment
undertaken. At this point the Tribunal also
notes the evidence of Dr Kelly that he had attempted to create a uniform
standard of
abbreviations within the profession and produced a document that was
circulated to the relevant universities in about 2005. Although
not relevant to
the considerations in this matter, the Tribunal indicates that the adoption of
such an initiative by practitioners
would no doubt have a positive
submission made on behalf of the Respondent appears to have misunderstood the
evidence of Dr Weeks. Dr Weeks made reference
to her understanding of the
importance of clinical records is one
‘that I owe to the insurance
(T393). While the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that
this is not an insurance contract case, this is not Dr Week’s evidence.
The reference made by Dr Weeks is to the continuing education seminars provided
by the professional indemnity insurers.
Ultimately,
the Tribunal considers that whether or not there was a detailed, articulated
requirement for a chiropractor to keep clinical
records there has been, for the
time the Respondent has been in practice, a well-established requirement placed
on health practitioners
to keep appropriate records. Records kept partly in
another language do not satisfy this requirement. The evidence of Dr Kelly that
‘English would be preferred’
cannot be accepted by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal is supported in this view by many factors. These include
the fact that English is
the language used in Australia and that English
language skills have long been a requirement for registration as a health
practitioner
in Australia.
peer reviewers made a detailed comparison between the account provided by the
Respondent of his treatment (in his statement) and
the clinical notes for these
consultations. While the clinical notes were for the most part consistent with
the account provided
by the Respondent there was one area in particular where
the notes did not support the statement. The peer reviewers were unable
ascertain which cervical adjustments were performed during the second
consultation based on the clinical records (see around
Tribunal found that a reading of the clinical notes kept by the Respondent did
not give a clear indication of the examinations
undertaken, the findings made on
those examinations, or the treatment provided to Patient A during either
consultation. Further,
the oral evidence of the Respondent did not assist in any
substantial way to clarify this situation despite extensive questioning.
notes that do not record an adequate history do not satisfy professional record
keeping requirements. Clinical notes that
do not record appropriate details of
symptoms, examinations, findings and treatment provided and reaction to the
treatment also do
not satisfy this requirement.
Tribunal is of the view that the clinical notes kept by the Respondent were
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level
of training and experience. Further, the Tribunal is of the view that the
keeping of part of those records
in a language other than English is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that
Particular 1(g) is established and that such conduct is
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 2
2 alleges that on or about 3 March 2010, when consulting with Patient A, the
Respondent failed to act in accordance with
appropriate therapeutic or
professional practice as set out in Particulars (a) to
Particular 2(a) - Pulling down and taking off Patient
A’s underpants
Tribunal repeats the observations made above with respect to Particular 1(a).
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 2(b) - Failing to provide Patient A
with an adequate or appropriate covering to cover himself with
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated that he provided Patient A with the
same coverage as he had given him during the first
consultation, being a sarong
(R1- page 9).
Tribunal makes the same comments regarding this Particular as made above with
respect to Particular 1(b). It was Patient A’s
evidence that he was not
provided with any covering after his underpants were removed during the second
consultation.
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 2(c) - Touching Patient A’s penis
whilst massaging Patient A’s lower buttocks and upper thigh
Tribunal notes that the Respondent did not provide details of any massage
treatment to Patient A’s lower buttocks and upper
thigh in his statement
R1. Further, the Respondent denied that he touched the thighs during the second
consultation (R1 – page
Tribunal repeats the comments made above regarding Particular 1(c). The Tribunal
also notes that Patient A was adamant that the
Respondent had massaged his
thighs and buttocks during the second consultation.
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 2(d) - Saying to Patient A when
touching Patient A’s penis “wake up” or words to the
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated that he made no attempt to touch
Patient A’s penis and saying any words to this
effect (R1 – page 9).
The Respondent stated that Patient A had his underpants on during the
consultation.
Tribunal repeats the comments made above regarding Particular 1(d).
standard of proof this Tribunal is required to apply is, in practice, a
demanding one in a case such as this. It requires reasonable
satisfaction and
not just a conclusion on the bare probabilities. The Tribunal has carefully
considered all the evidence and not
without substantial misgivings the Tribunal
has concluded this Particular is not established as it has not been able to be
to the requisite standard. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is
not indicating that Patient A is to be regarded as an untruthful
witness or the
Respondent as a truthful witness. However for any of the Particulars to be made
out it is necessary for the Tribunal
be reasonably satisfied the evidence is
both truthful and reliable based on the evidence as it was placed before the
Particular 2(e) - Failing to provide adequate
information or explanation to Patient A in relation to his assessment or
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated that he asked Patient A to remove his
shirt, pants and shoes and sit on the treatment
table. After some palpation
testing the Respondent asked Patient A to lie face down on the table before
providing some treatments.
The Respondent then asked Patient A to turn face up.
The Respondent does not record providing any other information or explanation
Tribunal repeats the comments made above regarding Particular 1(e).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 2(e)
occurred and that such conduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 2(f) - Failing to obtain informed consent from
Patient A for treatment
Tribunal notes that apart from receiving the ‘Ok’ from Patient A to
perform the upper thoracic adjustment at the end
of the first consultation the
Respondent did not record in his statement obtaining any informed consent (or
any consent at all).
Tribunal repeats the comments made above regarding Particular 1(f).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 2(f)
occurred and that such conduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 2(g)(i) and 2(g)(ii) – Failing to make and
keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition and /or treatment in
notes: (i) Were not recorded in English; (ii) Did not adequately record details
of examinations conducted or chiropractic
adjustments performed
Tribunal notes that the records were substantially written in Japanese.
Tribunal repeats the comments made above with respect to Particulars 1(g)(i) and
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied Particular 2(g) is established and that such
conduct is unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 2(h) - Failing to assess Patient A’s
response to chiropractic treatment provided at the previous consultation
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated that he asked Patient A at the
commencement of the second consultation
‘how he felt’
that he replied there had been no change. The Respondent then records that he
provided some of the testing and treatments he
had provided during the first
consultation (omitting some of them such as the testing of the hamstring muscle
as no problem had been
found during the first consultation). The Respondent
details various clinical findings he made during the consultation (R1 –
Tribunal notes that the peer reviewers were unable to determine what assessments
had been made during this second consultation
based on the clinical records. The
Tribunal remained unclear on this issue even after the Respondent gave extensive
evidence. The
Tribunal has evidence that the Respondent’s actions such as
not ordering x-rays of all relevant areas are not consistent with
assessment of the Respondent. The Respondent did not satisfy the Tribunal that
he undertook anything other than a cursory
enquiry of Patient A. The Tribunal is
of the view that this is a failure to assess Patient A in a chiropractic
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct detailed in Particular 2(h)
occurred and that such conduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 2(i) - Failing to conduct an examination or
perform any chiropractic adjustment on Patient A
Tribunal notes that the Respondent states that he provided limited massage and
adjustments to Patient A during this consultation.
the Tribunal is concerned about the adequacy of the Respondent’s
examination and treatment of Patient A there is evidence
that some examination
and adjustments occurred during the second consultation.
the Tribunal is satisfied that there was a failure of the Respondent to
adequately examine Patient A the conduct that occurred
does not satisfy this
Particular.
Tribunal does not find Particular 2(i) established.
Findings re Complaints
Tribunal makes a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
each of Particulars 1 (e), 1(f), 1(g)(i), 1(g)(ii),
2(e), 2(f), 2(g)(i),
2(g)(ii), and 2(h). The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of the
Respondent demonstrated that the knowledge,
judgement and skill possessed and
care exercised by him was significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a chiropractor
of an equivalent level of training and experience. The
Tribunal also finds that the conduct was improper and unethical conduct relating
to the practice of chiropractic.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct described in each of Particulars 1 (e),
1(f), 1(g)(i), 1(g)(ii), 2(e), 2(f), 2(g)(i),
2(g)(ii), and 2(h) considered
together is of such a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration. The Tribunal finds
professional misconduct and Complaint Two is established.
Factors relevant to Orders
noted above the Tribunal makes Orders that are protective not punitive. Orders
are for the purpose of protecting the public, of
maintaining the reputation of
the profession, of maintaining the confidence that the public is entitled to
repose in members of the
chiropractic profession. It may also act as a deterrent
for other health care practitioners from engaging in similar conduct.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent’s evidence about his
understanding of professional boundaries demonstrates inadequacies.
was not a specific Particular of Complaint the Tribunal recommends that the
Respondent take steps to address these deficits
to prevent them precipitating a
future breach of the Code of Conduct. The Respondent gave the following evidence
in cross-examination
(T251.41 – 252.10, 252.18-27):
Q. When you practise as a chiropractor, are you mindful of the code of
conduct that applies to chiropractors?
A. Yes, I am.
Q. You were familiar with, I take it, in 2010?
Q. You were familiar, were you, with that part of the code of conduct
that covers professional behaviour?
Q. You have an understanding, I assume, of professional
boundaries?
Q. What was your understanding of your obligations, if I could put it
that way, to respect professional boundaries in early 2010?
A. To respect the patient's beliefs and their right to privacy.
................
Q. Did you have any further understanding of your obligations to respect
professional boundaries than what you've just stated?
A. Insofar as privacy to the patient and as far as modesty, is that what
you're meaning?
Q. Well, what steps did you take to ensure that your appropriate respect
of professional boundaries was maintained in your practice
chiropractic?
A. That coverings were available and made to on patients, to
patients at any time when they had to disrobe.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent does not understand the fundamental
nature of a professional relationship in a contemporary
setting. This is further
reinforced by the fact that all of his personal referees were friends (with whom
he socialised) as well
as being his patients.
matter that indicates a lack of appropriate contemporary professional practice
is the fact that although stating that he would
make coverings available when
the patient disrobed, there was no evidence that he would leave the room while
the patient did so nor
was there a screened off area in his treatment room.
Tribunal further observes that the Respondent’s attitude towards record
keeping and informed consent were less than satisfactory.
Once again the
Respondent’s evidence does not reflect contemporary professional practice.
These are all serious flaws in professional
practice and warrant, in the
Tribunal’s view a reprimand. The Tribunal is of the view that this would
not be an appropriate
matter for the Chiropractic Board of Australia to exercise
its discretion to remove the reprimand from the Register at any time in
360. The Tribunal has considered what orders are appropriate in the current circumstances. The Tribunal has considered the unchallenged
evidence of the character witnesses (about which the Tribunal has expressed some reservations given the relationship of the referees
to the Respondent) and the otherwise unblemished record of the Respondent. The Tribunal is mindful that it is required to put in
place the least restrictive orders that will protect the public – there is no place for punitive orders in this jurisdiction.
It is the Tribunal’s view that remediation of the issues found in this matter does not require an order for suspension or cancellation
of registration. As an aside, the Tribunal notes, due to its relevance to the question of costs considered below, that it would have
formed this view even had it been able to be satisfied to the requite standard with respect to Particulars 1(a), 1(b), 1(c), 1(d),
2(a), 2(b), 2(c), 2(d) and 2(i).
regard to the Tribunal’s concerns regarding the Respondent’s
practice in the Particulars established, the Tribunal
is of the view that these
issues require the close monitoring of the Respondent’s practice by a
senior member of the profession
acting in the role of mentor. Given the evidence
in this matter the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent will need to
in this process for a minimum time of two hours per month (in a face to
face situation) for an initial period of six months and thereafter
for a period
of twelve months for a minimum time of one hour per month. The mentor is to be a
senior member of the profession who
has the appropriate expertise to guide the
Respondent through the process of fully appreciating the professional
requirements of
interacting with patients, of undertaking and recording
assessment and treatments, of obtaining informed consent and of making
appropriate
assessments of chiropractic treatment previously provided. Given the
views expressed by Dr Kelly do not accord with the Tribunal’s
findings it
would not be appropriate for Dr Kelly to act as the mentor for the purpose of
the orders made herein.
given the above indications the Tribunal leaves the question of the approval of
the specific mentor to the Chiropractic Council
of New South Wales (Council).
The Tribunal also notes that the mentor must be willing to provide regular
reports to the Council as
to the Respondent’s progress in relation to
these matters, details of the face to face meetings, details of audits
of the Respondent’s clinical notes. The mentor must also be
willing to undertake to notify the Council should any further issues
Respondent’s practice be identified during the mentoring process.
Tribunal intends for the mentor to determine matters such as the time spent with
the Respondent on a monthly basis, when audits
will occur, the contents of the
clinical notes held by the Respondent as well as any continuing professional
development that the
Respondent should undertake over and above those matters
detailed in the orders. The Respondent is responsible for meeting all costs
associated with the mentoring.
is also important to make clear that the Tribunal considers that the times set
for the mentoring are not only a minimum but apply
to full time practice. Should
the Respondent work something less than full time equivalent then the length of
time that the Respondent
will be required to undertake mentoring will be
extended accordingly. By way of example if the Respondent was away from his
for a period of more than two weeks during the initial six month period
then the six month period will be extended by the length
of time he is away from
the practice. Similarly if the Respondent drops to a part time practice the
length of time of mentoring will
be extended.
deficits in the practice of the Respondent should also be remedied by his
engagement in continuing professional development (CPD)
focussed on record
keeping. While there are well defined requirements for registered chiropractors
to engage in CPD as a requirement
for continuing registration, the Tribunal
specifies that the Respondent must undertake CPD focussed on record keeping
sometime in
the 18 months from the date of this Reasons document. The Respondent
is given an 18 month period to allow for the unlikely eventuation
that a course
not be available in the immediate future at a time and location available to the
Respondent.
the findings made herein and the oral evidence of the Respondent revealed that
the Respondent’s understanding of ethical
matters does not accord with
contemporary practice. This may well be said of ‘other’
practitioners as claimed by Dr Kelly
but this Tribunal is concerned about the
conduct of this respondent and the safety of the public. The Tribunal also
orders that the
Respondent undertake a formal educational course in ethics. This
may be satisfied by undertaking a unit within a university course
which includes
a formal assessment component (i.e. mere attendance does not satisfy the
requirements for satisfactory completion
of the course) or by engaging the
services of a suitably qualified registered health professional to design an
educational program
by setting readings, undertake discussions and being
formally assessed by way of an essay (no shorter than 2000 words –
and footnotes not to be included in this word count). The Respondent
is responsible for forwarding to the Council documentation that
satisfactory completion of the university course or written confirmation from
the registered health professional of satisfactory
completion of the educational
program including a copy of the essay. The Tribunal has fixed a period of time
for completion of this
course but has also given discretion to the Council to
extend this time up to three years from the date hereof should it be satisfied
that the Respondent has made a concerted effort to comply with this condition
and the delay has been caused by factors beyond the
control of the Respondent.
Any application for an extension of time is to be made in writing by the
Respondent to the Executive Officer
of the Council giving appropriate notice of
the matter. If the Respondent has not complied with this requirement after the
year period the Council should consider that the Respondent is in breach
of this order and act accordingly.
Tribunal remains troubled by the evidence that the sarongs placed into evidence
by the Respondent had been used in his practice
since at least July 2008 and had
each been washed a number of times a week. The pieces of cloth placed before the
Tribunal do not
have the appearance of cloth that had been regularly washed on
numerous occasions over a period of approximately three years. The
considers that the ‘warning’ given to the Tribunal regarding it not
having the requisite ‘expertise’
for drawing any conclusions from
such an observation does not sit with the requirement of a decision maker to
make its own observations
and bring common sense to bear upon issues. The
appearance of cloth after frequent washing is an observation that can be made by
any member of the community. Ultimately, without the benefit of formal forensic
examination the Tribunal has determined all of the
issues in this matter without
regard to the plausibility of the evidence of the Respondent regarding the
quantum of use the exhibited
sarongs had had.
Tribunal is also concerned that it appeared that there were no steps taken to
obtain statements from Patient A’s wife, Patient
A’s previous
employee who had also been the Respondent’s patient, the subsequent
treating chiropractor and had both Patient
A’s mobile telephone and the
Respondent’s mobile telephone number.
provisions of the
National Law (NSW)
relating to the award of costs are
what is commonly known as ‘costs follow the event’.
Tribunal notes that not all of the Particulars were found to be established to
the requisite standard. While this may not have
been assisted by the absence of
certain evidence in the material before the Tribunal it is also a result of
numerous factors. The
Tribunal is not of the view that the HCCC inappropriately
placed these Particulars before the Tribunal. Indeed the Tribunal is not
view that Patient A was an untruthful witness. However, the absence of certain
material did not assist the Tribunal.
parties emphatically declined the opportunity to have this matter heard as a
‘two phase’ process. The Tribunal has
proceeded to make the costs
orders based upon the usual principles applied in this
13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law is for all relevant purposes in the same
terms as the provisions considered by New South
Wales Court of Appeal in
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77.
The complaint by the Health Care Complaints
Commission was not made out against Dr Ohn. As a result of the Medical Tribunal
to make an order for costs in his favour Dr Ohn appealed. The Court,
(Gleeson CJ, Power JA and Cole JA), held that:
The principles to be applied by the Medical Tribunal in the exercise of
its discretion to award costs under regulation 27 are similar
to those applied
by a court in similar circumstances, so that costs should follow the event
unless the circumstances of the case
require the exercise of a discretion not to
do so [79B, 81A, 85E].
Gleeson CJ observed that the nature of an order for costs applies
... to civil litigation, summary proceedings and disciplinary proceedings.
This does not mean that the discretionary considerations
relevant to those
proceedings are identical. However, the subject of the discretion, that is, an
order for costs, has the same nature,
and that guides the exercise of the
discretion [79B].
Two things follow:
usual rationale for of making a costs order is that it is just and reasonable
that the successful party should be reimbursed for
costs incurred, in the
absence of grounds connected with the charge or the conduct of the proceedings
which make it unjust or unreasonable
that there should be such
reimbursement.
test of whether an order for costs should be made against an unsuccessful
plaintiff or complainant is not whether he or she has
done anything to warrant
punishment. It is whether, in the circumstances, the defendant or respondent
should be compensated.
JA observed that "in ordinary circumstances where a complaint against a medical
practitioner has failed, the Tribunal should
make an order for costs in the
practitioner's favour". As a matter of logic it follows that if a complaint is
made out against a
health practitioner then an order in favour of the
complainant should follow.
second reading speech and the explanatory memorandum in relation to the
National Law
does not provide any assistance on this issue.
Tribunal is of the view that the overall length of the Inquiry would have been
shortened had the additional material been in evidence.
In the circumstances the
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent should be compensated by bearing
only 80% of the HCCC costs
as agreed or assessed by the Tribunal upon an
application to have the matter relisted for this purpose.
If the Respondent moves into another jurisdiction within Australia the
relevant body to monitor these conditions will be the Chiropractic
Australia rather than the Chiropractic Council of New South Wales. The Tribunal
Orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter
as the Practitioner):
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he must provide a
copy of the Reasons for Decision documents in
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT
to any person working in his practice providing a health service (
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
), or to any employer should he work in an
employed capacity, whilst any conditions imposed in
HCCC v MAHER
remain on his Registration. Within 14 days of the engagement of a new
employee, or entering into a new practice relationship or entering
employment, the Practitioner is to forward written confirmation to the Council
from the health care provider or employer
that they have received and read the
Reasons documents,
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1.
This Condition is to
remain on the Practitioner’s registration until such time as all other
Conditions on Registration (except
for the reprimand) are lifted by the
Chiropractic Council of NSW, in accordance with these Orders.
is a condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that the Practitioner is
to undertake at his own cost a minimum of two
hours of individual
supervision/mentoring (face to face) a month with the Chiropractic Council of
NSW Approved Mentor (Approved Mentor)
for the initial period of six months and
then for a minimum of one hour a month for a minimum period of 18 months. The
Practitioner
is to forward the name, contact details and relevant details of a
proposed registered chiropractor (not being Dr Kelly) to be the
Approved Mentor.
Once the Practitioner receives confirmation of the Council’s approval of
the Approved Mentor the Practitioner
is to authorise and direct in writing the
Approved Mentor to forward reports as to the progress of the mentoring to the
Chiropractic
Council of NSW every two months after approval by the Council and
to advise the Council if at any stage concerns regarding the
Practitioner’s
compliance with Conditions on his Registration or his
practice generally arise. The Practitioner must forward a copy of this written
direction and authorization accepted by the Approved Mentor to the Council. The
Practitioner is to put in place appropriate arrangements
to allow the Approved
Mentor to have access to clinical notes and any other records requested by the
Approved Mentor. After two months
from the date of
HCCC v MAHER
the Practitioner is not to work as a registered chiropractor unless he
has an Approved Mentor until this Condition is lifted by the
Council. The
mentoring undertaken and reported upon by the Mentor is to include all of the
following areas:
Legal, ethical
and professional conduct
Professional
practice procedures
Record keeping
in particular clinical records and informed consent
Professional
boundaries in particular regarding the provision of information and explanation
to patients
Competencies in
professional practice in particular assessment of responses to treatment
The Practitioner is to provide the name, contact details and relevant details
of another registered chiropractor in the event approval
is not granted by the
Council of NSW or if the Approved Mentor is unable or unwilling to continue
acting in the role at any time.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he comply with all
directions made by the Approved Mentor in accordance
with the Conditions made in
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1.
This Condition may be lifted by the Council
at the time the Condition requiring mentoring of his practice by an Approved
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s registration that he complete a
Continuing Professional Development activity (CPD) focused
on record keeping in
the 18 months after the date of
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1.
Practitioner is to provide evidence of satisfactory completion of this course to
the Council. The Practitioner is also to take
advice from his Approved Mentor as
to other appropriate CPD to undertake. This Condition may be lifted by the
Council 18 months after
the date of
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1
has been receipt of appropriate written evidence of a satisfactory completion of
this course and any other course recommended
by the Approved Mentor. The
Practitioner will be in breach of this condition if he does not complete the CPD
relating to record keeping
within 18 months of
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT
and within 12 months of any recommendation being made by the Approved
Supervisor.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s registration that he completes a
formal educational course in ethics either by way of
completion of a course or
arrangement with an appropriately qualified registered health professional. The
Practitioner is to propose
an educational course in ethics to the Council in
writing for approval. The Council can be guided by comments made by the Tribunal
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1
when considering approval of the course,
in particular something more than mere attendance must be required for
satisfactory completion
of the course and a minimum of 10 hours of study. The
Practitioner is to forward to the Council documentation that indicates
satisfactory
completion of the formal educational course to the Council. The
course is to be completed within 18 months of the date of
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1.
However the Council has the discretion to extend this time up
to three years from the date of
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1
should it be
satisfied that the Practitioner has made a concerted effort to comply with this
condition and the delay has been caused
by factors beyond the control of the
Practitioner. Any application for an extension of time is to be made in writing
by the Practitioner
to the Executive Officer of the Council giving appropriate
notice of the matter. If the Practitioner has not complied with this requirement
after the three year period the Council should consider that the Practitioner is
in breach of this Condition.
Practitioner is to provide a self-report on his practice every two months for a
minimum of two years from the date of
HCCC v MAHER
[2013] NSWCHT 1
thereafter at a frequency and for a duration determined by the Council. This
Condition may be lifted by the Council at the time
the Condition requiring
mentoring of his practice by an Approved Mentor and those requiring CPD and an
ethics course are removed
or at some later date as determined by the
is a Condition on the Registration of the Practitioner that he is not to provide
professional supervision to any other registered
health practitioner for a
minimum period of two years and then not until such time as the Council lifts
this Condition.
is a Condition of the Practitioner’s Registration that he submit all
complaints (formal and informal) regarding his professional
practice and conduct
to the Approved Mentor. This Condition is to remain in place whilst the
Condition requiring an Approved Mentor
remains on the Practitioner’s
Registration and may thereafter be lifted by the Council.
is a Condition on the Practitioner’s Registration that he submit to a
professional performance assessment if requested by
the Council during the
period that the Condition requiring an Approved Mentor remains on the
Practitioner’s Registration. This
Condition may be lifted by the Council
when the Condition requiring an Approved Mentor is lifted.
Practitioner is ordered to bear all the costs associated with compliance with
the Conditions placed upon his Registration in
HCCC v HCCC v MAHER
Practitioner is to pay 80% of the costs of the HCCC as agreed or if agreement
cannot be reached as assessed by the Tribunal. Both
parties have leave to
re-list the matter before the Tribunal for determination of
Practitioner is hereby reprimanded in the terms of Annexure D to
[2013] NSWCHT
Publication
A copy of this Reasons
for Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal
2) The HCCC,
3) The Chiropractic Board of Australia,
(New South Wales Office) and
5) The Chiropractic Council of New South
___________________
___________________
Rosemary Giuriato
___________________
John Thompson
___________________
Frances Taylor
Annexure A – Index of Documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Written Outline of Submissions of the HCCC
Annexure C – Written Outline
of Submissions of the Respondent
Annexure D - Reprimand
Annexure E -
Schedule of Names Suppressed
HCCC v MAHER
TO THE DOCUMENTS OF THE HCCC
Formal Documents
Page Number
(a) Complaint
(b) Certificate of Registration Status dated 6 February 2012
Completed NSW Chiropractors Registration Board complaint form
Statements and information from witnesses
Statement from Patient A
Statement from Patient A’s friend
Commission file note titled ‘Spoke to [Patient A’s
Information obtained by the Commission
Copy of results of IPDN enquiry confirming that Mr Maher is the account
holder for telephone number 0412 XXXXXX
CCR for Mr Maher’s mobile no. 0412 XXXXXX
Copy of results of IPDN enquiry confirming that Patient A is the account
holder for telephone number 0417 XXXXXX
CCR for Patient A’s mobile no. 0417 XXXXXX
Copy of translation of Patient A’s clinical records from the
Community Relations Commission
Letter requesting an expert report
Expert report
Information from respondent
notice addressed to Mr Maher
Patient A’s clinical records obtained from Mr Maher
Submission from Mr Maher
Letter from the Commission to Mr Maher informing him of the proposed
outcome to the investigation.
Submission from Mr Maher to HCCC
Copy of part of Patient A’s typed statement with additional
handwritten notes produced by Patient A while giving evidence
Copy of Respondent’s advertisement from a Japanese language newspaper
(Nichigo Press)
INDEX TO THE RESPONDENT’S DOCUMENTS
Response by Dennis Maher dated 30.11.11
Resume of Dennis Maher
Statement of Gordon Wing-Lun dated 25.11.11
Statement of Toshinori Miyagawa dated 5.12.11
Statement of Rhonda Mangan dated 8.12.11
Statement of Yuki Miyagawa dated 5.12.11
Statement of Neill MacPherson dated 9.12.11
Patient A’s notes (part English/part Japanese)
Patient A’s notes (English as translated by the Respondent)
Patient A’s HICAPS receipts
Letter of instruction to expert
Expert report of John Kelly & CV & Codes of Conduct Chiropractors
Registration Board (NSW) & Chiropractic Board of Australia
Photograph of ‘low boy’ in Respondent’s treatment
Photograph of contents of ‘low boy’
(MFI – I) Diagram drawn by Patient A of the layout of the
Respondent’s treatment room
Photograph of treatment bed in Respondent’s treatment room
Photographs of various parts of the Respondent’s treatment room
Original ‘sarongs’ produced by Respondent during Inquiry
Photographs of various parts of the Respondent’s treatment room
‘Consent to Procedures’ document now used by the
Statement of Agnes Canning Campbell dated 23 July 2012
HCCC V MAHER
SUBMISSIONS MADE ON BEHALF OF
Maher (‘the Respondent”) has conducted chiropractic practice since
1975. He graduated from the Sydney College
of Chiropractic in 1975 and
practiced as a chiropractor in Sydney between 1975 and 1983, when he moved to
Japan. He was first registered
as a chiropractor in NSW on 16 June 1980. [Ex
1B] The Respondent practiced as a chiropractor in Japan between 1983 and 1992.
1992 the Respondent returned to Sydney and resumed practice as a chiropractor
at his clinic in rooms on level 8 of the Dymocks Building
at 428 George Street,
Sydney. The Respondent presently conducts chiropractic practice at this clinic
and at another clinic at his
are two complaints against the Respondent. The first alleges that he has been
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
as defined in s 139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National
Law”). The second alleges that he has been guilty of professional
misconduct as defined in s 193E of the
National Law.
complaints arise out of the following conduct of the Respondent during two
consultations with Patient A at the George Street
clinic on 26 February 2010 and
3 March 2010 when Patient A consulted the Respondent about pain in his
or about 26 February 2010 when consulting with Patient A, the respondent failed
to act in accordance with appropriate therapeutic
or professional practice
(a) Pulling down and taking off Patient A’s underpants;
(b) Failing to provide Patient A with an adequate or appropriate covering to
cover himself with;
(c) Touching Patient A’s penis whilst massaging Patient A’s lower
buttocks and upper thigh;
(d) Saying to Patient A “you have a nice cock” or words to that
(e) Failing to provide adequate information or explanation to Patient A in
relation to his assessment or treatment;
(f) Failing to obtain informed consent from Patient A for treatment;
(g) Failing to make and keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition
and/or treatment in that the notes:
(i) Were not
recorded in English;
(ii) Did not
adequately record details of examinations conducted or chiropractic adjustments
or about 3 March 2010, when consulting with Patient A, the respondent failed to
act in accordance with appropriate therapeutic
or professional practice
(a) Pulling down and taking off Patient A’s underpants;
(b) Failing to provide Patient A with an adequate or appropriate covering to
cover himself with;
(c) Touching Patient A’s penis whilst massaging Patient A’s lower
buttocks and upper thigh;
(d) Saying to Patient A when touching Patient A’s penis “wake
up” or words to that effect’
(e) Failing to provide adequate information in relation to his assessment or
(f) Failing to obtain informed consent from Patient A for treatment;
(g) Failing to make and keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition
and/or treatment in that the notes:
not recorded in English;
not adequately record details of examinations conducted or chiropractic
adjustments performed;
(h) Failing to assess Patient A’s response to chiropractic treatment
provided at the previous consultation;
(i) Failing to conduct an examination or perform any chiropractic adjustment on
Complaints relate to the level of the Respondent’s knowledge, skill and
judgment and also allege that he engaged in improper
or unethical conduct
relating to the practice of chiropractic.
Complainant’s Evidence
principal evidence of the complaints is from Patient A. On 26 February 2010
Patient A attended the Respondent’s clinic
in Sydney for the first time.
He had heard the Respondent was a good chiropractor who spoke Japanese. Patient
A was seeking treatment
for a sore neck. He is Japanese, speaks fluent English
but felt more comfortable speaking about his sore neck in Japanese. He had
met the Respondent prior to the first consultation. [Ex 3 p 14]
the first consultation Patient A told the Respondent about his neck pain. The
Respondent checked Patient A’s neck, shoulder
and spine while Patient A
was fully clothed. The Respondent then asked Patient A to undress and lie on
the bed. Patient A removed
all of his clothes except his underpants and lay on
the bed face down. Patient A felt the Respondent checking his neck and back
with his hands. The Respondent then gave Patient A a massage for about ten
minutes. [Ex 3 p 14]
informing Patient A or seeking his permission first, the Respondent moved
Patient A’s underpants halfway down his buttocks
and massaged his upper
buttocks. The Respondent then removed Patient A’s underpants altogether.
The Respondent does not remember
the Respondent saying anything to him before
doing this. The Respondent then massaged Patient A’s lower buttocks and
thighs. While doing this Patient A felt the Respondent’s hand touch
his penis, which was lying between Patient A’s legs.
Patient A recalls
the Respondent touching his penis four or five times this way during a
five-minute period of massage. [Ex 3 p
this the Respondent asked Patient A to roll onto his back. Patient A’s
penis was slightly erect, though he was not sexually
aroused. When he rolled
over Patient A, who was naked, did not have any covering. At this time the
Respondent said words to the
following effect: “You have a nice
cock”. At about the same time the Respondent touched Patient A’s
penis by brushing
his hand against it for a few seconds. Patient A asked the
Respondent: “Is there anything to cover my important parts?”,
meaning his penis. The Respondent gave Patient A a handkerchief-sized piece of
material. Patient A placed this over his penis,
but it subsequently fell off a
number of times during further massaging of the front of his thighs by the
Respondent. Patient A
therefore described as: “like I didn’t have
anything covering me”. The Respondent then “clicked” Patient
A’s neck shoulder and back whilst Patient A was still naked. [Ex
Patient A dressed the Respondent said Patient A needed to come back and see him.
He said he was not sure what the problem was
with Patient A’s neck unless
he had a look at some x-rays and it might take a long time to fix. The
Respondent did not send
Patient A for an x-ray. The Respondent booked Patient A
for a further consultation on 3 March 2010. [Ex 3 p 16]
the second consultation on 3 March 2010 the Respondent asked Patient A to get
undressed. Patient A removed all his clothes except
his underpants and lay face
down on the bed. The Respondent then massaged his shoulder, neck and back in
the same way he did at
the first consultation. The Respondent removed Patient
A’s underpants and massaged his thighs again, touching Patient A’s
penis as he did so. The Respondent then asked Patient A to roll over onto his
back. Patient A, who was naked, did so, but was not
provided with any covering
or draping at all. After Patient A rolled onto his back the Respondent touched
Patient A’s penis
with his hands and said: “Wake up” as he did
so. Patient A asked: “What are you doing?” The Respondent
reply but was smiling. [Ex 3 p 16]
Respondent subsequently processed Patient A’s payment, gave him a referral
for an x-ray and made an appointment for another
consultation on 10 March 2010.
However, Patient A did not attend the next appointment. On the day of that
appointment he sent the
Respondent an SMS stating that he was uncomfortable,
disappointed and shocked with what had happened during the previous visits and
did no wish to attend again. This was the first time Patient A had informed the
Respondent he was uncomfortable with what had happened.
The Respondent replied
by SMS stating that he did not know that Patient A was uncomfortable with the
treatment and that he would
try to focus professionally with what was happening
to Patient A’s neck. Patient A did not reply to the SMS and did not
the appointment. He did not have the SMS’s at the time of making
his statement as “they get automatically deleted after
a while”. [Ex
A formed the view that the Respondent’s conduct was on purpose after it
occurred on the second occasion and after discussing
the matter with a friend,
Patient B, a hairdresser. He recalled telling Patient B what had occurred
during the consultations with
the Respondent about a week after the second
consultation. Patient A also told his wife and a work colleague named [omitted]
what occurred during the consultations with the Respondent. [Ex 3 p
A first made a written complaint about the Respondent’s conduct on 29
March 2010 in a handwritten notification of complaint
faxed to the NSW
Chiropractors Registration Board. [Ex 2 pp 9-11] Though less detailed than his
statement dated 12 April 2010 [Ex
3] the details of the Respondent’s
conduct complained of in the handwritten complaint are consistent with the
A mentioned his experience in his consultations with the Respondent to his
hairdresser, Patient B. Patient B, who had sought
treatment from the Respondent
as well, did not have the same experience with the Respondent as Patient A.
Patient B also said he
was not asked to take his all clothes off by the
Respondent during consultations. He was asked to remove his shirt while the
examined his back and neck, and then asked to put it back on then lie
on the bed. [Ex 3 p 17]
A first mentioned his experience with the Respondent to a work colleague named
[omitted] on 26 February 2010. She said she
had not been required to remove all
her clothes while being treated by the Respondent. Patient A also mentioned
what had happened
in the consultations to his wife, after mentioning it to
Patient B. [Ex 3 p 17]
is consistent with Patient A’s later witness statement, although it
contains less detail and erroneously refers to the
date of the first
consultation as 26 March 2010. This should be 26 February 2010. [Ex 2 p
B stated that Patient A spoke to him about the Respondent on what must have been
21 May 2010. Patient A asked Patient B if
he was required to undress during his
consultations with the Respondent. Patient B said he never had to undress.
Patient B said
the Patient A told him he went to see the Respondent twice and
was “undressed in just my underwear”. He said that the
“pulled his pants down”. He said the Respondent asked him to turn
over and massaged his legs and Patient
A got an erect penis. Then the
Respondent asked him to turn over onto his back and “touched [Patient
A’s] penis, not
sexually, just touched it”. When Patient A asked
for blanket covering he was given “a little handkerchief”. Patient
A told Patient B he returned for a second consultation and the same things
happened. The Respondent massaged Patient A’s legs
while he was lying on
his stomach. Patient A got an erection again. The Respondent asked him to turn
over and “grabbed [Patient
A’s] penis as if he was trying to
masturbate [Patient A]”. Patient A showed Patient B an SMS he sent to the
which said something like: “I think you were unprofessional ...
during the last visit. Unfortunately I am not going back to
patient”. Patient B was also shown the Respondent’s SMS response in
which he recalled the Respondent “apologised”.
Patient A told
Patient B he was upset and embarrassed by the incidents. [Ex 4 pp
Call charge records
charge records for the mobile telephone services of the Respondent and Patient A
contain entries consistent with Patient A sending
an SMS message to the
Respondent at 2.08pm on 10 March 2010 [Ex 9 p 40] and with the Respondent
sending an SMS to Patient A at 2.16pm
on 10 March 2010 [Ex 7 p
Patient Records
Respondent’s patient records of the two consultations are very brief and
include a number of notations in Japanese. The
record for the first
consultation includes the notes “Gen OT esp C7, L5/S1 thighs &
feet”. The notes for 3 March
2010 repeat that reference through the use
of the words “As above”, which are written in Japanese. The notes
March 2010 state: “DKA SMS rec’d today cancelled apt”.
[Ex 10 pp 57-59]
Expert – Rachael Weeks
Complainant’s expert reviewer, Rachael Weeks, stated that the following
conduct of the Respondent, if found to have occurred,
fell significantly below
the standard of a chiropractor with an equivalent level of training and
experience but did not invite her
strong criticism:
Patient A to remove his underwear on 26 February 2010 and 3 March 2010; and
inadequate covering to Patient A;
Weeks stated that the following conduct of the Respondent, if found to have
occurred at the two consultations, fell significantly
below the standard of a
chiropractor with an equivalent level of training and experience and invited her
strong criticism:
Patient A’s penis while massaging his lower buttocks and upper thigh;
to Patient A “you have a nice cock” while touching Patient A’s
Weeks also expressed the opinion that the standard of the patient notes of his
consultations with Patient A kept by the Respondent
were below what is
reasonably expected of a chiropractor with his level of training and experience
because they contained insufficient
information as to the patient history
obtained by the Respondent or his examination findings and adjustments. Ms
Weeks noted that
patient notes “should be kept in sufficient detail that
another chiropractor could pick up the file and continue the patient’s
care”. [Ex 12 pp 64-71]
The Respondent’s
his response to the complaints dated 30 November 2011 [Ex 1] the Respondent gave
a detailed account of his treatment of Patient
A during the two consultations on
26 February 2010 and 3 March 2010.
the first consultation on 26 February 2010, after making some observations of
Patient A the Respondent asked him to remove
his shirt, trousers and shoes and
place them on coat hangers on the wall. After performing a number of tests on
Patient A, at about
2.30pm, the Respondent asked him to lie face down on the
treatment table. After placing “a large cotton sheet measuring 1.27m
1m over Patient A’s lower back and legs” the Respondent palpated
Patient A’s neck and thoracic areas. The Respondent
then lowered Patient
A’s underpants “to the level of the third sacral segment along with
the covering sheet which was
folded back” and “massaged the lumbar
spine concentrating on the lumbar-sacral area”. The Respondent then
the underpants to their original position and palpated Patient
A’s hamstrings. At about 2.40pm the Respondent asked Patient
face up on the treatment table and again applied the covering sheet. He
massaged Patient A’s neck then adjusted his
neck. He adjusted Patient
A’s lower back while Patient A was lying first on one side, then the
other. The Respondent then
asked Patient A to sit and performed a further
adjustment. Patient A subsequently retrieved his belongings, dressed and made a
appointment for treatment on 3 March 2010. [Ex R1 pp
the 3 March 2010 consultation the Respondent again asked Patient A to remove his
shirt, trousers and shoes which were placed on
the hangers and chair provided.
The Respondent palpated Patient A’s neck while the latter sat on the
treatment table. He
then asked Patient A to lie face down on the treatment
table and “again the covering sheet was placed over his lower back and
legs”. The Respondent massaged Patient A’s cervical, thoracic and
lumbar muscles. Petient A then turned face up and
the Respondent massaged his
neck for 5 minutes and “Adjustments were performed as in the previous
treatment”. A further
appointment was made for 10 March 2010 but the
Respondent received an SMS that day cancelling the appointment. The Respondent
not recall receiving any communication from Patient A saying he “was
uncomfortable following the treatment” provided.
The Respondent replied
by SMS asking Patient A to contact him for another appointment when he was
ready. [Ex R1 pp 4-5]
Respondent denied the substance of the complaints. He denied: removing Patient
A’s underpants; touching or rubbing his
penis; providing him with
inadequate covering or no covering at all; making comments about Patient
A’s penis; asking Patient
A to remove all his clothing; treating Patient A
while he was naked; massaging the front of Patient A’s thighs; trying to
or rub Patient A’s penis; or saying the words “wake up”.
In relation to assertions that he massaged Patient A’s
thighs, the
Respondent stated: “I deny touching his thighs during the second
consultation. The first [consultation] time was
only palpation to find if there
was something wrong. There was nothing wrong so there was no reason to go back
to his thighs the
second time.” [Ex R1 pp 5-9]
Respondent relied on the evidence of a peer reviewer, John Kelly. His evidence
is not relevant to the complaints of inappropriate
comments and touching as he
has assumed the Respondent’s account with respect to those matters (Note:
The Respondent’s
actions, if Patient A’s account is accepted, were
clearly in contravention of clause 9 of the Code of Conduct for Chiropractors
annexed to John Kelly’s statement). His report is critical of the
adequacy of the patient records of the two consultations.
Relevant law
National Law relevantly defines unsatisfactory professional conduct as: conduct
“that demonstrates the ... judgment possessed
... by the practitioner in
the practice of the practitioner’s profession is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience” [s 139B(1)(a)]; and, any other improper or
unethical conduct
relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner’s profession [s 139B(1)(l)]. Section 139E of the National
Law defines “professional misconduct” as:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.
allegations in Complaint One relate to the level of the Respondent’s
knowledge, skill or judgment in the practice of chiropractic,
and also allege
that he engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the practice of
chiropractic. It is alleged in Complaint Two
that the Respondent has engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct that falls within either or both of the
limbs of the definition
of professional misconduct referred to in the previous
paragraph that is sufficiently serious to justify suspension or cancellation
the Respondent’s registration as a chiropractor.
standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is the
civil standard. However, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be “comfortably
satisfied” that the particulars
of the Complaints have been established.
This flows from the well known principles articulated by Dixon J in
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362–363 as
“The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue
has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion
is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction
which in a civil issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily
affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
determining whether the Complaints are made out and imposing any consequential
orders, this Tribunal is exercising protective,
not punitive jurisdiction.
Protective orders are made in order to protect those members of the public who
require protection and,
“from the professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not lead to a loss of privilege”:
New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
patient of a chiropractor must place a similar degree of trust in the
chiropractor as the trust placed by a patient in a treating
practitioner. In
HCCC v Eather (No. 2)
[2011] NSWCHT 2
described in the following terms [at para. 7]:
“The trust placed in chiropractors is analogous to that placed in
medical practitioners because of the necessity for the patient
to come into
close physical contact with the practitioner and frequently to disclose highly
personal information to the chiropractor
in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638, Priestley JA said in
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
“The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their doctors
may vary according to the condition which takes the patient
to the doctor. Even
in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a patient places in
a doctor is considerable.
In some cases, of which the present seems to be an
example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost absolute. The
power in regard to the patient in such cases is also very great.
I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of fact;
the extent of
the power will vary according to the temperament of the patient, but the doctor
with some patients and for limited
periods, because of the relationship in which
they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do whatever the doctor wants
the body of the patient. This is one of the reasons why doctors are
subject to correspondingly great obligations and are expected
to maintain high
standards; all this being very much in the public interest.”
Complainant submits that these comments are clearly applicable to chiropractors
subject to appropriate regard being given to the
differences in the practise of
the two professions. Patients place a great deal of trust in chiropractors.
Patients trust chiropractors
to administer highly skilled physical treatment
usually in very close physical proximity in situations where they are usually in
a treatment room alone with the chiropractor while he or she administers close
physical treatment to the patient. This treatment
frequently involves the
practitioner touching and massaging the patient, often in close proximity to
intimate regions of the patient’s
person. Their position in the
profession gives chiropractors power over patients which requires strict
boundaries in their relations
with patients to be clearly understood by
chiropractors and observed by them. These boundaries are important to ensure
the protection
of the patient so he or she can always make informed consent
where necessary and to ensure that the treatment given to the patient
adequate and not compromised.
Submissions on the evidence
Complainant submits that the evidence of Patient A should be accepted and, where
it conflicts with the Respondent’s evidence,
the Respondent’s
evidence should be rejected. Patient A, it is submitted, presented as a witness
who was doing his best to
tell the truth. Patient A was clearly embarrassed by
having to give evidence but, nevertheless, gave it clearly and truthfully.
had nothing to gain in making what must have been embarrassing disclosures about
the inappropriate touching and comments by the
Respondent and the inadequate
draping provided during the consultations.
is significant support for Patient A’s evidence in other evidence admitted
in these proceedings.
The substance of
Patient A’s allegations about the Respondent’s alleged misconduct is
supported by the evidence of Patient
B and his conversation with Patient A about
what occurred during the consultations and the SMS messages.
reported the alleged misconduct to the Chiropractors’ Registration Board
as early as 29 March 2010, less than four
weeks after the two consultations.
Although the
hand-written complaint is not as detailed as Patient A’s subsequent formal
witness statement of 12 April 2010,
this difference is explained by the physical
constraints in the prop form document on which the hand-written complaint is
and the fact that the later witness statement was obtained during a
formal investigation process.
Patient A wrote in Japanese on the copy of his witness statement attached to his
summons to appear and give evidence, to
which he was taken during
cross-examination, are not inconsistent with his testimony about the events
during the two consultations.
for aspects of Patient A’s testimony is also found elsewhere. For
example, the CCR’s for his and the Respondent’s
mobile telephones
confirm that an SMS exchange occurred between them on 10 March 2010. Moreover,
the Respondent in his evidence
confirmed an SMS exchange took place that day [TS
Respondent also confirmed:
that Patient A
was dressed only in his underpants for a period of time during which treatment
was administered during the first consultation
that Patient A
indicated he had lower back pain in that consultation [TS 265]; that he massaged
Patient A in the first session while
he laying face down and then face up [TS
that he would
have spoken to Patient A during this procedure [TS270]; that he massaged Patient
A’s lower back (lower lumbar
area) while he was face down and moved the
underpants down over the lumbar sacral area to do so [TS271, 274, 287], so that
the buttocks
were one third exposed [TS 273];
that he palpated
Patient A’s thighs up to the lower buttock region while he was lying face
down on the bed during the first
consultation for 15 seconds on each thigh [TS
that his patient
notes for the first consultation recorded a reference to “thighs and
feet”, indicating he had palpated
both [TS 299-303]; and
that the patient
notes for the second consultation state “as above” beneath the
reference to “thighs and feet”
for the first consultation [TS 307].
A’s evidence during his very lengthy cross-examination remained consistent
as to the essential events forming the substance
of the complaints about the
removal of his underpants, the failure of the Respondent to provide him with
adequate or any covering,
the touching of his penis and the inappropriate
comments about his genitals.
A candidly admitted to making some errors in his statement about some aspects of
what occurred during the consultations: e.g
at TS 38, 48-50, 57, 59-60. This
is, perhaps, unsurprising given the passage of time between the making of that
statement and the
consultations and the somewhat peripheral nature of the
asserted contradictions.
A was steadfast in his evidence about the central allegations of undressing,
failure to provide covering, genital touching,
inappropriate comments and the
content of the SMS messages [e.g. TS 43, 88-91, 95-97, 100-101, 130-132,
144-146, 149-151, 155-160,
165, 175 and 188].
Patient A may be criticized for returning to the second consultation because he
was aware by then of the risk of inappropriate
comments and touching, his
evidence that he still hoped prior to the second consultation that what had
occurred in the first consultation
was accidental is both highly plausible and
consistent with the degree of trust patients generally place in health
professionals
such as chiropractors. [see e.g. TS 95-96]
Respondent, on the other hand, it is submitted, cannot be accepted as a witness
of reliability and credit.
Respondent’s evidence of purporting to have a detailed recollection of the
two consultations with Patient A, including the
words that were spoken and his
claim to have an accurate recollection of that conversation [TS 290-291] lacks
credibility.
detailed recollection the Respondent purported to have of each consultation in
his statement of 30 November 2011 should be
viewed with scepticism in the light
of the passage of time between March 2010 and November 2011 and the number of
patients the Respondent
admitted to having seen during that time – some 30
to 40 per week [TS 245].
Respondent’s evidence about palpating the posterior thigh region of
Patient A in the context of examining him in relation
to a lower back pain
complaint but not palpating the anterior thigh region also lacks credibility and
is consistent with the Respondent
being unwilling to admit to any touching of
Patient A’s thighs while he was lying face up on the bed [TS 294-295].
The Respondent
also sought to distance himself and selectively restrict the obvious meaning of
the entry “as above” in
the patient notes for 3 March 2010, which
clearly refer to and incorporate the reference to “thighs and feet”
patient notes above them for the 26 February 2010 consultation in an
attempt to explain the contradiction between those notes and
his evidence that
he did not touch Patient A’s thighs in the second consultation [TS
Respondent’s evidence that the sarongs in the photographs of the treatment
room from 2012 and the sarongs tendered in evidence
are the same as those he
stated were used for covering in 2010, (with two in use at the time Patient A
attended and the other three
being provided by an Indonesian friend within six
months from then) and that they had been washed multiple times since then with
some re-stitching of edges on at least one of them is, it is submitted,
inconsistent with the unused appearance of the sarongs tendered
in evidence. [TS
340-344, 352-353]
Complainant submits that the Respondent’s evidence that his patient notes
of the two consultations were “brief but
sufficient” [TS 245] should
also be rejected insofar as it amounts to an assertion that the notes were
adequate in the light
of the plain deficiencies in the notes on their face, the
peer review of the notes and the Respondent’s own later evidence
Clearly the
notes, on their face, are too brief and large portions of them are
incomprehensible to anyone who does not read Japanese.
Ms Weeks concluded that
the notes were insufficient. Despite his oral testimony, this is the effective
conclusion of John Kelly
in his report as well. He said “English would be
preferred” (an obvious conclusion in a predominantly English-speaking
He also stated
that the notations regarding generalised testing procedures would be
“insufficient for another practitioner to
interpret accurately in relation
to the tests which were performed” and “More detail in relation to
the specific tests
performed and results obtained should appear within the
clinical records.
The same is true
of each adjustment performed on each occasion”. [Ex R 12 p 4] The
Respondent himself virtually conceded the
inadequacy of the notes. When asked
the treatment
session he stated: “If they couldn’t get access to the
patient, no, they wouldn’t know” [TS 303].
Clearly, on any
view, reliance on the patient’s recollection of treatment rather than a
proper record by the practitioner of
the treatment is no basis for proper
record-keeping in the practice of chiropractic.
the extent that peer review evidence is necessary, the Complainant, relies upon
the evidence of Ms Weeks that some of the Respondent’s
actions fell
significantly below the applicable standard and invited her strong criticism.
the reasons set out above, the Complainant, therefore, submits that all the
particulars of each complaint are made out.
Appropriate
this Tribunal accepts Patient A’s evidence and the particulars of the
Complaints are made out, the Complainant submits that
a period of deregistration
is the appropriate order in the circumstances for the following
The Respondent
has not fully admitted the extent of the misconduct and has not been fully
candid with the Tribunal.
The Respondent
does not have true insight into the seriousness of the misconduct and the
Tribunal would no doubt consequently hold
concerns that he could repeat similar
behaviour in the future.
complainant’s version of the first treatment session is accepted, the
swiftness with which the conduct commenced (with
a patient he had just met) is a
factor of real concern.
There is no
evidence before this Tribunal that the Respondent has had counselling by a
registered psychologist or psychiatrist or
that any counselling has been based
on full and frank admissions regarding the extent of the conduct he engaged in.
The Tribunal
would not therefore be assured that there is no risk to the public
from a repeat of such behaviour.
HCCC v Eather
[2011] NSWCHT 1
HCCC v Eather
[2011] NSWCHT 2
Austin v Chiropractors Registration Board of NSW
[2009] NSWCHT 2.)
the event that the Tribunal does consider deregistration appropriate, the
Complainant submits that it would also be appropriate
to make a prohibition
order that would have the effect of prohibiting the Respondent from providing
health services including, in
particular, massage therapy or any treatment or
therapy involving body movement, joints or the muscular-skeletal
Complainant seeks its costs in these proceedings.
HCCC V MAHER
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
to the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (“
the National
), the Tribunal is enquiring into a complaint of the Health Care
Complaints Commission (“
”), concerning the
professional conduct of Dennis Maher (“
The Complaint
HCCC complains that the practitioner, being a chiropractor under the National
Law, is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of s.
and professional
misconduct within the meaning of s.
of the National Law.
HCCC maintains, pursuant to s. 139B, that:
respondent’s conduct demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by him in the practice
of chiropractic is
significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a chiropractor of
an equivalent level of training or experience; and/or
respondent has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice of chiropractic.
Complaint is in two parts. Both concern consultations on 26 February 2010 and 3
March 2010. Complaint 1 concerns a consultation
which occurred on 26 February
2010. Complaint 1 alleges “unsatisfactory professional conduct” in
respect of each consultation
while Complaint 2 alleges “professional
misconduct” in respect of each of the consultation.
significantly
” is not defined in the
National Law. Some assistance as to the meaning to be given to the expression
may be taken from the
second reading speech for the
Medical Practice Act
which is relevantly in the same terms, it was stated
“The first main purpose of the Bill is to refocus the
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) on investigating the serious
recommended that
unsatisfactory professional conduct be redefined so that
only significant instances
involving lack of skill, judgment or care will
result in an investigation or disciplinary action
The Respondent’s Response to Complaint
respondent denies he is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within
the meaning of section 139B of the National Law
as alleged in Complaint 1.
practitioner denies he is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning
of section 139E of the
National Law
as alleged in Compliant 2.
respondent’s evidence is altogether consistent with those denials:
T232/8-237/28; T237/36-238/34; T252/5-6; T252/24-27; T274/20-29;
T286/43-288/9; T289/1-20; T291/8-36; T293/37-38; T305/14-17; T305/31-32;
T306/39-307/2; T310/28-46; T312/45-313/5
Complaints (and all Particulars) have not been made out.
standard of proof
is uncontroversial that the HCCC bears the legal burden of proof that the
Complaint has been made out to the requisite standard
prove to the requisite standard of proof, the Complaint must be established to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal. But
satisfaction
” is not a state of mind that is obtained or established
independently of the nature or consequence of the fact or facts to
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description or the gravity
of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the
issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not
be proved by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect inferences
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1997] FamCA 57
(1997) 22 Fam. LR 592
Hammond Brothers Pty
Insurances Australia Ltd
[2004] NSWCA 366
McKensey & Ors
[2004] NSWCA 437
strength of the evidence necessary to establish conduct varies in circumstances
in which there is alleged criminal conduct:
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd
Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1991) 110 ALR 449
standard of proof is not met if the circumstances appearing in evidence do not
give rise to a reasonable and
(1952) 85 CLR 353 at 358 (Dixon, Fullagar & Kitto JJ);
Westbus Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 198
Conflicting
inferences are not enough to establish the requisite proof. Then it becomes a
mere matter of conjecture. (See generally,
Richard Evans & Co Ltd
[1911] UKLawRpAC 47
(1911) AC 674
The evidence of Patient
evidence of Patient A is inexact, lacks the requisite definition, inaccurate and
seeks (by reference to third parties) to raise
indirect inferences. All of these
features are damning of his testimony.
follows immediately hereafter is a comprehensive but not exhaustive reference to
those features. The respondent acknowledges
that some individual features may
appear to be relatively minor, but in the context of the seriousness of the
allegations made, the
gravity of the consequences for the respondent, the
assistance that the witness had in the preparation of his statement and the
unlikelihood of the occurrence, the discrepancies are significant
(a) Patient A
had the opportunity of reading, re-reading, ensuring the contents of his
statement were correct before he signed the
T57/30-T58/1;
. Patient A starts out be confirming that his statement is true and
. Despite those opportunities, errors abound.
(b) Patient A
said in the Notification of Complaint that, “
I visited to Doctor on
Friday 26/03/2010
. That was clearly untrue. The initial
visit occurred in February 2010.
Patient A wrote the Complaint he checked it to ensure that the details were
. But, he concedes, the contents of the Compliant were
not correct:
(d) Patient A
told the HCCC that “
I still kept transaction details with SMS if you
need to see that
. Patient A had the text messages when
he completed the Complaint:
. Those records were never produced.
Notification of Complaint Patient A says that “he [Mr. Maher] did not
provide anything to cover”:
. We now know that
statement is also wrong as even Patient A came to concede that Mr. Maher did
provide him with something to cover
part of his body:
(f) Despite
[THE OTHER TREATING CHIROPRACTOR]”
that chiropractor did not attend to corroborate Patient A’s
(g) Patient A
does not recall where he obtained the Complaint form from:
original of the Notification was never produced. Patient A said that he
didn’t have the original because he sent it:
incorrect for the Tribunal knows that what was sent was a faxed copy of the
Notification, not the original.
(i) Patient A
I only heard of him and seen his advertisements in Japanese
newspapers”
TAB 3, para. 6
. He admitted that this was wrong:
(j) Initially
Patient A was adamant that the first visit “
lasted less than half an
TAB 3, para. 6
. This was not so. Appointment records
along with accounting printout (HICAP) reveals that the appointment lasted more
hour. Indeed Patient A was ultimately prepared to acknowledge that
the evidence as set out in his statement regarding this subject
T48/47-T49/5.
(k) Patient A
failed to provide a comprehensive account of either consultation in his
(l) Patient A
said in his statement, “
I remember that he asked me to lie on the bed.
... I took my clothes off to my underwear. I remember this because I put my
on the clothes hanger on the wall
TAB 3, para.7
evidence was inconsistent with this – he said that he put his clothes on
the right side of the shelf drawer:
(m) The account
provided by Patient A in his statement is a grossly truncated account of what
transpired during the course of the
consultations:
T38/35-T39/38
(n) Patient A
was given an opportunity of drawing a diagram identifying features of the room
and his positioning in the room. He said
that he was lying on the bed with his
head in a position closer to the coat hanger than the window:
Thereafter (and after a delay of approximately 25 seconds) he said that evidence
was a mistake, wrong and a lie:
T59/40-T60/14.
(o) Patient A
conceded that Mr Maher went to the position of the lowboy to obtain some
covering to place over Patient A:
The Tribunal now knows that
the lowboy contained the fresh sarongs and towels used by Mr. Maher to place
over patients:
(p) When it was
put to the witness that a piece of material the size of a sarong was placed over
him (and the witness was shown a
sarong of a similar type) his evidence was
I don’t think so
rather than
“No, it was not.”
(q) Patient A
said that Mr Maher took off his underpants. He said they were placed on
the side table
” and he remembers
did this because of where my hands were at the time and I
couldn’t reach them
TAB 3, para. 10
(i) Mr Maher
did not remove Patient A’s underpants.
apparent from all the evidence that Mr Maher told Patient A what he proposed
doing. Patient A admits that he was informed
by Mr Maher, including being
informed that the underpants were going to be lowered a little to allow access
to the lumbo-sacral junction.
But now Patient A would ask the Tribunal to
comfortably accept that without warning Mr Maher whipped off the underpants and
Patient A didn’t question that move, didn’t ask for their
return, didn’t tell Mr Maher that he should not be referring
to his penis,
didn’t tell him there and then to stop further treatment:
T89/39-T90/9
Tribunal members could not be satisfied that Patient A’s hands were under
his head and face.
Tribunal members would not be satisfied that there was a side table in the
consulting room.
(v) Even on a
most generous reading of the plaintiff’s evidence it is difficult to
understand how the location of Patient A’s
hands precluded Patient A from
reaching his underpants. But even his own explanation doesn’t stand up for
Patient A conceded
in cross examination that the evidence he had given about the
positioning of his arms was incorrect and that his arms were on the
T69/13-22; T71/44
(vi) Patient A
said asserted that Mr Maher used both hands to pull down his underpants but then
retracted to tell the Tribunal that
he wasn’t sure whether Mr Maher had
used one or both hands:
(r) Patient
A’s account makes no reference to the pain experienced on the occasions
his underpants were said to have been removed.
To remove the underpants would
have been very difficult without actually hurting the patient because the
genitals would be trapped.
It would be a “
painful procedure
and to remove the underpants without discomfort would require a level of
co-operation from Patient A:
Kelly/Weekes, T412/35-413/30
. In the absence
of evidence of such hurt and pain and/or co-operation, the Tribunal could not be
satisfied that the events occurred.
Tribunal should not accept that Mr Maher massaged Patient A’s as described
TAB 3, para. 11
Tribunal should accept Mr. Maher’s account.
(ii) In Patient
A’s own statement he does not say that Mr Maher massaged both thighs.
Rather the reference is to the singular,
(iii) Being
generous to Patient A, part of what he may have been attempting to describe was
a palpation to a thigh rather than a massage.
imprecision in the paragraph when referring to “
lifting the muscle up
in my thing
” [sic] further detracts from the credence of the
statement Patient A has said “
Then he said something to me in English
like ‘You have a nice cock’. I think he used the word cock but he
may have used
the word dick. “
This account should be
(i) Patient A
says that he is not sure what Mr Maher said:
(ii) The image
Patient A had is one of Mr Maher saying, “It’s nice”:
(iii) Patient A
says that what Mr Maher said was “
Oh, it’s nice
. And later he says that Mr Maher said “
something along
the line of ‘nice one’
. And still later he
says that Mr Maher said “something like ‘
(iv) In his own
notations to his own statement Patient A has recorded in quotation marks what Mr
Maher said:
. That record makes no reference to
”. In fact what Patient A
was doing was “
to write down what was he said and he said something
like, ‘Oh nice’
(v) Given the
nature of the alleged comment, it beggars belief that Patient A made no comment.
But, he made no comment:
(vi) Mr Maher
couldn’t even see Patient A’s penis at this time, as it was
(vii) There is
no scope in disciplinary proceedings to accept a witness on such an important
matter as to a salacious comment in circumstances
where the witness cannot be
confident of the words spoken. The Tribunal could not be comfortably satisfied
that the statement was
(u) Patient
A’s account of the handkerchief is somewhat curious. He said in his
statement, “
I remember that Mr. Maher gave me something like a
handkerchief to cover myself with. It wasn’t a towel because I remember
it was a very thing
material. I think that it may have been
TAB 3, para. 16
account does not sit at all comfortably with the account provided in cross
examination, during which Patient A said that after
he asked Mr. Maher for a
cover he was given a cover – “
it was big like bath
(v) In order
for a chiropractor to pull off a patient’s underpants while that patient
was lying face down on the table the patient
would have to raise his pelvis,
pivot up on the knees and tummy:
Kelly/Weekes, T420/10-13; T420/3-6
simply did not occur.
(w) When it
came to describing the second consultation, Patient A was less than precise and
had difficulty remembering what happened:
(x) When it
came to telling the Tribunal whether or not his underpants came off on the
occasion of the second consultation, he is
anything but categorical in denying
the proposition that his underpants did not come off – what he says is
“I disagree
T146/43 [Emphasis added]
statement Patient A had said that the treatment was exactly the same during the
second consultation as the first consultation:
TAB 3, para. 22
he came to give evidence he was nowhere near as definitive – he did not
piece by piece
” what happened:
statement [
TAB 3, para. 22; T147/28-30
] Patient A makes no mention of Mr
Maher examining his spine before he started to massage. However, when questioned
he provided an
account which did include reference to the spine:
(aa) Despite
the fact that it was put to Mr Maher by the HCCC that the chiropractor massaged
Patient A’s buttocks, that was
not what Patient A said in his statement:
TAB 3, paras. 22-23
(bb) Patient A
says that during the second consultation Mr Maher “
did the massage on
TAB 3, para. 23
. In cross examination
Patient A said that it was incorrect and that he meant to say something else:
(cc) But when
questioned further about the alleged massage of the thigh[s] during the second
consultation Patient A was only able
to offer, “
I think I was given a
massage there
(dd) In his
statement Patient A says that during the second consultation Mr Maher
“tried to rub my penis”:
TAB 3, para. 24
. That was not the
viva voce evidence – Patient A didn’t speak of a rubbing but that Mr
” the penis:
. But then he
retracted even further from that position. His evidence was not that there was
any touching but “
I sensed he
was trying to
” the penis:
. And why did he “sense”
this? – because Patient A “felt that way he [Mr Maher] was
(ee) In his
statement [
TAB 3, para. 24
] Patient A says nothing about an erection.
Nowhere is recorded (prior to the viva voce evidence) that Patient A had a half
or something less than a full erection [
]. That evidence
is a recent invention to give credence to the assertion that Mr. Maher told
Patient A’s penis to “
”. Moreover, Patient A
doesn’t say that he remembers it happening at the time but rather
after it happened
then I remember
(ff) If events
giving rise to the Complaint had occurred then the Tribunal should reasonably
(i) Patient A
would have told Mr Maher to ‘Stop”. He did not say any such
(ii) Patient A
would not have returned for the second consultation
(iii) Patient A
would not have gone through the charade of getting the referral for x-rays and
taken another (3
) appointment
(iv) Would have
been more precise in identifying his dissatisfaction in the SMS sent to Mr.
Maher. Patient A readily concedes that
he made no mention in that SMS of
removing of underpants, touching the penis:
Patient A asserts) Mr Maher had said “Oh nice cock”, then the
patient could have been under no misapprehension
that there was something out of
the ordinary occurring and he (Patient A) would have at that point taken steps
to question what was
occurring during the consultation.
(vi) There is
something a little disingenuous about Patient A saying, “
tell him when I was in with him because he was the doctor and so I trusted him.
When it happened the first time, I
thought that it might not have been on
purpose. But when it happened the second time and
after I spoke to my
hairdresser
I realised that he did it on purpose
TAB 3, para.
. But when one reads the hairdresser’s statement there is nothing
contained in that statement which would give substance to
the assertion that
something said or done by Patient B created that realisation.
(gg) Patient A
did not see any laundry basket in the room for sarongs and towels:
T182/47-T183/1
. That is understandable as the basket was in the cupboard:
(hh) Patient A
provided an account of what he said in the SMS. There was a real contest about
the content of that SMS. Patient A was
less than precise in his recall of what
he said. The HCCC could have called Patient A’s wife [
“[THE OTHER TREATING CHIROPRACTOR]” [
veracity to his account. It did not do so and didn’t even ask Patient A to
download the messages:
(ii) Patient A
says that the first person he told was “[omitted]” and he told her
on 26 February 2010:
TAB 3, para. 32
. “[omitted]” did not
give evidence to support/advance the prosecutor’s case.
(jj) Patient A
says that he had the conversation with Patient B one week after the second
consultation with Mr Maher:
TAB, 3, para. 31
. Patient B was definite
– such a conversation did
occur at that time.
Tribunal should not accept the evidence of Patient A. The account of the
respondent is to be preferred. The Tribunal should
not attach such credit to the
oath of a single person of when we know nothing, as to be willing to destroy
another person on the
strength of that evidence. The power of lying is
unlimited, the causes of lying and delusion are numerous and many of them are
and the means of detection are
A was not a reliable witness. His accounts were inconsistent -
(a) He accepted
that critical parts of his evidence were untrue .
(b) He accepted
that parts of his evidence (including his statements) were wrong, in
circumstances where he had ample opportunity
to read his statements, check the
statements and had the opportunity of correcting errors prior to giving
(c) He changed
is evidence.
(d) When it was
put to him that a cloth of the type and dimension of that described by Mr. Maher
was placed over him, he did not (initially)
deny the account of Mr. Maher but
I don’t think so
evidence of Patient A is not inherently reasonable, probable and
conclusive.
Tribunal cannot find the Complaint made out on the uncorroborated evidence of
now turn to the issue of corroboration for Patient A’s
Corroboration
Corroboration
means ‘confirmation’ or ‘support’.
all cases in which it is required in law and practice, it must take the form of
a separate item of evidence implicating the person
against whom the testimony is
given in relation to the matter concerning which corroboration is necessary:
[1982] Qd R 508
in corroboration must be independent testimony which affects an accused by
connecting or tending to connect him with the
crime. In other words, it must be
evidence which implicates him, that is, which confirms in some material
particular not only the
evidence that the crime has been committed, but also
that the person committed it:
Baskerville
[1916] 2 KB 665
purpose of corroboration is not to give validity or credence to evidence which
is deficient or suspect or incredible but only
to confirm and support that which
as evidence is sufficient and satisfactory and credible and corroboration
evidence will only fill
its role if it itself is completely credible evidence:
[1961] VicRp 30
[1961] VR 186
at 190-191;
[1964-5] NSWR 1243
person cannot corroborate himself, otherwise it is only necessary for the
witness to repeat a story 25 times in order to get 25
corroborations of it:
[1924] ArgusLawRp 24
(1924) 34 CLR 154
[1916] HCA 76
(1916) 22 CLR 381
[1914] UKLawRpAC 20
[1914] AC 545.
a witness was intrinsically credible he could neither afford corroboration nor
be thought to require it:
[1975] AC 421
the HCCC had wanted to corroborate Patient A’s account it could
‘THE OTHER TREATING CHIROPRACTOR’, the Macquarie St Sydney
chiropractor upon whom Patient A attended in March
2010. There is no evidence
that he was/is not available.
Patient A’s wife who it is alleged by Patient A, read the SMSs. There is
no evidence that she is not available.
(c) obtained
Patient A’s Blackberry and attempted to retrieve the SMSs. There is no
evidence that the HCCC sought to do so or
that the SMS messages are not
retrievable.
cannot be said that Patient B, Patient A’s hairdresser corroborated
Patient A’s account. Patient B was unequivocal
– he did not recall
the content of the text messages sent from/to Patient A and Mr. Maher. In fact,
Patient B does provide
evidence which does
provide material
corroboration of Patient A’s assertions -
(a) Patient B
says that Patient A spoke to him about Dennis Maher on 21
TAB 4, para. 8; T114/5-10
. He was able to confirm that detail by
reference to an appointment book:
TAB 4, para. 8
. That is not consistent
with Patient A’s account.
(b) Patient B
is not sure what he was told by Patient A. He “
Patient A attended Mr. Maher for a neck injury:
TAB 4, para. 12
questioned, Patient B admitted that he didn’t know what the injury was:
(c) Patient A
told Patient B that he “
was undressed to just my underwear
TAB 4, para. 12
. When asked questions about that information he says that
he is not sure what Patient A said to him about that subject matter:
(d) Patient B
says that, “
I remember that Yoshihiro told me that Denis pulled his
TAB 4, para. 12
. Somewhat curiously, given the
expression of the balance of the statement, Patient B does not include within
quotation marks, what
Denis [sic] said. The Tribunal is only left with the
impression [as noted by the Chairperson] that “
this witness
doesn’t really understand the distinction between words in quotation marks
and words not in a quotation mark
impression is correct, it necessarily calls into question the veracity of the
balance of Patient B’s statement (where
quotation marks are used in not
less than 11 occasions):
. Patient B’s account is contrary to
that of Patient A.
(e) accepting
for the moment that Patient B was told “
Yoshihiro told me that Denis
pulled his pants down
” (as is recorded in
), then the
Tribunal could not be satisfied that Patient B provides any support to the
proposition that Yoshihiro told Patient B that
Dennis pulled Yoshihiro’s
pants down. Patient B’s statement only speaks of
”, not of underpants. There could not have been any
confusion in Patient B’s mind as to the different between the words
”. He understood
there was a difference:
(f) Patient B
says that “
I remember that Yoshihiro said ‘he massaged my legs
and then I got an erect penis. Then he asked me to turn over onto my back.
Obviously he saw my penis. Denis just touched my penis, not sexually, just
TAB 4, para. 13
. Patient B didn’t have a
history from Patient A, that Mr. Maher rubbed Patient A’s penis while the
patient was lying
on his stomach.
(g) Patient B
says that Patient A told him that “
Dennis put a little handkerchief on
TAB 4, para. 14
. But when it came to clarifying the
position, Patient B says that he was just not sure what Yoshihiro told him about
this subject
(h) Patient B
says that, “
Yoshihiro told me that Dennis asked him to come back for a
second session ... and the same things happened this time as in the second
session. He was told again to lie on his stomach penis and he
massaged his legs
TAB 4, para. 15
. But as we now know,
that statement is incorrect – Patient B said it was incorrect:
T118/41-119/12
(i) Patient B
says that “
Yoshihiro said ‘Dennis grabbed my penis as if he was
trying to masturbate me’ or something like that
. Patient B says that “
Yoshihiro told me he said
TAB 4, para. 16
. It was not put to Mr.
Maher during the course of cross examination that Mr. Maher grabbed the penis as
if to try and masturbate
Patient A or that Patient A told Mr. Maher to
“Stop”. In those circumstances, it cannot be the case that these
contentions
can be advanced by the HCCC.
(j) Patient B
says that “
Yoshihiro also showed me an SMS that he sent to Dennis. I
think he sent it very soon after the second session with Dennis. I don’t
remember exactly what it said. I remember that it was a very polite message. I
think it said something like this: ‘Hi Dennis.
I think you were
unprofessional ... during the last visit. Unfortunately I am not going back to
you as a patient
I can’t remember exactly what the
message contained”
TAB 4, para. 19.
But when questioned on the
topic, Patient B readily conceded that he did not really recall what was in the
SMS from Yoshihiro to Dennis:
T124/12-17.
(k) Patient B
cannot recall when Mr. Maher sent the SMS in reply and does remember exactly
what it said:
TAB 4, para. 20
. When it came time to question him about
what he recalled, Patient B agreed that he did not recall what was in the
message from Mr.
Maher to Patient A:
T125/24-40; T126/13-16
(l) Patient B
reports that he thinks Patient A told his wife about what had happened during
the chiropractic consultations, before
he spoke to Patient B. Patient B knows
this as he remembers speaking to the wife about it:
TAB 4, para. 21
(m) there is no
merit in the HCCC asserting that English was clearly a 2
and therefore the witness had difficulty answering the questions. Patient B
clearly understood that if he had any difficulty
understanding the questions
then he should say so:
T111/39-40; T116/8-9
. Moreover, he has been in
Australia for 18 years:
(n) Furthermore,
in preparing the statement Patient B had the assistance of Ms Jennifer Jansen of
the HCCC. He had the opportunity
to check that the information contained in the
statement was correct:
(o) Patient B
no problems with the way Dennis treated me each time
saw Dennis Maher:
TAB 4, para. 6
contentious evidence of Patient A has
been corroborated. The evidence
does not confirm in material particular the evidence of Patient A.
the context of the criminal law, it is dangerous to convict on the
uncorroborated testimony of a person (whether male or female)
on whom an offence
has been committed:
[1989] HCA 60
(1989) 168 CLR 79
[1974] HCA 48
(1974) 131 CLR 534
at 553. It is submitted
that in the context of allegations such as those made against the respondent
this Tribunal must be no less
concerned about such a danger.
Particulars of the Complaint
already noted, the respondent denies the particulars and each of them. The
respondent relies on the submissions already made as
a universal response to the
particulars. However, some particulars warrant further
Particulars – informed consent and record keeping
– sub-particulars (e), (f),
Tribunal cannot be satisfied that the conduct of the practitioner in regard to
record keeping and the obtaining of informed consent
should be the subject of
adverse findings against Mr. Maher.
(a) Dr Kelly
considered there appeared to be “
quite adequate verbal description
provided to <r Noda of the procedures to be undertaken
procedures were not devoid of consent because no written consent was obtained:
Kelly/Weekes, T4210/43-421/26
(c) Consent was
(d) Tribunal
members ought to be very careful not to apply the standards of 2012 to the
events of early 2010. At the earlier time,
the Chiropractic Board of Australia
Code of Conduct [
] was not in force. In February/March 2010 the NSW
Chiropractors Registration Board Code of Conduct did not require that patient
records contain sufficient information to allow another chiropractor to
continue patient care:
T404/15-17; T404/19-37
Chiropractic Board of Australia considered itself as raising the bar of what was
required in relation to clinical record keeping:
Kelly, T405/39-406/11
The Chiropractic Board of Australia has imposed a higher standard:
(e) Mr Maher
cannot be properly criticised for using abbreviations. All chiropractors have
unique references. His abbreviations are
not vague to the person who wrote them.
And almost every clinician would have to explain some aspect of their clinical
to anyone else taking up the care of that patient:
T379/26-380/16
expectation of a clinical record is that that it give (a) the identity of the
patient (b) date of consultation (c) identify
how they (the patient) was/were
(d) comments patient may have made (e) testing procedures which the clinician
considers relevant
to record (f) procedures:
Kelly, T393/4-16;
. When a patient attends with a simple neck pain of simple lower
back pain there maybe nothing to write in the clinical records:
. The presentation in this instance was rather simple:
. There is no indication for neurological tests being undertaken
Kelly, 384/16-17
(g) It would
not be expected that clinical records would include a treatment plan:
. The chiropractor’s notes would not be expected to include
reference to the clinical reasoning steps:
Kelly, T401/20-29
(h) It is not
necessary to record all the details in such a manner that another practitioner
could read the notes and understand what
has occurred without the need to go to
the other practitioner who made the notes:
Kelly, T381/32-46;
T382/28-383/1
extent that the Tribunal was interested in “
best practice
” of record keeping [
], that is of no
consequence. The Tribunal is concerned with a completely different issue - the
operation of s.139B(1) and 139E
National Law
(j) The records
did meet appropriate requirements. They were adequate:
Kelly, T385/3-9
Respondent:
T247/47-48; 303/22-24; T304/13-14; T304/43-44; T248/4-6;
Kelly/Weekes, T423/25-424/32;
(k) No set of
chiropractor’s clinical records will ever hold all the tests that were
performed or all the questions or answers
provided. It would be ludicrous that a
clinical records would be that comprehensive:
HCCC expert’s evidence
the extent that Dr Weekes has provided evidence conflicting with that of Dr
Kelly the Tribunal would accept Dr Kelly’s evidence
(a) The HCCC
relies on the opinion of Rachael Weeks and in particular her report dated
16 October 2010. Her opinions concerning the
respondent’s conduct is
based on the assumption she was asked to accept, namely Patient A’s
account (HCCC 61). There
can simply be no weight in an opinion in those
circumstances.
(b) Dr Weekes
was an advocate. As much is apparent from the fact that quite unsolicited, she
decided to offer gratuitous remarks about
a subject matter about which she was
not briefed to respond. Further, the remarks she does make are necessarily
conjecture and speculation
on her part. Such an approach by a person purporting
to be an expert is not permissible.
(c) In reaching
the opinion concerning record keeping (as expressed in her report) Dr Weekes
applied an incorrect test. A ‘continue
seamlessly’
was not the test to apply.
Even Dr Weekes came to acknowledge (during questioning) that a chiropractor
would not expect a seemless
transfer of care based on what maybe contained in a
chiropractor’s clinical records:
(d) Dr Weekes
applied at least one other, inappropriate test in assessing the clinical
records. She says that the requirement is one
that I owe to the
insurance company
. This is not an insurance
contracts case. It could never have been a situation of the chiropractor having
an obligation akin to an
insurer and insured. To provide an opinion adopting
such a test is misleading.
(e) Dr Weekes
as her adoption of incorrect tests for the purposes of providing opinions, there
can be no weight in the opinions adverse
to the respondent (as set out in
(f) Dr Weekes
has shown a general lack of attention to detail:
T372/24-34; T372/46-373/1;
T373/32-374/16; T375/22-33
even if the Tribunal finds that the practitioner’s notes were not
adequate, then it is necessary to consider whether
such conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct
” within the meaning of
the National Law. The Medical Tribunal has held as a general principle that
significant
” can be taken to mean “
not trivial, of
importance or substantial
Re a Medical Practitioner and the
Medical Practice Act
: 3 September 2007, (Freeman DCJ presiding). Any
criticism of the respondent in relation to note keeping cannot be described as
substantial
having regard to the statutory requirements which existed in
relation to note keeping at the time the notes were
English/Japanese included in the notes
to the issue as to whether the notes ought to have been written in English, Ms
Weekes made some brief comments at the end of her
report [HCCC 71]. These
comments should be contrasted with Mr Kelly’s opinion (
Respondents
bundle, Tab 12 page 4
) which have regard to the statutory requirements which
existed at the time the chiropractic treatment was performed.
(a) are not
illegible. They can be understood by the practitioner, Mr Maher. He can
accurately interpret what is written in Japanese:
T414/39-415/1
(b) It is the
fact that chiropractors do keep records which are not legible. There isn’t
one chiropractic. To be legible they
must be read by someone who as familiar
with the particular technique used by a particular practitioner. The different
have their own abbreviations. There are 116 techniques within
chiropractic. Practitioners are going to come across records which
deciphered because of the hybrid techniques:
Kelly/Weekes
T415/9-418/15
(c) Whilst it
might be said, on one view, that it would be preferable to have the entirety of
the notes recorded in English, the note
keeping is not below a standard
reasonably expected of a chiropractor with his training or
experience.
noted earlier in these submissions, inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or
indirect inferences cannot give rise to reasonable
satisfaction that the
Complaints have been made out. The HCCC has sought to lead such evidence (over
objection).
practitioner submits that the Tribunal could not be comfortably satisfied of the
matters alleged against him.
Complaint should be dismissed with costs.
HCCC V MAHER
Dennis Maher, the Chiropractic Tribunal of New South Wales has found you
guilty of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Your
actions constituted a serious breach of the standards expected of a registered
chiropractor.
Record keeping is an essential element of professional
practice as a health care practitioner. The keeping of clinical records is
merely advisory, it is essential. This is so for a number of reasons. It ensures
that a practitioner has a record of the treatment
provided whether it is used
merely to inform of the clinical picture in the past to inform current and
future treatment, whether
it is to play a role in litigation subsequent to an
adverse incident or whether it is a record to demonstrate to the health insurer
or Medicare that services for which payment was received had actually been
performed. Clinical records also allow appropriate peer
failures not only relate to record keeping but also to the assessment of the
patient’s response to previous treatment,
failing to obtain informed
consent and failing to provide adequate information or explanation to the
patient in relation to your
assessment and treatment.
Informed consent
is and has been an essential element of professional practice. Your failure to
outline the risks associated with
cervical adjustment or manipulation is very
grave indeed. This is the one area of treatment that has been singled out for
legislative restrictions. This had been the case in New South Wales for
many years.
You are reprimanded by this Tribunal for your breach of
professional standards in relation to communication with your patient.
In the profession of Chiropractic it is critically important to act in a
professional manner and within professional guidelines.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct
” is defined in s. 139B(1) of the
(a) conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or
experience.
139E provides:
“For the purposes of this law, professional misconduct of a
registered health practitioner means:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration;
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that,
when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration.”
Case of sexual abuse of
Fraudulent claim for
theft of motor vehicle
misrepresentation case.
Stephen J, A General View of the Criminal Law in England, pp. 249-250; quoted in
Cross on Evidence,
Butterworths, 3
ed., p.334.
“(e) Failing to provide adequate information or explanation to Patient
A in relation to his assessment or treatment;
(f) Failing to
obtain informed consent from Patient A for treatment;
(g) Failing to
make and keep clinical notes on Patient A’s condition and/or treatment in
that the notes:
(i) Were not recorded in English
(ii) Did not adequately record details of examinations conducted or
chiropractic adjustments
performed.”
T387/23-30.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter