URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rahman [2013] NSWMT 6 (22 April 2013)
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the decision for a list
of the amendments.
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rahman
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 6
Hearing Date(s):
Decision Date:
22 April 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr M Giuffrida
Ms C Berglund (PhD)
See paragraph 43
Catchwords:
Serious criminal conduct, deregistration
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) (No 86a)
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
General Medical Council v
[1943] AC 627
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Mr Mohammed Mofizur
Rahman (Respondent)
Representation
P Dwyer (Applicant)
In Person (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Suppression order in relation to the identification of the patients
CHAIRPERSON: The proceedings before the Tribunal are brought by the Health Care
Complaints Commission ("the HCCC"). The HCCC
seeks resolution of four
complaints.
respondent has consented to the Tribunal dealing with both the establishment of
the complaints and, if proved, the imposition
of protective orders.
Tribunal is acutely aware of the seriousness of the allegations put by the HCCC
and the long-reaching effect of the orders open
to it. Accordingly it has
approached the evidence on the basis of the standard of proof in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Some background
respondent was born in 1967 in Bangladesh. He graduated with the degree of MB.BS
from Chittagong Medical College in Bangladesh
in 1992. He then worked in various
capacities within the medical profession in Bangladesh. In June of 1994 he began
work in a government
hospital in Zambia for about six months. He worked from
March to December 1999 in a regional hospital in Natal in South Africa.
January of 1996 the respondent commenced work as a general practitioner in
Durban in South Africa and he remained in this capacity
for about four years.
respondent was first registered in Australia with the Queensland Medical Board
in 2001. He became registered in New South Wales
in May 2009. In the same year
he became a member of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners.
August 2009 the respondent commenced working as a general practitioner at the
Dapto Medical Centre. He remained at the centre until
he was charged with the
criminal offences that are the subject of the complaints.
13 March 2010 the respondent was charged with two offences under s61M of the
1900. The charges concerned the aggravated sexual assault of
two female patients. As a result of these charges a s66 hearing was
held by the
Medical Board on 15 April 2010. At this stage the respondent had not been found
guilty of any of the offences and, as
was his entitlement, he refused to answer
any questions about the allegations.
original two charges were significantly expanded to include allegations
concerning seventeen female patients. On 6 April 2011
the respondent pleaded
guilty to twenty-two counts of indecent assault under
and one allegation of aggravated indecent assault under
respondent was convicted of the offences and committed for sentence to the
District Court of New South Wales. The respondent's
registration was suspended
on 12 May 2011.
respondent appeared for sentence on 28 July 2011 when, in addition to the
charges of which he had been convicted, a further three
allegations were
admitted by the respondent and dealt with under
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Ac
hearing in the District Court was before Judge Cogswell SC. The cumulative
result of all of the sentences imposed by his Honour
was a term of imprisonment
of nine years with a non-parole period of six years. The term of imprisonment
commenced on 22 July 2011.
Judge Cogswell's reasons for sentence are in Exhibit
at the date of this Tribunal's hearing the respondent remains in prison and has
appeared pursuant to orders made by the Chairperson
of the Medical Tribunal on 6
December 2012.
respondent, before the Tribunal, admitted the complaints. This followed an
explanation of the complaints to him by both the Tribunal
and by counsel for the
HCCC. The Tribunal is grateful to counsel for her assistance in ensuring the
respondent understood the proceedings.
The complaints
1 is an assertion that the respondent has been convicted of a number of criminal
offences. The particulars outline the twenty-three
offences to which the
respondent pleaded guilty on 28 July 2011.
2 asserts that the respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
under s139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
("the National Law") relying on the offences set out in Complaint 1 together
with the further offences taken into account on
sentencing.
3 asserts that the respondent is guilty of professional misconduct under s139E
of the National Law, relying on all of the
offences set out in Complaint 2.
4 alleges that practitioner "is not a suitable person to hold registration in
the practitioner's profession", again based
on the admitted offences.
A to the Notice of Complaint is a Statement of Agreed Facts relied upon by the
Director of Public Prosecutions in the criminal
proceedings against the
respondent. The statement has been signed by the respondent and is to be taken
as indicating his admission
of the facts alleged therein.
of the seventeen victims are female. They were all patients of the Dapto
Medical Centre. Their ages range from fourteen to thirty-seven.
While most could
be described as young women there were two, respectively aged fourteen and
sixteen, who might be described as children.
They were certainly no more than
teenagers, as were three other victims, respectively aged seventeen, eighteen
and nineteen.
is not necessary to recount the details of the offences. They are apparent in
the agreed facts. Suffice to say that they involve
the interference with the
breasts and genitalia of the patients, usually under the most spurious excuses
for the need for examination.
The agreed facts also contain an acknowledgement
by the respondent of the absence of any need for his actions in the proper
of the patients.
conduct can only be described as extremely serious and the effect on the victims
as likely to be traumatic. This is emphasised
in the various victim statements
that can be found in the HCCC's tendered material.
respondent's admissions render the facts alleged in the complaints easily
proven. They also, without more, almost automatically
bespeak both
unsatisfactory professional conduct (Complaint 2) and professional misconduct
(Complaint 3). If any more need be said
in relation to the establishment of the
allegations concerning Complaints 2 and 3 it is that the offences committed by
the respondent
all display the highest degree of disregard for the care and
welfare of the patients.
facts disclose the most fundamental interference with the rights of all of the
women involved. They involve taking advantage of
patients as young as fourteen
and the absolute breach of trust that the medical profession relies upon in the
competent and ethical
treatment of patients.
Tribunal is satisfied that all of the allegations in the complaints have been
established to the necessary standard. As stated
above, the respondent admitted
the complaints.
Protective orders
Tribunal accepts that its role is not to punish. This was the task of Judge
Cogswell in the District Court. The Tribunal's task
is to make protective
orders, protective of both the public and the medical profession. The following
statement of Viscount Simon
General Medical Council v Spackman
[1943] AC 627
is an appropriate starting point:
"The high reputation of the medical profession as a whole depends in no
small measure on excluding from it those whose professional
misconduct makes
them unworthy to belong to it, and the confidence which the public are
accustomed to put in the family doctor is
intimately connected with the
assurance that those who practise the art of medicine are, in all relations with
their patients, individuals
of the highest honour".
conduct was over a prolonged a period (11 September 2009 to 12 March 2010)
during which the respondent must have known that his
actions were both medically
and ethically wrong as well unlawful.
more than one assault was committed on the same patient with the patient
sometimes being induced to return on a false premise,
such as the need for an
unnecessary follow-up breast examination.
of the patients were already vulnerable at the time of the assaults, for example
Patients C, E and H.
patients were subjected to acts of physical violence. These included Patients I
and J. In respect of Patient I it is also noted
that the first examination took
place in the presence of the patient's foster children.
continuing pattern of offending behaviour precludes any suggestion of an error
being followed by remorse and insight. Had the
respondent not been reported to
the police his conduct may well have continued.
respondent provided four references (Exhibit 1). They all give him considerable
support both as to his character and where relevant
to his competence as a
doctor. None of them, however, deals specifically with the offences involved.
They all refer to a period prior
to the commission of the offences. Although the
respondent said they were aware of the offences, the Tribunal does not find the
particularly useful in deciding protective orders.
respondent gave oral evidence and was cross-examined. He described his
background in the medical profession and his work in Queensland.
He said that he
came to the city because he wanted to ensure a better education for his three
children. He described his involvement
in the offences as more of a
demonstration of his intent to reach a good rapport with the patients than an
assault upon them. Nevertheless
he said, and often repeated, that he had signed
the Agreed Statement of Facts and "took responsibility".
Tribunal was unimpressed with the respondent's assertions of a lack of improper
intent and found the respondent to be avoiding
the serious nature of the
offences to which he had pleaded guilty and of which he accepted the factual
was a clear lack of insight on the respondent's part. At one stage he even
denied that he was a sexual offender. He shows little
insight into the extreme
departure from medical standards of his so called 'examinations', much less
their criminal nature.
respondent asked the Tribunal to allow him to practise upon his release from
prison. The Tribunal thinks this suggestion is both
impractical and, in any
event, entirely contrary to the protection of the public. It is impractical
because the respondent would
not have the necessary skills to rejoin the medical
profession after so many years away from it without the opportunity to maintain
his skills.
Tribunal is far from satisfied that there has been any indication of a
reformation of the defects of character that were evident
in the offences.
respondent's suggestion is contrary to the public interest, because the
respondent's apparent lack of insight into his wrongdoing
coupled with his
rejection today of matters clearly accepted by him (in the agreed facts)
indicates a clear risk of re-offending.
placed before the Tribunal would give it any confidence that the respondent is
able to return to practise even under the sternest
conditions.
Tribunal is firmly of the view that the only option open to it, to ensure the
protection of the public and of the medical profession,
is that the respondent
be deregistered. His conduct was so serious that cancellation of his
registration is an inevitable result.
149C(7) of the National Law provides that "an order may also provide that an
application for review of the order under Division
8 may not be made until after
a specified time". The respondent still has some four years of his sentence to
run. Before applying
for a review the respondent will need to take steps to
refresh his medical knowledge and take part in at least an ethics course.
Tribunal is of the view that the respondent should not be able to apply for
re-registration for eight years from today.
was some confusion about the respondent's current registration status; was he
suspended or already deregistered. The Tribunal's
orders reflect both
possibilities.
respondent said that he could see no reason why he should pay the costs of these
proceedings. The proceedings are a result of
his actions and it must follow that
he pay the costs.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(a) A direction that the respondent's registration be
(b) Alternatively, if appropriate, a direction that subject to Order C below the
respondent be disqualified from applying for
re-registration;
(c) The respondent may not make an application for review of his registration
for a period of eight years from the date of these
(d) The respondent is to pay the costs of these proceedings;
(e) The appropriate review body is the Medical Tribunal of New South
26 Apr 2013
"Not guilty" changed to guilty
Paragraphs: 33
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter