URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Secora APII Pty Ltd v Fiddes [2025] NSWPICPD 60; (13 August 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Secora APII Pty Ltd v Fiddes
[2025] NSWPICPD 60
Secora APII Pty Ltd
FIRST RESPONDENT:
Cathryn Marie Fiddes
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Nathan Owen Fiddes
THIRD RESPONDENT:
James Fiddes
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
Alison Fiddes
QBE Workers Compensation (NSW) Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W3848/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Paul Sweeney
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
13 August 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Certificate of Determination dated 11 October 2024 is revoked.
matter is remitted to another non-presidential member for determination of the
issues between the parties.
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Death of worker – whether inference
available that deceased’s employment impaired his diet
and sleep –
Fuller-Lyons v State of New South Wales
[2013] NSWSC
applied – evidentiary effect of “slight” knowledge when
uncontradicted – whether “common knowledge”
that travel to
and from work at remote locations can impair diet and sleep –
[1917] HCA 26
considered – whether error in
determination of “substantial contributing factor” pursuant to
s 9A – whether
Member engaged with evaluative exercise required by
phrase ‘main contributing factor’ in
Compensation Act 1987
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr A Joseph, counsel
Hicksons Lawyers
First Respondent:
Mr C Tanner, counsel
Turner Freeman, solicitors
Second Respondent:
Mr R Brown, counsel
Marsdens Law Group
Third Respondent:
Mr A Parker, counsel
Carroll & O’Dea
Fourth Respondent:
No appearance
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Fiddes v Secora APII Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWPIC 564
SENIOR MEMBER:
Ms E Beilby
DATE OF SENIOR MEMBER’S DECISION:
11 October 2024
INTRODUCTION
appeal concerns the liability of Secora APII Pty Limited (the appellant) to pay
compensation to the dependants of the late Michael
Fiddes (the deceased), who
died on 24 May 2023 in the course of his employment while undertaking an
assignment at the Bayswater Power
Station (Bayswater).
2013, the deceased contracted with the appellant to perform consulting work at
sites throughout Australia. From April 2022, he
worked for the appellant at
Bayswater near Muswellbrook in New South
the deceased resided in Melbourne, he commuted to Bayswater on a weekly basis.
He would travel to Muswellbrook on a Monday morning
and return to Melbourne
either on a Thursday or Friday
During the working week, he
resided with colleagues at the Remington Hotel at Muswellbrook.
was the deceased’s custom to telephone his wife, Cathryn (the first
respondent), each evening while away from
During one such call, at
approximately 9.10pm on 24 May 2023, the deceased suffered a cardiac arrest
in his hotel room. Although
his colleagues attempted cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR), he was unable to be revived.
9 January 2024, a coroner determined that the cause of the deceased’s
death was “Severe Coronary
Atherosclerosis”.
noted that a “significant pathology at the time of death was
cardiomegaly”.
their marriage the deceased and the first respondent had three children. While
each of the children was initially represented
by lawyers in these proceedings,
the eldest child of the marriage, Alison Fiddes, who was 23 years of age at the
date of the deceased’s
death, took no part in the arbitration hearing or
this appeal.
14 July 2023, the first respondent made a claim on the appellant’s workers
compensation insurer, QBE Workers Compensation
(NSW) Limited (QBE), for the
compensation payable on the death of a worker pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
By a notice pursuant to s 78
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
1998 Act), QBE denied liability to pay compensation as a result of the death of
the deceased.
issues raised in the dispute notice included a denial that the deceased died as
a result of “injury” as defined by
s 4 of the 1987 Act; that
his employment was a substantial contributing factor to an injury in accordance
with s 9A; and that the
deceased’s employment gave rise to a
significantly greater risk of a “stroke” injury as required by
s 9B of the
ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
the matter came on for a conciliation conference and arbitration hearing before
Senior Member Beilby on 15 August 2024, each
of the parties were represented by
counsel. Mr Tanner appeared for the first respondent, Mr Perry for the
appellant, Mr Brown for
Nathan Fiddes (the second respondent) and Mr Parker for
James Fiddes (the third respondent). As the matter could not be resolved
conciliation conference it proceeded to an arbitration hearing. During the
arbitration hearing, the “Injury Description”
in the ARDW was
amended without objection to add the following:
“The deceased
suffered a heart attack as a result of work-related travel, altered diet and/or
impaired sleep.”
issues in dispute were not recorded at the commencement of the hearing. However,
at paragraph [6] of her Statement of
the Senior Member recorded
an agreement that, the following issues remained in dispute:
(a) Was employment a substantial contributing factor to the deceased’s
death as required by s 9A of the 1987 Act?
(b) Did the deceased’s employment give rise to a significantly greater
risk of suffering a heart attack injury in accordance
with s 9B of the 1987
One of the issues on appeal is whether [6] of the reasons faithfully records
an agreement as to the issues in dispute.
arbitration hearing proceeded on the written evidence. Counsel for the
dependants addressed orally on the issues in dispute. As
the matter did not
conclude on 15 August 2024, it was listed for further hearing on 19 August 2024.
In the interval the appellant
provided written submissions, and Mr Perry spoke
to those submissions when the arbitration hearing resumed on 19 August 2024.
for each of the dependants made submissions in reply.
dependants argued at the hearing that the evidence of the first respondent laid
the factual foundation for the opinion of the
first respondent’s qualified
specialist, A/Prof Richard Haber, that frequent flights and poor eating habits
associated with
the deceased’s employment aggravated his coronary artery
disease and caused a significantly greater risk of the deceased suffering
cardiac arrest.
Tanner argued that if the deceased’s employment did not require frequent
absences from home at remote locations he would
have been “able to enjoy a
healthy diet”.
Further, had
the deceased been at home on the evening of 24 May 2023 in the presence of his
wife there was the “prospect of
averting” the cardiac “episode
resulting in an injury sufficient to cause his
His wife or
another family member could have administered CPR or summoned treatment to
ameliorate the cardiac arrest.
for the dependants attacked the opinion of A/Prof England, the cardiologist
qualified by the appellant for the purposes of
these proceedings. His evidence
did not address:
“the primary question of the contribution of
the work which involves multiple flights and the consequence of lack of sleep
the inability to obtain healthy food as the underlying – as an
underlying cause and a significant cause of the relevant
Thus, there was no basis in the evidence “to reject the conclusions as
to causation in Dr Haber’s report”.
Parker referred to the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in
v Atlantis Relocations (NSW) Pty
Absent a medical
response in the appellant’s case to A/Prof Haber’s opinion that the
deceased’s coronary artery
disease was contributed to by living conditions
associated with his employment, the appellant could not succeed on its
respect of the s 9B issue, the appellant argued that it had not been established
that the deceased would have survived had he not
been alone in a hotel room at
the time of his cardiac arrest.
There was no evidence that CPR would have been available to the deceased within
a short time of his cardiac arrest.
there was no evidence that the deceased’s “diet became
unhealthy” while living away from
The evidence merely
established that he consumed food from fast food outlets and restaurants. It was
unlikely that the deceased,
who was being treated for high cholesterol and
hypertension, would order “high fat foods” from a menu. The
also disputed that eating these foods “was a part of [the
deceased’s]
employment”.
the appellant submitted that the evidence in respect of the effect of flying on
the deceased’s cardiac disease was
unsatisfactory.
There was no
acceptable evidence that commuting by air led to poor eating habits or
materially contributed to the deceased’s
coronary artery disease.
the appellant submitted there was no evidence that the deceased’s
employment led to sleep
deprivation.
It submitted that
the effect of any work-related factors was to be evaluated in the context of all
of the causal factors in accordance
with the principles enunciated by Snell DP
appellant concluded its submission by arguing that the evidence did not support
a finding of injury. Alternatively, “employment
was not the main
contributing factor to any injury sustained” by the
THE SENIOR MEMBER’S FINDINGS
Senior Member accepted the evidence of the first respondent as to the obligation
of the deceased to travel for work and his consumption
of food at restaurants
and from takeaway food outlets while away from home. She inferred
“when travelling to regional NSW it is likely that the
food eaten is not as healthy as would have been cooked at
Senior Member also accepted that regional travel may have impaired the
deceased’s sleep although she observed this was not
addressed in the
respondents’ lay evidence.
Senior Member found that she received “no meaningful assistance from
[A/Prof] England in relation to the primary limb of
respondent’s] case”.
A/Prof England did not address the issue of the effect of air travel and the
consumption of harmful food while away from home in
his reports. His comment
that he had consulted “a barrister, personal injury lawyer, M[V]A mediator
and several colleagues”
before providing his second report tainted his
opinion. Conversely, there was no reason to reject the opinion of A/Prof Haber.
referring to
Badawi v Nexon Asia Pacific Pty Ltd t/as Commander Australia Pty
Da Ros v Qantas
Airways Ltd
Member continued:
“There is no medical evidence that support
any finding that if the [deceased] had not been required for work the death
have occurred in any event. The unchallenged opinion of Associate
Professor Haber is to the contrary. Quite clearly, plane travel,
eating away
from home and staying away from home are all factors that are wrapped in the
requirements of his employment. The requirements
of s 9A are therefore
It then becomes obvious that s 9B is also satisfied as these factors resulted
in a greater risk of injury as they are factors that
were not present if the
deceased remained at
Senior Member proceeded to find that the deceased’s employment was the
main contributing factor to the aggravation of the
coronary artery disease.
Similarly, the evidence established that the deceased’s employment
resulted in a significantly greater
risk of a heart attack than had he not been
employed in that work for the purpose of s 9B. She declined to determine whether
fact that the deceased was alone in his hotel room at the time of his
cardiac arrest also enabled the dependants to succeed under
s 9B. The Senior
Member made the following findings and orders:
deceased suffered employment injury on 24 May 2023 while in the course of his
employment, which resulted in the death
of the deceased on that date.
deceased’s employment was a ‘main contributing factor’ to the
injury which resulted in his death.
nature of the relevant employment gave rise to a significantly greater risk of
injury [than] had the deceased not been employed
in employment of that
matter is listed for further preliminary telephone conference to ventilate
issues including any claim in respect of apportionment,
weekly benefits,
interest and funeral expenses.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
its submissions in support of the appeal against the Senior Member’s
decision, which was lodged with the Commission on 8
November 2024, the appellant
identified two grounds of appeal.
appellant alleges that the Senior Member erred, in the context of s 9B of the
1987 Act, by finding:
(a) as a matter of fact, that the requirement of the deceased to travel in his
employment had a negative effect on his diet and sleep.
(b) by accepting the opinion of Associate Professor Haber dated 30 July 2024 and
in particular the factual foundation of that report
which related to the
deceased’s diet, sleep deprivation and their alleged effect on the
deceased’s underlying heart condition.
(c) erred in finding that the [respondents] had met the test in s 9B.
– The Senior Member erred in finding that the
employment was a substantial contributing factor to the death of Mr Fiddes
letter dated 2 December 2024, the appellant stated that “in reviewing the
transcripts” it had “identified a further
ground of appeal”.
It sought leave to rely on the additional submissions enclosed with the letter.
By its further submissions
of 28 November 2024, the appellant formulated the
proposed Ground 3 of the appeal as follows:
The failure of the Commission to determine whether the deceased had suffered an
injury pursuant to s 4(b) or, in the alternative,
erred by accepting that the
respondents had satisfied the requirements of section 4(b).
In disposing of the appeal it is convenient to first consider the question of
leave to argue the further proposed ground and, if appropriate,
to determine
that ground.
the nature of the dispute on appeal, it is necessary to briefly review aspects
of the evidence in the matter. What follows is
not intended to be a
comprehensive survey of the evidence. Rather, I set out the salient aspects of
the evidence so that the parties
may understand the way in which I have resolved
this appeal.
Cathryn Fiddes
evidence of the first respondent is contained in signed statements of 2 February
2024, 4 June 2024, and 21 June 2024. There was
no application by the
appellant to cross-examine her at the arbitration hearing. By her initial
statement, the first respondent says
that the deceased had worked for the
appellant on a “regular consulting basis for 10 years” prior to his
deceased had been working on the AGL Mills contract for the appellant for
approximately 13 months at the time of his death. He
worked 4 or 5 day weeks
with an occasional shorter week. The balance of the initial statement is
concerned with the question of “worker”
which was not in issue at
the arbitration hearing.
her statement of 4 June 2024, the first respondent states that she was married
to the deceased for over 28 years. She states that
“started working in the consulting industry in or around
2007. He was employed by a company called KM & T since in or around
until 2010. Michael was always travelling a lot for
first respondent says that the deceased engaged in contract work exclusively for
the appellant from around 2013. Save for the
period of the COVID lockdowns in
Victoria when he performed contracts in Melbourne, he was often required to
travel for work. She
“Once borders re-opened,
Michael again worked exclusively for Secora up until his passing. Michael was
always travelling a lot
for work; very few contracts were in Victoria over the
10 years with Secora.”
first respondent states that the deceased commenced working on the AGL contract
at Bayswater in April 2022. She continues:
“Michael would
typically fly up to Muswellbrook on a Monday morning and then would fly back
either on a Thursday or a Friday
night. Michael would work 4 to 5 days a week at
the AGL Australian
first respondent then describes the telephone conversation with the deceased,
which commenced at approximately 9pm on the evening
of 24 May 2023.
Approximately 10 minutes into the call the deceased told her that he was
not feeling well. She continues:
“I instantly heard this
muffling sound like his phone had just dropped out of his hand. I could
hear him making noises like
he was having a ‘fit’. I knew something
was wrong, so I started to scream and
first respondent then addresses her attempts to alert others, including the
emergency services, to the condition of the deceased.
The balance of the
statement addresses the issue of financial dependency in a way that is not
relevant to the issues on this appeal.
a third statement dated 21 June 2024, the first respondent addresses aspects of
the deceased’s work. She states that he would
travel “upwards of 8
to 10 flights a month”. She continues:
“On occasion, he
would comment to me that his blood pressure was raised after a flight. Michael
told me this after consulting
with his general practitioner. Michael told me
that his GP had told him that his blood pressure was staying elevated due to the
flying that he was required to undertake due to
employment.”
first respondent states that the deceased was “generally well”, was
a non-smoker, and a social drinker, who “did
not drink excessively”.
She continued:
“The work that Michael undertook with Secora
was stressful and required him to regularly travel. The travel that he undertook
often meant that he could not prioritise things such as exercise or healthy
eating. Michael was away for 4 to 5 times per week and
was therefore required to
eat out of home and often would have to rely upon fast food or food from
restaurants to sustain
Michael Reichardt
Reichardt worked with the deceased on the appellant’s project at the
Bayswater Power Station. He describes himself as a colleague
and a friend.
Whilst working at Bayswater they would stay at the Remington Hotel at
Muswellbrook.
the early evening of 24 May 2023, he met the deceased and Frank Barresi, who
drove them to the Commercial Hotel in Aberdeen for
dinner. Mr Reichardt states
that the deceased ordered a “ribs and rump combo”, a schooner of
Stone and Wood and two glasses
The colleagues returned to
the Remington Hotel, arriving at around 8pm, and “went to our separate
rooms”. He did not
observe the deceased to be unwell at any time.
Reichardt recounts that at about 9.30pm he was awakened by the hotel manager,
who asked him to come with her to the room of the
deceased. On entering the
room, he saw Mr Barresi on the ground giving the deceased CPR on
instructions provided over the telephone
by the emergency services. He states
that he then took over the CPR until the paramedics arrived and the paramedics
continued CPR
until approximately 10.14pm.
Reichardt states:
“At no point during the day at work or
throughout the evening did Michael appear to be unwell or make any mention of
being unwell.
I am not aware of any health condition Michael may have, but I do know he
takes medication but I am not sure what it is
Frank Barresi
Barresi also provided a statement to the police. He says that he knew the
deceased since 2018 and had worked with him since 2019.
His statement largely
mirrors the evidence of Mr Reichardt. He was alerted to the
deceased’s condition at around 9.25pm by
the hotel manager and went to his
room. At the direction of 000, he performed CPR for 5 minutes, until Mr
Reichardt arrived. At that
time he went to meet the paramedics and took them to
the deceased’s room where they took over CPR.
witness also says that during the day or the evening, the deceased did not
“appear to be unwell or mention that he did not
Associate Professor Richard Haber
Haber provided an initial report dated 9 March 2024 based upon documents
furnished by the first respondent’s solicitor.
He recorded the following
background:
“He considered himself to be in good health
exercising frequently. He was on treatment for hypertension with two drugs
telmisartan and Norvasc. In spite of this, his blood pressure was still
slightly elevated. He was also on medication for raised cholesterol
Crestor. Most recently total cholesterol was 6.9 and LDL cholesterol was 4.1.
These results are quite significantly elevated.
He was also on treatment for
asthma with
Symbicort.”
Haber noted that the coroner had found an enlarged heart and an almost complete
occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending
artery by calcified plaque.
In response to a request for a diagnosis the doctor stated
“He died as a result of significant single obstruction
of the LAD coronary artery, as well as enlarged heart which was most
to his hypertension.”
response to a request to express an opinion as to the connection between
employment and death, the doctor stated:
“On the balance of
probabilities his death was due to the fact that he was alone and could not have
immediate resuscitation.
At that time he was away from home for his
employment.”
response to an enquiry as to whether employment was the main contributing factor
to the deceased experiencing a sudden cardiac
arrest, the doctor
“I do not consider his employment to be a main
contributing factor to his sudden cardiac arrest as he had significant disease
found at autopsy and there was nothing obvious to have caused an aggravation of
his coronary artery disease to cause his cardiac
than the fact that he was alone at the time of his cardiac arrest, the doctor
did not believe that the deceased’s risk
of having a cardiac arrest was
accelerated, exacerbated or aggravated by the employment that he was performing.
He thought that it
was likely that he would have collapsed and died at the same
stage of his life regardless of his attendance at work on 24 May 2023.
following question and response appear in the doctor’s report:
“Do you consider that the nature of the deceased’s
employment as a consultant travelling considerable distances daily
gave rise to
a significantly greater risk to the deceased suffering a heart attack injury
than if he had not been employed in employment
of that nature? Please provide
detailed reasoning
Travelling considerable distances daily may have slightly increased the
chances of worsening of atherosclerosis, but not to any significant
a further report dated 25 June 2024, A/Prof Haber responds to an assumption that
the deceased’s employment required him to
fly extensively, experience lack
of sleep and rely upon unhealthy nutritional diet. He
“The combination of frequent flights and lack of sleep
as well as poor nutritional diet aggravate the tendency to coronary artery
disease and as such contributed to aggravation or acceleration of the
development of coronary artery atherosclerosis which in turn
acceleration or aggravation of development of blockages (stenosis) in arterial
tree including coronary
He also opined that “employment more likely [than] not substantially
contributes to this situation”.
a final report dated 30 July 2024, A/Prof Haber addressed further assumptions
put by the first respondent’s solicitors in
the following
“It is well known that cholesterol/lipids contribute to
development or worsening of atherosclerosis. As a traveller it is difficult
find appropriate places to eat healthy food and this of course is worse if you
travel frequently to different places where you
may not be able to find
appropriate eating places appropriate diet for atherosclerosis. Indirectly
therefore travelling and eating
in relatively unknown places means that you eat
food which is not suitable for people with atherosclerosis. This therefore
accelerates or exacerbate[s] coronary artery
Associate Professor John England
England provided a medical report to the appellant’s solicitors dated 12
March 2024. He was briefed with documents relevant
to the deceased’s
health including the coroner’s report dated 8 January 2024 and the
clinical records of the deceased’s
treating doctors at the Interhealth
Medical Centre. In summary, he concluded that the deceased
“extensive coronary artery disease that would have
developed over 20 years with plaque and lipid risk factors, hypertension,
BMI, and lifestyle risk
doctor was asked to consider the tests in ss 9B and 9A of the 1987 Act. In
respect of the former he expressed the opinion that
the nature of the
deceased’s employment did not give rise to a significantly greater risk of
suffering a heart attack than
had he not been employed. In respect of the latter
he stated that he did not believe that his employment was a substantial
contributing
factor to the deceased’s death.
a supplementary report dated 5 June 2024, A/Prof England addressed the report of
A/Prof Haber of 9 March 2024. He expressed the
opinion that A/Prof Haber’s
report, which primarily dealt with the prospect of the deceased being revived if
he was not alone
at the time of death, “does not reflect causation”.
He concluded the report by stating:
“I have researched this
report very carefully and ran it past barrister, personal injury lawyer, MVA
mediator and several
colleagues.”
ON THE PAPERS
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
“(3) If the Commission is satisfied that
sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with proceedings,
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling legislation
without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Procedural Directions PIC2 and WC3; the documents that are before me,
and the submissions by the parties that the
appeal can proceed to be determined
on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed
‘on the papers’ without holding any
conference or formal hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
LEGISLATION
so far as it is relevant, injury is defined by the 1987 Act as
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of
employment,
(b) includes a
disease injury
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing factor
to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in
the course of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease”.
9A of the 1987 Act is as follows:
No compensation payable
unless employment substantial contributing factor to injury
(1) No compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury
(other than a disease injury) unless the employment concerned
was a substantial
contributing factor to the injury.
In the case of a disease injury, the worker’s employment must be the
main contributing factor. See section 4.
(2) The following are examples of matters to be taken into account for
the purposes of determining whether a worker’s employment
substantial contributing factor to an injury (but this subsection does not limit
the kinds of matters that can be taken into
account for the purposes of such a
determination)—
(a) the time and place of the injury,
(b) the nature of the work performed and the particular tasks of that
(c) the duration of the employment,
(d) the probability that the injury or a similar injury would have
happened anyway, at about the same time or at the same stage of
worker’s life, if he or she had not been at work or had not worked in that
employment,
(e) the worker’s state of health before the injury and the
existence of any hereditary risks,
(f) the worker’s lifestyle and his or her activities outside the
(3) A worker’s employment is not to be regarded as a substantial
contributing factor to a worker’s injury merely because
of either or both
of the following—
(a) the injury arose out of or in the course of, or arose both out of
and in the course of, the worker’s employment,
(b) the worker’s incapacity for work, loss as referred to in
Division 4 of Part 3, need for medical or related treatment, hospital
ambulance service or workplace rehabilitation service as referred to in Division
3 of Part 3, or the worker’s death,
resulted from the injury.
(4) This section does not apply in respect of an injury to which
section 10, 11 or 12 applies.”
Leave to rely on proposed Ground 3
appellant’s Appeal Against Decision of a Member (Appeal) was lodged with
the Commission on 13 November 2024. On 14 November
2024, a delegate of the
President issued a Direction providing for the service of the appeal and
supporting documents on the respondents.
The respondents were required to lodge
a Notice of Opposition and submissions in reply by 19 December 2024 and to serve
these documents
on all parties to the appeal by 9 January 2025.
a further Direction of 18 November 2024, the delegate informed the parties that
the transcripts of the hearing before the Senior
Member were available to the
parties. It provided that:
“The appellant is to file and serve
on all parties any supplementary submissions it wishes to make in respect of the
transcripts
by 2 December 2024.
This does not constitute an opportunity to add further grounds without
2 December 2024, the appellant sought leave to rely on the proposed Ground 3 and
provided supplementary submissions in support.
counsel for the second and third respondents addressed the question of leave, it
remained unclear from her submissions whether
the first respondent had dealt
with the application. Accordingly, on 16 June 2025, I issued a Direction that if
the first respondent
wished to make a submission on the issue of leave, she
should do so by 20 June 2025. The first respondent lodged a further a submission
in compliance with the Direction. She “acknowledges that section 4
was an issue requiring determination, notwithstanding the
contents of paragraph
[6] of the [reasons]”.
submission is largely concerned with the merits of the proposed Ground 3.
second and third respondent oppose the application for leave to add a further
ground of appeal. The second respondent submits
that there is no evidence to
support the contention of the appellant that the agreement recorded by the
Senior Member at [6] of her
reasons was “not an accurate representation of
the issues in dispute between the
the legal representatives of the second respondent had no recollection of the
circumstances surrounding the agreement recorded
by the Senior Member, the
contents of the s 287A Notice, the written submissions, or the transcript
of the evidence could “not
usurp an agreement between the parties as to
the issues in dispute”.
Further, the appellant had not provided any satisfactory explanation for the
delay in raising the ground.
second respondent submits that if the agreement recorded at paragraph [6] was
incorrect, “that must have been known to it
on receipt of the
decision”. The respondents were “prejudiced by the delay”.
That prejudice was
“irremediable”.
third respondent also emphasises that there was no evidence from anyone on the
appellant’s side of the record on the issue
of the agreement. Mr Parker
submits that his recollection was that the case was simply run on the basis of
“liability”.
In those circumstances, it was entirely proper for the
Senior Member to approach the matter on the basis that “either liability
was established, or it was not, based on the factual
any event, it could not be established that a separate determination of the
issue of “injury” would make any difference
to the outcome. Thus, in
conformity with
Stead v State Government Insurance
should be refused as it “makes no difference to the
doubt whether paragraph [6] of the reasons is an accurate reflection of an
agreement between the parties that the only issues for
determination were those
arising from ss 9A or 9B and that “injury” was not in issue. There
is nothing in the transcript
of the hearing which supports this contention. It
is not consistent with the way the case was argued by the parties, or with
references by the Senior Member to s 4. At [17] of her reasons, for
example, the Senior Member noted that the claim was pleaded as
injury” thus attracting the operation of s 4(b)(i) and 4(b)(ii) of the
1987 Act. She continued:
“If the injury is found to be a
disease injury, the [dependants] must establish that employment was the main
contributing factor
to the disease or aggravation of the disease.”
the amendment to the description of injury during the hearing to allege a
disease, proof that employment was a substantial contributing
factor to the
deceased’s injury in accordance with s 9A was not material to the
determination of the case. It is true that
Mr Perry referred to s 9A
on several occasions in his written submissions, although it is not clear
whether those submissions were
prepared before or after the amendment.
Undoubtedly, he also pressed a defence under s 4. At [65] of those
submissions, he argued:
“If the [dependants are] to succeed
under sec 4(b) (or under sections 9A and 9B) non-work factors must be considered
work-factors are given the necessary status.”
He concluded his written submissions by stating that the evidence before the
Commission:
“does not support a finding of injury. Alternatively, employment was
not the main contributing factor to any injury
sustained.”
speaking to his submissions on 19 August 2024, Mr Perry explicitly addressed s
4(b). He argued that:
“Medical evidence to address the
ultimate question of whether the test of main contributing factor is satisfied
is both relevant
desirable.”
concluding his submissions on 19 August 2024, Mr Perry
“You just don’t have evidence to support the
proposition of main contributing factor or of substantial contributing factor
of the proposition that the employment gave rise to a significantly greater
references, and the lack of any response by counsel for the respondents,
establish that the Senior Member was mistaken in recording
the agreed issues in
dispute in paragraph [6] of her reasons.
the appellant does not seek an extension of time to lodge the appeal, the
authorities on that issue provide some guidance as
to the considerations to be
applied in an application for leave to amend the grounds of appeal.
Enviro Corp Pty Ltd v HTT Huntley Heritage Pty
Basten JA stated that
the primary considerations were:
“(a) the extent of the delay
and the reasons therefor;
(b) the prejudice to the applicant if the application were to be refused;
(c) the prejudice to the defendant from the delay if the application were to be
(d) the prospects of success”.
the delay in raising the issue was short. I doubt that a delay of less than
three weeks between the lodgement of the appeal
and the application for leave
would dramatically impair memories of the arbitration hearing as Mr Brown
suggests. Each of the respondents
have had the opportunity to address the
proposed ground within the time limited by the Commission’s directions.
discussed above, aspects of the argument at the hearing and the Senior
Member’s reasons are not consistent with a conclusion
that there was a
factual basis for the agreement recorded in paragraph [6] of the reasons.
Equally, they are inconsistent with the
assertion that the case was contested on
the grounds of an amorphous “liability” issue without refence to the
the legislation. I doubt that an alternative view of the transcript and
the reasons is arguable. In those circumstances, it is difficult
to identity any
prejudice to the respondents which would flow from a grant of leave to
accept that the only explanation offered by the appellant is that it did not
identify the proposed new ground until it had access
to the transcript of the
arbitration hearing. I agree that the error should have been identifiable from a
consideration of the reasons
and the appellant’s written submissions at
the hearing. On the other hand, it is understandable that a party may be
to challenge the correctness of a member’s recollection of the
agreed issues in a case without recourse to the transcript.
Parker, and probably Mr Tanner, submit that there is no real prospect of the
appellant succeeding on the proposed Ground 3, which
would weigh decisively
against a grant of leave. I have concluded, however, that the proposed Ground 3
raises an arguable case. I
elaborate on this below. Accordingly, I hold
that it is in the interests of justice that leave be granted to permit the
to argue Ground 3.
Grounds 1 and 2
2 of the appeal essentially contends that the evidence did not support the
finding that the deceased’s employment was
a substantial contributing
factor to an aggravation of his coronary artery disease or that the finding is
vitiated by factual error.
If, as the appellant asserts in Ground 3, the issue
before the Senior Member was whether the deceased suffered a s 4(b) disease
this ground is otiose. Section 9A has no role to play in the
determination of whether the deceased’s employment caused or aggravated
disease. As I accept that the issue for determination at the hearing arose
under s 4(b) and not s 9A, it is unnecessary to further
consider this
1 of the appeal is similarly based on a contention of factual error in finding
that the deceased’s employment gave rise
to a significantly greater risk
of an aggravation of coronary artery disease than had he not be employed. The
appellant adduced no
lay or medical evidence on the effect on the
deceased’s health of travel necessitated by his employment. As the
respondents
assert, the absence of evidence from the appellant permitted the
Senior Member to draw factual inferences based on slight evidence
in determining
this issue. Slight evidence, if uncontradicted, may permit a finding of fact on
the balance of probabilities. In
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
Court addressing the civil standard of proof said this:
direct proof is not available, it is enough if the circumstances appearing in
the evidence give rise to a reasonable
and definite inference: they must do more
than give rise to conflicting inferences of equal degrees of probability so that
between them is mere matter of conjecture [authority referred to].
But if circumstances are proved in which it is reasonable to find
a balance of
probabilities in favour of the conclusion sought then, though the conclusion may
fall short of certainty, it is not
to be regarded as a mere conjecture or
ground, however, also raises issues concerning the availability and use of
judicial or common knowledge.
Appeal under s 352
nature of an appeal under s 352 of the 1998 Act was recently considered by the
Court of Appeal in
State of New South Wales v
It is clear that
the approach to s 352
Raulston v Toll Pty
and the cases which
follow it, is wrong. The first “general principle” stated in
at [19] is predicated on too narrow a view of the appellate
function conferred by s 352. That approach is also inconsistent with
previous appellate caselaw.
proper approach to an appeal pursuant to s 352 can be found in the reasoning of
the High Court in
Leeming JA (Bell CJ, Kirk, McHugh and Free JJA agreeing) quoted the
following passage from
as illustrative of the proposition that it is
not sufficient to conclude that an inference from primary fact was
when an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial
judge to determine the
rejected the essential planks of the trial judge’s reasoning, it was not
to the point for the Court of Appeal
to formulate the question as which of the
two hypotheses the trial judge considered to be the more probable. Nor was it to
to consider whether the trial judge had been unduly influenced by the
DNA evidence. It was an error for the Court of Appeal to dismiss
the appeals in
this ‘very closely balanced’ case on the footing that the trial
was neither glaringly improbable nor
contrary to compelling inferences. It was the duty of the Court of Appeal to
decide for itself
which of the two hypotheses was the more probable. It was the
duty of the Court of Appeal to persist in its task of ‘weighing
conflicting evidence and drawing its own inferences and conclusions’, and,
ultimately, to decide for itself which of
the two hypotheses was the more
probable. It did not. The appellant’s second ground is made good.”
(citations omitted;
emphasis added).
, Leeming JA stated:
“Future appeals under s 352 should apply the approach in
Fox v Percy
. Appropriate deference is to be
given to members where their findings are based on evidence in respect of which
they have an advantage
(such as the kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential member hearing an appeal. But it is
not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the basis that
an inference was
‘open’ to the member, as if the member were a jury and there was
some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential member, after making
appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the member, would reach a
different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she should not shrink from
giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential member will be dismissing
appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an error of fact, law or
discretion.”
the advantage of the Member in this matter is constrained by the fact that it
was determined on the papers. Nonetheless,
it remains necessary for the
appellant to prove error if it is to succeed on the appeal. It must also remain
the case that the mere
preference of a Presidential member for another outcome
in a factual dispute does not inevitably establish error. That is particularly
so in evaluative decisions, such as those arising under s 9A or
contemplates a rehearing on the basis of the errors asserted in the grounds
of appeal and not a review, the statutory methodology
for an appeal prior to the
2011 amendments to s 352.
role of inference in reaching a finding of fact is canvassed in the cases
referred to by the Senior Member at [62] and [63] of
her reasons. The reasoning
of Keating P in
Namoi Cotton Cooperative Ltd v Stephen Easterman (as
Administrator of the Estate of Zara Lee
referred to by Mr Tanner, also address the availability of inference in the
context of the Commission
Ground 1 – Error of fact – diet and sleep –
inference and common knowledge
ground attacks the Senior Member’s findings concerning the effect of
travel on the deceased’s diet and sleep. The
appellant submits that there
was no “probative and reliable basis” for the finding that travel
had a negative effect
on his diet and
There was no evidence of
any effect of travel on the deceased’s sleeping patterns. It submits that
the sleep deprivation argument
was “effectively abandoned by the [first
respondent]”
criticising the finding that the deceased’s employment had a deleterious
effect on his diet, the appellant relies on its
submissions at the arbitration
hearing. It submits that the evidence upon which the Senior Member’s
findings were based was
Further, the
assertions made by the appellant as to what he ate and drank could not be
“logically or rationally tied to his
employment other than the fact that
the employment placed him around
Muswellbrook”.
there was no evidence that the employment had a deleterious effect on the
deceased’s sleep, A/Prof Haber’s opinion
did “not have a
proper evidentiary foundation”. Alternatively, the foundation of his
reports 25 June 2024 and 30 July
2024 was “opaque”. It is not
evident that the doctor had been briefed with further evidence. Rather, he had
to assume that the deceased had an “unhealthy nutritional diet
due to time poor nature of his
employment”.
First respondent’s submissions
first respondent argued that the Senior Member’s finding at [99] of her
reasons that the deceased’s employment had
a negative impact on his diet
was supported by the largely uncontradicted evidence that:
(a) the deceased travelled regularly by air;
(b) he spent several nights a week at remote locations;
(c) he “often” relied on takeaway or restaurant food while away from
(d) the Senior Member’s acceptance that these meals were less healthy than
those cooked at home, and
(e) the Senior Member’s acceptance that travel impaired the
deceased’s sleep.
inference drawn by the Senior Member in respect of the deceased’s diet is
supported by the evidence of the meal he consumed
on the evening of his death.
The argument put by the appellant that “healthy dietary options were
available” at remote
locations was speculative and ignored this
first respondent argued that the appellant was seeking to re-argue the merits of
the dispute “contrary to s 352(5) of the
1998 Act” as interpreted by
Northern NSW Local Health
This ground merely
addresses the weight to be given to aspects of the evidence. It fails to
appreciate that the first respondent’s
evidence was unchallenged.
Acceptance of this evidence could not involve
travel impaired the quality of the deceased’s sleep could be inferred from
the evidence. Travelling from Dingley Village,
Victoria, to Muswellbrook by air
and road would occupy several hours:
“all of which would mean
that the deceased would need, as a matter of weekly routine, to wake up very
early in order to prepare
to leave home, travel to Melbourne Airport and check
into his flight, in order to fly to an airport in New South Wales, and to then
Muswellbrook.”
It was open to the Senior Member to find impaired sleep applying
“common knowledge and ordinary human
experience”.
respect of Ground 1(b), the appellant does not suggest that A/Prof Haber’s
“medical conclusions were “erroneous”
open”. Rather, it attacks the “evidentiary assumptions” on
which conclusions were made. As the Senior
Member had accepted the evidence on
which the assumptions were based, “her acceptance of the attendant medical
conclusions
was open, follows logically, and involves no
1(c) involves the same complaint concerning the Senior Member’s factual
findings and the acceptance of A/Prof Haber’s
evidence. It was open to her
to accept that “the deceased’s employment was the main contributing
factor to the aggravation
of his cardiac
Second and third respondents’ submissions
an extensive survey of the caselaw on appellate review prior to
Mr Parker submits that it is clear that the appellant:
Cannot disturb the Member’s findings concerning the
reliability/credibility of ... Cathryn Fiddes; and
Cannot overturn the evaluative judgments made by the Member in relation to the
clinical records; and
overturn the evaluative judgments made by the Member in relation to
Dr Haber’s evidence; and
establish actual error (as opposed to, for instance, a different conclusion
being open”.
Senior Member made “entirely unsurprising factual findings” based on
direct evidence and inference. They were well
within the province of a
is evident from this brief review of the respondents’ submissions that
they rely in part on the principles enunciated in
subsequent Court of Appeal decisions which, seemingly, approved that approach.
Accordingly, by a Direction of 4 August 2025,
I gave the parties the
opportunity to furnish further submissions addressing the effect of the
reasoning in
on this appeal.
Submissions following
the appellant and the third respondent chose to make further submissions. There
is no significant issue arising from their respective
analysis of the ratio of
. By his supplementary submission, the third respondent withdrew
his submission insofar as it was predicated on the principes in
Mr Parker submitted that:
“Culhana does not alter the result
in this case. The Member’s findings were open, because they were correct.
did not err by making them. Nor were other inferences open that the
Presidential Member should
Conversely,
the appellant submitted that, as it was impermissible to defer to the findings
of the Senior Member, the reasoning in
enabled a finding of
The Senior Member’s finding on diet and sleep
at [68] of her reasons, the Senior Member addressed the issue of the evidence of
the first respondent relevant to altered
diet as follows:
accept her evidence without reservation and make findings in accordance with her
evidence. She described her husband’s
diet as relying on fast food or from
restaurants whilst travel[l]ing.
I accept that when one is travelling that the human experience is to eat out
at restaurants, pubs, and takeaway food outlets. It is
common experiences that
such meals are usually cooked with more oil, fat and salt and the like. I make
the inference that when travelling
to regional NSW it is likely that the food
eaten is not as healthy as would have been cooked at home.”
at [71], the Senior Member addressed the issue of the effect of employment on
the deceased’s sleep. She stated:
“I also accept that
due to the nature of regional travel, and the variety of accommodation, that
sleep is more likely to be
impaired [than] would have happened at home. This is
also aggravated by the usual early flight times (a matter which is common
with regional travel). I must say however that this is the weakest
link of the three branches proposed in the first limb of causation
as Mrs Fiddes
has not addressed this issue in her evidence. I observe however that Associate
Professor Haber does not appear to rely
on sleep exclusively as a single
causative matter in his opinion.
I therefore find that the [dependants have] established the factual matrix as
pleaded, that is poor diet and regular travel and to
a lesser extent poor sleep.
I make these findings based on human experience, common sense and Mrs Fiddes
it was open to the Senior Member to make findings by a process of inference from
proven facts and by utilising common knowledge
and experience. The unchallenged
evidence of the first respondent, the evidence of the deceased’s workmates
describing his
last meal, and the evidence A/Prof Haber provided more than the
prima facie evidence necessary to support the inference that employment
deleterious effect on the deceased’s diet. That conclusion is, of course,
no longer sufficient to resolve this aspect
of the appeal. In my opinion,
however, there is no error in the Senior Member’s acceptance that the
takeaway and restaurant
food available at rural locations is more likely to be
harmful to health than food prepared at home. This fact is so generally known
that “every ordinary person may reasonably be presumed to be aware of
Woods v Multi-Sport Holdings Pty
at [66] McHugh J, in a
dissenting judgment, gave examples of facts of which judicial notice had been
taken. They included that cancer
was a major health problem in the community,
that HIV was a life-endangering disease, and that many lawyers charge hundreds
an hour for their services. The connection between takeaway and
restaurant food and heath is not out of place in such a list. In
, Sixth Australian Edition, at [3050], the author records many
examples of the application by judges of the common law doctrine of
notice before it was subsumed by the
Evidence Act 1995
. It is not
appellant referred to
Evidence Act 1995
, which provides
that proof is not required in respect of matters that are “not reasonably
open to question”. While the
Commission is not bound by the rules of
evidence, I do not believe that my conclusion that the appellant has not proven
respect of altered diet is inconsistent with this section. Finally, I
am of the opinion that the Senior Member was able to infer
that food eaten when
travelling for work was inimical to health from the contents of A/Prof
Haber’s report of 30 July 2024
without resort to common knowledge and
experience. The doctor stated that travelling and eating in relatively unknown
places “means
that you eat food which is not suitable for people with
atherosclerosis.”
Haber’s evidence on the issue of altered diet was uncontradicted. Bearing
in mind the equally uncontested lay evidence on
this issue referred to above I
conclude that the appellant has not proven error. There was ample evidence on
which the Member could
make a finding on the balance of probabilities on that
the deceased’s work adversely affected his diet and, in turn, his
atherosclerosis. Applying the principles of appellate review stated
, the appellant does not succeed on this issue.
doubt, however, that there is near universal acceptance that regular domestic
flights in Australia cause impairment of sleep. To
use the language of Isaacs J
, whether the deceased suffered from impaired sleep as a result
of travel is a matter of “particular” and not “general”
facts. The evidence in this case is that for the 12 months before his death the
deceased travelled from Dingley Village, a suburb
of Melbourne, to Muswellbrook
at the beginning of each week and returned home on either Thursday or Friday.
The first respondent
argued that this would necessitate the deceased rising
early on Monday morning. While that is possible, no evidence was led at the
arbitration as to the time he left or returned home, the route or duration of
his flight, or the time he arrived home at the end
of each week. It is possible
that he flew from Melbourne to Newcastle and then travelled by car to Bayswater,
but other variations
of the route are also possible. Given the nature of the
deceased’s work at Bayswater, the probabilities suggest he only travelled
short distances during the four or five days he resided at Muswellbrook each
than the evidence of returning to his hotel on the day of his death, there is no
evidence that the deceased worked long hours
at Bayswater. Importantly, there is
no evidence that the deceased complained of difficulty sleeping, unusual
tiredness, or appeared
tired while at or away from his work.
first respondent relied on the reasoning in
Namoi Cotton
to contend that
the Senior Member’s finding in respect of sleep was based on inference
from objective evidence rather than speculation.
However, in that case there was
evidence that the deceased had worked very long hours in the week before her
death, that she was
acclimatising to nightshift, and, more importantly, evidence
that she was “tired and fatigued” in the period leading
There is no similar
evidence in this case. Neither inference nor common knowledge can be invoked
here as a substitute for the logical
and probative evidence directed at an issue
required by the rules of the Commission.
State of New South Wales v
I discussed the
reasoning and authorities cited by Beech-Jones J, as his Honour then was, in
Fuller-Lyons v State of New South Wales
“69. First, all the circumstances proved in evidence,
however slim, should be closely examined in order to establish whether
‘rais[e] a more probable inference in favour of what is alleged [ie
negligence on the part of the defendant]’ (
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty
(1951) 217 ALR 1
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
at 358 per Dixon, Fullagar and Kitto JJ,
Williams, Webb and Taylor JJ,
at 304 per Dixon CJ,
(Sales) Pty Ltd v Hurrell
[1982] HCA 15
149 CLR 155
at 161 to 162 per
Stephen J).
the inference must arise as an affirmative conclusion from the evidence and be
established to the reasonable satisfaction
of a judicial mind (
304 per Dixon CJ,
West v Government Insurance Office of New South Wales
[1981] HCA 38
at 66 per Stephen, Mason, Aickin and Wilson JJ,
at [68] per McColl JA, Campbell and Macfarlan JJA agreeing,
Jackson v Lithgow City Council
[2008] NSWCA 312
per Allsop P,
Basten JA and Grove J agreeing).
where the circumstances give rise to nothing but conflicting conjectures that
are of equal degrees of probability, the court
cannot reasonably arrive at an
affirmative inference of negligence (
per Dixon, Fullagar, Kitto JJ,
at 480 per Williams, Webb and
at 304 per Dixon CJ,
at 68 per Stephen,
Mason, Aickin and Wilson JJ,
at 161 to 162 per Stephen
J). The plaintiff cannot succeed unless the more probable inference is that the
injury arose from the defendant’s
negligence (
Millicent District
Council v Altschwager
[1944] ArgusLawRp 24
(1983) 50 ALR 173
to 174 per Gibbs CJ, Murphy,
Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ).
it is no answer to the question of whether something has been shown to be more
probable than not to say that there is another
possibility open (
Woolworths Ltd
[2012] HCA 5
246 CLR 182
per French CJ, Gummow,
Crennan and Bell JJ).”
these principles, I have concluded that there is no reasonable basis in the
evidence to permit a definite conclusion that
the deceased’s travel
impaired his sleep. It is evident that the journey from home to Muswellbrook
took several hours and the
same is true of the return journey. That may have
impaired the deceased’s sleep. On the other hand, it is possible that he
slept soundly at his hotel during the week. Acceptance of either conclusion
involves a substantial element of speculation. Even allowing
for any advantage
enjoyed by the Senior Member, a finding that travel caused impaired sleep was
not open in this case.
follows that the appellant has established error in respect of the Senior
Member’s factual finding as to impairment of sleep.
The finding was
material to the outcome of the case as A/Prof Haber’s opinion assumed
that the “combination of frequent
flights and lack of sleep as well as
poor nutritional diet”
aggravated he deceased’s coronary artery disease.
I have granted leave to the appellant to rely on Ground 3, I propose to briefly
discuss that ground below.
Appellant’s submission
appellant complains that [6] of the Senior Member’s reasons does not
accurately reflect the issues in dispute at the arbitration.
Contrary to what is
remained in dispute, the appellant submits that its notice
pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act dated 23 February 2004 and the written
submissions of Mr Perry of 18 August 2024 articulated its contention that s 4
had not been satisfied by the evidence in the case.
It refers to several
passages in the transcript in support of that argument. The submission
“the Senior Member has failed to determine the
section 4 question. Reading the decision, it is submitted that it does not
meaningfully
engage with the dispute over section 4 and is concerned, in
essence, with sections 9A and 9B. If that is so, the appeal should be
the matter returned so that this issue can be determined in accordance with the
decision of the Presidential Member hearing
that the Senior Member did address s 4 of the 1987 Act, the appellant submits
that she failed to engage with the appellant’s
submissions or
“engage in the evaluative process referred to in the decision of Snell DP
First respondent’s submission
first respondent submits that the Senior Member acknowledged at [17] of her
reasons that the claim by the dependants was pleaded
as a “disease”
injury and that the dependants must prove that employment was the main
contributing factor to the disease
or aggravation of the
Further, she was aware
that the test of causation required the evaluation of “any ostensibly
competing factors”.
found that there were no other “competing inferences” other than
those associated with the deceased’s travel
for work. Thus she was able to
specifically find that “employment was the main contributing factor to the
aggravation of the
first respondent submits that finding was the only finding open on the evidence
in the absence of a countervailing medical case
given the lack of weight which
the Senior Member gave to the evidence of A/Prof
As the Senior Member
clearly considered both work and non-work causal factors, she had
“engage[d] in the evaluative process
referred to in the decision of Snell
of the first respondent’s primary submissions may also be relevant to
Ground 3. Mr Tanner argued that as the appellant
had not adduced medical
evidence on the issue in dispute, there was no basis to challenge the Senior
Member’s factual findings
Second and third respondent’s submissions
have recorded the second respondent’s submission on the issue of leave
above. Otherwise, the second respondent relied on the
written submissions of the
third respondent.
Parker referred to the reasoning in
in support of the proposition
that an appeal is “not simply a
rehearing.”
He referred to
several well-known appellate cases which state that the weight to be given to
evidence is a matter for the trier of
fact unless there are compelling
inferences to the contrary. He argued that:
evaluative finding made by the Member, who had the advantages experienced by
trial judges at first instance, the
appeal must be
dismissed.”
Parker argued that it was appropriate for the Senior Member to “approach
the determination in a binary way: i.e. either liability
was established, or it
was not, based on the factual evidence.” The fact that the Senior Member
“applied s 9A
” did not detract from her finding under
s 4(b)(ii) that employment was the main contributing factor to the aggravation
(emphasis as in
Appellant’s submissions in reply
these submissions, which were prepared by Ms Roberts, of counsel, the appellant
submits that a failure to consider relevant contributory
factors may
“involve a misconstruction of the provision and therefore an error of
in accordance with
the reasoning in
Tudor Capital Australia Pty Limited v
Christensen.
response to the third respondent’s submission that there was “no
evidence” suggesting that the Senior Member’s
understanding as to
the issues in dispute was wrong, the appellant submits that it was clear from
the transcript and the written
submissions of counsel that the Senior Member was
required to consider the evidence pursuant to s 4(b) of the 1987
appellant submits that a consideration of the respondents’ submissions led
to the conclusion that the Senior Member erred
in applying s
“There is plainly ‘doubt’ over what the Member
determined (cf [23] of the third respondent’s submissions)
circumstances where the relevant section is not referred to in the
Member’s analysis at all (see 28 November
submissions)”.
The Senior Member’s consideration of
“substantial contributing factor” and “main contributing
accepted the uncontradicted evidence of the first respondent on the effects of
employment at remote locations on the deceased’s
diet and the medical
opinion of A/Prof Haber on its consequences for his cardiac condition, the
Senior Member commenced her consideration
of the legislation at [85] of her
reasons. She stated:
Turning to s 9A of the 1987 Act,
the [dependants] must show that employment was the
main contributing
.” (my italics)
considering aspects of the instruction of the Court of Appeal on s 9A in
, the Senior Member continued at
“What is required is a careful analysis of what the
worker was doing at the time of the injury and the strength of the causal
between the employment concerns and the injury. The probability that the injury
could have occurred anyway at the same stage
of the worker’s life must be
considered, as must the lifestyle of the worker. The determination is an
evaluative one, needing
[sic] a broad area for the personal judgment of the
decision-maker (Heavy Lift [sic] at
[105]–[106]).”
Senior Member found that as there were no “competing inferences in this
dispute, the only inferences that can be drawn all
align with the [first
respondent’s]
submissions.”
concluded her discussion under the heading “Applying the
legislation” by stating at [93] and [94]:
“There is no
medical evidence that support any finding that if the [deceased] had not been
required for work the death would
have occurred in any event. The unchallenged
opinion of Associate Professor Haber is to the contrary. Quite clearly, plane
eating away from home and staying away from home are all factors that
are wrapped in the requirements of his employment.
The requirements of s 9A
are therefore satisfied.
It then become[s] obvious that s 9B is also satisfied as these factors
resulted in a greater risk of injury as they are factors that
were not present
if the deceased remained at home.” (my italics)
the heading “Conclusion”, the Senior Member again briefly outlined
the nature of the dispute. She stated that the
“[dependants have] been
successful in relation to those issues and therefore I find in favour of the
[deceased’s] family.”
She continued at [99]:
this case, I feel a reasonable satisfaction that the deceased did indeed have a
poorer diet than he would have had but for
his employment together with poorer
sleep and frequent travel. The unchallenged evidence provided by Associate
Professor Haber is
that these aggravated his disease condition. I therefore find
as matter of common sense that employment was the main contributing
the aggravation of the disease.”
Consideration
the Senior Member erred in recording at [6] of her reasons that the issues
remaining in dispute were those arising under
ss 9A and 9B of the 1987 Act. It
is necessary to consider whether this error was material. Curiously, as
discussed above, the appellant’s
primary submission of 8 November 2024
continues to press an argument that the Senior Member erred in determining that
was a substantial contributing factor to the deceased’s
coronary artery disease and death. These submissions were made notwithstanding
that, following the amendment of the injury description, the claim pursued by
the respondents alleged an acceleration or aggravation
of the deceased’s
coronary artery disease. This necessitated proof that the “employment was
the main contributing factor
to the aggravation, acceleration, ... of the
disease” in accordance with s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act.
Senior Member recognised at [17] of her reasons that the case was pleaded as a
“disease injury” and that the first
respondent must prove that
employment was the main contributing factor to the disease or aggravation of the
disease. Having made
a finding that the deceased’s coronary artery disease
was accelerated or aggravated by the impact of his employment on his
sleep, the Senior Member found at [99] that employment was the “main
contributing factor to the aggravation of the
disease”. As the respondents
submit, these references plainly invoke s 4(b)(ii).
Ordinarily,
these references might refute an argument that the Senior Member failed to
engage with s 4(b)(ii) or carry out the evaluative
exercise required by the
section. The error in [6] would not be material. But, as the appellant submits,
the dispositive section
of the Senior Member’s reasons under the heading
“Applying the legislation” is entirely concerned with s 9A and
criteria arising under that section.
Senior Member addressed the elements of s 9A and the case law applicable to the
section between [83] and [93] of her reasons.
She canvassed several of the
examples enumerated in s 9A(2) and addressed
before finding
that the requirements of s 9A “are therefore
satisfied.”
rigorous attention to, and the making of a finding under s 9A suggests
Senior Member proceeds to find that the test in s 9B was also met. After making
findings in respect of s 9A and s 9B, under the
“Conclusion”, the Senior Member states that the “[dependants
have] been successful” and that she
“find[s] in favour of the
[deceased’s]
It was only
after this that she returned at [99] to the live issue under s 4(b)(ii). Thus,
the critical finding that the employment
“was the main contributing
factor” at [99] is made after the Senior Member had seemingly determined
the case and without
further reasons.
is axiomatic that a member’s reasons should not be overzealously
scrutinised with a view to finding error. Reasons must be
and the focus of
attention should be on the real issue identified by the grounds of
It is also true, as
the respondents argue, a consideration of “main contributing factor”
is an evaluative exercise; comparable
to an enquiry into causation, which can be
established by a process of inference which combines primary facts like
Nonetheless, I
have concluded that the Senior Member’s reasons do not engage with the
appellant’s argument that the deceased
did not die as a result of an
injury within s 4(b)(ii) of the 1987 Act.
is possible that the Senior Member’s discussion of s 9A was intended
to provide the foundation for her consideration of s
4(b)(ii), but the
Senior Member does not say this. On the contrary, she proceeds to make a finding
that the “requirements of
s 9A are satisfied”. The critical part of
her reasoning is, therefore, solely concerned with s 9A.
Undoubtedly,
the determination of a s 9A issue bears some resemblance to a determination
of “main contributing factor”
under s 4(b)(ii). But there are
significant differences. Section 4(b)(ii) does not require an evaluation of
the examples in s 9A(2).
Plainly, there is a vast difference between
substantial
contributing factor” and “
main contributing factor”
(my emphasis). A positive finding in respect of the former cannot readily be
transposed to the latter.
I appreciate that as is often the case in matters
arising under the 1987 Act, evidence which satisfies one provision will also
Parker submitted that the issue for determination could be characterised broadly
as one of “liability”. But it was
incumbent upon the Senior Member
to determine liability in accordance with the provisions of the 1987 Act
properly raised by the
appellant at the arbitration.
Parker argued that the fact that the Senior Member “applied”
s 9A did not detract from her determination of the injury
issue under
s 4(b)(ii). But, given the concentration on s 9A, it is by no means clear
that the Senior Member engaged with the evaluative
process required by
s 4(b)(ii). The determination of a wrong issue in the context of an error
identifying the issues in dispute
gives rise to significant uncertainty as to
whether the s 4(b)(ii) dispute was addressed and properly determined. I
accept the appellant’s
submission that there is substantial doubt over the
test the Senior Member employed in determining the injury issue.
greater force is the first respondent’s submission that, as the Senior
Member found an acceleration and aggravation of the
deceased’s coronary
artery disease related to his employment and that there were “no competing
inferences in this
that the employment was the main contributing factor to the disease was not only
open but inevitable.
undoubtedly correct that where an aggravation of pre-existing disease is
accepted or proven, employment need only be the main
contributing factor to that
aggravation or acceleration to establish a s 4(b)(ii)
But this argument
exemplifies the central difficulty arising under this ground. The Senior Member
found “no competing inferences”
during that part of her reasons
where she was, almost certainly, addressing s 9A and shortly before she
made a finding that s 9A
was satisfied. As discussed above, while both may
involve an evaluative exercise, the language and the requirements of the
are different.
need to undertake the evaluative exercise required by s 4(b)(ii) was
unquestionably raised by the appellant at the arbitration
hearing. This was not
a case where the medical evidence directly addressed the issue of whether
employment was the main contributing
factor to the aggravation of coronary
artery disease. A/Prof Haber stated in his primary report, admittedly on the
basis of an incomplete
history, that it was not. He was not asked to address
main contributing factor in his supplementary reports. The rejection of part
all) of the evidence of A/Prof English and the acceptance of the evidence of
A/Prof Haber did not provide a complete answer to
the issue of main contributing
factor. A/Prof Haber attributed the deceased’s death to coronary artery
disease, and an enlarged
heart probably caused by
hypertension.
A/Prof England,
in a probably uncontroversial aspect of his first report, diagnosed diabetes in
addition to hypertension. Both are
relevant to coronary artery disease. The
opinion of A/Prof Haber on these matters in his primary report was a prominent
the appellant’s case at the arbitration hearing.
and other matters raised in argument are not necessarily determinative of the
case. Possibly, an unhealthy diet related to work
may have had an adverse impact
on these conditions as well as his coronary artery disease. I raise them merely
to demonstrate that
the error of failing to address “main contributing
factor” was material. The appellant has proven error in failing to
with the evaluative process required by s 4(b)(ii).
submissions raise issues other than those discussed above. As I have found
material error in respect of Grounds 1 and 3, it is
unnecessary to consider
those arguments. The orders in the Certificate of Determination dated 11 October
2024 are revoked. There
remains evidence on which the respondents might succeed
in establishing liability. In those circumstances, I propose to order that
matter be allocated to a non-presidential member to determine the issues in
dispute between the parties.
Certificate of Determination dated 11 October 2024 is revoked.
matter is remitted to another non-presidential member for determination of the
issues between the parties.
Paul Sweeney
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
13 August 2025
First respondent’s
statement dated 4 June 2024, Application to Admit Late Documents (AALD) 5 June
AALD 5 June 2024, p
AALD 5 June 2024, p
Application in Respect of
Death of Worker (ARDW), p 130.
ARDW, pp 2–6.
Appellant’s Reply to ARDW (reply), p
Fiddes v Secora APII Pty
[2024] NSWPIC 564
Transcript of
proceedings (T) 15 August 2024, p
T 15 August 2024, p
T 15 August 2024, p
T 15 August 2024, p
[2023] NSWCA
[2004] NSWCA
Submissions 19 August
2024, [25]–[26].
Submissions 19 August 2024,
Submissions 19 August
2024, [49].
Submissions 18
August 2024, [55].
Submissions 18 August 2024,
[2020] NSWWCCPD
Submissions 19 August
2024, [65].
[2009] NSWCA 324
Reasons, [93]–[94].
AALD 12 June
AALD 5 June 2024,
AALD 5 June 2024, p
AALD 5 June 2024, p
AALD 25 June 2024, p 8,
AALD 25 June 2024, p 8,
Reply, p 82,
Reply, p 83,
AALD 25 June 2024, p
AALD 15 August 2024, p
First respondent
supplementary submissions,
respondent’s submissions (R2S),
respondent’s submissions (R3S),
Written submissions 19
August 2024, [65].
submissions 19 August 2024.
T 19 August 2024, p 23.
[2014] NSWCA 34
(1951) 217 ALR 1
[2025] NSWCA 157
NSWWCCPD 25
, [58] per Leeming
[1979] HCA 9
[2019] HCA 28
266 CLR 129.
[2003] HCA 22.
See the discussion of
the applicability of the correctness standard in
White v Redding
[2015] NSWWCCPD
Namoi Cotton
Appellant’s
submissions (AS), [21].
respondent’s submissions (R1S),
[2013] NSWCA 255
Namoi Cotton
respondent’s submission 7 August 2025,
Holland v Jones
[1917] HCA 26
[2002] HCA 9
Namoi Cotton
[2024] NSWPICPD
[2013] NSWSC 1672
AALD 25 June 2024, p
Appellant’s
further submissions (AFS),
respondent’s further submissions (R1FS),
Appellant’s submissions in response (ASR),
[2017] NSWCA
Government Insurance Office (NSW)
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Roncevich v Repatriation Commission
[2005] HCA 40
222 CLR 115
, [64], per
Seltsam Pty
Limited v McGuiness; James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited v McGuiness
, [91], per Spigelman
State Transit
Authority of New South Wales v El-Achi
[2015] NSWWCCPD 71
, [64]–[67],
v Shillingsworth
[2006] NSWCA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter