URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/846.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sharafi v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMP 846; (3 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Sharafi v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025]
NSWPICMP 846
Esmaeil Sharafi
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
REVIEW PANEL
Hugh Macken
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Christopher Canaris
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
of medical assessment; psychiatric injury being major depressive disorder;
pre-accident diagnosis of anxiety and depression;
application of a psychiatric
impairment rating; no pre-existing impairment; symptoms and treatment
post-accident; diagnosis of major
depressive disorder; no subsequent psychiatric
injury; requirement for medication;
– Review Panel assessed 7%
whole person impairment (WPI).
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
ASSESSMENT OF DEGREE OF PERMANENT IMPAIRMENT
Certificate of Review Panel Assessment – Whole
Person Impairment
Review Panel confirms the certificate of Medical Assessor Himanshu Singh dated
20 June 2024.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
claimant is a 33-year-old man who was injured in a motor vehicle accident on
7 March 2021. Following the accident, he lodged an Application for Personal
Injury Benefits and thereafter sought a concession from
the insurer that his
injuries ought to be considered non-threshold injuries. Following a review the
insurer declined to make this
concession.
claimant was examined by Medical Assessor Herald on 30 May 2022 who, in a
certificate dated 7 July 2022, determined that he has
sustained a non-minor
the claimant sought a concession from the insurer that his injuries exceeded 10%
whole person impairment (WPI). The insurer,
after a review, declined to make
this concession. The claimant was examined by Medical Assessor Robin Fitzsimons
4 July 2024, who in a certificate dated 20 July 2024 determined that the
injuries sustained by the claimant were not yet stable and
accordingly an
assessment of the degree of permanent impairment could not be made.
claimant was examined by Medical Assessor Singh on 4 June 2024, and a
certificate dated 20 June 2024 determined that the claimant
has sustained a
psychiatric injury being a major depressive disorder and sustained a permanent
impairment of 7%. The claimant sought
a review of this determination and, in a
certificate dated 24 September 2024 President's delegate Ratula Gupta certified
is a reasonable cause to suspect that the medical assessment is
incorrect in a material respect. The matter was then referred to
this Medical
Review Panel.
14F of Schedule 1 of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
Act) provides that the new review provisions apply in relation to a decision of
a new decision-maker. A “new decision
maker” is defined in cl 14A(1)
of the Schedule 1 of the PIC Act.
As the medical assessment, the subject of
the review, was made on or after 1 March 2021, the new review provisions
new review provision provide that a review panel consists of two Medical
Assessors and a Member assigned by the Motor Accidents
Division of the Personal
Injury Commission (the Commission).
5 of the PIC Act enables the Commission to make rules with respect to its
practice and procedure including proceedings before
a panel reviewing a decision
of a Medical Assessor.
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A Review Panel
determines how it conducts and
determines the proceedings and may determine the matter solely based on the
written application.
review of the medical assessment is by way of a new assessment of all the
matters with which the medical assessment is concerned.
directions were issued to the parties to upload to the portal material which was
before Medical Assessors at the time of
the assessment. This was
the examination of the claimant by the Medical Assessors the Panel reconvened to
discuss the findings on examination, consider
the material before the Panel and
settle on the certificate and reasons following the whole of the Panel’s
deliberations.
Medical re-examination
claimant was examined by Medical Assessors Baker and Canaris on 17 October 2025.
Their report follows.
Who attended the assessment
Sharafi (the claimant) attended the assessment on 17 October 2025 by MS Teams.
He was unaccompanied for the duration of the 100-minute
re-examination by
Medical Assessors Baker and Canaris.
claimant did require a Farsi interpreter, who was booked and organised through
the Commission. The claimant said he could understand
the interpreter well. The
interpreter said that she could understand the claimant.
claimant was living in rented accommodation in Greater Western Sydney. He said
he shared a unit with one other house mate.
Psychosocial history and pre-accident
claimant was born in Ahvaz, Khuzestan, Iran. His father was aged about 63 years
and was unemployed. His father had served for
an extended period for the Iranian
military during the Iran–Iraq war. His worked as a labourer for the
remainder of his career
and was not reported as been injured due to his military
service. His mother was also about 63 years of age. All of the claimant’s
large extended family live in Iran except for one brother who lives in
Melbourne, Victoria. The claimant said he had little contact
with this person
before and after the accident.
claimant was the fifth child, of 11 children. He provided the age range as
between 1359 to 1381 using the Islamic Calander. He
said he was born in 1370
(1991). He said he was a single man who had no children and had never married
prior to this re-examination.
claimant said that he attended a government school whilst living in Iran. He was
educated in Farsi. His first language is Farsi.
His second language is Arabic.
He completed about 12 years of education without gaining a certificate of higher
education in Iran.
He then attended the Iranian Army to serve his national
service. He reported that due to his father’s extended military service
only had to perform a short period of national service. He said he was never
injured whilst serving his less than one year of
national service. He was not
deployed to a border zone and he had not witnessed military or warlike
conditions.
claimant said on discharge from the military he found employment working as the
equivalent of an Uber driver in his hometown of
Ahvaz for about one year. He
said he had never had any motor accident whilst working as an Uber-driver in
claimant said he had been arrested in Iran due to his political beliefs whilst
living in Iran. Whilst living in his home province
of Khuzestan he was arrested.
He was placed in a van and taken to a facility for two days. He said he was not
physically harmed.
He said he was repeatedly asked to sign a “paper and
work for the police.” He said he refused and was released. He decided
travel to Sydney Australia with the hope of a better life.
claimant organised to travel to Australia. He flew from Iran to Indonesia. After
He said the boat was stopped
by the Australian Navy and he was taken to the Christmas Island detention
centre. He said he was the
only member of his family on the boat and he
travelled alone. He said he was fearful of the travel however he did not state
his life was ever in danger prior to entering Australia.
claimant was released from detention into the general Australian community in
Perth, WA. He moved to Sydney, NSW to work in 2013.
He said he had applied to
become a permanent resident and then an Australian citizen. He said his
application had progressed slowly.
He had an immigration lawyer who helped him
with his application. He said he had a general medical practitioner and
psychologist
who helped him with his application for citizenship. The claimant
said he was frustrated, irritable and would become depressed in
his mood due to
the prolonged process to become an Australian citizen. He said he had attended a
clinical psychologist and was said
to have “anxiety and depression.”
He said that during his time living in Australia prior to the motor accident he
always looked for and found employment.
claimant said that he initially worked in a pizza shop and then progressed to
working as a cleaner. He then found work in construction
as a “concrete
patcher.” He would labour in the construction industry. He enjoyed his
work and the community of workers
where he worked.
claimant said that prior to the motor accident he had never had any workplace
injuries or motor accidents. He said he was physically
fit. He said he had never
had any fractured bones or medical conditions. He would smoke tobacco socially.
He did not drink alcohol
or smoke cannabis. He did not gamble. He said he was
not allergic to any medications before the accident on 7 March 2021. At the
pf the re-examination his only income was from Centrelink, as a Jobseeker. He
said his family did not support him financially.
personal injury claims
claimant had no history of post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of his
military service. He was never deployed into combat
or injured in training.
claimant said that he had no prior motor accidents.
claimant stated that he had not made any work cover claims.
claimant had been diagnosed with “anxiety and depression” by his
general medical practitioner and psychologist. He
had received a brief course of
treatment. He attributed his psychological condition due to the slow progress of
his citizenship application.
He said that during 2019 and 2020 his “visa
had been rejected.” He said at the time of this
re-examination, he had
recently passed his Australian citizenship test and he was now waiting on the
date of the Australian Citizenship
functioning before the accident on 7 March 2021
Medical Assessors reviewed the forwarded documents and asked questions of
clarification regarding the claimant’s prior psychological
health. The
Medical Assessors agree that there was a pre-existing psychological condition
that had been diagnosed before the accident.
The diagnosis reported by the
claimant and recorded in the documents included, depression, anxiety and brief
periods of unemployment.
The main stressor was stated by the claimant to be the
slow citizenship application. The claimant had received treatment and reported
returning to work before the accident. The Medical Assessors agree that having
the main stressor of citizenship behind him, the claimant’s
43.23 adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was the best
diagnosis to fully explain the claimant’s
pre-existing assessable
psychological condition.
Assessment of WPI pre-existing before
the accident on 7 March 2021
Self-care and personal hygiene
claimant said that before the accident, he was independent in his self-care and
personal hygiene. He lived in rented accommodation
with other housemates. He
said he would shower daily after work. He was able to maintain his nutrition. He
was able to cook, clean
and assist with the maintenance of the rental. He could
wash and launder his own clothes. He was able to purchase his own groceries
his local supermarket. He was not required to attend the maintenance or garden
of the rental house as this duty was performed
by the landlord.
claimant said that he did not have any physical restriction in relation to his
self-care and personal hygiene.
Social and recreational
claimant said that he was able to socialise without impairment before the
accident. He said he would socialise with friends, and
he enjoyed going to
weddings, the club, Persian musical events in Sydney and funerals within his
local community. He would enjoy
dancing and participating in his local community
celebrations. He would celebrate cultural events such as Ramadan and Eid with
He enjoyed watching football (soccer) and playing social football with
his friendship circle. He would also enjoy listening to Iranian
popular music.
He said he could read Farsi and Arabic as his two languages. He had not learnt
English prior to his arrival in Australia.
claimant said that he did not have any physical restriction in relation to his
social and recreational activities.
claimant said that he was capable of travelling internationally alone from Iran
to Australia. He had travelled to Australia accepting
substantive risk to
himself. He had been able to drive before entering Australia. On entering
Australia, he was able to drive himself
to and from his work sites and travel to
unfamiliar locations without impairment. He had never returned to visit family
Melbourne since entering Australia.
claimant said that he did not have any physical restriction in relation to his
Social functioning
claimant said that he had no partner, children or extended family living in
Sydney, NSW.
said he had little contact with his brother in Melbourne before the
claimant said he had kept in contact with his mother and father in Iran.
claimant was able to form new friendships since living in Australia.
claimant said that he did not have any physical restriction in relation to his
social functioning.
Concentration persistence and pace
claimant said that he was able to concentrate and persist at complex tasks such
as maintaining a strict financial budget. He said
he had to manage his own
finances and he was not supported by any other person. He was able to keep his
accounts and manage his small
income. He said he was able to read in Farsi
better than Arabic. He would listen to international news in Farsi as his
language of
choice. He said he could speak limited English. He could watch Farsi
serial dramas and media before the accident without impairment.
claimant said that he did not have any physical restriction in relation to
concentration, persistence and pace.
claimant said that before the motor accident, he was working in his role as a
concrete patcher and construction labourer. He said
he was working so he could
save money to commence his own business before the accident. He said he had some
periods not working due
to his “anxiety and depression.” However he
could work and maintain his independence before the accident.
claimant said that he did not have any physical restriction in relation to
adaptation.
History of the motor accident
claimant stated that he was driving his car as he had an appointment with his
immigration lawyer. He said he was driving on Parramatta
Road and the car in
front of him stopped. He said he stopped his car. He said he had his foot on the
brake. He said he was stationary
waiting when he was hit from behind by another
car. He said his car was shunted forward into the car in front of him. He said
was forced forward in his seat and then forcibly restrained by his seatbelt
forcing him back into his seat.
claimant said he remembered the crash sounded like a bomb going off. He said he
was unconscious for a brief period. He said that
he was still dazed when the
driver at fault, a woman spoke to him through the passenger side window. He said
the female driver asked
if he was “OK.”
claimant said that he was able to exit the car. He said he started using his
phone to take photographs of the damage to his car.
He said he had damage to the
rear of his car and his front bumper bar.
claimant said he then experienced pain in his neck and upper thoracic spine,
(between his shoulder blades). He said his left hand
and arm became numb. He
explained that he was right hand dominant. He said he also suffered abdominal
pain from where the seatbelt
clasp had forced itself hard against his anterior
abdominal wall (stomach). He said that a short time later he suffered from
“electrical
shock” pain affecting his left leg.
claimant reported that he was transferred to hospital by ambulance. He was
discharged from hospital after about four days. He
reported that he did not have
any surgical treatment. He said he was told by the medical team at the hospital
that he had injured
his muscles and nerves. He said he was referred for
physiotherapy and follow-up with his general medical practitioner
Symptoms and treatment after the accident
claimant said he attended his doctor as he was in pain after the motor accident.
He said that the pain affected his neck, between
his shoulder blades, abdomen,
left arm and left leg. He said as his pain progressed he suffered from pain in
his right hand and leg.
He was prescribed physiotherapy and analgesic
medication. He was prescribed Tramal 50mg if required for break through pain in
combination
with Gabapentin 400mg twice daily. The claimant said his pain had
persisted from the time of the accident to the re-examination and
worked since the motor accident as he had difficulty lifting and labouring. The
claimant said he had not been referred
to a pain clinic. He had not had surgery
for the injury sustained in the accident.
claimant developed the following psychological symptoms because of the
claimant said that he developed a depressed mood, a low-esteem and feelings of
hopelessness and worthlessness as he had lost his
job after the accident.
claimant reported the following symptoms of a major depressive episode at the
re-examination:
depressed mood
most of the day, nearly every day as indicated by the claimant reporting
recurrent depressive worries of hopelessness
and ongoing sadness as he had not
recovered from the accident;
diminished interest and pleasure in all or almost all activities nearly every
day as demonstrated by his loss of capacity
to experience happiness and
participate in community celebrations or social football events;
poor sleep with
difficulty initiating sleep with the claimant having initial insomnia;
fatigue and loss
of energy nearly every day with the claimant delaying his activities of daily
living and slowing the pace such that
he could maintain his independence;
feelings of worthlessness every day since the accident because of his loss of
ability to concentrate with marked indecisiveness whilst making simple everyday
decisions due to his ongoing worries about
his future since the accident,
thoughts of death and not wanting to “be around” without any plans
to harm himself or others.
claimant said he was prescribed mirtazapine 30mg at night as his psychiatric
medication. He said he had psychological treatment
after the accident. The
claimant said he had never experienced an elevated mood such as mania or
hypomania in his life.
Medical Assessors both agree that from the re-examination and documents the
claimant reported depressive symptoms are consistent
with a diagnosis of
DSM-5-TR F 32.0 major depressive disorder.
claimant also reported symptoms consistent with post-traumatic stress disorder.
These symptoms include anxiety, irritability,
angry outbursts, poor
concentration and poor sleep. The Medical Assessors agree that the
claimant’s behaviour at the time of
the motor accident as well as since
the accident was inconsistent with the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress
disorder. The claimant
did not demonstrate symptoms of avoidance of driving a
car and did not report avoidance of the scene of the accident. The claimant
able to sustain his independence in his house and he was able to be successful
in his citizenship tests resulting in his Australian
citizenship been completed
at the time of the re-examination with his ceremony in the near future. He was
able to affirm his plan
to attend his Australian citizenship ceremony when he
was informed of the date of this event.
Medical Assessors agree that the accident did not meet Criterion A, for DSM-5-TR
F 43.10 post-traumatic stress disorder criteria.
The claimant was able to exit
his car unaided after the accident. He was able to engage in activities
including exchanging information
and photographing the damage to his car. He did
not receive surgical treatment at the hospital as would be expected had he
from a life-threatening injury. For these reasons the claimant was not
diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder.
claimant also had symptoms related to his physical experience of pain related to
his left and right upper limbs and hands, between
the shoulder blades, abdomen,
neck and back. He said his pain commenced at the time of his accident and had
persisted. He reported
that his pain would make him irritable and restrict his
work capacity and his capacity to lift and labour since the accident. He
would have angry outbursts when he had pain and was not able to do what he knew
he should be doing to help in the house and
Mental state examination
claimant presented as an unkempt man who had not groomed himself prior to the
re-examination. He said he had lost interest in his self-care and personal
hygiene and he no longer maintained the same standard of
self-care and personal
hygiene he had before the accident.
claimant said he had not returned to employment since the accident. The claimant
had an outburst of frustration and anger during
the re-examination. He reported
a depressed mood and a low self-esteem. He reported worries for his future as he
had lost his job
and had not returned to work. He felt shame that he was reliant
on Jobseeker payments from the Australian Government.
claimant reported that he had a depressed mood from the time he woke until he
fell asleep. He quickly became irritable and agitated
when talking about the
accident and his losses since the accident.
claimant was able to drive less as he was restricted by pain and the length of
time he could sit. He would change position between
sitting and standing
throughout the assessment at a frequency of once every 10 to 15 minutes.
claimant’s speech was normal throughout most of the re-examination. When
became agitated, he would speak quickly and would gesticulate
with his hands.
claimant’s concentration was impaired by his brief episodes of agitation
and irritability. The re-examination continued
at a slow pace and took about 100
minutes as the claimant required time to pause and settle his emotions and
agitation prior to answering
claimant did not require to be prompted to remain on track, he could organise
himself at a slower pace. He was able to persist throughout the
re-examination and provide a coherent and understandable history of
condition before and after the motor accident.
claimant was oriented in time, place, and person. His form of speech did not
demonstrate any common features that might be associated with any
abnormality of speech or thought form.
claimant did not report delusional ideas or psychotic symptoms.
claimant did report thoughts of death and “not being around.” He had
no history of acting on his thoughts about death.
He did not report suicidal
intent. The claimant was insightful about his condition. His judgment was
Assessment of permanent impairment after the
Medical Assessors note the following:
Guideline: 6.215 The
psychiatric impairment rating scale (PIRS) must not be used to measure
impairment due to somatoform disorders
or pain. The Medical Assessors agree that
pain for any cause is not to be assessed as part of the assessable WPI using the
PIRS Scale.
Guideline: 6.214 Impairment due to physical injury is assessed using
different criteria outlined in other parts of these Guidelines.
The Medical
Assessors agree that any impairment due to a physical condition is not to be
used for assessment of the WPI using the
PIRS Scale.
Medical Assessors agree that the DSM-5-TR F 32.0 major depressive disorder is
the most appropriate diagnosis to define this claimant’s
psychological injury.
following DSM-5-TR criteria for major depressive disorder are as
Criterion A.
Five (or more) of the following
symptoms have been present during the same two week period and represent a
change from previous functioning;
at least one of the symptoms is either (1)
depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
depressed mood
most of the day, nearly every day as indicated by the claimant reporting
recurrent depressive worries of hopelessness
and ongoing sadness as he had not
recovered from the accident;
diminished interest and pleasure in all or almost all activities nearly every
day as demonstrated by his loss of capacity
to experience happiness and
participate in community celebrations or social football events;
poor sleep with
difficulty initiating sleep with the claimant having initial insomnia.
fatigue and loss
of energy nearly every day with the claimant delaying his activities of daily
living and slowing the pace such that
he could maintain his independence;
feelings of worthlessness every day since the accident because of his loss of
ability to concentrate with marked indecisiveness whilst making simple everyday
decisions due to his ongoing worries about
his future since the accident,
thoughts of death and not wanting to “be around” without any plans
to harm himself or others.
Criterion B.
The symptoms cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.
This criterion is met because the claimant has lost his job and he has
decreased functional capacity in all areas of function, including
loss of his
capacity to participate in his community, play social football and attend
community celebrations.
Criterion C.
The episode is not attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance or to another medical condition.
This criterion is met because the claimant does not drink alcohol, use
substances or suffer from a medical condition that may cause
Criterion D.
The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not
better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform
disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified an unspecified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
This criterion is met because the claimant does not suffer from any of the
above conditions.
Criterion E.
There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic
This criterion is met because the claimant does not suffer from any of the
above conditions.
The claimant suffered from pain, and restricted capacity to sit for long
periods as well as lift heavy items which caused him to have
symptoms of
frustration irritability and angry outbursts, because of his limited capacity to
The claimant presented to his general medical practitioner for treatment of
pain that had not remitted from the time of the accident
to the date of the
re-examination.
Self-care and personal hygiene
Assessment of impairments due to pain and physical
claimant reported that his pain did not prevent him from attending to his
self-care and personal hygiene. He did state that he
was less able to perform
the heavy maintenance around the house such as cleaning common areas. He could
lift lighter items such a
lighter grocery bundles than prior to the accident.
This impairment due to pain and physical conditions were not included in the
PIRS assessment of WPI.
Assessment of assessable psychological
claimant said that he would shower at least every second day. He appeared
dishevelled, and he was ungroomed. He said he was living
in a share house with a
housemate. He said he was independent in his capacity to cook meals. He could
wash his own clothes and care
for his own room. He said he was independent in
his self-care and personal hygiene.
Social and recreational
Assessment of impairments due to pain and physical
claimant said he was unable to engage in traditional dances, which would be
performed at weddings or music events or attendance
at clubs because he was not
able to stand for long periods because of pain. He said he was not able to
participate in these recreational
and social activities like his social football
because of his pain. He said he could walk for short distances to the local
shop, but he rarely walked long distances because of pain. He said he
could not sit for long periods.
impairment due to pain and physical conditions was not included in the PIRS
assessment of WPI.
Assessment of assessable psychological
claimant said he would sometimes walk to his local 7-Eleven shop and sit whilst
having a coffee. He said that sometimes he would
meet members of his community
he had known before the accident at the shop. He said he did not organise these
meetings and the presence
of someone he might know was
claimant said he was not able to enjoy traditional music as he was unable to
experience joy or happiness from his music like he
could have before the
accident. He said he was less interested in socialising and participating in his
community. He said he could
watch television or YouTube but he found these
activities less enjoyable than before the accident. The claimant was less
in watching television events or
Assessment of impairments due to pain and physical
claimant said that he was not able to travel long distances alone as he would
suffer from pain when sitting or standing for long
periods. He said he required
to move to ease his pain. He was observed during the re-examination to change
his position from sitting
to standing frequently, at a rate of about once every
10 to 15 minutes. This impairment due to pain and physical conditions was not
included in the PIRS assessment of WPI.
Assessment of
assessable psychological injury
claimant said that he could leave his home and travel to the local shop alone.
He could travel alone to his medical appointments.
He could drive for short
distances and remained in areas that were close to his house and familiar to him
before the accident.
Social functioning
Assessment of impairments due to pain and physical
claimant said that his physical condition and pain did not impair his social
functioning.
Assessment of assessable psychological
claimant said that he was a single man. He said he had no partner before or
after the accident. He said he had no children to
any prior union. He said was
living in a share house and he was less able to meet the needs of the social
aspects of living in this
manner. He said he was less interested in sharing any
communal time with his housemate. He said he preferred to remain in his own
alone. He said his relationship with his parents was strained. He reported that
he would not ask for financial help as his parents
were not able to easily
provide assistance.
claimant had lost his social circle of friends and he was less interested in
finding new friendships.
claimant stated that his relationship with his brother in Melbourne was
unchanged as they rarely communicated before or since
Concentration, persistence and pace
Assessment of impairments due to pain and physical
claimant did report any pain or physical condition affecting his concentration,
persistence or pace. He was observed to have angry
outburst and episodes of
frustration, agitation and irritability when describing his pain. His
concentration, persistence and pace
were impaired with him, requiring brief
pauses that slowed his pace of progress through the re-examination.
impairment due to pain and physical conditions was not included in the PIRS
assessment of WPI.
Assessment of assessable psychological
claimant said his concentration was less since the accident. He said he could
still read and speak his second language Arabic
however it was not as fluent as
prior to the accident. He said he had lost interest in following international
claimant said that he could manage his own finances as his bills were few. He
was able to participate, clarify and explain his
condition and concerns
throughout the re-examination. He took a few brief pauses during the
re-examination.
claimant could concentrate to cook larger amounts of food to freeze and eat
later. Persistence and pace were mildly impaired by
his psychological injury as
observed during the re-examination.
Assessment of impairments due to pain and physical
claimant was unable to perform heavy lifting work because of his physical
condition and pain. He said his pain in his neck, shoulders,
legs and back
restricted his capacity to perform labouring jobs. He said he could lift lighter
bundles of groceries and he did perform
lighter duties for himself. This
impairment due to pain and physical conditions was not included in the PIRS
assessment of WPI.
Assessment of assessable psychological
claimant said he had difficulty adapting to his condition since the accident. He
said he had not worked since the accident.
claimant had applied for Job seeker allowance, from the Australian Government
since the accident. He said at the time of this
assessment he had a medical
certificate and he was not required to look for work as part of his mutual
obligation requirements for
Job seeker.
claimant’s attendance at work would be erratic with him not able to attend
more than one to two consecutive days of work
due to his psychological condition
Subsequent conditions
claimant had no subsequent conditions since the accident in
Causation and reasons
claimant was independent in his lifestyle and employment role before the
accident in 2021. The claimant did have a pre-existing
condition of adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood due to episodes of unemployment
and slow progress of his visa
to permit him to live in Australia. The adjustment
disorder’s primary stressor related to his visa had remitted in full prior
to this re-examination as the claimant was recently successful in passing his
citizenship test. He was waiting for his Australian
citizenship ceremony to
receive his certificate in the near future.
claimant was stationary when his car was hit in the rear by another car in the
accident. His car was shunted forward and hit a
third car in front of him. He
was able to exchange details with the at fault driver. Ambulance attended the
scene of the accident.
The claimant was transferred to hospital by ambulance. He
was assessed and discharged from hospital about four days after the accident.
did not receive any surgical treatment. The claimant’s physical and
psychiatric treatment was conservative.
claimant experienced immediate pain in his neck, between his shoulder blades, in
his stomach and his legs. He completed physiotherapy
and had been treated with
analgesic medication. He had not had surgical treatment.
Panel’s Medical Assessors agree that the claimant’s diagnosed
psychological injury, is DSM-5-TR F 32.0 major depressive
disorder. The claimant
had been treated for this psychological injury with evidence based psychological
treatment and evidence-based
antidepressant medication. He was compliant with
psychological treatment and mirtazapine 30mg at night.
Medical Assessors both agree that the accident could cause the psychological
injury defined as major depressive disorder.
Medical Assessors both agree that the accident on 7 March 2021 did cause the
psychological injury as described in the re-examination
Permanency of impairment
claimant’s permanent psychological impairment is now well stabilised and
onset of the claimant’s psychological injury was in March 2021 after the
accident. The date of this re-examination was in
October 2025. This permanent
psychological impairment is unlikely to change substantially and by more than 3%
WPI in the next year
with or without treatment.
Permanent Impairment Psychiatric Impairment Rating Scale (PIRS)
Psychiatric diagnoses
Major depressive disorder
Psychiatric treatment description
The claimant had been assessed and treated by his general medical
practitioner and psychologist for this mild condition.
and Personal Hygiene
The claimant said that he would shower at least every second day. He
appeared dishevelled, and he was ungroomed. He said he was living
house with a housemate. He said he was independent in his capacity to cook
meals. He could wash his own clothes and care
for his own room. He said he was
independent in his self-care and personal hygiene.
2. Social and Recreational Activities
The claimant said he would sometimes walk to his local 7-Eleven shop and
sit whilst having a coffee. He said that sometimes he would
meet members of his
community he had known before the accident at the shop. He said he did not
organise these meetings and the presence
of someone he might know was
The claimant said he was not able to enjoy traditional music as he was
unable to experience joy or happiness from his music like he
could have before
the accident. He said he was less interested in socialising and participating
in his community. He said he could
watch television or YouTube but he was found
these activities less enjoyable than before the accident. The claimant was less
in watching television events or movies.
The claimant said that he could leave his alone and travel to the local
shop alone. He could travel alone to his medical appointments.
He could drive
for short distances and remained in areas that were close to his house and
familiar to him before the accident.
4. Social Functioning
The claimant said that he was a single man. He said he had no partner
before or after the accident. He said he had no children to
any prior union. He
said was living in a share house and he was less able to meet the needs of the
social aspects of living in this
manner. He said he was less interested in
sharing any communal time with his housemate. He said he preferred to remain in
room alone. He said his relationship with his parents was strained. He
reported that he would not ask for financial help as his parents
were not able
to easily provide assistance.
The claimant had lost his social circle of friends and he was less
interested in finding new friendships.
The claimant stated that his relationship with his brother in Melbourne was
unchanged as they rarely communicated before the accident.
5. Concentration, Persistence
The claimant said his concentration was less since the accident. He said he
could still read and speak his second language Arabic
however it was not as
fluent as prior to the accident. He said he had lost interest in following
international news.
The claimant said that he could manage his own finances as his billed were
few. He was able to participate, clarify and explain his
condition and concerns
throughout the re-examination. He took a few brief pauses during the
re-examination.
The claimant could concentrate to cook larger amounts of food to freeze and
eat later. Persistence and pace was mildly impaired by
his psychological injury
as observed during the re-examination.
The claimant said he had difficulty adapting to his condition since the
accident. He said he had not worked since the accident.
The claimant had applied for Job seeker allowance, from the Australian
Government since the accident. He said at the time of this
assessment he had a
medical certificate and he was not required to look for work as part of his
mutual obligation requirements for
Job seeker.
The claimant’s attendance at work would be erratic with him not able
to attend more than 1 to 2 consecutive days of work due
to his psychological
condition alone.
List of Classes in ascending order: 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 4
Median Value: 2
Aggregate Score: 14
Whole person impairment 7%
Pre-existing psychiatric diagnoses
Adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood
Psychiatric treatment description
The claimant had been assessed and treated by his general medical
practitioner and psychologist or this condition.
1. Self-Care and Personal Hygiene
The claimant said that before the accident, he was independent in his
self-care and personal hygiene. He lived in rented accommodation
housemates. He said he would shower daily after work. He was able to maintain
his nutrition. He was able to cook, clean
and assist with the maintenance of the
rental. He could wash and launder his own clothes. He was able to purchase his
own groceries
from his local supermarket. He was not required to attend the
maintenance or garden of the rental house as this duty was performed
2. Social and Recreational Activities
The claimant said that he was able to socialise without impairment before
the accident. He said he would socialise with friends, and
he enjoyed going to
weddings, the club, Persian musical events in Sydney and funerals within his
local community. He would enjoy
dancing and participating in his local community
celebrations. He would celebrate cultural events such as Ramadan and Eid with
He enjoyed watching football (soccer) and playing social football with
his friendship circle. He would also enjoy listening to Iranian
popular music.
He said he could read Farsi and Arabic as his two languages.
The claimant said that he was capable of travelling internationally alone
from Iran to Australia. He had travelled to Australia accepting
substantive risk
to himself. He had been able to drive before entering Australia. On entering
Australia, he was able to drive himself
to and from his work sites and other
unfamiliar locations without difficulty. He had never returned to visit family
in Iran or Melbourne
since entering Australia.
4. Social Functioning
The claimant said that he had no partner, children or extended family
living in Sydney, NSW. He said he had little contact with his
Melbourne before the accident.
The claimant said he had kept in contact with his mother and father in
The claimant was able to form friendships since living in Australia.
5. Concentration, Persistence
The claimant said that he was able to concentrate and persist at complex
tasks such as maintaining a strict financial budget. He said
he had to manage
his own finances and he was not supported by any other person. He was able to
keep his accounts and manage his small
income. He said he was able to read in
Farsi better than Arabic. He would listen to International news in Farsi as his
language of
choice. He said he could speak limited English. He could watch Farsi
serial dramas and media before the accident without impairment.
6. Adaptation
The claimant said that before the motor accident, he was working in his
role as a concrete patcher and construction labourer. He said
he was working so
he could save money to commence his own business before the accident. He said he
had had some periods not working
due to his “anxiety and depression”
however he would work to maintain his independence before the accident.
List of Classes in ascending order: 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2
Median Value: 1
Aggregate Score: 7
Whole person impairment 0%
Apportionment – pre-existing/subsequent impairment
claimant had no pre-existing diagnosed psychiatric condition before the
assessment for pre-existing impairment is 0% WPI.
claimant had no psychological injury subsequent to the accident.
assessment for subsequent psychological impairment is 0%
Effects of treatment
claimant had no effects of treatment for his assessable psychological injury.
The reason for this assessment is that the claimant
continued to remain
symptomatic and that the antidepressant medication had not resulted in any
substantive change in the claimant’s
Medical Assessors both agree that under the Guidelines any effect of treatment
due to analgesia and pain treatment are not included
in the assessment of
treatment effect for the assessable psychological injury.
assessment of treatment effects was 0% WPI.
Panel assesses the degree of WPI, consequent on this psychological impairment
caused by the subject motor vehicle accident at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (515 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter